[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac049)  [Next](ac051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="2451.">2451.</span></span>

And all the inhabitants of the cities. That this signifies that all
goods were taken away from them, in order that they might have nothing
but evils, is evident from the signification of "inhabitants," when
predicated of a city, as being goods; which may be confirmed by many
things in the Word. The same is also evident from the fact that when a
"city" signifies truth (as already shown), an "inhabitant" denotes good;
for truth is that in which good dwells; and truth in which there is no
good, is like a city empty, or without an inhabitant. Moreover as
regards the fact that all goods are separated from the evil, so that
they may have nothing but evils, see above (n. 2449).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2452.">2452.</span></span>

And the growth of the ground. That this signifies all that is of the
church, is evident from the signification of the "growth" (by which is
meant both the crops and also every green thing, and that goods and
truths are signified by these, is evident from the Word throughout); and
also from the signification of the "ground," as being the church (see n.
566, 1068). That goods and truths are everything of the church, is well
known.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2453.">2453.</span></span>

Verse 26. And his wife looked back behind him, and she became a pillar
of salt. "His wife looked back behind him," signifies that truth turned
itself away from good, and looked to doctrinal things; "and she became a
pillar of salt," signifies that all the good of truth was vastated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2454.">2454.</span></span>

His wife looked back behind him. That this signifies that truth turned
itself away from good, and looked to doctrinal things, is evident from
the signification of "looking back behind him," and from the
signification of a "wife." It has been already said (n. 2417) that to
"look back behind him" is to look to doctrinal things, which are of
truth, and not to a life according to doctrinal things, which is of
good; for that is said to be "behind" him, which is posterior; and that
is said to be "before" him, which is prior. It has been frequently shown
that truth is posterior, and good prior; for truth is of good, because
good is the essence and life of truth; and therefore to "look back
behind him" is to look to truth, which is of doctrine, and not to good,
which is of life according to doctrine. That this is the signification
is very evident from the Lord's words (where also He is speaking of the
last time of the church, or of the consummation of the age) in Luke: In
that day he that shall be upon the house, and his vessels in the house,
let him not go down to take them away; and let him that is in the field
likewise not turn back behind him: Remember Lot's wife (Luke 17:31-32).
\[2\] These words of the Lord are not at all intelligible without the
internal sense, thus unless it is known what is signified by being upon
the house, what by the vessels in the house, what by going down to take
them away, and what by the field, and lastly what by turning back behind
him. According to the internal sense, to be "upon the house" is to be in
good (that a "house" denotes good may be seen above, n. 710, 2238,
2234). The "vessels" in a house denote the truths which are of good
(that truths are the vessels of good, may be seen above, n. 1496, 1832,
1900, 2063, 2269). To "go down to take them away" denotes to turn one's
self away from good to truth, as we can see; for as good is prior it is
also higher; and as truth is posterior it is lower. That a "field"
denotes the church, being so called from the seed which it receives into
it, consequently that those are "fields" who are in the good of
doctrine, is evident from many passages in the Word. This shows what is
signified by "turning back behind him," namely, to turn one's self away
from good, and to look to doctrinal things; wherefore, because these
things are signified by Lot's wife, it is added, "Remember Lot's wife."
It is not said that she "looked back behind herself," but "behind him;"
because "Lot" signifies good (see n. 2324, 2351, 2370, 2399). Hence it
is that when Lot was told what to do (verse 17), it was said, "Look not
back behind thee." \[3\] The reason why it is said in Luke, "Let him not
turn back behind him," and not "to the things that are behind him," is
that the celestial are not willing even to mention anything of a
doctrinal nature (see n. 202, 337); which is the reason why nothing
specific is mentioned, but it is merely said "behind him." These same
things are thus described in Matthew: When ye shall see the abomination
of desolation, foretold by Daniel the prophet, then let them that are in
Judea flee into the mountains; let him that is upon the house not go
down to take anything out of his house; and let him that is in the field
not return back to take his garments (Matt. 24:15-17). \[4\] The
"abomination of desolation" denotes the state of the church when there
is no love and no charity, for when these are desolated, abominable
things predominate. That "Judea" denotes the church, and indeed the
celestial church, is evident from the Word of the Old Testament
throughout, both the historic and the prophetic. That the "mountains"
into which they shall flee, denote love to the Lord and the consequent
charity toward the neighbor, may be seen above (n. 795, 1430, 1691).
That "he who is upon the house," denotes the good of love, has just been
stated. That to "go down to take anything out of his house," denotes to
turn one's self away from good to truth, has also just been stated. That
"they who are in the field" denote those who are in the spiritual
church, is evident from the signification in the Word of a "field." That
"let him not return back to take his garments," denotes that he should
not turn himself away from good to the truth that is of doctrine, is
because "garments" signify truths, for truths act as garments in
clothing good (see n. 1073). Everyone can see that very different things
are meant and that arcana are involved by all that the Lord there said
concerning the consummation of the age, as that they who were in Judea
should flee into the mountains, that they who were upon the house should
not go down to take anything out of the house, and that they who were in
the field should not return back to take their garments; and in like
manner by its being said that Lot should not look back behind himself
(verse 17), and here that his wife did look back behind him. This is
further evident from the signification of a "wife," as being truth (see
n. 915, 1468); and from the signification of "Lot," as being good (see
n. 2324, 2351, 2370, 2399); hence it is said "behind him." \[5\] Truth
is said to turn itself away from good, and to look to doctrinal things,
when the man of the church no longer has at heart what kind of a life he
lives, but what kind of a doctrine he possesses; when yet it is a life
according to doctrine that makes a man of the church, but not doctrine
separate from life; for when doctrine is separated from life, then
because good, which is of the life, is laid waste, truth, which is of
doctrine, is also laid waste, that is, becomes a pillar of salt; which
everyone may know who looks only to doctrine and not to life, when he
considers whether, although doctrine teaches them, he believes in the
resurrection, in heaven, in hell, even in the Lord, and in the rest of
the things that are of doctrine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2455.">2455.</span></span>

And she became a pillar of salt. That this signifies that all the good
of truth was laid waste, is evident from the signification of a
"pillar," and from the signification of "salt." In the original language
a "pillar" is expressed by a word which signifies a standing still, not
by one that means a pillar erected for worship, or for a sign, or for a
witness; so that by the "pillar of salt" is here signified that it,
namely, the truth signified by Lot's wife, stood vastated (n. 2454).
Truth is said to be vastated, or laid waste, when there is no longer any
good in it, vastation itself being signified by "salt." \[2\] As most
things in the Word have a double sense, namely, the genuine sense and
its opposite, so also has "salt;" in the genuine sense it signifies the
affection of truth; in the opposite sense, the vastation of the
affection of truth, that is, of good in truth. That "salt" signifies the
affection of truth may be seen in Exod. 30:35; Lev. 2:13; Matt. 5:13;
Mark 9:49, 50; Luke 14:34, 35; and that it signifies the vastation of
the affection of truth is evident from the following passages. In Moses:
The whole land shall be brimstone and salt, a burning; it shall not be
sown, it shall not bear, neither shall any herb spring up therein; like
the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim (Deut. 29:23);
where "brimstone" denotes the vastation of good; and "salt" the
vastation of truth: that the subject is vastation is evident from every
particular. \[3\] In Zephaniah: Moab shall be as Sodom, and the sons of
Ammon as Gomorrah; a place that is left to the nettle, and a pit of
salt, and an eternal desolation (Zeph. 2:9); where a "place that is left
to the nettle" denotes vastated good, and a "pit of salt" vastated
truth; for the expression "place left to the nettle" refers to Sodom, by
which is signified evil or vastated good, and a "pit of salt" to
Gomorrah, by which is signified falsity or vastated truth, as already
shown. That the subject is vastation is manifest, for it is said an
"eternal desolation." In Jeremiah: He that maketh flesh his arm shall be
like a bare shrub in the solitude, and shall not see when good cometh,
but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, a salt land, and
not inhabited (Jer. 17:5-6); where "parched places" denote vastated
goods, and a "salt land" vastated truths. \[4\] In David: Jehovah maketh
rivers into a wilderness, and water springs into dry ground, a fruitful
land into a salt one, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein (Ps.
107:33-34); a "fruitful land made into a salt one" denotes the vastation
of good in truth. In Ezekiel: The miry places thereof and the marshes
thereof shall not be healed; they shall be given up to salt (Ezek.
47:11); to be "given up to salt" denotes being altogether vastated as to
truth. As "salt" signified vastation, and "cities" the doctrinal things
of truth (shown at n. 402, 2268, 2428, 2451), in ancient times when
cities were destroyed they were sown with salt, in order to prevent
their being rebuilt (Judges 9:45). The words before us therefore denote
the fourth state of that church which was represented by Lot, which
state was that all truth was vastated as to good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2456.">2456.</span></span>

Verses 27-29. And Abraham rose up early in the morning unto the place
where he had stood before Jehovah. And he looked against the faces of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and against all the faces of the land of the plain;
and he saw and behold the smoke of the land went up, as the smoke of a
furnace. And it came to pass when God destroyed the cities of the plain,
that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the
overthrow, when He overthrew the cities in which Lot dwelt. "Abraham
rose up early in the morning," signifies the Lord's thought concerning
the last time; Abraham here as before denotes the Lord in that state;
"unto the place where he had stood before Jehovah," signifies the state
of perception and thought in which He had been before; "place" denotes
state. "And he looked against the faces of Sodom and Gomorrah,"
signifies thought concerning their interior state in respect to evil and
falsity; "and against all the faces of the land of the plain," signifies
all the interior states thence derived; "and he saw and behold the smoke
of the land went up, as the smoke of a furnace," signifies a state of
falsity (which is "smoke") from a state of evil (which is the "furnace")
within the church (which is the "land"). "And it came to pass when God
destroyed the cities of the plain," signifies when they perished through
the falsities of evil, which are the "cities of the plain;" "that God
remembered Abraham," signifies salvation through the unition of the
Lord's Divine Essence with His Human Essence; "and sent Lot out of the
midst of the overthrow," signifies the salvation of those who are in
good, and of those who are in truth in which is good, all of whom are
here meant by "Lot;" "when He over- threw the cities," signifies when
those who were in falsities from evils perished; "in which Lot dwelt,"
signifies although they who were saved were also in such falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2457.">2457.</span></span>

It is not necessary to explain these things in detail, because for the
most part they have been explained in the preceding chapter, and also
previously to that. They have been here added and inserted to the end
that it might be evident that the good were separated from the evil, the
former being saved while the latter were condemned, solely through the
unition of the Lord's Divine Essence with His Human Essence; for if this
had not taken place all those who are here represented by Lot would have
perished together with the rest; which is meant by these words: "And it
came to pass when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God
remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when
He overthrew the cities in which Lot dwelt;" which in the internal sense
denote that through the unition of the Lord's Divine Essence with His
Human Essence, all who were in good were saved, and also those who were
in truth in which there is good, here represented by Lot, while those
who were in falsities from evils perished, although they who were saved
were also in falsities and evils. In this way therefore are the things
said in this chapter conjoined with those said in the preceding one;
namely, that Abraham (that is, the Lord in that state) interceded for
those people of Sodom and Gomorrah who are signified by the "fifty," the
"forty-five," the "forty," the "thirty," the "twenty," and the "ten;"
concerning whom it was there explained that these are all in their order
who are in good, and also those who are in truth in which there is
anything of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2458.">2458.</span></span>

Verse 30. And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and
his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar; and he dwelt
in a cave, he and his two daughters. "Lot went up out of Zoar,"
signifies when they were no longer in the affection of truth; "and dwelt
in the mountain," signifies that they then betook themselves to a kind
of good; " and his two daughters with him," signifies that so did the
affections thence derived; "for he feared to dwell in Zoar," signifies
because they could no longer look to good from the affection of truth;
"and he dwelt in a cave," signifies the good of falsity; "and his two
daughters," signifies the affections thence derived, which are those of
such good and such falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2459.">2459.</span></span>

Lot went up out of Zoar. That this signifies when they were no longer in
the affection of truth, is evident from the signification of "Zoar," as
being the affection of truth (see n. 2439); and as there follows the
statement that "he dwelt in the mountain because he feared to dwell in
Zoar," the signification is "when they were no longer in the affection
of truth," and this because all the good of truth had been vastated, as
is evident from verse 26. In this verse therefore there is described the
fifth state of the church which was represented by Lot, which state was
that after there was no longer any affection of truth, a kind of impure
good, or good of falsity, infused itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2460.">2460.</span></span>

And dwelt in the mountain. That this signifies that they then betook
themselves to a kind of good, is evident from the signification of a
"mountain," as being love in every sense, namely, celestial and
spiritual love (n. 795, 1430); and also the love of self and of the
world (n. 1691); and this because most things in the Word have also an
opposite sense. And as all good is of some love, by the "mountain" is
here signified good; but what kind of good is described in what follows,
namely, that it was obscure, and became impure; for it is presently said
that he "dwelt in a cave," and afterwards that profane things took place
there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2461.">2461.</span></span>

And his two daughters with him. That this signifies that so did the
affections thence derived, is evident from the signification of
"daughters," as being affections (see n. 489-491); but such as the good
is, such are the affections that are derived from it. Even spurious and
impure good has its affections, for all are affected by the things which
they deem to be good, of whatever kind these may be, for they are the
objects of their love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2462.">2462.</span></span>

For he feared to dwell in Zoar. That this signifies because he could no
longer regard good from the affection of truth, is evident from the
signification of "Zoar," as being the affection of truth (n. 2439); and
when this is vastated no one can any longer have regard to good from it.
There is then also a fear of all truth, because this is opposed to the
good of an impure love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2463.">2463.</span></span>

And he dwelt in a cave. That this signifies the good of falsity, is
evident from the signification of a "cave." A cave is a kind of dwelling
in a mountain, but a dark one; and as all dwellings whatever, like
"houses," signify goods (n. 2233, 2234), but goods of such sort as are
the dwellings; here the "cave," being a dark dwelling, signifies the
good of falsity. "Caves of mountains" are often mentioned in the Word,
and in the internal sense have such a signification, as in Isaiah (2:19;
32:14), and in the historical books, as when Elijah, escaping from
Jezebel, Came to a cave in Mount Horeb, and spent the night there; and
there the word of Jehovah came to him, and He said unto him, Go forth
and stand on the mount before Jehovah; and he wrapped his face in his
mantle, and went out, and stood at the entrance of the cave (1 Kings
19:9, 13); where in the internal sense by a "cave" is signified obscure
good, but such as exists in temptations; and as this could not endure
the Divine, he wrapped his face in his mantle. So too elsewhere in the
historical books, as that the sons of Israel made for themselves caves
in the mountains on account of Midian (Judges 6:2); also on account of
the Philistines (1 Sam. 13:6). These historical facts, like those now
explained in the books of Moses, have a different meaning in the
internal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2464.">2464.</span></span>

And his two daughters. That this signifies the affections thence
derived, which are those of such good and such falsity, is evident from
the signification of "daughters," as being affections (n. 2461). The
good from which came these affections, or the father from whom came
these daughters, was Lot; and the truth from which came these
affections, or the mother of the daughters, was Lot's wife; and when she
was made a pillar of salt, that is, when the good of truth was vastated,
then there came forth such good as is signified by "Lot in the cave,"
and such affections thence derived as are signified by the "daughters."

<span class="margnote"><span id="2465.">2465.</span></span>

Verses 31-36. And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is
old, and there is no man in the earth to come unto us according to the
way of all the earth. Come, let us make our father drink wine, and let
us lie with him, and let us quicken seed from our father. And they made
their father drink wine that night; and the firstborn went in, and lay
with her father; and he knew not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the
younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father; let us make him drink
wine this night also, and go thou in and lie with him, and let us
quicken seed from our father. And they made their father drink wine that
night also; and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he knew not
when she lay down, nor when she arose. And the two daughters of Lot
conceived by their father. \[2\] " The firstborn said unto the younger,"
signifies here as before the affections; the firstborn the affection of
such good, the younger the affection of such falsity; "our father is
old, and there is no man in the earth," signifies that it is no longer
known what good is, and what truth is; "to come unto us," signifies with
which they might be conjoined; "according to the way of all the earth,"
signifies according to doctrinal things; the "earth" is the church.
"Come, let us make our father drink wine," signifies that they should
imbue such good with falsities, which are the "wine;" "and let us lie
with him," signifies that in this way they would be conjoined; "and let
us quicken seed from our father," signifies that so there would be a
newness of a sort of church. \[3\] "And they made their father drink
wine," signifies that they imbued such good with falsities; "that
night," signifies when all things were in such obscurity; "and the
firstborn went in," signifies the affection of such good; "and lay with
her father," signifies that thus they were brought into accordance; "and
he knew not when she lay down nor when she arose," signifies that such a
general kind of good knew no otherwise than that it was so. "And it came
to pass on the morrow," signifies afterwards "that the firstborn said
unto the younger," signifies that the affection of such good persuaded
the falsity; "Behold, I lay yesternight with my father," signifies that
thus they were conjoined; "let us make him drink wine this night also,"
signifies here as before that they imbued such good with falsities when
everything was in such obscurity; \[4\] "and go thou in and lie with
him," signifies that these things also should be conjoined; "and let us
quicken seed from our father," signifies here as before that so there
would be a newness of a sort of church. "And they made their father
drink wine that night also," signifies that in that obscure state they
imbued such good with falsities; "and the younger arose and lay with
him," signifies that the affection of falsity did in like manner, so
that falsities appeared as truths, and in this way they were conjoined;
"and he knew not when she lay down nor when she arose," signifies that
such general good knew no otherwise than that it was so. "And the two
daughters of Lot conceived by their father," signifies that hence was
the origin of such a religion as is signified by Noah and the son of
Ammon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2466.">2466.</span></span>

That the things now set forth are signified in the internal sense, can
be confirmed, and indeed as to each word; but most of them have been
confirmed before, and besides, they are such as do violence to our ideas
and give offense to chaste ears. From the summary explication we can see
that by the things in question there is described the origin of such a
religion as is signified in the Word by "Moab" and the "son of Ammon."
The nature of this religion will be told hereafter, where Moab and the
son of Ammon are treated of. That it is adulterated good and falsified
truth, is evident. The adulterations of good and the falsifications of
truth are commonly described in the Word by "adulteries" and
"whoredoms," and are also so called, the reason of which is based on the
fact that good and truth form a marriage with each other (n. 1904,
2173); nay, incredible as it may appear to most, it is from this
marriage as from its genuine origin that there comes the sanctity of
marriages on earth, and also the laws of marriages given in the Word.
\[2\] For the case is this: When celestial and spiritual things descend
out of heaven into a lower sphere, they are there turned in the most
perfect manner into some likeness of marriages, and this from the
correspondence that exists between spiritual and natural things
(concerning which correspondence of the Lord's Divine mercy elsewhere).
But when they are perverted in the lower sphere, as is done where evil
genii and evil spirits are present, the same are then turned into such
things as belong to adulteries and whoredoms. Hence it is that
contaminations of good and perversions of truth are described in the
Word by adulteries and whoredoms, and are also so named, as is very
evident from the following passages in Ezekiel: Thou didst commit
whoredom because of thy name, and pouredst out thy whoredoms on everyone
that passed by; thou didst take of thy garments and madest for thee high
places decked with diverse colors, and didst commit whoredom upon them;
thou didst take the vessels of thy adornment of My gold and of My
silver, which I had given thee, and madest for thee images of a male,
and didst commit whoredom with them; thou hast taken thy sons and thy
daughters, whom thou hast borne unto Me, and these hast thou sacrificed
unto them. Was there but little of thy whoredoms? Thou hast committed
whoredom with the sons of Egypt, thy neighbors, great of flesh and hast
multiplied thy whoredom to provoke Me to anger; thou hast committed
whoredom with the sons of Asshur, and hast committed whoredom with them,
and wast not satisfied; and thou hast multiplied thy whoredom even unto
the land of traffic, unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfied
therewith (Ezek. 16:15-17, 20, 26, 28-29, etc.), \[3\] where Jerusalem
is treated of, by which is here signified the church perverted in
respect to truths. Everyone can see that all these things have quite
different meanings. That something of the church that has been perverted
is called "whoredom" is quite evident; the "garments" here mentioned
denote the truths that are being perverted; the falsities thence
derived, which are worshiped, are the "high places decked with divers
colors," with which there was whoredom. (That "garments" denote truths
may be seen above, n. 1073; and that "high places" denote worship, n.
796.) The "vessels of adornment of gold and silver which I had given,"
denote the knowledges of good and truth from the Word by which they
confirm falsities; and when these appear as truths, they are called
"images of a male" with which whoredom was committed. (That the "vessels
of adornment of gold and silver," denote the knowledges of good and
truth, is evident from the signification of "gold," as being good, n.
113, 1551, 1552; and of "silver" as being truth, n. 1551, 2048; and that
the "images of a male" signify that they appear as truths may be seen
above, n. 2046.) That the "sons and daughters" which they bore and
sacrificed to them denote the truths and goods which they have
perverted, is evident from the signification of "sons and daughters"
(see n. 489-491, 533, 2362). That to "commit whoredom with the sons of
Egypt," denotes to pervert these truths and goods by means of
memory-knowledges is evident from the signification of "Egypt" as being
memory-knowledge (n. 1164, 1165, 1186, 1462). That to "commit whoredom
with the sons of Asshur," denotes to pervert them by reasonings, is
evident from the signification of "Asshur," as being reasoning (n. 119,
1186). That to "multiply whoredom even unto the land of Chaldea,"
denotes to pervert them even to the profanation of truth, which is
"Chaldea" (n. 1368). All this makes clear what is the nature of the
internal sense of the Word in the very sense of the letter. \[4\] In
like manner elsewhere in the same Prophet: Two women, the daughters of
one mother, committed whoredom in Egypt; they committed whoredom in
their youth; Samaria is Oholah, Jerusalem is Oholibah. Oholah committed
whoredom under Me, and she doted on her lovers, the Assyrians her
neighbors, she bestowed her whoredoms upon them, the choice of all the
sons of Asshur; she hath not forsaken her whoredoms from Egypt, for they
lay with her in her youth. Oholibah corrupted her love more than she,
and her whoredoms more than the whoredoms of her sister; she doted upon
the sons of Asshur; she added to her whoredoms, and saw the images of
the Chaldeans, she doted upon them at the view of her eyes; the sons of
Babel came to her into the bed of loves (Ezek. 23:2-5, 7-8, 11-12, 14,
16, etc.). "Samaria" denotes the church which is in the affection of
truth, and "Jerusalem" that which is in the affection of good; whose
"whoredoms with the Egyptians," and "with the sons of Asshur," denote
perversions of good and truth by means of memory-knowledges and
reasonings, by which falsities are confirmed, as is evident from the
signification of "Egypt" (n. 1164, 1165, 1186, 1462); and of "Asshur"
(n. 119, 1186). That this was done even to profane worship, which in
respect to truth is "Chaldea" (n. 1368); and in respect to good is the
"sons of Babel" (n. 1182, 1326). \[5\] In Isaiah: And it shall come to
pass at the end of seventy years that Jehovah will visit Tyre, and she
shall return to her harlot hire, and shall commit whoredom with all the
kingdoms of the earth (Isa. 23:17). It is the vaunting of what is false
that is signified by the "harlot hire" and the "whoredom" of Tyre. That
"Tyre" denotes the knowledges of truth may be seen above (n. 1201); and
also that the "kingdoms" with which the whoredom was committed denote
truths (n. 1672). \[6\] In Jeremiah: Thou hast committed whoredom with
many companions; and return again unto Me. Lift up thine eyes unto the
hills, and see; where hast thou not been debauched? Upon the ways hast
thou sat for them as an Arab in the wilderness, and thou hast profaned
the land with thy whoredoms and with thy wickedness (Jer. 3:1-2). To
"commit whoredoms" and to "profane the land with whoredoms" denote to
pervert and falsify the truths of the church (that the "land" denotes
the church see above, n. 662, 1066, 1067). \[7\] Again: By the voice of
her whoredom she hath profaned the land, she hath committed adultery
with stone and with wood (Jer. 3:9); to "commit adultery with stone and
with wood," denotes to pervert the truths and goods of external worship
(that "stone" is such truth may be seen above, n. 643, 1298; and that
"wood" is such good, n. 643). \[8\] Again: Because they have wrought
folly in Israel, and have committed adultery with the wives of their
fellows, and have spoken a word in My name that is false, which I
commanded them not (Jer. 29:23); to "commit adultery with the wives of
their fellows," is to teach falsity as from them. \[9\] Again: In the
prophets of Jerusalem I have seen a horrible thing, in committing
adultery and walking in falsehood (Jer. 23:14); where to "commit
adultery" regards good which is contaminated; and to "walk in falsehood"
regards truth which is perverted. Again: I have seen thine abominations;
thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the foulness of thy whoredom upon
the hills in the field. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, thou wilt not be
made clean; how long shall it yet be? (Jer. 13:27). \[10\] In Hosea:
Whoredom, and wine, and new wine, have taken possession of the heart. My
people inquireth of wood, and the staff thereof will declare it; for the
spirit of whoredom hath led them astray, and they have committed
whoredom from under their God; they sacrifice upon the tops of the
mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under the oak, the poplar,
and the terebinth \[robore\]; therefore your daughters commit whoredom,
and your daughters-in-law commit adultery; shall I not visit upon your
daughters because they commit whoredom, and upon your daughters-in-law
because they commit adultery? For they divide with whores, and sacrifice
with prostitutes (Hos. 4:11-14). What each of these things signifies in
the internal sense can be seen from the signification of "wine," as
being falsity; of "new wine," as being the evil thence derived; of the
"wood that is inquired of," as being the good of the delight of some
cupidity; of the "staff that will declare," as being the imaginary power
of their understanding; also of the "mountains" and the "hills," as
being the loves of self and of the world; of the "oak, the poplar, and
the terebinth," as being so many gross perceptions thence derived in
which they trust; of "daughters" and the "daughters-in-law" as being
such affections; all of which show what is here signified by
"whoredoms," "adulteries," and "harlots." \[11\] In the same: O Israel,
thou hast committed whoredom over thy God, thou hast loved harlot hire
upon all the corn floors (Hos. 9:1); "harlot hire" denotes the vaunting
of what is false. In Moses: Lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land, and they commit whoredom after their gods, and
sacrifice unto their gods; and one call thee, and thou eat of his
sacrifices, and thou take of his daughters for thy sons, and his
daughters commit whoredom after their gods, and make thy sons commit
whoredom after their gods (Exod. 34:15-16). In the same: I will cut off
all that commit whoredom after him, committing whoredom after Molech,
from the midst of their people; and the soul that turneth unto them that
have familiar spirits, and unto the soothsayers, to commit whoredom
after them, I will set My face against that soul, and will cut him off
from the midst of his people (Lev. 20:5-6). In the same: Your sons shall
be shepherds in the wilderness forty years, and shall bear your
whoredoms, until your bodies be consumed in the wilderness (Num. 14:33).
In the same: Remember all the precepts of Jehovah, and do them, that ye
seek not after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which ye do
commit whoredom (Num. 15:39). \[12\] And still more plainly in John: An
angel said, Come hither, I will show thee the judgment of the great
harlot that sitteth upon many waters, with whom the kings of the earth
have committed whoredom, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made
drunk with the wine of her whoredom (Rev. 17:1-2); the "great harlot"
denotes those who are in profane worship; the "many waters" upon which
she sits, are knowledges (n. 28, 739); the "kings of the earth" who have
committed whoredom with her, are the truths of the church (n. 1672,
2015, 2069); the "wine" with which they were made drunk, is falsity (n.
1071, 1072). Because "wine" and "drunkenness" signify these things, it
is said of the daughters of Lot, that they made their father drink wine
(verses 32-33, 35). \[13\] In the same: Babylon hath made all nations
drink of the wine of the fury of her whoredom, and the kings of the
earth have committed whoredom with her (Rev. 18:3). "Babylon" or "Babel"
denotes a worship the externals of which appear holy, while the
interiors are profane (n. 1182, 1295, 1326); the "nations that she makes
to drink," are the goods which are being profaned (n. 1259, 1260, 1416,
1849); the "kings" who committed whoredom with her, are truths (n. 1672,
2015, 2069). In the same: True and just are the judgments of the Lord
God, for He hath judged the great harlot, who corrupted the earth with
her whoredom (Rev. 19:2); where the "earth" denotes the church (n. 566,
662, 1066, 1068, 2117, 2118). \[14\] As "whoredoms" signify such things,
and "daughters" signify affections, it was therefore forbidden so
severely that the daughter of a priest should commit whoredom;
concerning which we read in Moses: The daughter of a priest, having
begun to commit whoredom, she is profaning her father, she shall be
burned with fire (Lev. 21:9). It was also commanded that they should not
bring the hire of a harlot into the house of Jehovah, because it is an
abomination (Deut. 23:18). And for the same reason there was such an
inquisitorial process concerning a wife whose husband had conceived a
suspicion of adultery (Num. 5:12-31), in which instance each and all
things have relation to the adulterations of good. Moreover in the Word
many different kinds of adulteries and whoredoms are spoken of, and
still more varieties. This kind which is here described by Lot's
daughters lying with their father, is what is called "Moab" and the "son
of Ammon," now to be explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2467.">2467.</span></span>

Verses 37, 38. And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab;
he is the father of Moab even unto this day. And the younger, she also
bare a son, and called his name Ben-ammi; he is the father of the sons
of Ammon even unto this day. "The firstborn bare a son," signifies the
religion of that church in respect to good; "and called his name Moab,"
signifies its quality; "he is the father of Moab even unto this day,"
signifies that this is the source of such persons. "And the younger she
also bare a son," signifies the falsified truth of that church; "and
called his name Benammi," signifies its quality; "he is the father of
the sons of Ammon even unto this day," signifies that this is the source
of such persons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2468.">2468.</span></span>

These things, again, need no confirmation; for that such things are
signified is evident from the explication itself, and from what precedes
and what follows. But what is the nature and quality of the religion
signified by "Moab" and the "sons of Ammon," can be seen from their
origin, as here described; as well as from many passages in the Word,
both historic and prophetic, where these nations are mentioned. To speak
generally they denote those who are in an external worship which appears
in a manner holy, but who are not in internal worship; and who readily
learn as being goods and truths the things that belong to external
worship, but reject and despise those of internal worship. \[2\] Such
worship and such religion fall to the lot of those who are in natural
good, but despise others in comparison with themselves. They are not
unlike fruits which in the external form are not unbeautiful, but which
are moldy or rotten within; and they are not unlike marble vases, within
which are things impure and even foul; or not unlike women seemly enough
in face, form, and manners, but diseased within, and full of impurities.
For there is a general good appertaining to such which appears not
ill-favored; but the particulars that enter into it are filthy. In the
beginning indeed it is not so, but it gradually becomes so; for such men
easily suffer themselves to be imbued with whatever things are called
good, and with any falsities whatsoever that are derived from these, and
which, because they confirm them, they suppose to be truths; and this
because they despise the interior things of worship, for the reason that
they are in the love of self. Such persons have their existence and
derivation from those who are in external worship alone (represented in
this chapter by Lot); and this when the good of truth has been
desolated. They are described in the Word, both such as they are in the
beginning, when their good has not yet become so defiled; and afterwards
when it is becoming defiled; and also after this, when it has become
utterly defiled; and it is shown that they reject the interior things of
worship and of doctrine. \[3\] The character of such in the beginning
when their good has not yet become so defiled, is described in Daniel:
In the time of the end shall the king of the south be at variance with
him; and the king of the north shall rush upon him like a storm, with
chariot, and with horsemen, and with many ships, and shall come into the
lands, and shall overflow, and shall pass through; and he shall come
into the land of beauty, and many lands shall go to ruin: these shall be
rescued out of his hand, Edom, and Moab, and the firstlings of the sons
of Ammon (Dan. 11:40-41). The "king of the south," denotes those who are
in goods and truths; the "king of the north," those who are in evils and
falsities; the "king of the north with chariot, horsemen, and ships,
coming upon the lands, overflowing, and passing through," signifies that
the evils and falsities denoted by "chariots," "horsemen," and "ships,"
will prevail; "Edom, Moab, and the firstlings of the sons of Ammon who
are to be rescued out of his hand," denote those who are in such good
that is not as yet so defiled by falsities; on which account they are
called the "firstlings of the sons of Ammon." \[4\] In Moses: We passed
through by the way of the wilderness, and Jehovah said unto Moses,
Distress not Moab, neither mingle thyself with them in war, for I will
not give thee of his land for an inheritance, because I have given Ar
unto the sons of Lot for an inheritance (Deut. 2:8-9). And concerning
the sons of Ammon: Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying, Thou art to pass
this day over Ar the border of Moab, and thou wilt come near over
against the sons of Ammon; distress them not, nor mingle thyself with
them; for I will not give thee of the land of the sons of Ammon for an
inheritance, because I have given it unto the sons of Lot for an
inheritance (Deut. 2:17-19); "Ar" denotes such good; "Moab" and the
"sons of Ammon" denote those who are in such good, but in the beginning;
on which account it is ordered that they be not distressed. \[5\] Hence
it is that Moab drove out the Emim, and the Rephaim who were like the
Anakim; and that the sons of Ammon also drove out the Rephaim whom they
called the Zamzumim (Deut. 2:9-11, 18-21). By the Emim, Rephaim, Anakim,
and Zamzumim, are signified those who are imbued with persuasions of
what is evil and false (see n. 581, 1673); by Moab and the sons of Ammon
are here meant those who were not yet so imbued. These nations however
when they too had become so imbued, that is, when their good was defiled
by falsities, were likewise driven out (Num. 21:21-31; Ezek. 25:8-11).
\[6\] Their character when their good is becoming defiled is described
in Jeremiah: Unto Moab thus saith Jehovah, Woe unto Nebo, for it is laid
waste; Kiriathaim is put to shame, is taken; Misgab is put to shame and
is dismayed; the praise of Moab is no more; give wing to Moab, for
flying she must fly away, and her cities shall become a desolation,
without any to dwell therein. Leave the cities, and dwell in the rock, O
inhabitants of Moab; and be like the dove, she maketh her nest in the
passages of the mouth of the pit. I know his anger, saith Jehovah, but
it is not firm; his falsities, they have not done right. Therefore will
I howl over Moab, and I will cry out to all Moab. From the weeping of
Jazer will I weep for thee, O vine of Sibmah; thy shoots have passed
over the sea, they reached even to the sea of Jazer; upon thy summer
fruits and upon thy vintage the spoiler is fallen. Therefore my heart is
moved over Moab, like fruits. Woe unto thee, O Moab, the people of
Chemosh is destroyed; for thy sons are taken into captivity, and thy
daughters into captivity. And I will bring back the captivity of Moab in
the latter days (Jer. 48:1, 9, 28, 30-32, 36, 46-47). \[7\] In this
whole chapter the subject treated of is Moab; but through him those are
treated of who are in such good, in that they suffer themselves to be
imbued with falsities; on which account it is said that they should
"give wing to Moab, that it may fly away, and that its cities shall
become a desolation;" but that they should "leave the cities, and dwell
in the rock, and make nests like the dove in the passages of the mouth
of the pit," and so on, by which expressions it is signified that they
are persuaded to remain in their general goods and truths; and that if
they should then be seduced by the falsities of ignorance, they will be
brought back from captivity in the latter days; but concerning those
with whom this was not done it is said, "I will howl over Moab, and I
will cry out for all Moab, and my heart is moved over Moab." The
falsities with which they are imbued are signified by Nebo, Kiriathaim,
Misgab, Sibmah, Jazer, Chemosh, and other names in this chapter. \[8\]
In Isaiah: A nest sent away shall the daughters of Moab be. Bring forth
counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow like the night <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2468-1](#fn_68) in the midst of the noonday; hide the
outcasts, betray not the wanderer, let mine outcasts dwell with thee, O
Moab; be thou a covert to them from the spoiler. We have heard the
arrogance of Moab, he is very arrogant, his pride, and his arrogance,
and his anger; his lies are not so; therefore Moab shall howl, for Moab
all shall howl. Therefore my bowels shall be stirred like a harp over
Moab, and mine inward part for the city of Heres. And it shall come to
pass when Moab shall be seen, when he is wearied upon the high place,
and shall come to his sanctuary to pray, that he shall not prevail. In
three years, as if years of hire, and the praise of Moab shall become
vile, in all the great multitude; and the remnant shall be very small,
and not strong (Isa. 16:2-4, 6, 11-12, 14). Moab is further treated of
in this whole chapter, and through him those who are in such good; and
they are described there in words similar to those in Jeremiah (chapter
48) and are in like manner persuaded to remain in their general goods
and truths, and not to suffer themselves to be imbued with falsities.
These general goods and truths are signified by their "giving counsel,"
"executing judgment," "hiding the outcasts," "not betraying the
wanderer," and being "a covert to the outcasts from the spoiler;" all of
which things signify the externals of worship. But as they suffer
themselves to be imbued with falsities, it is said, "in three years, as
years of hire, shall the praise of Moab become vile in all the great
multitude, and the remnant shall be very small, and not strong." \[9\]
As such persons are easily led away, Moab is called "the sending forth
of the band of the Philistines," and the sons of Ammon their
"obedience," in Isaiah: The root of Jesse which standeth for an ensign
of the peoples, unto Him shall the nations seek, and His rest shall be
glory; the envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the enemies of Judah shall
be cut off Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not distress
Ephraim and they shall fly upon the shoulder of the Philistines toward
the sea; together shall they spoil the sons of the east, Edom, Moab the
sending forth of their hand, and the sons of Ammon their obedience (Isa.
11:10, 13, 14) the "root of Jesse" denotes the Lord; "Judah" those who
are in celestial good; "Ephraim" those who are in spiritual truth; the
"Philistines" those who are in the mere memory-knowledge of the
knowledges of truth, and not in charity, the "sons of the east," those
who are in the mere memory-knowledge of the knowledges of good, and also
not in charity; and Moab is called the "sending forth of their hand,"
and the sons of Ammon their "obedience," because they are imbued with
falsities by them. \[10\] But of what character become those who are
called Moab and the sons of Ammon when their good has been altogether
defied by falsities, is described in David: God hath spoken in His
holiness, Gilead is Mine, Manasseh is Mine, Ephraim also is the strength
of My head, Judah is My lawgiver, Moab is My washpot (Ps. 60:7-9, and
also Ps. 108:8-10) the "washpot" denotes good defiled by falsities.
\[11\] In Jeremiah: The praise of Moab is no more in Heshbon they have
devised evil against him: come, let us cut him off from being a nation.
Moab hath been at peace from his youth, and he hath settled on his lees,
and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, and hath not gone into
exile therefore his taste remaineth in him, and his odor is not changed.
On all the housetops of Moab there shall be lamentation everywhere,
because I have broken Moab like a vessel in which there is no pleasure
(Jer. 48:2, 11, 38) The falsities with which the good denoted by Moab is
defiled, are here called "lees, in which the taste and the odor remain,"
if he is not reformed, which is here denoted by being "emptied from
vessel to vessel." This good itself is called the "vessel in which there
is no pleasure," just as in David it is called a "washpot," in which
washing is done. In Isaiah: In this mountain the band of Jehovah
resteth, and Moab shall be trodden down under it, as chaff is trodden
down in the dunghill (Isa. 25:10). \[12\] That they who are in such good
care for external things only, and despise, reject, and indeed spew out
the internal things of worship and of doctrine, and that consequently
they have falsities instead of truths - in Ezekiel: Son of man, set thy
face toward the sons of Ammon, and prophesy against them, and say unto
the sons of Ammon, Hear the word of the Lord Jehovah. Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah, Because thou saidst, Aha, against My sanctuary when it was
profaned, and against the land of Israel when it was made desolate, and
against the house of Judah when they went into captivity, I will make
Rabbah a habitation for camels, and the sons of Ammon a couching-place
for the flock. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Because thou hast clapped
the hand, and hast stamped with the foot, and hast been glad with all
the contempt of thy soul against the ground of Israel, therefore behold
I will stretch out My hand upon thee, and give thee for a spoil to the
nations, and I will cut thee off from the peoples, and destroy thee from
the lands (Ezek. 25:2-11). These words: "Aha, against My sanctuary when
it was profaned, and against the land of Israel when it was made
desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went into captivity,"
"thou hast clapped the hand, and hast stamped with the foot, and hast
been glad with all the contempt of thy soul against the land of Israel,"
are expressions of contempt, derision, and rejection of the interior
things of worship and of doctrine; and when these are rejected, external
things are of no avail; but such persons are "given for a spoil to the
nations," that is, they are taken possession of by evils, and are "cut
off from the peoples," that is by falsities, and are "destroyed from the
earth," that is they become of no church. \[13\] In Zephaniah: I have
heard the reproach of Moab, and the blasphemies of the sons of Ammon,
who have reproached My people; they enlarged against their border:
therefore, as I live, Moab shall be as Sodom, and the sons of Ammon as
Gomorrah, a place abandoned to the nettle, and a pit of salt, and a
perpetual desolation. This they have for their pride, because they
reproached and enlarged against the people of Jehovah Zebaoth (Zeph.
2:8-10). To "reproach the people," and to "enlarge against their
boundary, and against the people of Jehovah Zebaoth," is to hold as vile
and to reject interior truths, which are the "people of Jehovah
Zebaoth." The consequence of this is that goods become evils of falsity,
which are "Sodom" and a "place abandoned to the nettle;" and truths
become falsities, which are "Gomorrah" and a "pit of salt." For it is
from internal things that external are capable of being good and true.
\[14\] In David: Thine enemies craftily meditate a secret thing against
thy people, they consult together against thy hidden ones: Come, let us
cut them off from being a nation, and let the name of Israel be no more
in remembrance for they consult together with one heart; against thee do
they cut out a covenant, the tents of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, Moab
and the Hagarenes, Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, Philistia with the
inhabitants of Tyre Asshur also is joined with them, they are an arm to
the sons of Lot (Ps. 83:2-8). To "consult together against the hidden
ones," to "cut them off from being a nation, that the name of Israel
should be no more in remembrance," denotes to utterly reject interior
things; the "tents of Edom, the Ishmaelites, Noah, the Hagarenes, Gebal,
and Ammon," denote those who are in the external things of worship and
of doctrine; "Philistia with Tyre" denote the things they say concerning
internal things while not being in them; "Asshur, who is an arm to the
sons of Lot," denotes the reasoning by which they contend in favor of
external things and against internal things. \[15\] In Moses: A man
shall not take his father's wife, and shall not violate his father's
skirt. He that is bruised with a bruising, or is bruised in the
testicle, shall not come into the congregation of Jehovah; a Moabite and
an Ammonite shall not come into the congregation of Jehovah; even to the
tenth generation, they shall not come into the congregation of Jehovah
forever (Deut. 22:30; 23:1-3). These words show what is the character of
Moab and Ammon in the "end of days," or when they have become altogether
imbued with falsities (that is, those with whom good is being
adulterated and truth falsified), in that they despise, reject, and at
length utterly cast out all interior things. On this account they are
here mentioned after mention has been made of foul adulteries, such as
taking a father's wife, and violating a father's skirt; nearly as is
related of Lot's daughters, from whom came Moab and Ammon; and also
after the mention of those who are bruised with a bruising, and bruised
in the testicle, by whom are signified those who utterly reject whatever
is of love and charity. The "congregation of Jehovah" is heaven, into
which they cannot come, because they have no remains, which are solely
from interior goods and interior truths, and are signified by the "tenth
generation" (n. 576, 1738, 2280). \[16\] These were also among the
nations who sacrificed their sons and daughters to Molech, by which is
signified in the internal sense that they extinguished truths and goods;
for the god of Moab was Chemosh, and the god of the sons of Ammon was
Molech and Milchom (1 Kings 11:7, 33; 2 Kings 23:13), to which they
sacrificed (2 Kings 3:27). That by "sons and daughters" are signified
truths and goods, may be seen above (n. 489-491, 533, 1147). \[17\] Such
then is the signification of Moab and Ammon; but as regards the various
kinds of falsity by which they adulterate goods and extinguish truths,
these are numerous, being thus recounted in Jeremiah, but merely by
names: Judgment is come upon the land of the plain, upon Holon, upon
Jahzah, and upon Mephaath; and upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon
Beth-diblathaim; and upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gamul, and upon
Beth-meon; and upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon all the cities of
the land of Moab, far and near. The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm
is broken. Make him drunken, because he magnified himself against
Jehovah; and let Moab exult in his vomit (Jer. 48:21-26). These are the
kinds of falsity that assemble together in those who are called Moab and
Ammon; but what is the nature and quality of these various kinds of
falsity can be seen from the signification of these several names in the
internal sense. That in the Word names signify nothing else than actual
things, has often been shown already.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2469.">2469.</span></span>

CONCERNING MAN'S MEMORY WHICH REMAINS AFTER DEATH, AND THE RECOLLECTION
OF WHAT HE HAD DONE IN THE LIFE OF THE BODY Scarcely anyone has yet
known that every man has two memories, one exterior and the other
interior; and that the exterior memory is proper to his body, but the
interior memory to his spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2470.">2470.</span></span>

Man, while living in the body, can scarcely be aware that he has an
interior memory, because the interior memory then acts almost as one
with his exterior memory; for the ideas of thought of the interior
memory flow into the things in the exterior memory as into their
vessels, and the two are there conjoined together. It is as when angels
and spirits are speaking to a man; for then the ideas of the former, by
which they converse with each other, flow into the words of the man's
language, and so conjoin themselves with them that the spirits know no
otherwise than that they are speaking the man's own language; when yet
the ideas are theirs, and the words into which they flow are the man's;
on which subject I have often spoken with spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2471.">2471.</span></span>

These two memories are entirely distinct from each other. To the
exterior memory, which is proper to man while he is living in the world,
pertain all the words of languages, also the objects of the outer
senses, and also the knowledges that belong to the world. To the
interior memory pertain the ideas of the speech of spirits, which are of
the inner sight, and all rational things, from the ideas of which
thought itself comes into existence. That these two classes of things
are distinct from each other, man does not know, both because he does
not reflect upon it, and because he is in corporeal things, from which
he cannot then so far withdraw his mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2472.">2472.</span></span>

Hence it is that men while living in the body cannot speak with each
other except by means of languages distinguished into articulate sounds,
that is, into words, and are unable to understand one another unless
they are acquainted with these languages, for the reason that their
speech is from the exterior memory. Whereas spirits speak with each
other by means of a universal language distinguished into ideas such as
are of thought itself, and thus they can have converse with any spirit
whatever, of whatever language and nation he had been while in the
world, for the reason that their speech is from the interior memory.
Into this language comes every man immediately after death, because he
comes into this memory, which, as before said, is proper to his spirit
(see n. 1637, 1639, 1757, 1876).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2473.">2473.</span></span>

The interior memory immeasurably surpasses the exterior, and is
relatively as are some myriads to one, or as light is to darkness; for
myriads of the ideas of the interior memory flow into a single thing of
the exterior memory, and there present a general obscure something.
Hence all the faculties of spirits, and still more those of angels, are
in a more perfect state, that is, both their sensations, and their
thoughts and perceptions. In what way the interior memory excels the
exterior, may be seen from examples. When a man calls to remembrance any
other man whose quality is known to him from the interaction of many
years, whether a friend or an enemy, that which he then thinks about him
is presented as one obscure thing; and this because he is thinking from
the exterior memory. But when the same man has become a spirit, and
calls the other to remembrance, that which he then thinks about him is
presented as to all the ideas which he had ever conceived concerning
him; and this because he is then thinking from the interior memory. And
so it is with everything: the thing itself about which anyone has known
many things presents itself in the exterior memory as a single general
thing; but in the interior memory it presents itself as to all the
particulars about which he has ever acquired for himself an idea in
respect to that thing; and this in a wonderful form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2474.">2474.</span></span>

All things whatever that a man hears and sees, and by which he is
affected, are, unknown to the man, insinuated as to ideas and ends into
his interior memory; and they remain in it, so that not anything
perishes; although the same things are obliterated in the exterior
memory. Such therefore is the interior memory that there are inscribed
on it all the single, nay, the most singular things that the man has
ever thought, spoken, and done; nay, even those which have appeared to
him as but a shade, with the minutest particulars, from his earliest
infancy to the last of old age. The memory of all these things the man
has with him when he comes into the other life, and he is successively
brought into full recollection of them. This is his Book of Life, which
is opened in the other life, and according to which he is judged. He
then can scarcely believe this, but yet it is most true. All the ends,
which to him have been in obscurity, and all the things he has thought;
together with everything that from these he has spoken and done, down to
the smallest point, are in that Book, that is, in the interior memory,
and whenever the Lord grants, are made manifest before the angels as in
clear day. This has several times been shown me, and has been attested
by so much experience that not the least doubt remains.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2475.">2475.</span></span>

As yet no one knows what is the state of souls after death in respect to
the memory. From much and daily experience of many years, it has been
given me to know that after death a man loses nothing whatever of what
has been in his memories, whether in the exterior or in the interior
memory; insomuch that nothing can possibly be thought of so small or so
minute that the man does not have it with him; so that after death he
leaves nothing whatever behind him except his bones and flesh, which,
while he lived in the world, were not animated from themselves, but from
the life of his spirit, which was his purer substance annexed to the
things of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2476.">2476.</span></span>

But as regards man's exterior memory, the case is this: He has all
things of it with him both in general and in particular; but he is not
then allowed to use this memory, but only the interior memory. The
reasons are many; the first being that which has been stated, namely,
that from the interior memory one can speak and have interaction in the
other life with all in the universe. The second is, that this memory is
proper to the spirit and is adapted to the state in which it then is;
for exterior things-that is, those of memory-knowledge, of the world,
and of the body-are adapted to man and correspond to his state while he
is in the world and the body; but interior things-that is, things
rational, spiritual, and celestial-are adapted and correspond to his
spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2477.">2477.</span></span>

I once heard spirits speaking together of the fact that whatever is
adopted as a principle, no matter what it may be, can be confirmed by
innumerable things, until at length, to the man who has confirmed
himself, it appears entirely true even though false; and that men can be
more easily persuaded of a falsity than of a truth. In order that they
might be convinced of this, it was proposed to them that they should
think and speak together on the point as to whether it is useful to
spirits to use the exterior memory (for spirits converse on such
subjects in a manner far surpassing man's belief, or even conception,
but each one in accordance with his affection). The spirits who were in
favor of corporeal and worldly things confirmed the proposition in
question by many reasons, such as that in this way they would have lost
nothing, but would be men after death equally as before; that in this
way they could come again into the world through man; that the delight
of life is in the exterior memory; and that in no other faculty and
endowment are there intelligence and wisdom; besides many other reasons
by which they confirmed themselves in their principle, until it appeared
to them true. \[2\] But others then thought and spoke from the opposite
principle, knowing that what they said was true, because it was from
Divine order. They said that if spirits were permitted to use the
exterior memory they would then be in similar imperfection as before,
when they were men; that by so doing they would be in gross and obscure
ideas, in comparison with those who are in the interior memory; and thus
would not only become more and more foolish, but would also descend, and
not ascend; thus would not live eternally; for to immerse themselves
again in worldly and corporeal things would be to give themselves again
into a state of death. They said also that if spirits were permitted to
use the exterior memory the human race would perish; for every man is
directed by the Lord through angels and spirits; and that if spirits
were to flow into man from the exterior memory, he could not think from
his own memory, but only from that of the spirit; thus man would come to
be no longer in the enjoyment of his own life and his own freedom, but
would be obsessed (the obsessions of former times being nothing else);
besides other reasons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2478.">2478.</span></span>

In order that I might know how the case is as to man's not being able to
think from his own memory if spirits flowed in from their exterior
memory, it has been permitted two or three times that this should be
done; and I then knew no otherwise than that that was mine which was not
mine, but a spirit's; and that I had thought things before which I had
not thought; and this I was not able to perceive until they withdrew.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2479.">2479.</span></span>

A certain newly arrived spirit was indignant that he did not remember
many things which he knew in the life of the body, grieving on account
of the delight which he had lost, and with which he had been very
greatly pleased. But he was told that he had lost nothing at all, and
that he knew everything he had known; but that in the other life it is
not permitted to draw forth such things; and that it is sufficient that
he is now able to think and speak much better and more perfectly,
without immersing his rational as before in dense, obscure, material,
and corporeal things which are of no use in the kingdom into which he
has now come; and that the things which were in the kingdom of the world
had been left behind; and that he now has whatever conduces to the use
of eternal life; and that thus and not otherwise can he become blessed
and happy; thus that it is a result of ignorance to believe that in the
other life intelligence perishes with the disuse of the corporeal
memory; when yet the case is that insofar as the mind can be withdrawn
from sensuous or corporeal things, so far is it elevated to spiritual
and heavenly things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2480.">2480.</span></span>

Seeing that men after death are in the interior memory (which has
belonged to their rational) therefore those who in the world have been
preeminently skilled in languages, cannot call forth even one syllable
of them; and they who have been preeminently versed in the sciences
cannot call up anything of their knowledges, and are sometimes more
stupid than others. But whatever they have imbibed by means of the
languages, or of the sciences, this they bring forth into use, because
it has formed their rational. The rational they had so procured is that
from which they think and speak. He who has imbibed falsities by means
of the languages and sciences, and has confirmed himself in them,
reasons from nothing but falsities; but he who has imbibed and confirmed
truths, speaks from the truths. It is the affection itself which gives
life-the affection of evil which gives life to falsities, and the
affection of good which gives life to truths. Everyone thinks from
affection, and no one without affection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2481.">2481.</span></span>

That men after death, that is, spirits, have lost nothing whatever of
the things which belong to their external or corporeal memory; but that
they retain all things of it (that is to say, they retain the whole of
it), although it is not permitted to bring forth from it the
particulars <span id="fr_69"></span>[2481-1](#fn_69) of their life, has
been given me to know from much experience, as may be seen from what
follows. Two persons whom I had known during their life in the body, and
who had been enemies to each other, met; and I heard one describing the
character of the other with many circumstances, and also telling what
opinion he had had of him, repeating an entire letter that he had
written to him, and many other things in series which were particulars,
and that belonged to the exterior memory; all of which the other
acknowledged, and at which he was silent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2482.">2482.</span></span>

I heard a certain one upbraiding another, in that he had kept back his
property, and had not restored it; and this together with circumstances
that were of the exterior memory, until the other was ashamed. I also
heard the other replying, and rehearsing the reasons why he had done it;
all of which were worldly particulars.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2483.">2483.</span></span>

A certain woman was let into the state in which she had been in the
world when she had plotted a misdeed; and then all the details of her
thoughts, and of her conversation with another female, came out as into
clear day. A certain female belonging to the crew of the Sirens, because
she persisted in denying that she had been such in the life of the body,
was let into the state of her corporeal memory; and then her adulteries
and shameless deeds, which while she lived had been known to scarcely
anyone, were laid open and were recounted in series, almost to hundreds:
where she had been; with whom she had committed adultery; what she then
plotted; and all these as much to the life as if in open day; thus was
she convicted. Such things are brought forth when anyone desires to
exculpate himself from having been such; and indeed to the life, with
every circumstance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2485.">2485.</span></span>

A certain one was with me whom I had not known during his life in the
body. When I inquired whether he knew whence he was, he did not know;
but by means of the interior sight he was led by me through the cities
where I had been, and at length through the city from which he was, and
then through its streets and squares, all of which he recognized, and at
length into the street where he had dwelt; and if I had been acquainted
with the houses, and how they were situated, I should have been able to
know his house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2486.">2486.</span></span>

That men have with them everything of the corporeal memory, both in
general and in particular, has frequently been made evident to me from
those with whom I had been acquainted during their life in the body, in
that when I spoke with them they recognized everything they had done
while I was present, and which they had then spoken and thought. From
these and many other experiences, it has been given me to know for
certain that a man carries with him into the other life all things of
the exterior or corporeal memory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2487.">2487.</span></span>

I have been instructed that regarded in itself the exterior memory is
simply something organic formed from the objects of the senses-specially
those of the sight and of the hearing-in the substances which are the
beginnings of the fibers; and that according to the impressions from
these objects are effected variations of form, which are reproduced; and
that these forms are varied and changed according to the changes of the
state of the affections and persuasions. Also that the interior memory
is in like manner organic, but purer and more perfect, being formed from
the objects of the interior sight; which objects are disposed into
regular series, in an incomprehensible order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2488.">2488.</span></span>

Before I had been instructed by living experience, I had supposed, as do
others, that no spirit could possibly know the things in my memory and
in my thought; but that they were solely in my possession, and were
hidden. But I can assert that the spirits with man know and take note of
the smallest things of his memory and thoughts; and this much more
clearly than the man himself; and that the angels know and take note of
the ends themselves, how they bend themselves from good to evil, and
from evil to good; and of many more things than the man knows; such as
those which he has immersed in his delights, and thus as it were in his
nature and disposition; for when this is done such things no longer
appear, because he no longer reflects upon them. Let no man therefore
any longer believe that his thoughts are hidden, and that he is not to
render an account of his thoughts, and of his deeds according to the
degree and the quality of the thoughts that have been in them; for the
deeds have their quality from the thoughts, and the thoughts from the
ends.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2489.">2489.</span></span>

The things of the interior memory manifest themselves in the other life
by a certain sphere, from which the quality of spirits is known at a
distance, that is, what is their affection, and what their opinions.
This sphere comes forth from the activity of the things in the interior
memory. (Concerning these spheres see above, n. 1048, 1053, 1316, 1504,
etc.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2490.">2490.</span></span>

As regards the interior memory the case is this: There are retained in
it not only all and each of the things the man from his infancy has ever
seen and heard, and those he has thought, spoken, and done; but also
those which he sees and hears, and which he thinks, speaks, and does, in
the other life. But this takes place with a difference. They who are in
the persuasion of falsity and the cupidity of evil imbibe and retain all
things that are in agreement therewith, for they enter in as water does
into a sponge. All other things do indeed also flow thereto, but are
retained so slightly that they scarcely know that they are anything. But
they who are in the faith of truth and the affection of good retain all
things which are true and good, and are thereby being continually
perfected. Hence it is that they can be instructed, and that they are
instructed in the other life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2491.">2491.</span></span>

There are spirits whose origin shall of the Lord's Divine mercy be
spoken of elsewhere, who relate to the interior memory. These wander
about in bands, and in wonderful ways elicit whatever others know, and
whatever they hear they communicate to their companions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2492.">2492.</span></span>

The nature of the memories is sometimes presented to view in the other
life, in forms to be seen there alone. (Many things are there presented
to the sight, which in the case of men fall only into the ideas.) The
exterior memory is thus presented to view as a callosity; the interior
memory as a medullary substance such as is in the human brain. From this
circumstance it is possible to know of what quality the spirits are.
With those who in the life of the body have fostered the memory alone,
and so have not cultivated their rational, the callosity appears hard,
and striated within. With those who have filled the memory with
falsities, it appears as if made of hair and shaggy, and this from the
disorderly mass of things. With those who have fostered the memory for
the sake of the love of self and of the world, it appears conglutinated
and indurated. With those who have desired to penetrate into Divine
arcana by things scientific, and especially by things philosophical, and
who would not believe until persuaded by means of these things, it
appears dark, and of such a nature as to absorb the rays of light, and
turn them into darkness. With those who have been deceitful and
hypocrites, it appears as if bony and of ebony, <span
id="fr_70"></span>[2492-1](#fn_70) reflecting the rays of light. But
with those who have been in the good of love and the truth of faith,
such a callosity does not appear; because their interior memory
transmits the rays of light into the exterior memory, in the objects or
ideas of which-as in their basis or as in their ground-the rays are
terminated, and find there delightful receptacles. For the exterior
memory is the ultimate of order, in which spiritual and heavenly things
are softly terminated and reside when there are goods and truths
therein.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2493.">2493.</span></span>

I have spoken with the angels concerning the memory of things past, and
the consequent anxiety regarding things to come; and I have been
instructed that the more interior and perfect the angels are, the less
do they care for past things, and the less do they think of things to
come; and also that from this comes their happiness. They say that the
Lord gives them every moment what to think, and this with blessedness
and happiness; and that they are thus free from cares and anxieties.
Also, that this was meant in the internal sense by the manna being
received daily from heaven; and by the daily bread in the Lord's Prayer;
and likewise by the instruction not to be solicitous about what they
should eat and drink, and wherewithal they should be clothed. But
although the angels do not care for past things, and are not solicitous
about things to come, they nevertheless have the most perfect
recollection of past things, and the most perfect mental view of things
to come; because in all their present there are both the past and the
future. Thus they have a more perfect memory than can ever be thought of
or expressed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2494.">2494.</span></span>

When men who are in love to the Lord and in charity toward the neighbor
are living in the world, they have with themselves and in themselves
angelic intelligence and wisdom, but stored up in the inmosts of their
interior memory; which intelligence and wisdom cannot possibly appear to
them until they put off corporeal things. Then the memory of particulars
(spoken of above) is put to sleep; and they are awakened into the
interior memory, and successively afterwards into the angelic memory
itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2495.">2495.</span></span>

CHAPTER 20 That the Word contains within it an internal sense that is
not apparent in the letter has already been stated and shown in many
places, and the nature of this internal sense appears from all that has
thus far been unfolded, beginning with the first chapter of Genesis.
Nevertheless as the few who at this day believe in the Word do not know
that there is such a sense, it may be well to confirm it further. \[2\]
The Lord describes the Consummation of the Age, or the last period of
the church, as follows: Immediately after the affliction of those days
the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and
the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be
shaken (Matt. 24:29; Mark 13:24). That in this passage the "sun" does
not mean the sun, nor the "moon" the moon, nor the "stars" the stars;
but that the "sun" signifies love to the Lord and charity toward the
neighbor; the "moon" the faith of love and charity; and the "stars" the
knowledges of good and truth, was shown above (n. 31, 32, 1053, 1521,
1529-1531, 2120, 2441); so that by these words of the Lord there is
signified that in the consummation of the age (or last period of the
church) there will no longer be any love, or charity, nor therefore any
faith. \[3\] That this is the meaning is evident from similar words of
the Lord in the Prophets, as in Isaiah: Behold, the day of Jehovah
cometh, to make the earth a solitude and He shall destroy the sinners
thereof out of it; for the stars of the heavens and the constellations
thereof shall not shine with their light; the sun shall be darkened in
his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine (Isa.
13:9-10); where also the last period of the church, or what is the same,
the consummation of the age, is treated of. In Joel: A day of darkness
and of thick darkness, a day of cloud and obscurity, before Him the
earth quaked, the heavens trembled, the sun and the moon were darkened,
and the stars withdrew their shining (Joel 2:2, 10); with a similar
meaning. Again in the same: The sun shall be turned into darkness, and
the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of Jehovah comes
(Joel 2:31). And again in the same: The day of Jehovah is near, the sun
and the moon have been darkened, and the stars have withdrawn their
shining (Joel 3:14-15). In Ezekiel: When I shall extinguish thee, I will
cover the heavens, and make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun
with a cloud, and the moon shall not make her light to shine; all the
luminaries of light in the heavens will I make dark, and will set
darkness upon thy land (Ezek. 32:7-8). So too in John: I saw when he
opened the sixth seal, and behold there was a great earthquake, and the
sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood, and
the stars fell unto the earth (Rev. 6:12, 13). The fourth angel sounded,
so that the third part of the sun was smitten, and the third part of the
moon, and the third part of the stars, and the third part of them was
darkened (Rev. 8:12). \[4\] From these passages it is evident that the
Lord's words in the Evangelists involve much the same as His words in
the Prophets, namely, that in the last times there will be neither
charity, nor faith; and that this is the internal sense; as also is
still further evident in Isaiah: The moon shall blush, and the sun shall
be ashamed, for Jehovah Zebaoth shall reign in Mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem (Isa. 24:23); that is to say, faith, which is the "moon,"
shall blush; and charity, which is the "sun," shall be ashamed, because
they are such; for it cannot be said of the moon and the sun that they
shall blush and be ashamed. And in Daniel: The goat's horn grew toward
the south, and toward the east, and grew even to the army of the
heavens, and some of the army and of the stars it cast down to the earth
and trampled upon them (Dan. 8:9-10); where it is plain to everyone that
the "army of the heavens" does not signify an "army," nor the "stars"
stars. GENESIS 20 1. And Abraham journeyed thence toward the land of the
south, and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur, and he sojourned in Gerar. 2.
And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister; and Abimelech king
of Gerar sent and took Sarah. 3. And God came to Abimelech in a dream by
night, and said to him, Behold thou wilt die because of the woman whom
thou hast taken, for she is married to a husband. 4. And Abimelech had
not come near her; and he said, Lord, wilt Thou slay also a righteous
nation? 5. Said he not himself unto me, She is my sister? And she
herself also said, He is my brother: in the uprightness of my heart and
in the blamelessness of my hands have I done this. 6. And God said unto
him in the dream, Yea, I know that in the uprightness of thy heart thou
hast done this; and I also withheld thee from sinning against Me;
therefore I did not suffer thee to touch her. 7. And now restore the
man's wife, for he is a prophet; and he shall pray for thee, and thou
shalt live; and if thou restore her not, know thou that dying thou shalt
die, thou and all that are thine. 8. And Abimelech rose early in the
morning, and called all his servants, and spoke all these words in their
ears; and the men feared greatly. 9. And Abimelech called Abraham, and
said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? And wherein have I sinned
against thee that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
Thou hast done unto me deeds that ought not to be done. 10. And
Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou that thou hast done this
word? 11. And Abraham said, Because I said, Surely there is no fear of
God in this place, and they will kill me on account of the word of my
wife. 12. And moreover truly she is my sister, being the daughter of my
father, but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife. 13.
And it came to pass when God caused me to depart from my father's house
that I said unto her, This is thy goodness which thou shalt do unto me;
at every place whither we shall come, say of me, He is my brother. 14.
And Abimelech took flock and herd, and menservants and maidservants, and
gave unto Abraham; and restored to him Sarah his wife. 15. And Abimelech
said, Behold my land is before thee; dwell in that which is good in
thine eyes. 16. And unto Sarah he said, Behold I have given a thousand
of silver to thy brother; behold it is unto thee a covering of the eyes
to all that are with thee, and with all; and she was vindicated. 17. And
Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his
maidservants; and they brought forth. 18. For closing Jehovah had
therefore closed every womb of the house of Abimelech, because of the
word of Sarah, Abraham's wife.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2496.">2496.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. In the twelfth chapter above, Abraham's sojourning in
Egypt has been treated of; by which was signified the Lord's instruction
in memory-knowledges while still a boy. In this chapter the subject
treated of is Abraham's sojourn in Gerar, where Abimelech was; by which
the Lord's instruction is in like manner signified, but in the doctrinal
things of charity and faith. The subject that is especially treated of
here is the doctrine of charity and faith in respect to its origin;
namely, that it is spiritual from a celestial origin, but is not from
the rational.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2497.">2497.</span></span>

The Lord's state in which He was when He first instructed Himself in the
doctrinal things of charity and faith is treated of; the state itself is
signified by "Kadesh and Shur;" the doctrine of faith by "Abimelech king
of Gerar" (verses 1, 2). That He at first thought in regard to the
rational that it should be consulted (verse 2). That still it was not
consulted (verses 3, 4, 8, 9). The reasons why He so thought (verses 5,
6, 10 to 13). That the doctrine of charity and faith is spiritual from a
celestial origin (verse 7). That He was so instructed; and that then all
things rational, as well as all memory-knowledges, were of service to
Him, being like a covering or garment (verses 14 to 16). And in this way
the doctrine was perfect (verse 17). That it would have been otherwise
if the doctrine had come from the rational (verse 18).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2498.">2498.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE That these historical matters, like all the other
things of the Word, involve Divine arcana, is evident from the fact that
Abraham now again said that his wife was his sister; for the same thing
had occurred when he came into Egypt; for he then said to Sarah, "Say, I
pray, thou art my sister" (Gen. 12:13). And not Abraham alone, but Isaac
likewise, when he came to Gerar, said that his wife Rebecca was his
sister: "The men of that place asked concerning his wife, and he said,
She is my sister" (Gen. 26:6-7); and there are other things in the same
chapters that resemble each other, so that such historical matters are
related three times; which, without a hidden cause in the internal
sense, would by no means have been done.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2499.">2499.</span></span>

Verse 1. And Abraham journeyed thence toward the land of the south, and
dwelt between Kadesh and Shur, and he sojourned in Gerar. "Abraham
journeyed thence toward the land of the south," signifies the Lord's
progression in the goods and truths of faith ("Abraham" is the Lord in
that state); "and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur," signifies His state
specifically ("Kadesh" is the affection of interior truth proceeding
from things rational; "Shur" is the affection of exterior truth
proceeding from memory-knowledges); "and he sojourned in Gerar,"
signifies instruction thence in the spiritual things of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2500.">2500.</span></span>

Abraham journeyed thence toward the land of the south. That this
signifies the Lord's progression in the goods and truths of faith, is
evident from the signification of "journeying," as being to progress
(see n. 1457); and from the signification of the "land of the south," as
being the good and truth of faith (see n. 1458). It has already been
stated concerning Abraham, in the twelfth chapter, that he "journeyed,
going and journeying toward the south," when he went into Egypt (verses
9, 10); by which was signified in the internal sense that the Lord when
a child progressed into goods and truths in respect to the
memory-knowledge of knowledges (n. 1456, 1459); <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2500-1](#fn_71) and here it is said that he journeyed
"toward the land of the south," by which there is signified a further
and more interior progression, which is into goods and truths in respect
to the doctrine of faith; on which account it is here said the "land" of
the south, because "land" in its proper sense signifies the church, for
the sake of which is doctrine (n. 566, 662, 1066, 2117, 2118). \[2\] As
regards the Lord's instruction in general, the nature of it is very
clear in the internal sense of this chapter; namely, that it was by
continual revelations, and thus by Divine perceptions and thoughts from
Himself, that is, from His Divine; which perceptions and thoughts He
implanted in Divine intelligence and wisdom, and this even to the
perfect union of His Human with His Divine. This way of growing wise is
not possible with any man; for it flowed in from the Divine itself,
which was His inmost, being of the Father, of whom He was conceived;
thus from the Divine Love itself, which the Lord alone had, and which
consisted in His desire to save the universal human race. \[3\] It is an
arcanum which is as yet known to scarcely anyone, that within love
itself there are wisdom and intelligence; these being such as is the
love. That wisdom and intelligence are within love comes from the fact
that all influx takes place into the love, or what is the same, into the
good, thus into man's very life. This is the source of the wisdom and
intelligence of the angels, which is ineffable. It is also the source of
the wisdom and intelligence of men who are in love to the Lord and in
charity toward the neighbor; who, although they have no perception of it
in themselves while they are living in the body, nevertheless come into
it after death, for the reason that it is within this very love and
charity (see n. 2494). But as regards the Lord's love, it was infinitely
above the love in which the angels are, for it was the Divine love
itself; and therefore He had in Himself a supereminence of all wisdom
and intelligence; into which however because He was born a man, and was
to progress as a man according to Divine order, He introduced Himself by
successive steps, in order that He might thus unite His Human to the
Divine, and make it Divine; and this by His own power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[2468-1](ac050.htm#fr_68) Totam but sicut noctem
n. 9642 \[Rotch ed.\]

<span id="fn_69"></span>[2481-1](ac050.htm#fr_69) By "particulars"
Swedenborg here means such things as the words of natural languages, the
names of men, and of cities, together with other similar merely external
matters. See this plainly stated in the Spiritual Experiences, n.2285.
\[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_70"></span>[2492-1](ac050.htm#fr_70) Ebena, perhaps for
eburnea, of ivory, as in the Apocalypse Explained, n. 253. \[Rotch ed.\]

<span id="fn_71"></span>[2500-1](ac050.htm#fr_71) That is in respect to
possessing a mere memory acquaintance with the knowledges of what is
good and true. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2501-2550](ac051)
