[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac062)  [Next](ac064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="3101.">3101.</span></span>

To know whether Jehovah had prospered his way or not. That this
signifies inquiry concerning Divine truth, what it was, is evident from
the signification of a "way," as being truth (see n. 627, 2333); whether
it was Divine is signified by its being said "whether Jehovah had
prospered it," which is the same as inquiring whether it was from
Jehovah, or from the Divine, and thus what truth it was; for truths
which are called forth from the natural man into the rational are not
all received; but only those which agree with the good there, and thus
by insemination and insertion act as one with it; the rest, although
they had appeared as truths before they were elevated, still are not
received, because they are not acknowledged. It is good that
acknowledges its own truth, and it is truth that acknowledges its own
good. That the truth was acknowledged for what it was, and that thus it
was received, is also clear from what now follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3102.">3102.</span></span>

And it came to pass when the camels had done drinking. That this
signifies acknowledgment from enlightenment in general
memory-knowledges, is evident from the fact that the two expressions,
"it came to pass," and "had done," signify what is successive, and
involve the end of the act that precedes and the beginning of the act
that follows (see above, n. 3093); here therefore they signify
acknowledgment, as shown just above. The same is evident also from the
signification of "camels," as being general memory-knowledges (see n.
3048, 3071); and from the signification of "drinking," as being here the
same as "drawing waters" (see n. 3097), and also the same as "giving to
drink" (see n. 3058, 3071), namely, being enlightened. Hence it is
evident that by these words, "and it came to pass when the camels had
done drinking," is signified the acknowledgment of truth Divine from
enlightenment in general memory-knowledges. \[2\] The case is really
this: Every truth that is elevated out of the natural man, that is, out
of memory-knowledges (or out of knowledges and doctrinal things, for
these are of the natural man) into the rational, and there received,
must first be acknowledged for what it is, and whether it is in
agreement with the good that is in the rational or not; if it is in
agreement, it is received; and if not, it is rejected. There are many
apparent truths in a single company; but only those are conjoined which
acknowledge the good there, and thus which mutually love each other. In
order, however, that they may be acknowledged to be such, there must be
enlightenment in the natural man, by which all things there both in
general and in particular may be seen at one view, and that thus there
may be choice. This enlightenment in the natural man is from good, but
still is by means of truth (see n. 3094). It is this enlightenment that
is signified by Rebekah's drawing for the camels, and making them drink,
or giving them to drink.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3103.">3103.</span></span>

And the man took a jewel of gold. That this signifies Divine good, is
evident from the signification of a "jewel of gold," as being good; and
here, because in the internal sense the Lord is treated of, it signifies
the Divine good; and because this is from the rational, the term "man"
\[vir\] is used (that a "man" denotes the rational, may be seen above,
n. 265, 749, 1007). In ancient times, when the forms of worship in
churches were representative, and it was known what they signified, when
marriages were being entered upon it was customary to give the bride a
jewel of gold and bracelets, because the church was represented by the
bride, its good by the jewel, and its truth by the bracelets; and
because it was known that the conjugial love with the bride and the wife
descends from the marriage of the Lord's Divine good and Divine truth
(n. 2508, 2618, 2727-2729). The jewel of gold was put upon the nose, as
is evident also from what is said afterwards, that he "put the jewel
upon her nose" (verse 47), for the reason that the nose signified the
life of good, from the respiration there, which in the internal sense is
life, and also from the fragrance, which is what is grateful to the
love, the good of which it is (n. 96, 97). \[2\] That the "jewel" was
the badge of marriage as to good, is evident also from other passages of
the Word as in Ezekiel: I decked thee with ornaments, and I put
bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain upon thy throat; and I put a jewel
upon thy nose (Ezek. 16:11-12); concerning the Ancient Church, here
called "Jerusalem," which is described as a bride, to whom were given
bracelets, a chain, and a jewel. "Bracelets upon the hands" were a badge
representative of truth; and a "jewel upon the nose" was a badge
representative of good. \[3\] In Isaiah: Because the daughters of Zion
are haughty, the Lord will make bald the crown of their head, and will
take away the rings, and the nose jewels, the changes of garments, and
the mantles (Isa. 3:16-18, 21-22). The "daughters of Zion who are
haughty," denote the affections of evil within the church (n. 2362,
3024); the "rings and the nose jewels which will be removed," denote
good and its badges; the "changes of garments and the mantles," truth
and its badges. \[4\] In Hosea: I will visit upon her the days of the
Baalim to which she burned incense; and she put on her nose jewel and
her ornaments, and went after her lovers (Hos. 2:13); treating of the
perverted church, and the new church after it. The "nose jewel" here
also denotes a badge of the good of the church. When these jewels were
fitted to the ears, they also signified good, but good in act; and in
the opposite sense evil in act (as in Gen. 35:4; Exod. 32:2, 3).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3104.">3104.</span></span>

Of half a shekel weight. That this signifies sufficient for initiation,
is evident from the signification of a "shekel," a "half shekel," and
"weight." That a "shekel" is the price or estimation of good and truth,
and that a "half shekel" is the determination of its quantity, may be
seen above (n. 2959). That "weight" signifies the state of a thing as to
good will be seen presently; and thus it is evident that "of half a
shekel weight" signifies and involves the quantity in respect to the
good meant by the jewel of gold. That it is for initiation, follows from
what precedes and follows. \[2\] That "weight" is the state of a thing
as to good, is evident from the following passages of the Word. In
Ezekiel: The prophet was to eat food by weight, twenty shekels a day;
and was to drink water by measure, the sixth part of a hin; for behold,
I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread
by weight and with anxiety, and they shall drink water by measure and
with astonishment, that they may want bread and water (Ezek. 4:10-11,
16-17). Here the vastation of good and of truth is treated of, a
representation of which was made by the prophet. The state of vastated
good is signified by their "eating food and bread by weight;" and the
state of vastated truth by their "drinking water by measure" (that
"bread" is the celestial, and thus is good, may be seen above, n. 276,
680, 1165, 2177; also that "water" is the spiritual, and thus is truth,
n. 739, 2702, 3058); hence it is evident that "weight" is predicated of
good, and "measure" of truth. \[3\] Again: There shall be balances of
justice, and an ephah of justice, and a bath of justice (Ezek. 45:10,
etc.). This is said of the holy land, by which is signified the Lord's
kingdom in the heavens, as may be known from the several particulars
there mentioned by the prophet; where there will be no balances, ephah,
and bath, but goods and truths which are signified by these weights and
measures. In Isaiah: Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his
hand, and hath made ready the heavens with the palm of his hand, and
hath comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? (Isa. 40:12). To "weigh
the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance," denotes that from
the Lord are the celestial things of love and charity, and that He alone
disposes their states. (That "mountains and hills," concerning which
such weights are predicated, are the celestial things of love, may be
seen above, n. 795, 796, 1430, 2722.) \[4\] In Daniel: The writing upon
the wall of the palace of Belshazzar was, Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin.
This is the interpretation: Mene, God hath numbered thy kingdom, and
finished it; Tekel, thou art weighed in the balances, and art found
wanting; Peres, thy kingdom is divided and given to the Mede and the
Persian (Dan. 5:25-28); where mene or "hath numbered," is predicated of
truth; while tekel or "weighed in the balances" is predicated of good;
in the internal sense consummation is treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3105.">3105.</span></span>

And two bracelets. That this signifies Divine truth, is evident from the
signification of "bracelets," as being truth, here Divine truth, because
the Lord is treated of in the internal sense; they are said to have been
"two," to denote fullness. Bracelets were placed on the hands of a
bride, because by a bride was signified the church, and by her hands
were signified powers from truth (that "hands" are predicated of truth,
may be seen above, n. 3091). (That "bracelets" have such a signification
may be seen in Ezek. 16:11; see above, n. 3103; also Ezek. 23:42.)
Bracelets were not only for a bride, but also for a king (but for a king
they were on the arm, as appears in 2 Sam. 1:10), for the reason that
royalty was representative and significative of Divine truth pertaining
to the Lord (n. 1672, 1728, 2015, 2069, 3009); and the "arm" is
significative of power (n. 878).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3106.">3106.</span></span>

For her hands. That this signifies the power of the affection of truth,
is evident from the signification of a "hand," as being power (see n.
878, 3091); and from the representation of Rebekah-here meant by
"her"-as being the affection of truth (see n. 2865, 3077).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3107.">3107.</span></span>

Ten of gold their weight. That this signifies what is full for
initiation, is evident from the signification of "ten," as being a full
state, like a "hundred" (see n. 1988, 2636); and from the signification
of "gold," which is here a kind of coin from the weight of which the
valuation was made; and from the signification of "weight," as being the
state of a thing as to good (see above, n. 3104). Hence it is evident
that "ten of gold their weight" signifies a full state of what is
estimated, as to good. That it is for initiation, is evident from the
several particulars in this chapter in which initiation is treated of,
that is, betrothal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3108.">3108.</span></span>

These two verses treat of the initiation of truth into good; but what is
the nature of this initiation does not easily fall into the idea of
thought with anyone who has been enlightened only by such things as are
of the light of the world, and not at the same time by such things as
are of the light of heaven, from which light the things which are of the
light of the world may themselves be enlightened. They who are not in
good, and thence in faith, have no other ideas of thought than those
which have been formed from objects of the light of the world. These do
not know that there is anything spiritual, nor indeed what the rational
is in the genuine sense, but only the natural to which they attribute
all things; and this is the reason why these things which are said in
the internal sense concerning the initiation of truth into good, are to
them too remote to appear to amount to anything; when yet to those who
are in the light of heaven these are among their precious things. As
regards the initiation of truth into good the case is this: Before truth
has been initiated and rightly conjoined, it is indeed with man, but it
has not been made as it were of him, or as his own; but as soon as it is
being initiated into his good, it is appropriated to him; and it then
vanishes from his external memory, and passes into the internal memory;
or what is the same, it vanishes from the natural or external man, and
passes into the rational or internal man, and puts on the very man, and
makes his human, that is, his quality as to the human. Such is the case
with all truth that is being conjoined with a man's good; such also is
the case with the falsity that is being conjoined with evil which he
calls good; but the difference is that the former opens the rational,
and so makes the man rational; whereas the latter closes the rational
and makes the man irrational; although he seems to himself, in the
darkness in which he then is, to be pre-eminently rational.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3109.">3109.</span></span>

Verses 23-25. And he said, Whose daughter art thou? Tell me I pray is
there room in thy father's house for us to pass the night? And she said
unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she bare
unto Nahor. And she said unto him, We have both straw and much
provender, also room to pass the night. "He said, Whose daughter art
thou?" signifies further exploration concerning innocence; "tell me I
pray is there room in thy father's house for us to pass the night;"
signifies exploration concerning the good of charity; "and she said unto
him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she bare unto
Nahor," signifies here as above the whole of its origin; "and she said
unto him," signifies perception; "we have both straw," signifies truths
in the form of memory-knowledge; "and much provender," signifies their
goods; "also room to pass the night," signifies the state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3110.">3110.</span></span>

He said, Whose daughter art thou? That this signifies further
exploration concerning innocence, is evident from the question, "Whose
daughter art thou?" as being exploration; that here it is further
exploration, is evident from what has been said above (n. 3088, 3101).
That it was exploration concerning innocence, is evident from the
signification of a damsel, as being an affection in which is innocence
(see n. 3067). In this verse indeed the word "damsel" is not found; but
seeing that above (in verses 14 and 16) Rebekah is called a and the
question is here addressed to her, therefore "thou" here means nothing
else than damsel. \[2\] As regards the thing itself here treated of,
namely, that truth was explored as to what innocence it had, and then
also as to what charity, before it was initiated into good and conjoined
with it, this cannot but appear wonderful to those who have no knowledge
of the subject; but still let them know that in regard to the initiation
and conjunction of truth with good in every man there is the most
exquisite exploration, and such as surpasses all belief. To the veriest
good there is never admitted anything but the veriest truth; for when
anything not so true approaches, it does not conjoin itself with good
itself, but with some good that in itself is not good, but appears as
good; if falsity approaches, the good withdraws itself inward, and the
falsity conjoins itself outwardly with some evil which it believes to be
good. \[3\] This Divine disposal is effected by the Lord, spirits and
angels being the mediums; and in this world it is very secret, but it is
perfectly well known in the other. Moreover everyone who is of sound
reason is able to know it, or at least to have some apprehension of it;
for evil and falsity together are hell, and flow in from hell; whereas
good and truth together are heaven, and also flow in through heaven from
the Lord; and since this is so, evil and truth can no more be joined
together than can hell and heaven; wherefore there is a more exquisite
balance applied in these things than it is possible for anyone to
believe; and this is what is meant by exploration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3111.">3111.</span></span>

Tell me I pray is there room in thy father's house for us to pass the
night? That this signifies exploration concerning the good of charity,
is evident from the signification of "tell me I pray is there," as being
exploration; from the signification of a "house," as being good (see n.
2048, 2233, 2331); and from the signification of "father," in this case,
Bethuel, as being the good of charity such as there is with the better
Gentiles (see n. 2865)-the very origin of the affection of truth
represented by Rebekah being from such good-and from the signification
of "room to pass the night," as being a state of "abiding" (see below,
n. 3115). \[2\] That there is in the internal sense a description of the
exploration concerning the origin of the affection of truth as to
innocence and the good of charity, is for the reason that the truth
which is to be initiated and conjoined with good derives its first
origin from no other source, as may be seen from all those with whom
truth is received and wedded to good. Within the church, they who have
not some measure of innocence and of charity toward the neighbor,
howsoever they may be acquainted with truth and profess it with the
lips, yet in no wise do they acknowledge it at heart. Outside of the
church, among the Gentiles who are called to the truth of faith, or are
instructed concerning it in the other life, no others receive it than
those who are in innocence, and who live together in mutual charity; for
innocence and charity produce the ground in which the seeds of faith can
take root and grow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3112.">3112.</span></span>

And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah,
whom she bare unto Nahor. That this signifies the whole of its origin,
that is, the whole of the origin of the affection of truth, is evident
from the representation of Bethuel, and also of Milcah and of Nahor, as
being the origin of the affection of truth, which is represented by
Rebekah (see n. 3078).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3113.">3113.</span></span>

And she said unto him. That this signifies perception, is evident from
the signification in the historical parts of the Word of "saying," as
being in the internal sense to perceive, as frequently shown above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3114.">3114.</span></span>

We have both straw and much provender. That "straw" signifies truths in
the form of memory-knowledge, and that "much provender" signifies their
goods, is evident from the signification of "straw" and of "provender."
That "straw" signifies these truths, is because it is spoken of as being
the food of camels; for when by "camels" is signified the natural man as
to the general memory-knowledges therein, then by their food, namely, by
straw, nothing else than these can be signified; for the natural man has
no other food which is the food of its life, seeing that its nourishment
is from such truths; for if such food should fail it, that is, knowing,
it would not continue to exist. That this is the case, is evident from
the life after death; for then such things are to spirits in place of
food (see n. 56-58, 680, 681, 1480, 1695, 1973, 1974). In the natural
man, as in the rational, there are two classes of things in general
which constitute its essence, namely, those of the understanding and
those of the will. To the things of the understanding pertain truths; to
those of the will pertain goods. The truths of the natural man are
truths in the form of memory-knowledge, that is, whatever things are in
his external memory; these are what are signified by "straw," when
camels, and also when horses, mules, and asses are treated of. But the
goods of the natural man are delights, chiefly those of the affection of
such truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3115.">3115.</span></span>

Also room to pass the night. That this signifies the state, is evident
from the signification of "room," as being state (see above, n. 2625,
2837); and from the signification of "passing the night," as being to
abide or have an abode (see n. 2330); here therefore there is signified
the state of the affection of truth, in regard to its origin. Its origin
is described by the things represented by Bethuel, Milcah, and Nahor;
and its relationships by "Laban" in the verses that follow. And because
this origin was obscure, its state is signified by "room to pass the
night," as also above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3116.">3116.</span></span>

These three verses treat of the exploration of the truth which is to be
initiated and thus conjoined with good; and this indeed especially in
regard to its origin, for on the origin depend all things in general and
in particular; from it the derived things have their form, as from their
root, or their seed, as a plant or a tree has from its root or seed.
These truths the Lord saw and explored in Himself from the Divine, and
from His own wisdom and intelligence initiated; that is to say He
initiated truths into the good of the rational. The exploration itself
is here described in the internal sense; but the things contained
therein can be explained only very briefly. Exploration takes place
likewise with every man who is being reformed, and also with everyone
who receives remains; but of this exploration the man knows nothing at
all; it is so entirely in obscurity with him that he does not even
believe that there is any; when yet it is taking place every moment, but
from the Lord, who alone sees man's state-not only his present state,
but also his future state to eternity. The exploration is a most
exquisite balancing, to prevent even the least of falsity from being
conjoined with good, and the least of truth from being conjoined with
evil; for if there should be such conjunction, the man would perish
eternally; because then in the other life he would hang between hell and
heaven; and by reason of the good he would be spewed out from hell, and
by reason of the evil from heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3117.">3117.</span></span>

Verses 26, 27. And the man bent himself, and bowed himself down to
Jehovah; and he said, Blessed be Jehovah the God of my lord Abraham, who
hath not forsaken His mercy and His truth from my lord; I being in the
way, Jehovah hath led me to the house of my lord's brethren. "The man
bent himself, and bowed himself down to Jehovah," signifies gladness and
joy; "and he said, Blessed be Jehovah the God of my lord Abraham,"
signifies here as before, from the Divine Itself and the Divine Human;
"who hath not forsaken His mercy," signifies a perception of the influx
of love; "and His truth from my lord," signifies the influx of charity
therefrom; "I being in the way," signifies in a state of the conjunction
of truth with good in the rational; "Jehovah hath led me to the house of
my lord's brethren," signifies to the good of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3118.">3118.</span></span>

The man bent himself, and bowed himself down to Jehovah. That this
signifies gladness and joy, is evident from the signification of
"bending himself," and of "bowing himself down," as denoting to be glad
and to rejoice. Bending and bowing down are gestures of humiliation,
that is, they are humiliation in act, whether in a state of grief or in
a state of joy-in a state of grief when that which is wished for does
not come to pass, but in a state of joy when it does come to pass; as in
this case, that Rebekah, according to the vow of his heart, gave him to
drink out of her pitcher, and made his camels drink also. (That "bowing
down" is a gesture of joy also, may be seen above, n. 2927, 2950.) The
term "gladness" is used, and also "joy," for the reason that in the Word
"gladness" is predicated of truth, and "joy" of good. Moreover gladness
is of the countenance, but joy of the heart; or what is the same,
gladness is of spiritual affection or of truth, but joy is of celestial
affection or of good; thus gladness is in a degree less than joy, as
bending is likewise less than bowing down; which is also evident from
the fact that the man of the spiritual church merely bends himself
before the Lord, and invokes grace; whereas the man of the celestial
church bows himself down before the Lord and implores mercy (see n. 598,
981, 2423). Both terms are used by reason of the marriage of truth and
good in every single thing of the Word (n. 683, 793, 801, 2516, 2712).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3119.">3119.</span></span>

And he said, Blessed be Jehovah the God of my lord Abraham. That this
signifies from the Divine Itself and the Divine Human, is evident from
what was said above (n. 3061), where the same words occur, except that
the word "blessed" is here added. "Blessed be Jehovah" was a form of
thanksgiving, thus also of joy and gladness, when wished-for events took
place. (What the ancients meant by "blessing Jehovah," may be seen
above, n. 1096, 1422.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3120.">3120.</span></span>

Who hath not forsaken His mercy. That this signifies a perception of the
influx of love, is evident from the signification of "mercy," as being
love (see n. 1735, 3063, 3073). That "who hath not forsaken His mercy"
signifies a perception of the influx of love, is because these are words
of acknowledgment and confession; and all acknowledgment and confession
are from the perception of influx.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3121.">3121.</span></span>

And His truth from my lord. That this signifies an influx of charity
therefrom, is evident from the signification of "truth," as being
charity. "Truth" in its proper sense signifies the same as "faith," and
in the Hebrew language faith is expressed by a like word; so that what
is called "truth" in the Word of the Old Testament is in various places
called "faith" in the Word of the New Testament; and for this reason
also it has been so often said in the foregoing pages that truth is of
faith and good is of love. And yet that in the internal sense faith is
nothing else than charity, may be seen from what has been said and shown
above in many places-as that there is no faith except by love (n.
30-38): That no faith is possible except where there is charity (n. 654,
724, 1162, 1176, 2261): That faith is the faith of charity (n. 1608,
2049, 2116, 2343, 2349, 2419): That charity makes the church, not faith
separate from charity (n. 809, 916, 1798, 1799, 1834, 1844, 2190, 2228,
2442). From all this it is evident that in the internal sense truth or
faith is the same as charity; for all faith is from charity; the faith
which is not from charity not being faith; or what is the same, in the
internal sense all truth is good; for all truth is from good, and the
truth which is not from good is not truth, truth being nothing else than
the form of good (n. 3049); its birth is from no other source, and its
life is from no other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3122.">3122.</span></span>

Moreover in regard to this truth by which is signified charity, the case
is this: The most ancient people, who were celestial, by mercy and truth
from the Lord understood nothing else than the reception of the influx
of love to the Lord, and of the derivative charity toward the neighbor.
But the ancients, who were spiritual, by the mercy and truth from the
Lord with themselves, understood charity and faith; the reason of which
is, that the celestial never thought concerning those things which are
of faith or truth, but concerning those which are of love or good, as
may be seen from what has been said above concerning the celestial man
(n. 202, 337, 2669, 2715). Moreover celestial men when being reformed
and regenerated were introduced into love to the Lord through charity
toward the neighbor. It is evident therefore that by "mercy from the
Lord" nothing else is signified than a perception of the influx of love
to Him; and by "truth," a derivative influx of charity toward the
neighbor. \[2\] But it is otherwise with the spiritual; these think
concerning the things of faith; and when being reformed and regenerated
they are introduced by means of the things of faith into charity toward
the neighbor. And therefore when the spiritual are treated of, by "mercy
from the Lord" is meant an influx of charity toward the neighbor; and by
"truth" is meant an influx of faith. But still this faith, when the
spiritual man has been regenerated, becomes charity; for he then acts
from charity; insomuch that one who does not act from charity is not
regenerate, but he who acts from charity is regenerate; and in this case
he is not solicitous about the things of faith or truth, for he lives
from the good of faith, and no longer from its truth; for truth has so
conjoined itself with good that it no longer appears, except merely as
the form of charity. \[3\] From what has been said we can see what the
most ancient people, and what the ancients, understood by "mercy and
truth," so frequently mentioned in the Word. As in David: The king shall
dwell before God forever; O prepare mercy and truth, that they may
preserve him (Ps. 61:7). Again: Mercy and truth shall meet together,
righteousness and peace shall kiss each other (Ps. 85:10). Again: Thou O
Lord art a God great in mercy and truth (Ps. 86:15). Again: My truth and
My mercy shall be with Him (Ps. 89:24). Again: Jehovah hath remembered
His mercy and His truth toward the house of Israel (Ps. 98:3). Again: O
Jehovah, not unto us, but unto Thy name give glory, for Thy mercy and
for Thy truth's sake (Ps. 115:1). In Micah: Jehovah God will give the
truth to Jacob, the mercy to Abraham, which Thou hast sworn unto our
fathers from the days of old (Micah 7:20); where "Jacob" denotes the
Lord's external man, and "Abraham" the internal, as to the Human. In
Hosea: Jehovah hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land,
because there is no truth, and no mercy, and no knowledge of God (Hos.
4:1). "No truth" denotes no reception of the influx of charity; "no
mercy," no reception of the influx of love; "no knowledge of God," no
reception of the influx of the truth of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3123.">3123.</span></span>

I being in the way. That this signifies in a state of the conjunction of
truth with good in the rational, is evident from the signification of a
"way," as being truth (see above, n. 627, 2333). That "in the way" here
denotes the conjunction of truth with good in the rational, is because
this is the subject treated of in this chapter (see n. 3012, 3013); for
one is said to be "in the way" when he is making progress toward the
place to which he intends to go.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3124.">3124.</span></span>

Jehovah hath led me to the house of my lord's brethren. That this
signifies to the good of truth, is evident from the signification of the
"house of the brethren," of which was Rebekah, as being the good from
which is the truth. That the "house of the brethren" is good, here the
good from which is the truth, is evident from the signification of a
"house," as being good (see n. 2233, 2234, 2559); and of "brethren," as
being the origin of that good from which is the truth represented by
Rebekah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3125.">3125.</span></span>

The foregoing verses treat of the exploration of the truth which was to
be conjoined with good in the rational, in regard to innocence, to
charity, and to origin. For inasmuch as the Lord, by His own proper
power, made His rational Divine in respect to truth as well as in
respect to good, He therefore explored the truth which He conjoined with
good. But with men, truth is never conjoined with good by their own
power, but by the power of the Lord; which may be seen from the fact
that all good and truth flow in from the Lord, and that all reformation
and regeneration are from the Lord, and that man does not know one whit
of how he is regenerated. At the present day he does not even know that
he is regenerated by truth and good, still less that truth is initiated
and conjoined with good, and that this is effected as by exploration,
that is, most exactly. These two verses treat of perception in regard to
the quality of truth, and whence it was; and at the same time of joy
because of it. Therefore in what now follows the initiation is treated
of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3126.">3126.</span></span>

Verses 28-30. And the damsel ran, and told her mother's house according
to these words. And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban; and
Laban ran out of doors unto the man, unto the fountain; and it came to
pass when he saw the jewel, and the bracelets upon his sister's hands,
and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spoke
the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and behold he stood by the
camels at the fountain. "And the damsel ran," signifies the desire
\[animus\] of that affection; "and told her mother's house according to
these words," signifies toward natural good of every kind whithersoever
enlightenment could reach"; and "Rebekah had a brother" signifies the
affection of good in the natural man; "and his name was Laban,"
signifies the quality of that affection; "and Laban ran out of doors
unto the man, unto the fountain," signifies its desire \[animus\] toward
the truth which was to be initiated into truth Divine; "and it came to
pass when he saw the jewel, and the bracelets upon his sister's hands,"
signifies when it was observed that Divine good and Divine truth were in
the power of the affection of truth which is the "sister;" "and when he
heard the words of Rebekah his sister," signifies the inclination of
that affection; "saying, Thus spoke the man unto me," signifies the
propensity or inclination of truth in the natural man; "that he came
unto the man," signifies that it adjoined itself; "and behold he stood
by the camels," signifies presence in general memory-knowledges; "at the
fountain," signifies their enlightenment from truth Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3127.">3127.</span></span>

The damsel ran. That this signifies the desire \[animus\] of that
affection, is evident from the signification of "running," as meaning
that which is of the inclination or of the desire; and from the
signification of a "damsel," as being an affection in which is innocence
(see above, n. 3067, 3110).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3128.">3128.</span></span>

And told her mother's house according to these words. That this
signifies toward natural good of every kind whithersoever enlightenment
could reach, is evident from the signification of the "mother's house,"
as being the good of the external man, that is, natural good. (That a
"house" denotes good may be seen above, n. 2233, 2234, 2559; also that
man's external or natural is from the mother, but the internal from the
father, n. 1815.) The good with man is compared in the Word to a
"house," and on this account a man who is in good is called a "house of
God;" but internal good is called the "father's house," and the good
that is in the same degree is called the "house of the brethren;" but
external good, which is the same as natural good, is called the
"mother's house." Moreover all good and truth are born in this manner,
namely, by the influx of internal good as of a father into external good
as of a mother. \[2\] As this verse treats of the origin of the truth
which is to be conjoined with good in the rational, it is therefore said
that Rebekah (by whom this truth is represented) ran to the house of her
mother, for that was the origin of this truth. For as before said and
shown, all good flows in by an internal way (that is, by the way of the
soul) into man's rational, and through this into his faculty of knowing,
even into that which is of the senses; and by enlightenment there it
causes truths to be seen. Truths are called forth thence, and are
divested of their natural form, and are conjoined with good in the
midway, that is, in the rational, and at the same time they make the man
rational, and at last spiritual. But how these things are accomplished
is utterly unknown to man; because at this day it is scarcely known what
good is, and that it is distinct from truth; still less that man is
reformed by means of the influx of good into truth, and by the
conjunction of the two; neither is it known that the rational is
distinct from the natural. And when these things, which are most
general, are not known, it cannot possibly be known how the initiation
of truth into good, and the conjunction of the two, is effected-which
are the subjects treated of in this chapter in its internal sense. But
whereas these arcana have been revealed, and are manifest to those who
are in good, that is, who are angelic minds, therefore however obscure
they may appear to others, they nevertheless are to be set forth,
because they are in the internal sense. \[3\] Concerning the
enlightenment from good through truth in the natural man, which is here
called the "mother's house," the case is this: Divine good with man
inflows into his rational, and through the rational into his natural,
and indeed into its memory-knowledges, that is, into the knowledges and
doctrinal things therein, as before said; and there by a fitting of
itself in, it forms truths for itself, through which it then enlightens
all things that are in the natural man. But if the life of the natural
man is such that it does not receive the Divine good, but either repels
it, or perverts it, or suffocates it, then the Divine good cannot be
fitted in, thus it cannot form for itself truths; and consequently the
natural can no longer be enlightened; for enlightenment in the natural
man is effected from good through truths; and when there is no longer
enlightenment, there can be no reformation. This is the reason why in
the internal sense the natural man also is much treated of in regard to
its quality; thus whence truth is, namely, that it is from good there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3129.">3129.</span></span>

And Rebekah had a brother. That this signifies the affection of good in
the natural man, is evident from the signification of a "brother" and a
"sister" in the Word, namely, that a "brother" is the affection of good,
and a "sister" is the affection of truth (see n. 367, 2360, 2508, 2524);
for in the natural man, as in the rational, there are relationships by
both blood and marriage of all the things therein (see n. 2556, 2739).
And it also is from this that the mind, both the rational and the
natural, is called a "house" (or family), where parents, brothers,
sisters, kinsmen, and other relatives exist in order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3130.">3130.</span></span>

And his name was Laban. That this signifies the quality of that
affection, is evident from the signification of "name," as being the
quality of anyone (see n. 144, 145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 2724). "Laban"
therefore is the quality of that affection which is here treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3131.">3131.</span></span>

And Laban ran out of doors unto the man, unto the fountain. That this
signifies its desire, that is, the desire of the affection of good,
toward the truth which was to be initiated into truth Divine, is evident
from the signification of running," as manifesting the inclination or
desire (as above, n. 3127); from the representation of Laban, as being
the affection of good (of which just above, n. 3129, 3130); from the
signification of "the man," as being truth (of which, n. 265, 749,
1007); and from the signification of a "fountain," as also being truth,
here truth Divine (see n. 2702, 3096; also below, n. 3137). \[2\] From
these and from the other things here treated of, we can see what is the
quality of the internal sense, and what arcana there are in it. Who
could know, except from an interior searching of the Word, and at the
same time from revelation, that these words, "Laban ran out of doors
unto the man, unto the fountain," signify the desire of the affection of
good toward the truth that was to be initiated into truth Divine? And
yet this is what the angels perceive when these words are read by man;
for such are the correspondences between a man's ideas and an angel's
that while the man takes these words according to the sense of the
letter, and has the idea of Laban as running out of doors to the man
unto the fountain, the angel perceives the desire of the affection of
good toward the truth which was to be initiated into truth Divine. For
the angels have no idea of Laban, nor of running, nor of a fountain, but
they have spiritual ideas corresponding to these. That there is such a
correspondence of actual things, and thence of ideas, natural and
spiritual, may be seen from what was said above concerning
correspondences (see n. 1563, 1568, 2763, 2987-3003, 3021). \[3\] As
regards the actual thing itself, namely, that truth was to be initiated
into truth Divine, the case is this: The first truth in the natural man
was not truth Divine, but was truth that appeared as if Divine; for in
its first infancy no truth is truth, but is apparent truth; but in
process of time it puts off the appearance, and puts on the essence of
truth. In order that this may be comprehended, it may be illustrated by
examples, but for the present merely by the following. It is a truth
Divine that the Lord is never angry, never punishes anyone, still less
does evil to anyone, and that from the Lord there never comes anything
but good; nevertheless in its first infancy this truth takes the form
that the Lord is angry when anyone sins, and that therefore the Lord
punishes; nay, with some that evil is from the Lord; but as a man
advances from childhood, and grows up and matures in judgment, he puts
off that which was as truth to him from its appearing to be so, and
gradually puts on the real truth, namely that the Lord is never angry,
that He does not punish, that still less does He do what is evil; and
thus by the former truth he is initiated into this. For that which first
enters is the general truth, which in itself is obscure, and in which
scarcely anything appears until it has been enlightened by particulars,
and these by singulars; and when it has been enlightened the interior
things are clear. Thus fallacies and appearances, which in time of
ignorance are truths, are dissipated and shaken off.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3132.">3132.</span></span>

And it came to pass when he saw the jewel, and the bracelets upon his
sister's hands. That this signifies when it was observed that Divine
good and Divine truth were in the power of the affection of truth, which
is the "sister," is evident from the signification of "seeing," as being
to observe (n. 2150); from the signification of the "jewel," as being
Divine good (see n. 3103, 3105); from the signification of "bracelets,"
as being Divine truth (see n. 3103, 3105) from the signification of
"hands," as being power (see above, n. 878, 3091); and from the
signification of "sister," as being the affection of truth (see n. 2508,
2524, 2556); from all which it is evident that to "see the jewel and the
bracelets upon his sister's hands," is to observe that Divine good and
Divine truth were in the power of the affection of truth. \[2\] The case
herein is this: The conjunction of Divine good and Divine truth in the
Lord is the very Divine marriage from which is the heavenly marriage,
which is likewise a marriage of good and truth; from this also comes
conjugial love (see n. 2727-2759). Hence it is that where marriage is
treated of in the Word, in the internal sense there is signified the
heavenly marriage, which is that of good and truth; and in the supreme
sense the Divine marriage, which is in the Lord; wherefore nothing else
is here meant by the marriage between Isaac and Rebekah. The conjunction
of good and truth is the marriage itself, but the initiation is the
betrothal, or the state preceding marriage. But the state that precedes
betrothal is what is here described. As in this state it is within the
power of the damsel to be betrothed, and afterwards as a wife to be
conjoined with a husband, so it is within the power of the affection of
truth to be initiated into Divine truth, and in this manner to be
conjoined with Divine good. And further: in the first affection and
afterwards in every affection of truth with the Lord, there was inmostly
the Divine good itself and the Divine truth itself, because there was
Jehovah Himself; from this came the power that is here treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3133.">3133.</span></span>

And when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister. That this signifies
the inclination of that affection, is evident from the affection in
these words; and also from the affection in the words that precede; for
they bear witness to the inclination on the part of the affection of
truth which is here represented by Rebekah the sister.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3134.">3134.</span></span>

Saying, Thus spoke the man unto me. That this signifies the inclination
of truth in the natural man, is in like manner evident from the
affection in these words, and also from what the man, or Abraham's
servant, spoke to Rebekah; from which it is evident that it is the
inclination that is signified; and also from the signification of a
"man" as being truth (see n. 265, 749, 1007), here truth in the natural
man from the Divine-because the man is here Abraham's elder servant, by
whom is signified the natural man (as may be seen above, n. 3019). In
the Word, especially the prophetic, the word "man" \[vir\] often occurs;
as "man and wife," "man and woman," "man and inhabitant," also "man
\[vir\] and man \[homo\]"; and in such places by "man" \[vir\] in the
internal sense is signified that which is of the understanding, which is
truth; and by "wife," "woman," "inhabitant," and "man" \[homo\], that
which is of the will, which is good. As in Isaiah: I see, and there is
no man; even among them, and there is no counselor (Isa. 41:28); "no
man" denotes no one intelligent, thus no truth. Again: I came, and there
was no man; I called, and there was none to answer (Isa. 50:2); the
meaning here being the same. \[2\] Again: Truth hath stumbled in the
street, and uprightness cannot enter; and truth hath been taken away;
and he that departeth from evil is mad. And Jehovah saw, and it was evil
in His eyes that there was no judgment, and no man, and He was amazed
(Isa. 59:14-16). "No man" plainly means no one intelligent, and thus in
the universal sense no truth. It here treats of the last time of the
church, when there is no longer any truth; and it is therefore said,
"truth hath stumbled in the street, uprightness cannot enter, truth hath
been taken away." (That "street" also is predicated of truth, may be
seen above, n. 2336; and "judgment" also, n. 2235.) In Jeremiah: Run ye
to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and
seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any
that doeth judgment, that seeketh truth (Jer. 5:1). Here a "man"
evidently denotes one who is intelligent; and also truth. In Zephaniah:
I will make their streets desolate, that none passeth by; their cities
shall be devastated, so that there shall be no man; that there shall be
no inhabitant (Zeph. 3:6). "No man" denotes no truth; "no inhabitant,"
no good (see above, n. 2268, 2451, 2712, and many other places).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3135.">3135.</span></span>

He came unto the man. This signifies that it (that is, the affection of
good that is represented by Laban, see n. 3129, 3130) adjoined itself to
the truth signified by the "man" (n. 3134), both of them in the natural
man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3136.">3136.</span></span>

And behold he stood by the camels. That this signifies presence in
general memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification of
"standing by," as being to be present; and from the signification of
"camels," as being general memory-knowledges (see n. 3048, 3071).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3137.">3137.</span></span>

At the fountain. That this signifies their enlightenment from Divine
truth, is evident from the signification of a "fountain," as being truth
(see n. 2702, 3096), here Divine truth (as above, n. 3131). As the Word
is Divine truth, it is called a "fountain." That in the internal sense
"to stand at the fountain" here involves the enlightenment of those
things which are in the natural man, follows from the series; for where
there is Divine truth, there is also enlightenment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3138.">3138.</span></span>

These three verses treat of the preparation and enlightenment of the
natural man in order that the truth might be called forth thence which
was to be conjoined with good in the rational. But with preparation and
enlightenment the case is as follows: There are two lights which form
the intellectual things of man-the light of heaven, and the light of the
world; the light of heaven is from the Lord, who to angels in the other
life is a Sun and Moon (see n. 1053, 1521, 1529, 1530); the light of the
world is from the sun and moon which appear before the bodily sight. The
internal man has its sight and its understanding from the light of
heaven; but the external man has its sight and its understanding from
the light of the world. The influx of the light of heaven into the
things which are of the world's light, effects enlightenment and at the
same time observance; an observance of truth if there is correspondence,
and an observance of falsity instead of truth if there is not
correspondence. But enlightenment and observance are impossible unless
there is affection or love, which is spiritual heat, and which gives
life to the things that are enlightened by the light; comparatively as
the sun's light does not give life to the things of the vegetable
kingdom, but the heat that is in the light, as is evident from the
seasons of the year. \[2\] In the verses which next follow, the
preparation is further described-namely, that the light of heaven which
is the Lord's Divine light inflowed into the things that were of the
light of the world in His natural man, in order that He might bring out
thence the truth which was to be conjoined with good in the rational;
thus by the ordinary way. And therefore in order that the Lord might
make the human Divine by the ordinary way, He came into the world; that
is, it was His will to be born as a man, and to be instructed as a man,
and to be reborn as a man; but with the difference that man is reborn of
the Lord, whereas the Lord not only regenerated Himself, but also
glorified Himself, that is, made Himself Divine; and further, that a man
is made new by an influx of charity and faith, but the Lord, by the
Divine love which was in Him and which was His. Hence it may be seen
that the regeneration of man is an image of the glorification of the
Lord; or what is the same, that in the process of the regeneration of
man may be seen as in an image, although remotely, the process of the
Lord's glorification.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3139.">3139.</span></span>

Verses 31-33. And he said, Come, thou blessed of Jehovah, wherefore
standest thou without? For I have swept the house, and there is room for
the camels. And the man came into the house, and loosed the camels; and
he gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet
and the feet of the men that were with him. And there was set before him
to eat; and he said, I will not eat until I have spoken my words. And he
said, Speak. "He said, Come, thou blessed of Jehovah," signifies an
invitation of the Divine within Him; "wherefore standest thou without?"
signifies somewhat therefrom; "for I have swept the house," signifies
that all things were prepared and full of goods; "and there is room for
the camels," signifies a state for all things that would be serviceable
to Him; "and the man came into the house," signifies influx into the
good therein; "and loosed the camels," signifies freedom for those
things which were to serve; "and he gave straw and provender for the
camels," signifies instruction in truths and goods; "and water to wash
his feet," signifies purification there; "and the feet of the men that
were with him," signifies purification of all things belonging to Him,
in the natural man; "and there was set before him to eat," signifies
that good in the natural man desired these things should be
appropriated; "and he said, I will not eat," signifies refusal; "until I
have spoken my words," signifies until instruction should be given; "and
he said, Speak," signifies longing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3140.">3140.</span></span>

He said, Come, thou blessed of Jehovah. That this signifies an
invitation of the Divine within Him, is evident from the signification
of "Come," as being invitation; and from the signification of the
"blessed of Jehovah," as being the Divine; that the "blessed Jehovah" is
the Divine Itself, may be seen above (n. 1096, 1420, 1422); and it
follows that the "blessed of Jehovah" is the Divine therefrom. Good is
the Divine Itself, but truth is the Divine thence derived. By the "man"
here who was sent by Abraham, is signified the truth which was from the
Divine, in the natural man (n. 3134); it is Divine truth which is called
the "blessed of Jehovah," and which is invited.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3141.">3141.</span></span>

Why standest thou without? That this signifies somewhat therefrom, is
evident without explication. The case herein is as follows: The Lord's
Divine rational was born of the Divine truth itself conjoined with the
Divine good. The Divine rational is Isaac, who was born to Abraham (who
here is the Divine good) of Sarah who here is the Divine truth; as
before shown. The rational of the Lord alone was thus born Divine, and
indeed from Himself; for the veriest being of the Lord was Jehovah or
the Divine good itself; and the veriest being of the Lord from this was
of Jehovah or was the Divine truth itself. The Divine good in the
rational, which is "Isaac," was thus born; and this was not good
separate from truth, but was Divine good with Divine truth; and yet both
together are called good in the rational, with which was to be conjoined
truth from the natural man, which truth is "Rebekah." In order that the
Lord might make His human Divine, both as to good and as to truth, and
this by the ordinary way (as before said, n. 3138), it could not be done
otherwise; for such is the Divine order, according to which is all
regeneration, and thus according to which was the Lord's glorification
(see n. 3138 at end). \[2\] This Divine good through Divine truth in the
rational, was that which was flowing into the natural man, and was
enlightening all things there. The process itself is here described,
namely, that at first it flowed in somewhat more remotely, which is
meant here by there being "somewhat therefrom," and that it was not
willing to flow in with fuller presence before instruction. For the
ordinary way is that instruction must precede, and that influx takes
place according to the degrees of instruction; and that truth
continually comes into existence thence, which is initiated, and is
afterwards conjoined with the good of the rational. From all this it may
be seen what is the nature of the arcana that are contained in the
internal sense of the Word; and that these arcana are such as to be
scarcely apprehended by man even as to their most general things; and
yet that they are evident to the angels, together with innumerable
particulars which can never be uttered in words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3142.">3142.</span></span>

For I have swept the house. That this signifies that all things were
prepared, and full of goods, is evident from the signification of
"sweeping," as being to prepare and to be filled (of which we shall
speak presently); and from the signification of a "house" as being good
(concerning which above, n. 2233, 2234, 2559; and that man himself, from
the good which is in him, is called a house, n. 3128). The reason "to
sweep" signifies to prepare and to be filled, is that nothing else is
required of man than to sweep the house; that is, to reject the
cupidities of evil and the derivative persuasions of falsity; for he is
then filled with goods, because good is continually flowing in from the
Lord-but into "the house," that is, into the man who is purified from
such things as impede the influx, that is, which reflect, or pervert, or
suffocate the inflowing good. Hence it was common with the ancients to
speak of sweeping or cleaning the house, and of sweeping and preparing
the way; and by sweeping the house was meant to purify one's self from
evils, and thereby to prepare one's self for goods to enter; but by
sweeping the way was meant to prepare one's self so that truths might be
received (for by a "house" was signified good, n. 3128; and by a "way,"
truth, n. 627, 2333). \[2\] As in Isaiah: The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Sweep \[prepare\] ye the way of Jehovah; make straight in
the desert a highway for our God (Isa. 40:3). In the same: Cast up, cast
up, sweep \[prepare\] the way, take away the stumbling-block out of the
way of My people (Isa. 57:14). Again: Go through, go through the gates,
sweep \[prepare\] the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway,
gather out the stones (Isa. 62:10). In Malachi: Behold I send Mine
angel, and He shall sweep \[prepare\] the way before Me; and the Lord,
whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple (Mal. 3:1). In these
passages, to "sweep the way" signifies to make themselves ready and
prepare to receive truth. The subject treated of therein is the advent
of the Lord, for which they were to prepare themselves for receiving the
truth of faith, and thereby the good of charity, and by this eternal
salvation. \[3\] In David: Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt, Thou
didst drive out the nations and plantedst it; Thou didst sweep before
it, and didst cause its root to be rooted, and it filled the land (Ps.
80:8-9); where in the supreme sense the Lord is treated of; the "vine
out of Egypt" is truth from memory-knowledges; "driving out the nations"
is purifying from evils; "sweeping before it," is making ready so that
goods may fill. In the opposite sense "to sweep the house" is said also
of the man who deprives himself of all goods and truths, and thus is
filled with evils and falsities; as in Luke: The unclean spirit, finding
no rest, says, I will return into my house whence I came out; and when
he is come he findeth it swept and garnished; then goeth he and taketh
to him seven other spirits worse than himself, and they enter in and
dwell there (Luke 11:24-26; Matt. 12:43-45).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3143.">3143.</span></span>

And there is room for the camels. That this signifies a state for all
things that would be serviceable to Him, is evident from the
signification of "room," as being state (see above, n. 1273-1277,
1376-1381, 2625); and from the signification of "camels," as being
general memory-knowledges (see n. 3048, 3071). That these are things for
service may be seen above (n. 1486, 3019, 3020); for all things that
belong to the natural man are for no other use than to serve the
spiritual; wherefore also menservants, maidservants, camels, and asses,
in the internal sense chiefly signify the things which belong to the
natural man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3144.">3144.</span></span>

And the man came into the house. That this signifies influx into the
good therein, is evident from the signification of "coming;" here, to
flow in; and from the signification of a house," as being good (see n.
2233, 2234, 2559).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3145.">3145.</span></span>

And loosed the camels. That this signifies freedom for those things
which were to serve, is evident from the signification of "loosing," as
being to make free; and from the signification of "camels," as being
general memory-knowledges, and thus the things which were to serve (as
just above, n. 3143). The real case herein is this: Without freedom no
production of truth in the natural man is possible, nor any calling
forth therefrom into the rational, and conjunction with good there. All
these things take place in a free state; for it is the affection of
truth from good which produces freedom. Unless truth is learned from
affection, thus in freedom, it is not implanted; still less is it
exalted toward the interiors and there made faith. That all reformation
is effected in freedom, and that all freedom is of affection, and that
the Lord keeps man in freedom, so that he may from himself and from what
is his own be affected with truth and good and thereby be regenerated,
may be seen above (n. 2870-2893). This is what is signified by "loosing
the camels;" for if they were not significative of such things, these
particulars would be too trifling to be recorded.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3146.">3146.</span></span>

And he gave straw and provender for the camels. That this signifies
instruction in truths and goods, is evident from the signification of
"straw," as being the truths of the natural man, and from the
signification of "provender" as being the goods therein (concerning
which see above, n. 3114). Because these things are signified by "straw
and provender," it follows that to "give straw and provender" is to
instruct in truths and goods. That freedom is for the sake of these
things, namely, that man may be instructed in the affection and from the
affection of truth, and thus that truths may be insinuated even to the
spiritual man, or even to the soul, and may there be conjoined with
good, may be seen from what was shown above concerning freedom (n.
2870-2893). Such is the inrooting of faith, or of the truth which is of
faith, that unless it is coupled with good in the rational, the truth of
faith never receives any life, nor does any fruit come from it; for all
that which is called the fruit of faith, is the fruit of the good of
love and charity through the truth of faith. Unless spiritual heat,
which is the good of love, operated by spiritual light, which is the
truth of faith, the man would be as ground hard frozen as in winter
time, when nothing grows, still less bears fruit. For as light without
heat produces nothing, so faith produces nothing without love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3147.">3147.</span></span>

And water to wash his feet. That this signifies purification there, is
evident from the signification of "water for washing," or of washing
with water, as being to purify (concerning which presently); and from
the signification of "feet," as being natural things, or what is the
same, the things in the natural man (see n. 2162). In the representative
church it was customary to wash the feet with water, and thereby to
signify that the unclean things of the natural man were washed away. The
unclean things of the natural man are all those things which are of the
love of self and of the love of the world; and when these unclean things
have been washed away, then goods and truths flow in, for it is solely
these unclean things that hinder the influx of good and truth from the
Lord. \[2\] For good is continually flowing in from the Lord, but when
it comes through the internal or spiritual man to his external or
natural man, it is there either perverted, turned back, or suffocated.
But when the things which are of the love of self and of the love of the
world are removed, then good is received there and is made fruitful; for
then man practices the works of charity. This is evident from many
considerations; as when in misfortune, distress, and sickness, the
things that belong to the external or natural man are merely lulled, the
man forthwith begins to think piously and to will what is good, and also
to practice works of piety insofar as he is able; but when the state is
changed, there is a change also in all this. \[3\] These things were
signified by the washings in the Ancient Church, and the same were
represented in the Jewish Church, The reason why they were signified in
the Ancient Church, but represented in the Jewish church, was that the
man of the Ancient Church regarded the rite as a something external in
worship, and did not believe that he was purified by that washing, but
by the washing away of the impurities of the natural man, which as
before said are the things which are of the love of self and of the
world. But the man of the Jewish Church believed that he was purified by
that washing; neither knowing nor desiring to know that the purification
of the interiors was signified. \[4\] That by "washing" is signified a
cleansing from the impurities referred to, is evident in Isaiah: Wash
you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before Mine
eyes, cease to do evil (Isa. 1:16); where it is evident that to "wash
themselves" means to make themselves pure and to put away evils. Again:
When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion,
and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, in
the spirit of judgment and in the spirit of expurgation (Isa. 4:4);
where "washing away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and purging the
blood of Jerusalem," denotes purifying from evils and falsities. In
Jeremiah: O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou mayest
be saved. How long shall the thoughts of thine iniquity lodge within
thee? (Jer. 4:14). \[5\] In Ezekiel: I washed thee with water, and I
washed away thy bloods from upon thee, and anointed thee with oil (Jer.
16:9); concerning Jerusalem, by which is there meant the Ancient Church;
"washing with waters" denotes purifying from falsities; "washing away
bloods" denotes purging from evils; "anointing with oil" denotes filling
then with good. In David: Wash me from mine iniquity, and cleanse me
from my sin. Thou shalt purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; Thou
shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow (Ps. 51:2, 7). Here
"being washed" plainly denotes being purified from evils and their
falsities. \[6\] These are the things that were signified by "washing"
in the representative church; and it was commanded for the sake of the
representation that when they had become unclean they should wash the
skin, the hands, the feet, and also the garments, and should be
cleansed; by all which things were signified those which are of the
natural man. Lavers also, of brass, were placed outside the temple,
namely, the brazen sea and the ten brazen lavers (1 Kings 7:23-39); and
a laver of brass at which Aaron and his sons were to wash was placed
between the tent of meeting and the altar; and thus outside the tent
(Exod. 30:18, 19, 21); by which also was signified that only external or
natural things were to be purified; for unless these have been purified,
that is, unless the things that are of the love of self and of the world
have been removed, the internal things which are of love to the Lord and
toward the neighbor cannot possibly flow in, as before said. \[7\] For
the better understanding of how these things are circumstanced, namely,
that external things are to be purified, take as an example and
illustration good works, or what is the same, the goods of charity which
at this day are called the fruits of faith; these are external things,
because they are the exercises of charity. Good works are evil works
unless those things are removed which are of the love of self and of the
world; for when works are done before these have been removed, they
indeed appear good outwardly, but are inwardly evil; for they are done
either for the sake of reputation, or for gain, or for the sake of one's
honor, or for recompense, thus they are either self-meritorious <span
id="fr_86"></span>[3147-1](#fn_86) or hypocritical; for that which is of
the love of self and the world causes the works to be such. But when
these evils are removed, the works then become good; and they are goods
of charity; that is, in them there is not regard to self, to the world,
to reputation, to recompense; thus they are neither self-meritorious nor
hypocritical; for then celestial love and spiritual love flow in from
the Lord into the works and cause them to be love and charity in act;
and then the Lord through these loves also purifies the natural or
external man, and disposes it into order, so as to receive
correspondently the celestial and spiritual things that flow in. \[8\]
This is clearly evident from what the Lord taught when He washed the
feet of the disciples, as we read in John: Then cometh He to Simon
Peter; and Peter saith unto Him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet? Jesus
answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now, but thou
shalt know hereafter. Peter saith unto Him, Thou shalt never wash my
feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with Me.
Simon Peter saith unto Him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands
and my head. Jesus saith to him, He that hath been washed, needeth not
save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit; ye are clean already,
but not all (John 13:4-17). "He that hath been washed, needeth not save
to wash his feet" signifies that he who has been reformed, has need only
to be cleansed as to natural things, that is, has need that evils and
falsities should be removed from them; and then all things are disposed
into order by the influx of spiritual things from the Lord. Moreover to
wash the feet was an office of charity, as meaning not to reflect on the
evils of another; and it was also an office of humility, as meaning to
cleanse another from evils as from impurities; as also is evident from
the Lord's words in the passage just quoted (verses 12-17; also Luke
7:37, 38, 44, 46; John 11:2; 1 Sam. 25:41). \[9\] Everybody can see that
washing himself does not purify anyone from evils and falsities, but
only from the impurities that cling to him; nevertheless, as washing was
among the rites commanded in the church, it follows that it involves
something special, namely, spiritual washing, that is, purification from
the uncleannesses which inwardly adhere to man. Therefore they who knew
these things in that church, and thought about the purification of the
heart, or the removal of the evils of the love of self and of the love
of the world from the natural man, and who endeavored to effect this
with all diligence, observed the rite of washing as external worship
according to commandment; but those who did not know this and did not
desire to know it, but thought that the mere rite of washing their
garments, skin, hands, and feet, would purify them, and that provided
they did these things they might be allowed to live in avarice, hatreds,
revenge, unmercifulness, and cruelties, which are spiritual impurity,
practiced this rite as an idolatrous one. Nevertheless they could
represent by it, and by representation exhibit something of the church,
whereby there might be some conjunction of heaven with man before the
Lord's advent; yet such conjunction as affected the man of the church
little or not at all. \[10\] The Jews and Israelites were such that they
had no thought about the internal man, nor willingness to know anything
about it; thus none at all concerning celestial and spiritual things,
relating to the life after death. But yet lest all communication with
heaven and thus with the Lord should perish, they were bound to external
rites, whereby internal things were signified. All their captivities and
plagues were in general for the end that external rites might be
strictly observed for the sake of the representation. Hence then it was
that Moses washed Aaron and his sons with water at the door of the tent,
that they might be sanctified (Exod. 29:4; 40:12; Lev. 8:6); that Aaron
and his sons were to wash their hands and feet before they entered into
the tent of meeting and came near to the altar to minister, that they
might not die; and that this was to be to them a statute forever (Exod.
30:18-21; 40:30-31); that Aaron was to wash his flesh before he put on
the garments of ministry (Lev. 16:4, 24); that the Levites were to be
purified by being sprinkled with the water of expiation; and that they
were to cause a razor to pass over their flesh, and to wash their
garments, and thus should be pure (Num. 8:6-7); that whoever should eat
the carcass even of a clean beast, or one that was torn, should wash his
garments, and bathe himself in water; and if he did not wash himself and
bathe his flesh, he should bear his iniquity (Lev. 17:15-16); that
whoever touched the bed of one affected with the flux, or who sat upon a
vessel on which he had sat, and whoever touched his flesh, should wash
his garments, and bathe himself with water, and should be unclean till
the evening (Lev. 15:5-7, 10-12); that whoever let go the he-goat, as a
scape-goat, should wash his flesh (Lev. 16:26); that when a leprous
person was cleansed, he was to wash his garments, shave off all his
hair, and wash himself with water, and he should be clean (Lev. 14:8,
9); nay, that the very vessels which were made unclean by the touch of
things unclean, should be passed through water, and should be unclean
until evening (Lev. 11:32). From these things it may be seen that no one
was made clean or pure as to internal things by the rite of washing, but
only represented one pure or spiritually clean, for the reason given
above. That this is so, the Lord teaches plainly in Matthew (15:1-2,
20), and in Mark (7:1-23).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3148.">3148.</span></span>

And the feet of the men that were with him. That this signifies the
purification of all things belonging to Him, in the natural man, is
evident from the signification of "feet," as being the things of the
natural man (see n. 2162); and from the signification of "the men that
were with him," as being all things there. It was the custom for
travelers, when they came into any house, to wash their feet; as when
the brethren of Joseph were introduced into Joseph's house (Gen. 43:24);
and when the Levite and his attendant were received into the house of
the old man (Judges 19:21); and when Uriah on his return home was
commanded by David to go down to his house and to wash his feet (2 Sam.
11:8). The reason was that traveling and journeying signified what
relates to instruction, and thence to life (see n. 1293, 1457, 1463,
2025); and that these were to be purified was shown above; and further,
lest the impurity understood in the spiritual sense should adhere, and
defile the house, that is, the man; as is also evident from the fact
that the disciples were to shake off the dust of the feet, if the city
or the house would not receive peace (Matt. 10:14).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3149.">3149.</span></span>

And there was set before him to eat. That this signifies that it was the
will of the affection of good in the natural man that these things
should be appropriated, is evident from the representation of Laban, by
whom it was set, as being the affection of good in the natural man (see
n. 3129, 3130); and from the signification of "eating," as being to be
communicated and appropriated (see n. 2187, 2343), namely, the Divine
things treated of above (n. 3140, 3141).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3150.">3150.</span></span>

And he said, I will not eat. That this signifies refusal, that is, that
they were not yet to be so appropriated, is evident without explication.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[3147-1](ac063.htm#fr_86) The words "merit," "to
merit," and "meritorious," are used by Swedenborg in a bad sense,
meaning self-merit, etc., except when applied to the Lord. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3151-3200](ac064)
