[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac078)  [Next](ac080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="3901.">3901.</span></span>

The reason why the last state of the church is compared to "eagles"
gathered together to a "carcass," or to a "body," is that by "eagles"
are signified man's rational things, which when predicated of the good,
are true rational things; but when predicated of the evil, are false
rational things or reasonings. "Birds" in general signify man's
thoughts, in both senses good and bad (n. 40, 745, 776, 866, 991, 3219);
and every species has a special signification. As eagles fly high and
are sharp-sighted, they signify rational things. That this is the case
may be seen from many passages in the Word, of which in confirmation we
may adduce the following. First, where they signify true rational
things; in Moses: Jehovah found His people in a desert land, and in
emptiness, in wailing, in solitude: He led him about, He instructed him,
he kept him as the pupil of the eye; as the eagle stirreth up her nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreadeth out her wings, taketh him, beareth
him upon her wings (Deut. 32:10-11). Instruction in the truths and goods
of faith is what is here described, and is compared to the "eagle." The
very process until man becomes rational and spiritual, is contained in
the description and comparison. The comparisons in the Word are all made
by means of significatives; thus here by the "eagle," which is the
rational. \[2\] In the same: Jehovah said to Moses: Ye have seen what I
did unto the Egyptians, and bare you up upon eagles' wings, that I might
bring you unto Myself (Exod. 19:3-4); denoting the same. In Isaiah: They
that wait upon Jehovah shall be renewed in strength, they shall mount up
with strong wing as eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall
walk and not faint (Isa. 40:31); "to be renewed in strength" is to grow
as to the willing of good; and "to mount up with strong wing as eagles"
is to grow as to the understanding of truth, thus as to the rational.
The subject is set forth here as elsewhere by two expressions, one of
which involves the good which is of the will, and the other the truth
which is of the understanding; and the case is the same with the
expressions, "they shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not
faint." \[3\] In Ezekiel: Speak a parable about the house of Israel, and
say, Thus said the Lord Jehovih, A great eagle, with long pinions, full
of feathers, that had embroidery, came upon Lebanon, and took a twig of
the cedar; he carried it into a land of traffic, he set it in a city of
spice merchants. It grew, and became a spreading vine. There was another
great eagle, with great and many feathers; and behold this vine did bend
its roots toward him, and sent forth its branches toward him, that he
might water it from the beds of its plantations in a good field, by many
waters; but it shall be laid waste. He sent his ambassadors into Egypt
that they might give him horses and much people (Ezek. 17:2-9, 15). The
"eagle" first mentioned denotes the rational enlightened by the Divine;
the "eagle" mentioned in the second place denotes the rational from what
is man's own, afterwards become perverted through reasonings from
sensuous things and memory-knowledges. ("Egypt" denotes
memory-knowledges, see n. 1164, 1165, 1186, 1462; "horses" the
intellectual from them, n. 2761-2762, 3217.) \[4\] In Daniel: The vision
of Daniel: Four beasts came up out of the sea, diverse one from another;
the first was like a lion, and had eagle's wings. I held till the wings
thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth and made to
stand upon its feet like a man, and a man's heart was given to it (Dan.
7:3-4). The first state of the church is what is here described by a
"lion that had eagle's wings;" and the "eagle's wings" here are rational
things from what is man's own, on the taking away of which they were
given rational and voluntary things from the Divine, which are signified
by its "being taken up from the earth, and made to stand upon its feet
like a man, and having a man's heart given to it." \[5\] In Ezekiel, in
the description of the likeness of the faces of the four living
creatures, or cherubs: They had the face of a man, and they four had the
face of a lion on the right side, and they four had the face of an ox on
the left side, and they four had the face of an eagle (Ezek. 1:10). As
for the wheels they were called Galgal \[whirling wheels\], and everyone
and everyone had four faces; the first face was the face of the cherub,
and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a
lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle (Ezek. 10:13-14). In John:
Round about the throne were four living creatures full of eyes before
and behind; the first living creature was like a lion; and the second
living creature was like a calf; and the third living creature had a
face as a man; and the fourth living creature was like a flying eagle
(Rev. 4:6-7). That the living creatures thus seen signify Divine arcana,
is evident; and consequently so does the "likeness of their faces;" but
what arcana in particular are signified cannot be known unless it is
known what in the internal sense is a "lion," a "calf," a "man," and an
"eagle." That the "face of an eagle" is circumspection and consequently
Providence is manifest; for the cherubs represented by the living
creatures in Ezekiel signify the Providence of the Lord lest man should
enter into the mysteries of faith from himself and his own rational (see
n. 308). This shows that when it is predicated of man, the "eagle" is in
the internal sense the rational; and this for the reason that the eagle
flies high, and from above has a wide view of the things that are below.
\[6\] In Job: Does the hawk fly by thine intelligence, and stretch her
wings toward the south? Does the eagle mount up at thy command, and make
her nest on high? (Job 39:26-27); it is evident that the "eagle" here is
reason, which is of intelligence. Such was the signification of the
"eagle" in the Ancient Church; for the book of Job is a book of the
Ancient Church (see n. 3540, end). Almost all the books of that period
were written by means of significatives; but in process of time the
significatives have become so completely forgotten that it is not even
known that "birds" in general denote thoughts, although they are so
frequently mentioned in the Word and it appears quite plain that they
have another meaning. \[7\] That in the opposite sense an "eagle"
signifies rational things that are not true, and thus are false, is
evident from the following passages. In Moses: Jehovah shall bring upon
thee a nation from far from the end of the earth, as the eagle flieth, a
nation whose tongue thou hearest not, a nation hard in faces (Deut.
28:49-50). In Jeremiah: Behold he shall come up as clouds, and his
chariots shall be as a whirlwind; his horses are swifter than
eagles. <span id="fr_111"></span>[3901-1](#fn_111) Woe unto us! For we
are laid waste (Jer. 4:13). In the same: Thy boasting hath deceived
thee, the pride of thy heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the
rock, that holdest the height of the hill; because thou makest thy nest
as high as the eagle I will bring thee down from thence. Behold he shall
come up and fly as the eagle, and spread out his wings above Bozrah; and
the heart of the mighty men of Edom at that day shall be as the heart of
a woman in her pangs (Jer. 49:16, 22). In the same: Our pursuers were
swifter than the eagles; they chased us upon the mountains; they laid
wait for us in the wilderness (Lam. 4:19). In Micah: Make thee bald, and
poll thee for the sons of thy delights; enlarge thy baldness as the
eagle; for they are gone into captivity from thee (Micah 1:16). In
Obadiah: Though thou mount on high as the eagle, and though thou set thy
nest among the stars, I will bring thee down from thence (Obad. 4). In
Habukkuk: I am stirring up the Chaldeans, a bitter and hasty nation,
that marcheth through the breadths of the land to inherit
dwelling-places that are not theirs. Their horses are swifter than
eagles; <span id="fr_112"></span>[3901-2](#fn_112) their horsemen come
from far, they fly as an eagle that hasteth to devour (Hab. 1:6, 8).
\[8\] By "eagles" in these passages is signified falsity induced by
reasonings, which is induced from the fallacies of the senses and
external appearances. That by the "Chaldeans" in the Prophet last cited
are signified those who are in a holy external, but interiorly in
falsity, may be seen above (n. 1368); also that they who vastate the
church are like Babylon (n. 1327); that the "breadths of the land"
denote truths (n. 3433, 3434). Vastation is signified by "marching
through the breadths of the land." Their "horses" are their intellectual
things, which are similar (see n. 2761, 2762, 3217). What the "eagle
hastening to devour" signifies, is thus evident, namely, the desolation
of man in respect to truths; for the desolation of the church is there
treated of. Comparisons are here made with eagles; but as before said,
the comparisons in the Word are made by means of significatives. From
all this we can now see what is signified by the comparison with the
"eagles that will be gathered together to the carcass." GENESIS 30 1.
And Rachel saw that she did not bear to Jacob, and Rachel was zealous
against her sister; and she said unto Jacob, Give me sons; and if not, I
am dead. 2. And Jacob was kindled with anger against Rachel, and he
said, Am I in God's stead, who withholdeth from thee the fruit of the
belly? 3. And she said, Behold my maidservant Bilhah, come to her, and
she shall bear upon my knees, and I shall be built, even I, from her. 4.
And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid for a woman, and Jacob came to her.
5. And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son. 6. And Rachel said, God
hath judged me, and also hath heard my voice, and hath given me a son;
therefore she called his name Dan. 7. And she conceived again, and
Bilhah Rachel's handmaid bare a second son to Jacob. 8. And Rachel said,
With the wrestlings of God have I wrestled with my sister, and I have
prevailed; and she called his name Naphtali. 9. And Leah saw that she
had stood still from bearing; and she took Zilpah her handmaid, and gave
her to Jacob for a woman. 10. And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bare Jacob a
son. 11. And Leah said, A troop cometh; and she called his name Gad. 12.
And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bare a second son to Jacob. 13. And Leah
said, In my blessedness; for the daughters will call me blessed; and she
called his name Asher. 14. And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest,
and found dudaim in the field, and brought them unto Leah his mother.
And Rachel said to Leah, Give me I pray of thy son's dudaim. 15. And she
said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken away my man,
and wouldest thou take also my son's dudaim? And Rachel said, Therefore
he shall lie with thee tonight for thy son's dudaim. 16. And Jacob came
from the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said,
Thou must come to me, for hiring I have hired thee with my son's dudaim;
and he lay with her that night. 17. And God hearkened unto Leah, and she
conceived and bare Jacob a fifth son. 18. And Leah said, God hath given
me my reward, because I gave my handmaid to my man; and she called his
name Issachar. 19. And Leah conceived again, and bare a sixth son to
Jacob. 20. And Leah said, God hath endowed me with a good dowry; now
will my man dwell with me, because I have borne him six sons; and she
called his name Zebulun. 21. And afterwards she bare a daughter, and
called her name Dinah. 22. And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened
to her, and opened her womb. 23. And she conceived, and bare a son, and
said, God hath gathered my reproach. 24. And she called his name Joseph,
saying, Let Jehovah add to me another son. 25. And it came to pass, when
Rachel had borne Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, and I
will go to my place and to my land. 26. Give me my females, and my
children, for whom I have served thee, and I will go; for thou knowest
my service, wherewith I have served thee. 27. And Laban said unto him,
If I pray I have found grace in thine eyes, I have tested it, and
Jehovah hath blessed me for thy sake. 28. And he said, Signify to me thy
reward, and I will give it. 29. And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I
have served thee, and how thy substance has been with me. 30. For it was
little that thou hadst before me, and it hath burst forth into a
multitude, and Jehovah hath blessed thee at my foot; and now when shall
I also be doing for mine own house? 31. And he said, What shall I give
thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me anything; if thou wilt do
this word for me, I will return, and feed and keep thy flock. 32. I will
pass through all thy flock this day, removing from thence every small
cattle that is speckled and spotted, and every black one among the
lambs, and the spotted and speckled among the goats, and these shall be
my reward. 33. And my righteousness shall answer for me on the morrow,
because thou comest upon my reward before thee; every one that is not
speckled and spotted among the goats, and black among the lambs, stolen
is this with me. 34. And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be
according to thy word. 35. And he removed that day the he-goats that
were party-colored and spotted, and all the she-goats that were speckled
and spotted, everyone that had white in it, and all the black among the
lambs, and gave them into the hand of his sons. 36. And he set a way of
three days between himself and Jacob; and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's
flocks. 37. And Jacob took him a fresh rod of poplar, and hazel, and
plane-tree, and peeled white peelings on them, laying bare the white
that was upon the rods. 38. And he set the rods which he had peeled in
the gutters, in the watering troughs, whither the flocks came to drink,
over against the flocks; and they grew warm when they came to drink. 39.
And the flocks grew warm at the rods, and the flocks brought forth
party-colored, speckled, and spotted. 40. And Jacob separated the lambs,
and set the faces of the flock toward the party-colored and all the
black in the flock of Laban; and he put for himself droves for himself
alone, and put them not unto Laban's flock. 41. And it came to pass in
every growing warm of the flock that came together first, that Jacob put
the rods before the eyes of the flock in the gutters, that it might grow
warm at the rods. 42. And to the flock that came together later he did
not set them; and those that came together later were Laban's, and those
that came together first were Jacob's. 43. And the man spread himself
abroad exceeding greatly, and he had many flocks, and maidservants, and
menservants, and camels, and asses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3902.">3902.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. In the preceding chapter by the four sons of Jacob from
Leah there was described the state of the church, or of the man who is
becoming a church, as to the ascent from the truth which is of faith to
the good which is of love. In this chapter, by Jacob's sons from the
maidservants of Rachel and Leah, and from Leah, and lastly from Rachel,
there is described the conjunction of natural truth with spiritual good
through means, and this in the order in which it is effected in the man
who is being regenerated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3903.">3903.</span></span>

After this conjunction there is described the fructification and
multiplication of truth and good, which is signified by the flock that
Jacob procured for himself by means of the flock of Laban.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3904.">3904.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE. Verses 1, 2. And Rachel saw that she did not bear to
Jacob, and Rachel was zealous against her sister; and she said unto
Jacob, Give me sons; and if not, I am dead. And Jacob was kindled with
anger against Rachel, and he said, Am I in God's stead, who withholdeth
from thee the fruit of the belly? "And Rachel saw that she did not bear
to Jacob," signifies that interior truth was not yet acknowledged; "and
Rachel was zealous against her sister," signifies indignation that it
was not acknowledged as was external truth; "and she said unto Jacob,
Give me sons," signifies that there was a desire to have interior truths
from the good of natural truth; "and if not, I am dead," signifies that
thus there would be no rising again; "and Jacob was kindled with anger
against Rachel," signifies indignation on the part of natural good; "and
he said, Am I in God's stead," signifies that it was impossible for it;
"who withholdeth from thee the fruit of the belly," signifies that this
must be from the internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3905.">3905.</span></span>

And Rachel saw that she did not bear to Jacob. That this signifies that
interior truth was not yet acknowledged, is evident from the
representation of Rachel, as being the affection of interior truth, or
interior truth itself (n. 3758, 3782, 3793, 3819); from the
signification of "bearing," as being to acknowledge in faith and also in
act (concerning which below); and from the representation of Jacob, as
being the good of natural truth (of which n. 3669, 3677, 3829, and in
the whole of the preceding chapter). The reason why "to bear" is to
acknowledge in faith and also in act, is that by "births" in the Word
are signified spiritual births (n. 1145, 1255, 3860, 3868). Spiritual
birth is the acknowledgment of and faith in truth and good; here, the
acknowledgment in faith and also in act, namely, of the interior truth
represented by Rachel. As nothing is acknowledged in faith until the man
lives according to it, it is for this reason said, "the acknowledgment
in faith and also in act." Truths of faith which are not learned for the
sake of doing, but only for the sake of knowing them, join themselves to
the affections of evil and falsity; for which reason they are not of
faith with the man who has learned them, but are interiorly contrary to
faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3906.">3906.</span></span>

And Rachel was zealous against her sister. That this signifies
indignation that it was not acknowledged as was external truth, is
evident from the signification of "being zealous," as being expressive
of indignation, and this because she did not bear as Leah did; from the
representation of Rachel, as being interior truth (see n. 3905); and
from the signification of a "sister," who here is Leah, as being
external truth. (That "Leah" is external truth, see above, n. 3793,
3819.) With those who are being regenerated the case is this: They learn
to know what internal truth is, but at first do not acknowledge it with
such faith as to live according to it. For internal truths are conjoined
with spiritual affection, which cannot inflow until external truths have
been adapted to correspondence with the internal. \[2\] Take for example
this internal truth: All good is from the Lord, and that which is of
man's own is not good. In the beginning of regeneration this may be
known, but yet is not acknowledged in faith and also in act; for to
acknowledge it in faith and in act is to have a perception that it is
so, and an affection to will it to be so; and this in every act of good;
and is also to have a perception that good from what is man's own cannot
but have regard for self, and thus to the preference of self above
others, and consequently a contempt for others, and moreover a feeling
of self-merit in the good that we do. These things are within external
truth before internal truth has been conjoined with it; and this cannot
be conjoined until regard for self begins to cease, and regard for the
neighbor begins to be felt. From this it is evident what is meant by
"indignation that internal truth was not yet acknowledged as was
external truth."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3907.">3907.</span></span>

And she said unto Jacob, Give me sons. That this signifies a desire to
have interior truths from the good of natural truth, is evident from the
representation of Jacob, as being the good of natural truth (see n.
3905); and from the signification of "sons," as being truths (n. 489,
491, 533, 1147, 2623); here interior truths because from Rachel, by whom
is represented interior truth (n. 3758, 3782, 3793, 3819).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3908.">3908.</span></span>

And if not, I am dead. That this signifies that thus there would be no
rising again, is evident from the signification of "dying," as being not
to rise again into life. In ancient times wives called themselves "dead"
when they did not bring forth a son or a daughter; and they also
believed themselves to be so, because no memory of them, or as it were
no life, would be left to posterity. Their so calling and believing
themselves was indeed for worldly causes; but as every cause comes forth
from a cause prior to itself, and thus everything of cause in the
natural world from a cause in the spiritual world, so also does this.
The cause in the spiritual world was the heavenly marriage of good and
truth, in which there are no other births than truths of faith and goods
of charity. These there are "sons and daughters," and are also signified
by "sons and daughters" in the Word. Whoever has not these births, that
is, truths of faith and goods of charity, is as it were dead, that is,
is among the dead who do not rise again to life or heaven. From this we
may see what is signified by these words of Rachel: "If not, I am dead."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3909.">3909.</span></span>

And Jacob was kindled with anger against Rachel. That this signifies
indignation on the part of natural good, is evident from the
signification of "being kindled with anger," as being to be indignant
(concerning which in what follows); and from the representation of
Jacob, as being the good of the natural (concerning which above). It is
said "against Rachel," because the interior truth represented by Rachel
could not as yet be acknowledged in faith and act by the good of the
natural which is "Jacob." That in the internal sense "to be kindled with
anger" denotes to be indignant, is because every natural affection on
ascending toward the interiors, or toward heaven, becomes more mild, and
is at last changed into a heavenly affection. For the things that stand
forth in the sense of the letter (as here "to be kindled with anger")
are relatively harsh, because they are natural and corporeal, but they
become mild and gentle as they are elevated from the corporeal and
natural man to the internal or spiritual man. This is the reason why the
literal sense is of this nature, being accommodated to the apprehension
of the natural man; and why the spiritual sense is not of such a nature,
being accommodated to the apprehension of the spiritual man. This shows
that "to be kindled with anger" signifies to be indignant. Real
spiritual indignation (and especially celestial indignation) derives
nothing from the anger of the natural man, but from the interior essence
of zeal; which zeal does indeed appear in the outward form like anger,
but in internal form is not anger, nor even the indignation of anger;
but is a certain sadness that is attended with a prayerful wish that it
be not so; and in a form still more interior it is merely a certain
obscure feeling that breaks in on the celestial delight on account of
something not good and true in another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3910.">3910.</span></span>

And he said, Am I in God's stead? That this signifies that it was
impossible for it, is evident from the signification of "not being in
God's stead," as being to be impossible; for "God" is named in the Word
from ability or power; but "Jehovah" from being or essence (n. 300). For
this reason "God" is mentioned when the subject is truth, and "Jehovah"
when it is good (n. 2769, 2807, 2822); for ability is predicated of
truth when being is predicated of good; for good has power through
truth, inasmuch as it is through truth that good performs everything
that comes to pass. From this we can see that by the words, "am I in
God's stead?" there is signified in the internal sense that it was
impossible for it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3911.">3911.</span></span>

Who withholdeth from thee the fruit of the belly. That this signifies
that this must be from the internal, is evident from the signification
that results from the internal sense of the words; for in the internal
sense the "fruit of the belly" signifies the like as "birth," namely,
the acknowledgment of truth and good in faith and in act (n. 3905); and
what is more, the consequent conjunction of truth and good. This
acknowledgment and conjunction cannot come forth from the external man,
but from the internal; for all good inflows from the Lord through the
internal man into the external, and there adopts the truths that are
insinuated by means of the sensuous things of the external man, and
causes the man to acknowledge them in faith and act, and causes them to
be adjoined and thus appropriated to the man. That all good inflows from
the Lord through the internal man into the truths gathered in the memory
of the external man, has been repeatedly shown before. This is what is
meant by the explication of the words before us-that this must be from
the internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3912.">3912.</span></span>

Verses 3-5. And she said, Behold my maidservant Bilhah, come to her and
she shall bear upon my knees, and I shall be built, even I from her. And
she gave him Bilhah her handmaid for a woman, and Jacob came to her. And
Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son. "And she said, Behold my
maidservant Bilhah," signifies the affirming means there is between
natural truth and interior truth; "come to her," signifies that with
this there is the faculty of conjunction; "and she shall bear upon my
knees," signifies acknowledgment in the affection of interior truth,
from which there is conjunction; "and I shall be built, even I, from
her," signifies that thereby this affection has life; "and she gave him
Bilhah her handmaid for a woman" signifies that the affirmative means
was adjoined; "and Jacob came to her," signifies that it was conjoined;
"and Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son," signifies reception and
acknowledgment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3913.">3913.</span></span>

And she said, Behold my maidservant Bilhah. That this signifies the
affirming means which there is between natural truth and interior truth,
is evident from the signification of a "maidservant" and also of a
"handmaid" as being the affection of the knowledges that belong to the
exterior man (n. 1895, 2567, 3835, 3849); and because this affection is
the means for conjoining interior truths with natural or external
truths, by "handmaid" is here signified the affirming means between
them: and from the representation of Bilhah, as being the quality of
this means. By the handmaids given to Jacob by Rachel and Leah for women
to the intent that they might bring forth offspring, nothing else was
represented and signified in the internal sense, than such a thing as is
of service; here, for a means of the conjunction of interior truth with
external truth; for by Rachel is represented interior truth, and by Leah
external truth (n. 3793, 3819). For by the twelve sons of Jacob are here
described the twelve general or cardinal things by means of which while
being regenerated or made a church, man is initiated into what is
spiritual and celestial. For when a man is being regenerated, or made a
church (that is, when from a dead man he is becoming alive, or from
corporeal heavenly), he is led by the Lord through many states. These
general states are what are designated by the "twelve sons," and
afterwards by the "twelve tribes;" for which reason the "twelve tribes"
signify all things of faith and love, as may be seen above (n. 3858);
for generals involve all the particulars and singulars, and these latter
bear relation to the former. \[2\] When a man is being regenerated, the
internal man is to be conjoined with the external, consequently the
goods and truths of the internal man with the goods and truths of the
external; for from truths and goods man is man. These cannot be
conjoined without means. Means are such things as derive something from
the one side, and something from the other, and which are attended with
the effect that insofar as the man accedes to the one, the other becomes
subordinate. These means are what are signified by the "handmaids," the
means on the part of the internal man by the handmaids of Rachel; and
the means on the part of the external man by the handmaids of Leah.
\[3\] That there must be means of conjunction may be seen from the fact
that of itself the natural man does not in the least agree with the
spiritual man, but disagrees so far as to be altogether opposite. For
the natural man regards and loves himself and the world; but the
spiritual man does not regard himself and the world, except insofar as
is conducive to the promotion of uses in the spiritual world; and thus
regards its service and loves it from the use and end. The natural man
seems to himself to have life when he is elevated to dignities, and thus
to supereminence over others; but the spiritual man seems to himself to
have life in humility, and in being the least. Nor does he disregard
dignities, provided that by them as means he can be of service to his
neighbor, to the community, and to the church. Yet he does not reflect
for the sake of himself upon the dignities to which he is elevated, but
for the sake of the uses which he regards as the ends. The natural man
is in his bliss when he is richer than others, and possesses the world's
wealth; but the spiritual man is in his bliss when he is in the
knowledges of truth and good, which are his riches; and still more when
he is in the practice of good according to truths; and yet he does not
despise riches, because by means of them he can be in that practice, and
in the world. \[4\] From these few considerations it is evident that the
state of the natural man and that of the spiritual man are opposed to
each other by their ends; but that nevertheless they can be conjoined,
which takes place when the things of the external man are made
subordinate and subservient to the ends of the internal man. In order
therefore that a man may become spiritual, it is necessary for the
things of the external man to be reduced to compliance; thus that the
ends in favor of self and the world be put off; and ends in favor of the
neighbor and the Lord's kingdom be put on. The former can by no means be
put off and the latter put on, and thus the two be conjoined, except
through means. These means are what are signified by the "handmaids,"
and in particular by the "four sons" born of the handmaids. \[5\] The
first means is one that affirms or is affirmative of internal truth-that
it is so. When this affirmative comes, the man is in the beginning of
regeneration; good is being worked by the internal, and causes the
affirmation. This good cannot inflow into what is negative, nor even
into what is full of doubt, until this becomes affirmative. But
afterwards it manifests itself by affection, that is, by the man's being
affected with truth, or beginning to be delighted with it; first in
knowing it, and then in acting according to it. Take, for example, the
truth that the Lord is the salvation for the human race. Unless this is
made affirmative by the man, all the things he has learned from the Word
or in the church concerning the Lord, and that are in his natural memory
among the memory- knowledges, cannot be conjoined with his internal man,
that is, with what can be there of faith. Thus neither can affection
flow in, not even into the generals of that truth which are conducive to
man's salvation. But when it becomes affirmative, innumerable things are
added, and are filled with the good that flows in; for good continually
flows in from the Lord, but where there is no affirmative, it is not
received. An affirmative is therefore the first means, and is as it were
the first abode of the good that flows in from the Lord. The same is the
case with all the other truths that are called truths of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3914.">3914.</span></span>

Come to her. That this signifies that with this there is the faculty of
conjunction, is evident from the signification of "coming to anyone,"
when what is matrimonial is referred to, as being conjunction; here the
faculty of conjunction with the affirmative; for the first of
conjunction must be with the affirmative-that it is so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3915.">3915.</span></span>

And she shall bear upon my knees. That this signifies acknowledgment in
the affection of interior truth, from which there is conjunction, is
evident from the signification of "bearing," as being to acknowledge in
faith and act (see n. 3905); and from the signification of "knees," or
"thighs," as being the things that belong to conjugial love (n. 3021);
thus the things that belong to the conjunction of the truth of faith
with the good of love; for this conjunction is the very conjugial
principle in the Lord's kingdom. Thus "bearing upon my knees" signifies
an acknowledgment of the interior truth represented by Rachel. The
custom among the ancients of sons and daughters being acknowledged as
legitimate who were born of handmaids by consent of the wife, and
brought forth upon her knees in order that they might be acknowledged,
was derived from the Ancient Church, whose worship consisted in rituals
that were representative and significative of celestial and spiritual
things. In that church, because "bearing" signified the acknowledgment
of truth, and "knees" conjugial love, thus the conjunction of good and
truth from affection, such a ritual was accepted when the wife was
barren, to the intent that she might not represent the dead who do not
rise again to life (according to what has been said just above, n.
3908). \[2\] In the internal sense by these words there is signified a
second degree of affirmation or acknowledgment, which is from affection;
for in order that the conjunction may take place, there must be
affection within the acknowledgment or affirmation; for all conjunction
is effected by means of affection, because without affection truths have
no life. For example: to know the truths that the neighbor must be
loved, and that charity consists in this, and in charity spiritual life,
is bare memory-knowledge, unless attended with affection, that is,
unless they are willed from the heart. Without affection these truths do
not live, and however well anyone knows them, he nevertheless does not
love his neighbor, but himself more than him, and he is in natural life,
but not in spiritual life. It is natural affection that rules over
spiritual affection, and so long as natural affection rules, the man is
called "dead," for he has a life contrary to heavenly life, and heavenly
life is the veriest life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3916.">3916.</span></span>

And I shall be built, even I from her. That this signifies that thereby
this affection has life, is evident from the signification of "being
built" as being not to die (see n. 3908), and consequently to rise
again, or live.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3917.">3917.</span></span>

And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid for a woman. That this signifies
that the affirmative means was adjoined, is evident from the
representation of Bilhah, and from the signification of "handmaid," as
being an affirmative means (n. 3913); and from the signification of
"giving for a woman," as being to adjoin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3918.">3918.</span></span>

And Jacob came to her. That this signifies that it was conjoined, is
evident from the signification of "coming or entering in unto" anyone,
when predicated of what is matrimonial, as being conjunction (n. 3914).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3919.">3919.</span></span>

And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son. That this signifies
reception and acknowledgment, is evident from the signification of
"conceiving," as being reception; and from the signification of
"bearing," as being acknowledgment (see n. 3860, 3868, 3905, 3911); for
in the spiritual sense conceptions and births are receptions of truth
from good, and the consequent acknowledgments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3920.">3920.</span></span>

Verse 6. And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and also hath heard my
voice, and hath given me a son; therefore she called his name Dan. "And
Rachel said, God hath judged me, and also hath heard my voice,"
signifies in the supreme sense justice and mercy; in the internal sense,
the holy of faith; and in the external sense, the good of life; "and
hath given me a son," signifies that this truth was acknowledged;
"therefore she called his name Dan," signifies its quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3921.">3921.</span></span>

And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and also hath heard my voice. That
this signifies in the supreme sense justice and mercy; in the internal
sense, the holy of faith; and in the external sense, the good of life,
is evident from the signification of "God judging me," and from that of
"hearing my voice." That "God judging me" signifies the Lord's justice,
is evident without explication, as also that His "hearing my voice" is
mercy; for the Lord judges all from justice, and hears all from mercy.
He judges from justice because from Divine truth, and He hears from
mercy because from Divine good; from justice He judges those who do not
receive the Divine good; and from mercy He hears those who do. But still
when He judges from justice, it is also at the same time from mercy; for
in all Divine justice there is mercy, as in Divine truth there is Divine
good. But as these are arcana too deep to be told in a few words, they
will of the Lord's Divine mercy be more fully explained elsewhere. \[2\]
That by "God hath judged me, and also hath heard my voice" is meant in
the internal sense the holy of faith, is because faith, which is
predicated of truth, corresponds to the Divine justice; and the holy,
which is good, to the Divine mercy of the Lord; and further, "to judge"
or "judgment" is predicated of the truth of faith (n. 2235); and because
it is said of God that He "judged," it denotes what is good or holy.
Thus it is evident that the holy of faith is what is signified by both
these expressions together; and as this one whole is signified by both
of them together, the two expressions are joined together by "and also."
That in the external sense the good of life is signified, is also from
correspondence, for the good of life corresponds to the holy of faith.
That without the internal sense it cannot be known what is signified by
"God hath judged me and also hath heard," is evident from the fact that
the expressions do not so cohere in the sense of the letter as to
present one idea to the understanding. \[3\] The reason why in this
verse, and in the following down to "Joseph," "God" is named, and in the
preceding verses, "Jehovah," is that in these verses the regeneration of
the spiritual man is treated of, but in the preceding ones the
regeneration of the celestial man; for "God" is named when the subject
is the good of faith, which is of the spiritual man; but "Jehovah" when
the subject is the good of love, which is of the celestial man (see n.
2586, 2769, 2807, 2822). For by Judah, to whom the narrative was brought
down in the preceding chapter, there was represented the celestial man
(see n. 3881); but by Joseph, to whom it is continued in this chapter,
the spiritual man, who is treated of in the verses that follow (23, 24).
That "Jehovah" was named when the narrative was brought down to Judah,
may be seen in verses 32, 33, 35 in the preceding chapter; that "God" is
named where it is continued to Joseph, may be seen in verses 6, 8, 17,
18, 20, 22, 23 of the present chapter; and "Jehovah" is again named
afterwards, because the subject proceeds from the spiritual man to the
celestial. This is the secret which lies hidden in these words, and
which no one can know except from the internal sense, and unless also he
knows what the celestial man is, and what the spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3922.">3922.</span></span>

And hath given me a son. That this signifies that this truth was
acknowledged, is evident from the signification of a "son," as being
truth (n. 489, 491, 533, 1147); and from the signification of "giving a
son," as being to give this truth, which is the same as to acknowledge
it; for every truth that is acknowledged is given by the Lord. "Giving a
son" involves the same as "bearing;" and that "bearing" is
acknowledgment may be seen above (n. 3905, 3915, 3919).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3923.">3923.</span></span>

Therefore she called his name Dan. That this signifies its quality, is
evident from the signification of a "name" and of "calling a name," as
being quality (see n. 144, 145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 2724, 3421). The
quality itself is within the name "Dan," for he was so called from
"judging." But though the name was given to him from "judging," it
nevertheless involves what is signified by all these words of Rachel:
"God hath judged me, and also hath heard my voice," that is, the good of
life, and the holy of faith, and also in the supreme sense the justice
and mercy of the Lord. It is this general principle of the church that
is signified by "Dan," and that is represented by the tribe named from
Dan. This general principle is the first that is to be affirmed or
acknowledged, before a man can be regenerated or made a church. Unless
these things are affirmed and acknowledged, the rest of the things both
of faith and of life cannot possibly be received, and therefore cannot
be affirmed, still less acknowledged. For he who affirms mere faith with
himself, and not the holy of faith, that is, charity (for this is the
holy of faith), and does not affirm this by the good of life, that is,
by the works of charity, can no longer have a relish for the essence of
faith, because he rejects it. Affirmation together with acknowledgment
is the first general principle with the man who is being regenerated,
but is the last with him who has been regenerated; and therefore "Dan"
is the first with him who is to be regenerated, and "Joseph" is the
last; for "Joseph" is the spiritual man himself. But "Joseph" is the
first with him who has been regenerated, and "Dan" the last; because the
man who is to be regenerated commences from the affirmation that it is
so, namely, the holy of faith and the good of life. But the regenerate
man, who is spiritual, is in spiritual good itself, and from this he
regards such affirmation as last; for with him the holy things of faith
and goods of life have been confirmed. \[2\] That "Dan" is the
affirmative which must be the first thing when a man is being
regenerated, may also be seen from other passages in the Word where
"Dan" is named; as from the prophecy of Jacob, then Israel, respecting
his sons: Dan shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel; Dan
shall be a serpent upon the way, an adder upon the path, that biteth the
horse's heels, and his rider falleth backward. I wait for thy salvation,
O Jehovah (Gen. 49:16-18). "Dan" here denotes the affirmative of truth,
concerning which it is said that it will be "a serpent upon the way, and
an adder upon the path," when anyone reasons about truth from sensuous
things; "biting the horse's heels," when it consults the lowest
intellectual things or memory-knowledges, and draws conclusions from
them; and that it is then led away from the truth, is signified by "his
rider falling backward;" for which reason it is said, "I wait for thy
salvation, O Jehovah." That the "serpent" is the man who reasons from
sensuous things and memory-knowledges concerning Divine arcana, may be
seen above (n. 195-197); and that "way" and "path" signify truth (n.
627, 2333); and that the "horse's heels" are the lowest intellectual
things or memory-knowledges (n. 259); for a "horse" is the intellectual
(n. 2761, 2762); the lowest part of which is the "heel." \[3\] Again in
the prophecy of Moses concerning the twelve tribes: Of Dan he said, Dan
is a lion's whelp, he leapeth forth from Bashan (Deut. 33:22); a "lion"
in the internal sense of the Word signifies the truth of the church,
from his strength, for truth is that which fights and conquers; hence a
"lion's whelp" denotes the first of truth, which is affirmation and
acknowledgment. It is said "from Bashan," because it is from the good of
the natural. In Jeremiah: Wash thine heart from wickedness, O Jerusalem,
that thou mayest be saved. How long makest thou the thoughts of thine
iniquity to lodge in the midst of thee? For a voice declareth from Dan,
and causeth to hear iniquity from Mount Ephraim (Jer. 4:14-15); "from
Dan," denotes the truth that is to be affirmed; "from Mount Ephraim,"
that it is from the affection of it. \[4\] In the same: Wait for peace,
but there is no good; and for a time of healing, and behold terror. The
snorting of his horses was heard from Dan; at the sound of the neighings
of his strong ones the whole land trembled; and they came and devoured
the land and the fullness thereof, the city and them that dwell therein.
For behold I will send among you serpents, basilisks, against which
there is no enchantment, and they shall bite you (Jer. 8:15-17); "the
snorting of horses heard from Dan" denotes reasoning concerning truth
from what is nonaffirmative; the "land that trembled," and their
"devouring the fullness thereof," denotes the church and all the things
of the church; for they who reason concerning truth from what is
nonaffirmative (that is, negative) destroy all things of faith; the
"basilisk serpents" denote reasonings, as above. \[5\] In Ezekiel: Dan
and Javan coming in gave bright iron in thy fairs; cassia and calamus
were in thy trading (Ezek. 27:19); where Tyre is the subject treated of,
by which are signified the knowledges of truth and good (n. 1201). "Dan"
denotes the first truths that are affirmed; "fairs" and "trading," the
acquisitions of truth and good (n. 2967); the "bright iron," natural
truth which is the first (n. 425, 426); "cassia and calamus," natural
truth from which there is good. \[6\] In Amos: In that day shall the
fair virgins and the young men faint for thirst. They that swear by the
guilt of Samaria, and have said, Thy God, O Dan, liveth; and the way of
Beersheba liveth; even they shall fall, and shall rise up no more (Amos
8:13-14); "Thy God, O Dan, liveth, and the way of Beersheba liveth"
denotes that they are in the denial of all things of faith and its
doctrine. (That "way" denotes truth, see above, n. 627, 2333; and
"Beersheba," doctrine, n. 2723, 2858, 2859, 3466.) That there is
signified the denial of all things of faith, is because Dan was the last
boundary of the land of Canaan, and Beersheba the first, that is, the
midst or inmost of the land; for by the "land of Canaan" was represented
and signified the Lord's kingdom, and thus the church (n. 1607, 3038,
3481), and accordingly all things of love and faith, because these are
of the Lord's kingdom and church. Hence all things in the land of Canaan
were representative, according to their distances, situations, and
boundaries (n. 1585, 1866, 3686). \[7\] The first boundary, that is, the
midst or inmost of the land, was Beersheba, before Jerusalem became so,
because Abraham was there, and also Isaac; but the last boundary, or the
outermost of the land, was Dan; and hence when all things in one complex
were signified, it was said, "from Dan even to Beersheba;" as in the
second book of Samuel: To transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul,
and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan
even to Beersheba (2 Sam. 3:10). In the same: All Israel gathering was
gathered together from Dan even to Beersheba (2 Sam. 17:11). And again:
David said to Joab, Pass through all the tribes of Israel from Dan even
to Beersheba (2 Sam. 24:2, 15). And in the first book of Kings: Judah
and Israel dwelt in security, every man under his vine and under his
fig-tree, from Dan even to Beersheba (1 Kings 4:25). By this expression
are meant in the historic sense all things of the land of Canaan; but in
the internal sense all things of the Lord's kingdom, and also all things
of the church. \[8\] The reason why, as before said, "Dan" is the first
boundary, and also the last, is that the affirmative of truth and good
is the first of all things when faith and charity are beginning with
man, and the last when man is in charity and thereby in faith. It was
from this also that the last lot fell to Dan when the land of Canaan was
divided for inheritance (Josh. 19:40, etc.); for the lot was cast before
Jehovah (Josh. 18:6); and hence it fell according to the representation
of each tribe. \[9\] And because the lot did not fall to Dan among the
inheritances of the rest of the tribes, but beyond their borders (Judges
18:1), that tribe was omitted by John in the Revelation (Rev. 7:5-8),
where the twelve thousand that were sealed are mentioned; for they who
are only in the affirmative of truth and also of good, and go no
further, are not in the Lord's kingdom, that is, among the "sealed."
Even the worst men are able to know truths and goods, and also to affirm
them; but the quality of the affirmation is known from the life. \[10\]
"Dan" is also mentioned as a boundary in Gen. 14:14, where Abraham is
described as having pursued the enemy thus far, and where "Dan" has a
similar signification. The city called "Dan" was not indeed built by the
posterity of Dan at that time, but afterwards (Josh. 19:47; Judges
18:29); yet even then it was called the first boundary with respect to
entering into the land of Canaan, or the last with respect to going out;
and the inmost of the land was Hebron, and afterwards Beersheba, where
Abraham and Isaac dwelt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3924.">3924.</span></span>

Verses 7, 8. And she conceived again, and Bilhah Rachel's handmaid bare
a second son to Jacob. And Rachel said, With the wrestlings of God have
I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed: and she called his name
Naphtali. "And she conceived again, and Bilhah Rachel's handmaid bare,"
signifies here as before reception and acknowledgment; "a second son to
Jacob," signifies a second general truth; "and Rachel said, With the
wrestlings of God have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed,"
signifies in the supreme sense own power; in the internal sense,
temptation in which there is victory; in the external sense, resistance
by the natural man; "and she called his name Naphtali," signifies its
quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3925.">3925.</span></span>

And she conceived again, and Bilhah Rachel's handmaid bare. That this
signifies reception and acknowledgment, is evident from the
signification of "conceiving," as being reception; and from the
signification of "bearing," as being acknowledgment (n. 3319); and also
from the signification of "handmaid," as being a subserving means (n.
3913, 3917); for the subject here is a second general means that is of
service for the conjunction of the internal man with the external.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3926.">3926.</span></span>

A second son to Jacob. That this signifies a second general truth, is
evident from the signification of a "son," as being truth (see n. 489,
491, 533, 1147). That the signification here is a general truth, is
evident from what has been said above concerning the twelve sons of
Jacob, and the twelve tribes named from them, as being the general
things of the church, and accordingly the general things of faith and
love, or of truth and good, which are signified and represented by them;
and that in the opposite sense are also meant general things not of
faith and love, but all things of falsity and evil, will appear
hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3927.">3927.</span></span>

And Rachel said, With the wrestlings of God have I wrestled with my
sister, and I have prevailed. That this signifies in the supreme sense
own power; in the internal sense, temptation in which there is victory;
and in the external sense, resistance by the natural man, is evident
from the signification of the "wrestlings of God" and of "wrestling," as
being temptations; for temptations are nothing else than wrestlings of
the internal man with the external, or of the spiritual man with the
natural; for each desires to rule, and when dominion is in question,
combat arises, which is here called "wrestling." That "to prevail" is to
overcome, is evident without explication. \[2\] That in the supreme
sense these words signify own power, is because the Lord, when He was in
the world and in the human there, sustained all temptations from His own
power, and conquered from His own power; differently from every man, who
never sustains any spiritual temptation and conquers in it from his own
power; for it is the Lord who sustains and conquers within him. (See
what has been stated and shown on these subjects before, namely, That
the Lord sustained the most grievous temptations, beyond all others, n.
1663, 1668, 1690, 1737, 1787, 1789, 1812, 1813, 1815, 1820, 2776, 2786,
2795, 2813, 2816, 3318: That the Lord combated and conquered from His
own power, n. 1616, 1692, 1813, 3381: And that the Lord alone combats in
man, n. 1692.) \[3\] That in the internal sense the "wrestlings of God"
and "prevailing" denote the temptations in which man conquers, is
evident from what has been said just above. But that in the external
sense there is signified resistance by the natural man is because all
temptation is nothing else; for as before said in spiritual temptations
there is dispute about dominion, as to which shall have the supremacy,
the internal man or the external; or what is the same, the spiritual man
or the natural, for these are opposed to each other (n. 3913). For when
man is in temptations, his internal or spiritual man is ruled by the
Lord through angels; but his external or natural man through infernal
spirits; and the combat between them is that which is perceived by the
man as temptation. When a man is such in faith and life that he can be
regenerated, he will conquer in temptations; but when he is such that he
cannot be regenerated, he yields in temptations. That there is
resistance by the natural man, is signified by its being said that she
"wrestled with her sister;" for by "Leah," who is here the "sister," is
signified the affection of the external man; but by "Rachel," the
affection of the internal man (n. 3793, 3819).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3928.">3928.</span></span>

And she called his name Naphtali. That this signifies its quality,
namely, the quality of the temptation in which there is victory, and
also the quality of the resistance by the natural man, is evident from
the signification of "name," and of "calling a name," as being quality
(see n. 144, 145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 2724, 3421). The quality itself is
that which is signified by "Naphtali," for he was named "Naphtali" from
"wrestling." Hence also by Naphtali is represented this second general
truth of the church, for temptation is the means of the conjunction of
the internal man with the external, because they are at variance with
each other, but are reduced to agreement and correspondence by means of
temptations. The external man is indeed such that of itself it lusts for
nothing else than corporeal and worldly things, these being the delights
of its life. But the internal man, when it is opened toward heaven and
desires the things of heaven, such as it is with those who can be
regenerated, then finds heavenly delight in these things, and while the
man is in temptations there is a combat between these two kinds of
delight. This the man does not then know, because he does not know what
heavenly delight is, and what infernal delight is; and still less that
they are so entirely opposed to each other. But the celestial angels
cannot possibly be with man in his corporeal and worldly delight until
this delight has been reduced to subservience, so that the corporeal and
worldly delight is no longer sought as the end; but for the sake of the
use of serving the heavenly delight (as shown above, n. 3913). When this
has been effected, the angels can be with the man in both; but in this
case his delight becomes bliss, and finally happiness in the other life.
\[2\] He who believes that before regeneration the delight of his
natural man is not infernal, and that it is not possessed by diabolical
spirits, is much mistaken, and does not know how the case is with man,
namely, that before regeneration he is possessed as to his natural man
by genii and infernal spirits, however much he may appear to himself to
be like any other man; and even though he may be with others in what is
holy, and may reason about the truths and goods of faith, and may indeed
believe himself to be confirmed in them; yet if he does not perceive in
himself anything of the affection of what is just and equitable in his
employment, and of truth and good in company and in life, let him know
that his delight is that of the infernals, for there is no other love in
it than that of self and the world; and when this love makes his
delight, there is in it no charity and no faith. After this delight has
become dominant, it is deadened and dissipated by no other means than
the affirmation and acknowledgment of the holy of faith and of the good
of life, which is the first means, signified by "Dan," as shown above;
and then by means of temptation, which is the second means, and is
signified by Naphtali; for this means follows the other, for they who do
not affirm and acknowledge the good and truth of faith and charity
cannot come into any combat of temptation, because there is nothing
within which offers resistance to the evil and falsity to which natural
delight persuades. \[3\] In other places in the Word where "Naphtali" is
mentioned, there is signified man's state after temptations; as in the
prophecy of Jacob, then Israel: Naphtali is a hind let loose, giving
sayings of elegance (Gen. 49:21); where a "hind let loose" denotes the
affection of natural truth in the free state which exists after
temptations; which state is also the quality that is in the temptations
signified by "Naphtali;" for in temptations the struggle is concerning
freedom. In like manner in the prophecy of Moses: To Naphtali he said,
Naphtali is satisfied with favor, and full with the blessing of Jehovah,
he shall possess the west and the south (Deut. 33:23); for the
representations of the sons of Jacob and of the tribes are in accordance
with the order in which they are named (n. 3862). And in the prophecy of
Deborah and Barak: Zebulun a people that hath devoted his soul to die,
and Naphtali upon the high places of the field (Judg. 5:18); where also
in the internal sense the combats of temptations are treated of; and the
man is among those who fear nothing of evil because they are in truths
and goods; which is to be "upon the high places of the field."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3929.">3929.</span></span>

Verses 9-11. And Leah saw that she had stood still from bearing, and she
took Zilpah her handmaid, and gave her to Jacob for a woman. And Zilpah
Leah's handmaid bare Jacob a son. And Leah said, A troop cometh, and she
called his name Gad. "And Leah saw that she had stood still from
bearing," signifies that no other external truths had been acknowledged;
"and she took Zilpah her handmaid," signifies an affirmative conjoining
means; "and gave her to Jacob for a woman," signifies that this effected
conjunction; "and Zilpah Leah's handmaid bare Jacob a son," signifies
acknowledgment; "and Leah said, A troop cometh," signifies in the
supreme sense omnipotence and omniscience, in the internal sense the
good of faith, and in the external sense works; "and she called his name
Gad," signifies its quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3930.">3930.</span></span>

And Leah saw that she had stood still from bearing. That this signifies
that no other external truths had been acknowledged, is evident from the
representation of Leah, as being external truth (see n. 3793, 3819); and
from the signification of "bearing," as being to acknowledge in faith
and act (n. 3905, 3915, 3919). Hence Leah's "standing still from
bearing" signifies in the internal sense that no other external truths
had been acknowledged.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3931.">3931.</span></span>

And she took Zilpah her handmaid. That this signifies an affirmative
conjoining means, is evident from the signification of a "handmaid," as
being an affirmative means that is of service for the conjunction of the
external man with the internal (n. 3913, 3917).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3932.">3932.</span></span>

And gave her to Jacob for a woman. That this signifies that this means
effected conjunction, is evident from the signification of "giving for a
woman," as being to conjoin (n. 3915, 3917).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3933.">3933.</span></span>

And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bore Jacob a son. That this signifies the
acknowledgment of external truth, is evident from the signification of
"bearing," as being acknowledgment; from the signification of a
"handmaid," as being an affirmative conjoining means; and from the
signification of a "son," as being truth (n. 489, 491, 533, 1147).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3934.">3934.</span></span>

And Leah said, A troop cometh. That this signifies in the supreme sense
omnipotence and omniscience; in the internal sense, the good of faith;
and in the external sense, works, is evident from the signification here
of a "troop." That a "troop" in the supreme sense is omnipotence and
omniscience, is because a "troop" here is a multitude; and when
"multitude" is predicated of the Lord's Divine, it denotes an infinite
multitude, which is no other than omnipotence and omniscience. But
omnipotence is predicated from the quantity which is of magnitude; and
omniscience from the quantity which is of multitude. Omnipotence also is
predicated from infinite good, or what is the same, from the Divine
love, and thus from the Divine will; but omniscience from infinite
truth, or what is the same, from the Divine intelligence. That in the
internal sense a "troop" is the good of faith is from correspondence;
for to the Lord's Divine omnipotence corresponds the good which is of
charity; and to His omniscience the truth which is of faith. \[2\] That
a "troop" in the external sense signifies works, is because these
correspond to the good of faith; for the good of faith produces works,
because the good of faith is not possible without works, just as
thinking good and willing good are not possible without doing good. The
one is the internal, and the other the corresponding external.
Furthermore, in regard to works, unless they correspond to the good of
faith they are neither works of charity nor works of faith; for they do
not come from their internal, but are dead works, in which there is
neither good nor truth; but when they correspond, they are then works
either of charity or of faith. Works of charity are those which flow
from charity as from their soul; but works of faith are those which flow
from faith. Works of charity exist with the regenerate man; and works of
faith with him who has not yet been regenerated, but is being
regenerated; the case being the same as it is with the affections of
good and of truth; for the regenerate man does good from the affection
of it, thus from willing good; but the man who is to be regenerated does
good from the affection of truth, thus from knowing good. The nature of
the difference has already been repeatedly shown. From this it is
manifest what works are. \[3\] Moreover, in regard to works the good of
faith is comparatively as are man's will and the derivative thought to
his face, which is well known to be an image of his mind, that is, of
his will and the derivative thought. If the will and thought are not
presented in the face as in their image, what is seen there is not the
will and thought, but hypocrisy or deceit; because the man presents a
face different from that which he wills and thinks. The case is the same
with every act of the body in respect to the interiors which are of the
thought and will. Man's internal lives in his external by act or by
acting. If the act or acting is not according to his internal, it is a
proof either that it is not his internal that is producing the act, but
an impulse recurring from custom and habit; or else that it is something
feigned, as in hypocrisy and deceit. From this it is again manifest what
works are; and from this it follows that he who makes profession of
faith, and still more he who makes profession of the good of faith, and
denies works, and still more if he rejects them, is devoid of faith, and
yet more of charity. \[4\] Such being the nature of the works of charity
and faith, and as man is never in charity and faith unless he is in
works, for this reason "works" are so frequently mentioned in the Word;
as may appear from the following passages: Thine eyes are open upon all
the ways of the sons of man, to give everyone according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his works (Jer. 32:19). Be ye converted
everyone from his evil way, and make your works good (Jer. 35:15). I
will render to them according to their work, and according to the work
of their hands (Jer. 25:14). In Hosea: I will visit upon him his ways,
and render to him his works (Hos. 4:9). In Micah: The land shall be a
desolation because of them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their
works (Micah 7:13). In Zechariah: Thus said Jehovah Zebaoth: Be ye
converted from your evil ways, and from your evil works. As Jehovah
Zebaoth thought to do unto us according to our ways, and according to
our works, so hath He done to us (Zech. 1:4, 6). In John: Blessed are
the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, saith the spirit,
that they may rest from their labors; and their works follow with them
(Rev. 14:13). \[5\] In the same: I saw the dead small and great stand
before God, and the books were opened; and another book was opened which
is the book of life; and the dead were judged out of the things that
were written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up
the dead that were in it; and death and hell gave up the dead that were
in them; and they were judged everyone according to their works (Rev.
20:12-13). Behold I come quickly, and My reward is with Me, to give to
every man according to his works (Rev. 22:12). In John the Evangelist:
This is the judgment, that the light is come into the world, and men
loved the darkness rather than the light, because their works were evil.
For everyone that doeth evil hateth the light, and cometh not to the
light, lest his works should be reproved; but he that doeth the truth
cometh to the light, that his works may be made manifest, because they
have been wrought in God (John 3:19-21). The world cannot hate you, but
Me it hateth, because I testify of it that its works are evil (John
7:7). Jesus said to the Jews, If ye were Abraham's sons ye would do the
works of Abraham. Ye do the works of your father (John 8:39, 41). If ye
know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them (John 13:17). \[6\] In
Matthew: Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good
works. Whosoever shall do and teach them, he shall be called great in
the kingdom of the heavens (Matt. 5:16, 19). Not everyone that saith
unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of the heavens; but he
that doeth the will of My Father who is in the heavens. Many will say to
Me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied by Thy name, and by
Thy name have cast out demons, and in Thy name done many mighty works?
And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from Me ye
that work iniquity (Matt. 7:21-23). In Luke: The master of the house
shall answer and say to them, I know you not whence ye are; then shall
ye begin to say, We did eat and drink in thy presence, and thou didst
teach in our streets; but he shall say, I tell you I know you not whence
ye are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity (Luke 13:25-27). In
Matthew: Everyone that heareth My words, and doeth them, I will liken
him to a wise man; but everyone that heareth My words, and doeth them
not, shall be likened unto a foolish man (Matt. 7:24, 26). The Son of
man shall come in the glory of His Father with His angels, and then
shall He render to every man according to his works (Matt. 16:27). \[7\]
From these passages it is evident that works are what save man, and what
condemn man; that is to say, that good works save, and evil works
condemn; for in his works is man's will. He who wills good, does good;
but he who does not do good, however he may say that he wills good,
still does not will it when he does not do it. This is as if he should
say, I will it, but I do not will it. And because the will itself is in
works, and charity is of the will, and faith is of charity, it is
manifest what of the will, or what of charity and faith, there is in a
man, when he does not do good works; and especially when he does the
contrary, or evil works. \[8\] Moreover be it known that the Lord's
kingdom commences in a man from the life which is of works, for he is
then in the beginning of regeneration; but when the Lord's kingdom is in
a man, it terminates in works, and then the man is regenerate. For his
internal man is then within his external man in correspondence
therewith; and his works are of his external man, while charity and the
derivative faith are of his internal man; and therefore in this case his
works are charity. As the life of the internal man thus comes forth in
the works of the external man, therefore the Lord in speaking of the
Last Judgment (Matt. 25:32-46), recounts nothing but works, and says
that those who have done good works shall enter into life eternal, and
those who have done evil works into damnation. From what has been said
it is also evident what is signified by that which we read of John-that
he lay at the breast and on the bosom of Jesus, and that Jesus loved him
more than the rest (John 13:23, 25; 21:20); for by John were represented
good works-(see the preface to the eighteenth and to the twenty-second
chapters of Genesis). What the works of faith are, which from the
resemblance may also be called its fruits; and what the works of
charity, will of the Lord's Divine mercy be stated more fully elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3935.">3935.</span></span>

And she called his name Gad. That this signifies its quality, is evident
from the signification of a "name" and of "calling a name," as being
quality (concerning which above). The quality itself is signified by
"Gad;" namely, the quality of the good of faith and of works. By
"quality" is signified everything whatever that is within; here, within
the good of faith and within works; and these are things innumerable,
for the quality varies in each individual, and is also the contrary in
those who are not in the good of faith, and thus not in good works;
which quality is also signified by "Gad," when he is named in the
opposite sense. When the good of faith of the internal man, and the good
works of the external man, correspond, they, as shown above, are a third
general means, which is to be acknowledged in faith and in act before a
man can enter into the Lord's kingdom; that is, before he can by
regeneration be made a church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3936.">3936.</span></span>

Verses 12, 13. And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bare a second son to Jacob.
And Leah said, In my blessedness; for the daughters will call me
blessed; and she called his name Asher. "And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bare
a second son to Jacob," signifies the acknowledgment of the second
general truth; "and Leah said, In my blessedness; for the daughters will
call me blessed," signifies in the supreme sense eternity, in the
internal sense the happiness of eternal life, and in the external sense
the delight of the affections; "and she called his name Asher,"
signifies its quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3937.">3937.</span></span>

And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bare a second son to Jacob. That this
signifies the acknowledgment of the second general truth, is evident
from the signification of "bearing," as being acknowledgment (see n.
3911, 3915, 3919); from the signification of a "handmaid" as being an
affirmative means that is of service for the conjunction of the external
man with the internal (n. 3913, 3917); from the signification of a
"son," as being truth, here a general truth (see n. 3926) and from the
representation of Jacob, and of Leah, and also of Zilpah (concerning
which above). This shows what is the internal sense of these words,
namely, the acknowledgment of the second general truth that is of
service as a means for conjoining the external man with the internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3938.">3938.</span></span>

And Leah said, In my blessedness; for the daughters will call me
blessed. That this signifies in the supreme sense eternity; in the
internal sense, the happiness of eternal life; and in the external
sense, the delight of the affections, is evident from the signification
of "blessedness," and from the signification of "the daughters will call
me blessed." That "blessedness" in the supreme sense is eternity, cannot
be seen except from the correspondence with the things in man; for
things that are Divine, or that are infinite, are not apprehended except
from finite things of which man can form some idea. Without an idea
derived from finite things, and especially an idea from the things of
space and time, man can comprehend nothing of Divine things, and still
less of the Infinite. Without an idea of space and time man cannot have
any thought at all (n. 3404); for in respect to his body he is in time,
and thus in respect to his thoughts which are from the external senses;
whereas the angels, not being in time and space, have ideas of state,
and therefore spaces and times in the Word signify states (see n. 1274,
1382, 2625, 2788, 2837, 3254, 3356, 3827). \[2\] There are two states,
namely, a state that corresponds to space and a state that corresponds
to time. The state that corresponds to space is state as to being; and
the state that corresponds to time is state as to coming forth <span
id="fr_113"></span>[3938-1](#fn_113) (n. 2625). For there are two things
that make man, namely, being and coming forth. Man's being is nothing
else than a recipient of the eternal which proceeds from the Lord; for
men, spirits, and angels are nothing but recipients, or forms recipient,
of life from the Lord. The reception of life is that of which coming
forth is predicated. Man believes that he is, and this of himself; when
yet it is not true that he is of himself; but that as before said, he
comes forth. Being is solely in the Lord, and is called "Jehovah." From
being, which is Jehovah, are all things which appear to be \[sicut
sint\]. But the Lord's being, or Jehovah, can never be communicated to
anyone; but solely to the Lord's Human. This was made the Divine being,
that is, Jehovah. (That the Lord is Jehovah as to both the Essences may
be seen above, n. 1736, 2004, 2005, 2018, 2025, 2156, 2329, 2921, 3023,
3035.) \[3\] Coming forth also is predicated of the Lord; but only when
He was in the world, where He put on the Divine. But since He has become
the Divine being, coming forth can no longer be predicated of Him,
except as a something that proceeds from Him. That which proceeds from
Him is that which appears as the coming forth in Him; yet it is not in
Him, but is from Him, and causes men, spirits, and angels to come forth;
that is, to live. In man, spirit, and angel, coming forth is living; and
his living is eternal happiness. The happiness of eternal life is that
to which in the supreme sense eternity, which is from the Lord's Divine
being, corresponds. That the happiness of eternal life is that which is
signified by "blessedness" in the internal sense, and by the delight of
the affections in the external sense, is manifest without explication.
\[4\] But that which is here signified is the delight of the affections
of truth and good that corresponds to the happiness of eternal life. All
affections have their delights; but such as are the affections, such are
the delights. The affections of evil and falsity also have their
delights; and before a man begins to be regenerated, and to receive from
the Lord the affections of truth and good, these delights appear to be
the only ones; so much so that men believe that no other delights exist;
and consequently that if they were deprived of these, they would utterly
perish. But they who receive from the Lord the delights of the
affections of truth and good, gradually see and perceive the nature of
the delights of their former life, which they had believed to be the
only delights-that they are relatively vile, and indeed filthy. And the
further a man advances into the delight of the affections of truth and
good, the more does he begin to regard the delights of evil and falsity
as vile; and at last to hold them in aversion. \[5\] I have sometimes
spoken with those in the other life who had been in the delights of evil
and falsity; and I have been permitted to tell them that they have no
life until they are deprived of their delights. But they said (as say
such persons in the world) that if they should be deprived of them,
nothing of life would be left them. But I was permitted to reply that
life then first begins, together with such happiness as there is in
heaven, which in comparison with that of their former delights is
unutterable. But this they could not apprehend, because what is unknown
is believed to be nothing. It is the same with all in the world who are
in the love of self and of the world, and therefore in no charity. They
know the delight of these loves, but not the delight of charity. Thus
they are altogether ignorant of what charity is, and still more that
there is any delight in charity; when yet the delight of charity is that
which fills the universal heaven, and constitutes the blessedness and
happiness there; and if you will to believe it, it constitutes the
intelligence and wisdom also, together with their delights; for into the
delights of charity the Lord inflows with the light of truth and the
flame of good, and with the derivative intelligence and wisdom. But
falsities and evils reject, suffocate, and pervert these delights, and
hence come folly and insanity. From all this it is evident what is the
nature and quality of the delight of the affections, and that it
corresponds to the happiness of eternal life. \[6\] The man of this age
believes that if at the hour of death he merely has the confidence of
faith, he can get into heaven no matter in what affection he may have
lived during the whole course of his life. I have sometimes spoken with
those who have so lived, and have so believed. When they come into the
other life, they at first have no other idea than that they may enter
into heaven, without any regard to their past life, in which they had
put on the delight of the affection of evil and falsity from the loves
of self and of the world, which had been their ends. I have been
permitted to tell them that everyone can be admitted into heaven,
because heaven is denied by the Lord to no one; but whether they can
live there they can know when admitted. Some who firmly believed that
they could, have also been admitted. But as the life there is that of
love to the Lord and of love toward the neighbor, which constitutes all
the sphere and happiness of the life there, on coming into it they began
to be distressed, not being able to breathe in such a sphere, and they
then began to perceive the filthiness of their affections, thus to feel
infernal torment. In consequence of this they cast themselves headlong
down, saying that they desired to be far away, and marveling that that
was heaven which to them was hell. This shows what is the nature of the
one delight, and what is that of the other; and that they who are in the
delight of the affections of evil and falsity can by no means be among
those who are in the delight of the affection of good and truth; and
that these delights are opposite to each other, as are heaven and hell
(see n. 537-539, 541, 547, 1397, 1398, 2130, 2401). \[7\] Furthermore,
as regards the happiness of eternal life: during his life in the world
the man who is in the affection of good and truth cannot perceive it,
but a certain delight in its stead. The reason of this is that while in
the body he is in worldly cares and consequent anxieties that prevent
the happiness of eternal life (which is deep within him) from then being
manifested in any other way. For when this happiness inflows from within
into the cares and anxieties that are with the man outwardly, it sinks
down among the cares and anxieties there, and becomes a kind of obscure
delight; but still it is a delight within which there is blessedness,
and within this happiness. Such is the happiness of being content in
God. But when a man is divested of his body, and at the same time of
these worldly cares and anxieties, the happiness which had lain hidden
in obscurity within his interior man comes forth and reveals itself.
\[8\] As affection is so often spoken of, let us state what is meant by
affection. Affection is nothing else than love, but is what is
continuous of it. For from love a man is affected either with evil and
falsity, or with good and truth. As this love is present and is within
all things in general and particular that belong to him, it is not
perceived as love, but is varied according to its matter in hand, and
according to the man's states and their changes; and this continually in
everything that he wills, thinks, and does. It is this continuous of
love that is called affection; and it is this continuous that reigns in
a man's life and makes all his delight, and consequently his very life;
for man's life is nothing else than the delight of his affection; and
thus is nothing else than the affection of his love. Love is man's
willing, and derivatively is his thinking, and thereby his acting.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3939.">3939.</span></span>

And she called his name Asher. That this signifies its quality, is
evident from the signification of "calling a name," as being quality-as
above. The quality itself is that which Asher represents. "Asher" in the
original language means "blessedness;" but the name involves all that is
signified by the words of his mother Leah-"in my blessedness; for the
daughters will call me blessed," namely, the delight of the affections
which corresponds to the happiness of eternal life. This is the fourth
general principle that conjoins the external man with the internal; for
when a man perceives this corresponding delight within himself, his
external man is then beginning to be conjoined with his internal man. It
is the delights of the affections of truth and good that conjoin them;
for without the delights of the affections nothing is conjoined, because
the man's life is in them. (That all conjunction is through the
affections, see n. 3024, 3066, 3336, 3849, 3909.) By the "daughters who
call her blessed" are signified churches. (That in the internal sense of
the Word "daughters" signify churches see n. 2362.) This was said by
Leah because by the births from the handmaids are signified the general
truths which are the means that are of service for conjunction, to the
intent that the church may come forth in the man. For when a man
perceives this delight or affection, he is beginning to become a church;
and this being the case this is said of the fourth or last son of the
handmaids. \[2\] "Asher" is often named in the Word, but by him, as well
as by the other sons, is signified the quality then treated of, that is,
the quality of those in that state which is the subject there treated
of; and the quality is also according to the order in which the sons are
named, being of one kind when the order begins with "Reuben" or faith,
of another when it begins with "Judah" or celestial love, and of another
when with "Joseph" or spiritual love; for the essence and quality of
that which is first is derived and passes on into the things which
follow. This is the ground of their varying significations in the places
where they are named. Here, where their birth is treated of, the general
principles of the church are signified by them; and consequently all
things of faith and love that make the church; and this for the reason
that in what goes before, the regeneration of man is treated of, or
man's states before he becomes a church; and in the supreme sense the
Lord - how He made His Human Divine; and thus the ascent of the ladder
which was seen by Jacob in Bethel, even to Jehovah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3940.">3940.</span></span>

Verses 14-16. And Reuben went in the days of wheat-harvest, and found
dudaim in the field, and brought them unto Leah his mother. And Rachel
said to Leah, Give me I pray of thy son's dudaim. And she said unto her,
Is it a small matter that thou hast taken away my man, and wouldest thou
take also my son's dudaim? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with
thee tonight for thy son's dudaim. And Jacob came from the field in the
evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come to me,
for hiring I have hired thee with my son's dudaim; and he lay with her
that night. "And Reuben went in the days of wheat-harvest," signifies
faith as regards its state of love and charity; "and found dudaim in the
field," signifies the things that belong to conjugial love in the truth
and good of charity and love; "and brought them unto Leah his mother,"
signifies application to the affection of external truth; "and Rachel
said to Leah," signifies the perception of the affection of interior
truth, and a longing for it; "give me I pray of thy son's dudaim,"
signifies of the things that belong to conjugial love, with which it
might be mutually and alternately conjoined; "and she said unto her, Is
it a small matter that thou hast taken away my man?" signifies that
there is conjugial desire; "and wouldest thou take also my son's
dudaim?" signifies that thus there would be withdrawn the conjugial
relation of natural good with external truth; "and Rachel said,"
signifies consent; "therefore he shall be with thee tonight for thy
son's dudaim," signifies that there should be conjunction; "and Jacob
came from the field in the evening," signifies the good of truth in a
state of good, but in obscurity such as belongs to the natural; "and
Leah went out to meet him," signifies a longing on the part of the
affection of external truth; "and said, Thou must come to me," signifies
that it should be conjoined therewith; "for hiring I have hired thee
with my son's dudaim," signifies that it was promised from forethought;
"and he lay with her that night," signifies conjunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3941.">3941.</span></span>

And Reuben went in the days of wheat-harvest. That this signifies faith
as regards its state of love and charity, is evident from the
representation of Reuben, as being the faith which is the first thing of
regeneration (see n. 3861, 3866); from the signification of "days," as
being states (n. 23, 487, 488, 493, 893, 2788, 3462, 3785); and from the
signification of "wheat," as being love and charity-to be explained in
what follows; hence "wheat-harvest" is an advancing state of love and
charity. The means of the conjunction of the external man with the
internal have been described under the representation of the four sons
of Jacob by the handmaids; and the subject now treated of is the
conjunction of good and truth by means of the rest of the sons; and
therefore the "dudaim" are first spoken of, by which this conjunction or
conjugial relation is signified. The reason why a "wheat-harvest"
signifies an advancing state of love and charity, is that a "field"
signifies the church, and thus the things of the church; and the "seeds"
sown in the field signify the things of good and truth; and the plants
born from them, such as wheat, barley, and other grains, signify the
things of love and charity, and also of faith. The states of the church
in regard to these things are therefore compared to "seed time" and
"harvest," and are so called, as in Genesis 8:22 (n. 932). \[2\] That
"wheat" denotes the things of love and charity, may also be seen from
the following passages. In Moses: Jehovah maketh him to ride on the high
places of the earth, and feedeth him with the increase of the fields,
and maketh him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty
rock; butter of the herd and milk of the flock, with the fat of lambs
and of rams, the sons of Bashan, and of he-goats, with the fat of the
kidneys of wheat, and thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape (Deut
32:13-14); here in the internal sense the subject treated of is the
Ancient Church and its state when it was set up; and all the things of
love and charity and all the things of faith that were in it, are
described by significatives. The "fat of the kidneys of wheat" is the
celestial of love and charity; and as "fat" or "fatness" signifies the
celestial (n. 353), and "wheat," love, they are frequently joined
together in the Word-as also in David: O that My people were obedient to
Me, that Israel would walk in My ways. He should feed them with the fat
of wheat, and with honey out of the rock would I satisfy thee (Ps.
81:13, 16). And again in the same: Jehovah, He maketh thy border peace,
and filleth thee with the fat of wheat (Ps. 147:14). \[3\] That "wheat"
is love and charity, may be seen in Jeremiah: Many shepherds have
destroyed My vineyard, they have trodden down the portion of My field,
they have made the portion of My field a wilderness of solitude. Wasters
are come upon all the hills in the wilderness; for the sword of Jehovah
devoureth from one end of the land even to the other end of the land; no
flesh hath peace. They have sown wheat, and have reaped thorns (Jer.
12:10, 12-13); "vineyard" and "field" denote the church; the "wilderness
of solitude," its vastation; the "sword that devoureth," the vastation
of truth; "no peace," no good that affects; "sowing wheat," the goods of
love and charity; "reaping thorns," the evils and falsities of the love
of self and of the world. (That a "vineyard" is the spiritual church,
may be seen above, n. 1069; and that a "field" is the church as to good,
n. 2971; that a "wilderness" is vastation, n. 1927, 2708; that a
"devouring sword" is the vastation of truth, n. 2799; and that "peace"
is good that affects, n. 3780.) \[4\] In Joel: The field is wasted, the
ground mourneth, for the corn is wasted, the new wine is dried up, the
oil languisheth, the husbandmen were ashamed, the vine-dressers have
howled, for the wheat and for the barley; for the harvest of the field
is perished. Gird yourselves and lament, ye priests; howl, ye ministers
of the altar (Joel 1:10, 11, 13). Everyone sees that the state of the
vastated church is that which is here described; thus that "field" and
"ground" are the church; the "corn" <span
id="fr_114"></span>[3941-1](#fn_114) its good, and the "new wine" its
truth (n. 3580); and that the "wheat" is celestial love, and the
"barley" spiritual love; and as the state of the church is treated of,
it is said, "gird yourselves and lament, ye priests; howl, ye ministers
of the altar." \[5\] In Ezekiel, the Spirit of Jehovah said to the
prophet: Take unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentils, and
millet, and spelt, and put them into one vessel, and make thee bread
thereof. With the ordure of man's dung shalt thou make a cake before
their eyes. Thus shall the sons of Israel eat their bread unclean (Ezek.
4:9, 12-13); where the profanation of good and truth is treated of; the
"wheat, barley, beans, lentils, millet, and spelt" denote the kinds of
good and its derivative truth; the "bread" or "cake" "made thereof with
the ordure of human dung," denotes the profanation of all of them. \[6\]
In John: I saw and behold a black horse; and he that sat thereon had a
balance in his hand. And I heard a voice from the midst of the four
living creatures, saying, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three
measures of barley for a penny; and hurt thou not the oil and the wine
(Rev. 6:5-6); where the vastation of good and truth is treated of; a
"measure of wheat for a penny" denoting the scarcity of love; and "three
measures of barley for a penny," the scarcity of charity. \[7\] In
Ezekiel: Judah and the land of Israel were thy merchants; with wheat of
Minnith, and pannag, and honey, and oil, and balsam, they made thy
tradings (Ezek. 27:17); where the subject is Tyre, by which are
signified the knowledges of good and truth; the goods of love and
charity and their happinesses are the "wheat of Minnith, and pannag, and
honey, and oil, and balsam;" "Judah" is the celestial church, and the
"land of Israel," the spiritual church, from which those things are;
"tradings" are acquisitions. \[8\] In Moses: A land of wheat and barley,
a land of vine and fig-tree and pomegranate, a land of olive, of oil,
and of honey (Deut. 8:8); describing the land of Canaan, which in the
internal sense is the Lord's kingdom (n. 1413, 1437, 1585, 1607, 3038,
3705). The goods of love and charity are signified by the "wheat and
barley;" and the goods of faith by the "vine and the fig-tree." \[9\] In
Matthew: Whose fan is in His hand, and He will thoroughly purge His
threshing floor and He will gather His wheat into the barn, but the
chaff He will burn with unquenchable fire (Matt. 3:12). John the Baptist
thus speaks of the Lord; the "wheat" denotes the good of love and
charity; the "chaff," that in which there is nothing of good. In the
same: Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the time of the
harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather first the tares, and bind them
in bundles to burn them, but gather the wheat into My barn (Matt.
13:30); the "tares" denote evils and falsities and the "wheat," goods.
They are comparisons, but the comparisons in the Word are all made by
means of significatives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3942.">3942.</span></span>

And found dudaim in the field. That this signifies the things of
conjugial love in the truth and good of charity and love, is evident
from the signification of "dudaim" as being the things that belong to
conjugial love (concerning which in what follows); and from the
signification of the "field," as being the church, and consequently the
truth of faith and good of charity, because these make the church (n.
368, 2971, 3196, 3310, 3500, 3508, 3766). What the "dudaim" were, the
translators do not know. They suppose them to have been fruits or
flowers, to which they give names according to their several opinions.
But of what kind they were it does not concern us to know, but merely
the fact that among the ancients who were of the church, all fruits and
flowers were significative; for they knew that universal nature is a
theater representative of the Lord's kingdom (n. 3483); and that all the
things in its three kingdoms are representative; and that each thing
represents some specific thing in the spiritual world, and therefore
also each fruit and flower. That by the "dudaim" there is signified the
conjugial of good and truth, may be seen from the series of things here
in the internal sense; as well as from the derivation of that word in
the original language; for it is derived from the word dudaim, which
means loves and conjunction by means of them. That "dudaim" comes from
this, and that it signifies that which is conjugial is evident from the
following words: In the morning we will arise to the vineyards; we will
see whether the vine hath blossomed and hath put forth the grape,
whether the pomegranates have put forth flowers; there I will give thee
my loves \[dudim\]; the dudaim have given forth a scent (Song of Solomon
7:12-13). All this shows what is signified by the "dudaim." \[2\] As
regards the book in which this passage is found, and which is called
"The Song of Solomon," it is not among those called "Moses and the
Prophets," because it has not the internal sense; but it was written in
the ancient style, and is full of significatives collected from the
books of the Ancient Church, and of many things which in the Ancient
Church signified celestial and spiritual love, and especially conjugial
love. That this is the nature of that book is also evident from the fact
that in its literal sense are many things not decorous, which is not the
case with the books called "Moses and the Prophets;" but as within it
there have been collected together such things as are significative of
celestial and of conjugial love, it appears as if it possessed a certain
mystic meaning. \[3\] From this signification of the "dudaim" we can now
see that by "Reuben found them in the field" there is signified the
conjugial that is in the truth and good of love and charity; that is to
say, that which can be conjoined. For in the spiritual sense the
conjugial principle is nothing else than that truth which can be
conjoined with good, and that good which can be conjoined with truth.
From this also comes all conjugial love (n. 2728, 2729, 3132); and
therefore genuine conjugial love is not possible except with those who
are in good and truth, and thus are together in the heavenly marriage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3943.">3943.</span></span>

And brought them unto Leah his mother. That this signifies application
to the affection of external truth, is evident from the signification of
"bringing," as here being application; and from the representation of
Leah, as being the affection of external truth (see n. 3793, 3819).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3944.">3944.</span></span>

And Rachel said to Leah. That this signifies the perception of the
affection of interior truth, and a longing for it, is evident from the
signification of "saying," as being to perceive (see n. 1898, 1919,
2080, 2619, 2862, 3395, 3509); and from the representation of Rachel, as
being the affection of interior truth (n. 3758, 3782, 3793, 3819). That
the signification is the affection of and the longing for this truth, is
also evident from what presently follows; for Rachel says, "Give me I
pray of thy son's dudaim."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3945.">3945.</span></span>

Give me I pray of thy son's dudaim. That this signifies the affection of
and longing for the things of conjugial love, with which it might be
mutually and alternately conjoined, is evident from the signification of
the "dudaim," as being the things of conjugial love (n. 3942). That the
signification is affection and longing, is also evident (n. 3944). (That
conjugial love is conjunction mutually and alternately, may be seen
above, n. 2731.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3946.">3946.</span></span>

And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken away my
man? That this signifies that there is a conjugial longing, is evident
from the signification of "taking a man" who is also another's (as here
Jacob, who was also Leah's), as involving mutual love between them.
Hence it is that by these words, "Is it a small matter that thou hast
taken away my man?" there is signified conjugial longing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3947.">3947.</span></span>

And wouldest thou take also my son's dudaim? That this signifies that
thus would be withdrawn the conjugial of natural good with external
truth, is evident from the signification of "taking," as being here to
withdraw; from the signification of the "dudaim," as being what is
conjugial (see n. 3942); and from the signification of a "son," as being
truth, (see n. 489, 491, 533, 1147); here, external truth, because it is
Leah who says it; and that "Leah" is external truth has been shown
above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3948.">3948.</span></span>

And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee tonight for thy son's
dudaim. That this signifies consent that it should be conjoined is
evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3949.">3949.</span></span>

And Jacob came from the field in the evening. That this signifies the
good of truth in a state of good, but in obscurity such as belongs to
the natural, is evident from the representation of Jacob, as being the
good of truth of the natural (see n. 3669, 3677, 3775, 3829); from the
signification of a "field," as being the church as to good (n. 2971),
and thus good; and from the signification of the "evening," as being
obscurity (n. 3056, 3833).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3950.">3950.</span></span>

And Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come to me. That this
signifies a longing on the part of the affection of external truth, to
be conjoined therewith, is evident from the representation of Leah, as
being the affection of external truth, as shown above. That the
signification is a longing to be conjoined, is evident without
explication.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[3901-1](ac079.htm#fr_111) The Latin here has
aquilis, eagles. Elsewhere sometimes pardis, leopards, as in the
Apocalypse Explained, n. 281, 355; but aquilis in n. 780 of that work.
In the Hebrew the two words are nearly alike in form. Schmidius reads
pardis. \[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_112"></span>[3901-2](ac079.htm#fr_112) The Latin here has
aquilis, eagles.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[3938-1](ac079.htm#fr_113) Esse, here rendered
being, and existere, here rendered coming forth, are terms difficult to
translate with precision, for in English "being" is often used in the
sense of living existence as distinguished from a thing without life;
as, "a human being," "human beings," "the Divine Being;" and as for the
expression "to exist," this has come to mean precisely the same as "to
be." \[REVISER.\]

<span id="fn_114"></span>[3941-1](ac079.htm#fr_114) "Corn (frumentum)"
In the Bible the word "corn" always means "the various farinaceous
grains ... as wheat, rye, barley, maize, oats." (Webster.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3951-4000](ac080)
