[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac086)  [Next](ac088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="4301.">4301.</span></span>

As he passed over Penuel. That this signifies the state of truth in
good, is evident from the signification of "Penuel," as being the state
of truth in good. For Jabbok was the stream first passed over by Jacob
when he entered into the land of Canaan, and by this is signified the
first instilling of the affections of truth, see n. 4270, 4271. It is
the Penuel that he now passes over, and therefore by it is signified a
state of truth that is insinuated into good. The conjunction of good is
also treated of, and good is not good unless there is truth in it; for
good has its quality and also its form from truth, insomuch that good
cannot be called good in any man unless there is truth in it; but truth
receives its essence, and consequently its life, from good; and this
being the case, and the subject treated of being the conjunction of
goods, the state of truth in good is also treated of. \[2\] As regards
the state of truth in good, this can indeed be described, but yet it
cannot be apprehended, except by those who have celestial perception.
Others cannot even have an idea of the conjunction of truth with good,
because with them truth is in obscurity; for they call that truth which
they have learned from doctrinal things, and that good which is done
according to this truth; whereas they who have perception are in
celestial light as to their understanding (that is, as to their
intellectual sight), and they are affected with truths which are
conjoined with good, as the eye or bodily sight is affected with flowers
in gardens and meadows in the time of spring; and they who are in
interior perception are affected with these truths as with a fragrance
that is exhaled from them. Such is the angelic state, and therefore such
angels perceive all the differences and all the varieties of the
instilling and conjunction of truth in good, and thus endless things
more than man; for man does not even know that there is any instilling
and conjunction, and that a man becomes spiritual thereby. \[3\] A few
words shall be added in order to convey some notion of this matter.
There are two things which constitute the internal man-the understanding
and the will. To the understanding pertain truths, and to the will
goods; for what a man knows and understands to be so, he calls truth;
and what he does from will, thus what he wills, he calls good. These two
faculties should constitute a one. This may be illustrated by comparison
with the sight of the eye, and with the pleasantness and delight that
are experienced by means of this sight. When the eye sees objects, it
experiences a pleasantness and delight from them in accordance with
their forms, colors, and their consequent beauties both in general and
in their parts; in a word, in accordance with the order or dispositions
into series. This pleasantness and delight are not of the eye, but of
the animus and its affection; and insofar as the man is affected with
them, so far he sees them and retains them in memory, while the things
that the eye sees from no affection, are passed over and are not
implanted in the memory, thus are not conjoined with it. \[4\] From this
it is evident that the objects of the external sight are implanted in
accordance with the pleasantness and delight of the affections; and that
they are in this pleasantness and delight; for when a similar
pleasantness or delight recurs, such objects also recur; and in like
manner when similar objects recur, such pleasantness and delight also
recur, with variety according to the states. It is the same with the
understanding, which is the internal sight - its objects are spiritual,
and are called truths; the field of these objects is the memory; the
pleasantness and delight of this sight is good; and thus good is that in
which truths are inseminated and implanted. From this it may in some
measure appear what the instilling of truth into good is, and what the
conjunction of truth in good; also, what the good is which is here
treated of, and in regard to which angels perceive things so
innumerable, while man perceives scarcely anything.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4302.">4302.</span></span>

And he halted upon his thigh. That this signifies that truths were not
yet disposed into such an order that all together with good might enter
into celestial spiritual good; is evident from the signification of
"halting," as being to be in good in which there are not yet genuine
truths, but general ones into which genuine truths can be insinuated,
and such as do not disagree with genuine truths (of which hereafter).
But in the supreme sense, in which the Lord is treated of, by "halting
upon the thigh" is signified that truths had not yet been disposed into
such an order that all together with good might enter into celestial
spiritual good. (That the "thigh" is celestial spiritual good may be
seen above, n. 4277, 4278.) \[2\] As regards the order in which truths
must be when they enter into good (here celestial spiritual good),
neither can this be set forth to the apprehension; for it must first be
known what order is, and then what is the order of truths; also what
celestial spiritual good is, and then how truths enter into it by means
of good. Although these things should be described, they still would not
be manifest except to those who are in heavenly perception, and by no
means to those who are in natural perception alone. For they who are in
heavenly perception are in the light of heaven from the Lord, in which
light there is intelligence and wisdom. But they who are in natural
light are not in any intelligence and wisdom, except insofar as the
light of heaven flows into this light, and so disposes it that the
things which are of heaven may appear as in a mirror, or in a certain
representative image, in the things which are of natural light; for
without the influx of the light of heaven, natural light presents
nothing of spiritual truth to view. \[3\] This only can be said
respecting the order in which truths must be in order that they may
enter into good - that all truths, like goods, both as to generals and
as to particulars, and even as to the veriest singulars, in heaven are
disposed into such an order that the one regards the other in such a
form as do the members, organs, and viscera of the human body, or their
uses, have mutual regard to one another, in general, also in particular,
and likewise in the veriest singulars, and thus effect that all are a
one. It is from this order in which truths and goods are disposed that
heaven itself is called the Grand Man. Its life itself is from the Lord,
who from Himself disposes all things in general and in particular into
such order; and hence heaven is a likeness and an image of the Lord; and
therefore when truths are disposed into such an order as that in which
heaven is, they are then in heavenly order and can enter into good. The
truths and goods with every angel are in such an order; and the truths
and goods with every man who is being regenerated are also being
disposed, into such an order. In a word, the order of heaven is the
disposal of the truths that are of faith in the goods that are of
charity toward the neighbor, and the disposal of these goods in the good
that is of love to the Lord. \[4\] That "to halt" denotes to be in good
in which there are not yet genuine truths, but nevertheless general
truths into which genuine truth can be insinuated, and such as do not
disagree with genuine truths; and thus that the "lame" are those who are
in good, but not in genuine good because of their ignorance of truth
(that is, in such good as are the Gentiles who live in mutual charity),
may be seen from those passages in the Word where the "lame" and the
"halt" are mentioned in a good sense. As in Isaiah: The eyes of the
blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be opened; then
shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing
(Isa. 35:5-6). In Jeremiah: Behold, I bring them from the land of the
north, and I will gather them from the sides of the earth, among them
the blind and the lame one, the woman with child and her that travaileth
with child together (Jer. 31:8). In Micah: In that day, saith Jehovah, I
will gather her that halteth, and I will assemble her that is driven,
and I will make her that halteth for remains, and her that was driven a
numerous nation; and Jehovah shall reign over them in the mountain of
Zion, from henceforth and to eternity (Micah 4:6-7). In Zephaniah: At
that time I will save her that halteth, and assemble her that was
driven, and I will make them a praise and a name (Zeph. 3:19). That in
these passages by the "lame" and the "halt" are not meant the lame and
the halt, may be seen by everyone, for it is said of them that they
"shall leap," "shall be assembled," "shall be made for remains," and
"shall be saved;" but it is evident that those are signified who are in
good and not so much in truths, as is the case with well-disposed
Gentiles, and also with those of a similar nature within the church.
\[5\] Such are also meant by the "lame" of whom the Lord speaks in Luke:
Jesus said, When thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
lame, and the blind; then thou shalt be blessed (Luke 14:13-14). And in
the same: The master of the house said to his servant, Go out quickly
into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor,
and the maimed, and the lame, and the blind (Luke 14:21). The Ancient
Church distinguished into classes the neighbor or neighbors toward whom
they were to perform the works of charity; and some they called
"maimed," some "lame," some "blind," and some "deaf," meaning those who
were spiritually so. Some also they called the "hungry," the "thirsty,"
"strangers," the "naked," the "sick," the "captives" (Matt. 25:33-36);
and some "widows," "orphans," the "needy," the "poor," and the
"miserable;" by whom they meant no other than those who were such as to
truth and good, and who were to be suitably instructed, led on their
way, and thus provided for as to their souls. But as at this day charity
does not make the church, but faith, what is meant in the Word by these
persons is altogether unknown; and yet it is manifest to everyone that
it is not meant that the maimed, the lame, and the blind are to be
called to a feast, and that it was not commanded by the master of the
house that such should be brought in, but that those are meant who are
spiritually such; also that in every thing spoken by the Lord there is
what is Divine, consequently a celestial and spiritual sense. \[6\]
Similar is the meaning of the Lord's words in Mark: If thy foot cause
thee to stumble, cut it off; it is good for thee to enter into life
lame, rather than having two feet to be cast into the gehenna of fire,
into fire unquenchable (Mark 9:45; Matt. 18:8); by the "foot which must
be cut off" if it caused stumbling, is meant the natural, which is
constantly opposing itself to the spiritual - that it must be destroyed
if it attempt to impair truths; and thus that on account of the
disagreement and dissuasion of the natural man, it is better to be in
simple good, although in the denial of truth. This is signified by
"entering into life lame." (That the "foot" is the natural may be seen
above, n. 2162, 3147, 3761, 3986, 4280.) \[7\] By the "lame" in the Word
are also signified those who are in no good, and thence in no truth, as
in Isaiah: Then shall the prey that multiplieth be divided, the lame
shall plunder the prey (Isa. 33:23). In David: When I am halting they
are glad and gather themselves together; the lame whom I knew not gather
themselves together against me (Ps. 35:15). And because such are
signified by the "lame," it was forbidden to sacrifice anything that was
lame (Deut. 15:21, 22; Mal. 1:8, 13); and also that anyone of the seed
of Aaron who was lame should discharge the office of the priesthood
(Lev. 21:18). It is similar with the lame as with the blind, for the
"blind" in a good sense signify those who are in ignorance of truth, and
in the opposite sense those who are in falsities (n. 2383). \[8\] In the
original language the "lame" is expressed by one word, and "he that
halteth" by another, and by the "lame" in the proper sense are signified
those who are in natural good into which spiritual truths cannot flow,
on account of natural appearances and the fallacies of the senses; and
in the opposite sense those who are in no natural good, but in evil,
which altogether obstructs the influx of spiritual truth; whereas by
"him that halteth," in the proper sense, are signified those who are in
natural good into which general truths are admitted, but on account of
their ignorance, not particular and singular truths; and in the opposite
sense, those who are in evil and thus do not admit even general truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4303.">4303.</span></span>

Therefore the sons of Israel eat not the nerve of that which was
displaced, which is upon the hollow of the thigh. That this signifies
that those truths were not appropriated in which were falsities, is
evident from the signification of "eating," as being to be conjoined and
appropriated (see n. 2187, 2343, 3168, 3513, 3596, 3832); and from the
signification of a "nerve" as being truth; for truths in good are
circumstanced as are nerves in the flesh, and moreover in the spiritual
sense truths are nerves, and good is flesh (n. 3813). Similar things are
also signified by sinews <span id="fr_124"></span>[4303-1](#fn_124) and
flesh in Ezekiel: Thus said the Lord Jehovih unto these bones, I will
put sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and I will put
breath in you; and I beheld, and lo, there were sinews upon them, and
flesh came up (Ezek. 37:5-6, 8). Here the subject treated of is the new
creation of man, that is, his regeneration. But when truths have been
distorted, they then no longer become truths, but in proportion as they
are distorted to what is opposite, they accede to falsities; and hence
it is that by the "nerve of that which was displaced" is signified
falsity. (That the hollow of the thigh is where there is the conjunction
of conjugial love with natural good, consequently where there is influx
of spiritual truth into natural good, may be seen above, n. 4277, 4280.)
Hence it is evident that by "therefore the sons of Israel eat not the
nerve of that which was displaced which is upon the hollow of the
thigh," is signified that those truths were not appropriated in which
were falsities. That these things are said of the sons of Israel because
by "Israel" is signified the Divine celestial spiritual, may be seen
above (n. 4286), and by "sons" truths (n. 489, 491, 2623); and thus the
meaning is that the truths of the Divine celestial spiritual did not
appropriate to themselves any falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4304.">4304.</span></span>

Even unto this day. That this signifies even forever, that falsities
should not be adjoined, is evident from the signification of "even unto
this day," as being, wherever used in the Word, what is perpetual and
eternal (see n. 2838).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4305.">4305.</span></span>

Because he touched in the hollow of Jacob's thigh the nerve of that
which was displaced. That this signifies the reason, because there were
falsities, is evident from the signification of "touching in the hollow
of Jacob's thigh," as here being the reason, because there were
falsities. That this is signified by "touching in the hollow of Jacob's
thigh," may be seen from what has been said above (n. 4277, 4278, 4303).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4306.">4306.</span></span>

That these same words which have been explained thus far, treat also of
the posterity of Jacob, and that this sense is called the lower sense,
and also the internal historical sense, see n. 4279, 4288. How these
words are to be understood in this sense, shall now be explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4307.">4307.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense by "Jacob asked and said, Tell I
pray thy name," are signified evil spirits, may be seen from many things
in this sense, in which these words and those which follow are
predicated of the posterity of Jacob; for the internal sense is
determined by its application to the subject treated of. That not good
spirits, but evil ones are signified by him who wrestled with Jacob, may
be seen from the fact that by "wrestling" is signified temptation (n.
3927, 3928, 4274); and temptation is never caused by good spirits, but
by evil, for temptation is the excitation of the evil and falsity that
are in the man (n. 741, 751, 761, 1820, 4249, 4299). Good spirits and
angels never excite evils and falsities, but defend man against them,
and bend them to good; for good spirits are led by the Lord, and from
the Lord nothing ever proceeds but holy good and holy truth. That the
Lord tempts no one, is known from the doctrine received in the church,
and may also be seen above (n. 1875, 2768). From this, and also from the
fact that the posterity of Jacob gave way in every temptation, both in
the wilderness and afterwards, it is evident that not good spirits, but
evil, are signified by him who wrestled with Jacob. Moreover that
nation, which is here signified by "Jacob," was not in any spiritual and
heavenly love, but in bodily and worldly love (n. 4281, 4288-4290,
4293); and the presence of spirits with men is determined in accordance
with their loves. Good spirits and angels are present with those who are
in spiritual and heavenly love, and evil spirits with those who are
solely in bodily and worldly love; and this so much that everyone may
know the quality of the spirits with him by merely observing the quality
of his loves, or what is the same, the quality of his ends; for everyone
has for an end that which he loves. \[2\] The reason why the spirit
called himself God was that Jacob believed this; like his posterity, who
constantly believed that Jehovah was in their holy external, when yet
Jehovah was present only representatively, as will be evident from what
follows. They also believed that Jehovah led into temptations, that all
evil was from Him, and that He was in anger and fury when they were
punished. For this reason it was so expressed in the Word, in accordance
with their belief, when yet Jehovah never leads into temptations, nor is
there ever anything evil from Him, nor is He ever in anger, and still
less in fury (see n. 223, 245, 592, 696, 1093, 1683, 1874, 1875, 2395,
3605, 3607, 3614). This is also the reason why he who wrestled with
Jacob was not willing to reveal his name. That in the internal spiritual
sense by him who wrestled with Jacob is meant the angelic heaven (n.
4295), is because the Lord, who in the supreme sense is there
represented by Jacob, allowed angels also to tempt Him; and because the
angels were at that time left to what is their own, as was shown in the
number cited.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4308.">4308.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense, by "he said, Wherefore is this
that thou dost ask after my name," is signified that they did not
acknowledge that it was from evil spirits, is evident from what is said
just above (n. 4307).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4309.">4309.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense, by "he blessed him there" is
signified that it was so done, is evident from the signification here of
"to bless," as being that they served as a representative of a church
(see n. 4290); for which reason by "he blessed him there" is here
signified that it was so done.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4310.">4310.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense by "Jacob called the name of the
place Peniel" is signified the state in which they put on the
representations, is evident from the signification of "calling a name,"
as being the quality (of which often before); from the signification of
"place," as being state (n. 2625, 2837, 3356, 3387); and from the
signification of "Peniel" as being in this sense to put on
representations, for these are the subject treated of in what precedes
and what follows. What "Peniel" signifies is explained by the words,
"for I have seen God faces to faces, and my soul is delivered," by which
is signified that the Lord was present representatively (of which in
what soon follows), thus here that they put on representations. Names of
places, like names of persons, as also the things themselves, do not
signify the same in one sense as in another. Thus "Jacob" himself in the
sense of the letter signifies Jacob himself; in the internal historical
sense, his posterity (n. 4281); in the internal spiritual sense, the
natural man in him who is regenerate; but in the supreme sense, "Jacob"
signifies the Lord as to the Divine natural, as has been often shown. It
is the same with all other names, and thus with Peniel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4311.">4311.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense by for I have seen God faces to
faces, and my soul is delivered, is signified that He was present
representatively, is evident from the signification of "seeing God faces
to faces," when these words are predicated of the state in which the
posterity of Jacob were, as being that the Lord was present
representatively; for to see God faces to faces in the external form and
with the bodily sight, is not to see Him present (n. 4299). That He was
not present as with those who are regenerate, and thereby are in
spiritual love and faith, is manifest from what has been said of that
nation (n. 4281, 4288, 4290, 4293) - that they were in external worship,
and not at the same time in internal, or what is the same, in bodily and
worldly, and not in spiritual and heavenly love. With such the Lord
could never be present except representatively. \[2\] What it is to be
present representatively, must be briefly told. A man who is in bodily
and worldly love and not at the same time in spiritual and heavenly
love, has none but evil spirits with him, even when he is in a holy
external; for good spirits cannot possibly be present with such a
person, because they at once perceive in what kind of love a man is.
There is a sphere which is exhaled from his interiors, which spirits
perceive as manifestly as a man perceives by his sense of smell
offensive and foul vapors floating around him in the air. That nation
which is here treated of, was in such a state as to good and truth, or
as to love and faith. In order, however, that they might serve as the
representative of a church, it was miraculously provided by the Lord
that when they were in a holy external, and were at the same time
surrounded by evil spirits, the holy in which they were might yet be
uplifted into heaven; and this by good spirits and angels not within but
without them, for within them there was nothing but emptiness or
uncleanness. Communication was therefore given not with the man himself,
but with the holy itself in which they were when they fulfilled the
statutes and precepts given them, which were all representative of
spiritual and heavenly things of the Lord's kingdom. This is signified
by the Lord's being present with that nation representatively. But the
Lord is present in a very different way with those within the church who
are in spiritual love and thence in faith. With these there are good
spirits and angels not only in their external worship, but also at the
same time in their internal; and therefore with them there exists a
communication of heaven with themselves; for the Lord flows into them
through heaven through their internals into their externals. To these
the holy of worship is profitable in the other life, but not to the
former. \[3\] It is similar with priests and elders who preach holy
things, and yet are in evil life and evil belief. With these there are
not good, but evil spirits, even when they are in worship that appears
holy in the external form. For it is the love of self and of the world,
or a love for securing honors and acquiring gain and thereby fame, that
fires them and presents an appearance of affection for what is holy,
sometimes to such a degree that no simulation is perceived, nor is at
the time believed by them to exist; when yet they are in the midst of
evil spirits, who are then in a similar state, and who breathe upon them
and into them. That evil spirits can be in such a state, and are so when
they are in their externals, and are inflated with the love of self and
of the world, has been given me to know by manifold experience, which of
the Lord's Divine mercy will be described hereafter at the end of the
chapters. Such preachers have no communication with heaven in
themselves; and yet those have who hear and receive the words from their
mouth, if they are in a pious and holy internal; for it matters not from
whom the voice of good and truth flows forth, provided their life is not
manifestly wicked; for this life causes a scandal. \[4\] That the nation
descended from Jacob was of such a character (namely, that they were
surrounded with evil spirits, and yet the Lord was present with them
representatively), may be seen from many passages in the Word; for they
were very far from worshiping Jehovah with the heart, and as soon as
miracles were lacking, they immediately turned to other gods and became
idolaters. This was a manifest proof that at heart they worshiped other
gods and confessed Jehovah with the mouth only, and this merely for the
reason that they might be the greatest and have preeminence over all the
nations round about. That this people at heart worshiped an Egyptian
idol, and only confessed Jehovah with the mouth on account of His
miracles (with Aaron himself among them), is plainly evident from the
golden calf which Aaron made for them, and this but a month after they
had seen such great miracles on Mount Sinai, besides those which they
had seen in Egypt (see Exod. 32). That Aaron also was of the same
character is plainly stated at verses 2 to 5, and especially in verse
35. The same appears also from many other passages in Moses, in the book
of the Judges, in the books of Samuel, and in the books of the Kings.
\[5\] That they were only in external worship and not in any internal
worship, is evident also from the fact that they were forbidden to come
near to Mount Sinai when the Law was promulgated, and were told that if
they touched the mountain, they should surely die (Exod. 19:11-13;
20:16, 19). The reason was that their internal was unclean. It is also
said in Moses: That Jehovah dwelt with them in the midst of their
uncleannesses (Lev. 16:16). The quality of that nation is evident also
from the song of Moses (Deut. 32:15-43), and from many passages in the
Prophets. From all this it may be known that with that nation there was
not any church, but only a representative of a church, and that the Lord
was present with them only representatively. \[6\] Compare also what has
previously been stated in regard to them: That with the posterity of
Jacob there was a representative of a church, but not a church (n. 4281,
4288); That the representative of a church was not instituted with them
until after they had been altogether vastated as to a holy internal, and
that they would otherwise have profaned holy things (n. 3398, 4289);
That when they remained in their statutes they could represent, but not
when they turned aside from them (n. 3881e); That on this account they
were kept strictly in rituals, and that they were driven thereto by
external means (n. 3147, 4281); That their worship was made external
without internal in order that they might serve as a representative of a
church (n. 4281); That for this reason also the interior things of the
church were not disclosed to them (n. 301-303, 2520, 3398, 3479, 3769);
That they were of such a nature that they could more than others be in a
holy external without an internal (n. 4293); That for this reason they
have been preserved to this day (n. 3479); And that their holy external
does not affect them at all as to their souls (n. 3479).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4312.">4312.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense, by "the sun arose to him," is
signified when they came into representations, is evident from the
signification of the "sun arising" in this sense, in which the posterity
of Jacob is treated of, as being when they came into representations. By
the "arising of the dawn" is signified the state before they came into
representatives (n. 4289). The sun is also said to "arise" with everyone
who is becoming a church, thus also with everyone who is becoming
representative of a church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4313.">4313.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense by "as he passed over Penuel," is
signified when they came into the land of Canaan, is evident from the
fact that Penuel was the first station after Jacob had passed over the
river Jabbok, and that all boundaries were significative according to
distance and situation (n. 1585, 1866, 4116, 4240). Thus "Penuel," being
the first boundary, signifies when they came into the land of Canaan.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4314.">4314.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense by "he halted upon his thigh" is
signified that goods and truths were altogether destroyed with that
posterity, is evident from the representation of Jacob, who here is
"he," as being his posterity (see n. 4281); and from the signification
of "halting upon the thigh" as denoting those who are in no good, and
consequently in no truth (n. 4302). Here therefore by his "halting upon
his thigh" is signified that goods and truths were altogether destroyed
with that posterity. \[2\] The quality of that nation is also plainly
evident from many things spoken by the Lord Himself in parables, which
in their internal historical sense were said of that nation-as in the
parable of the man that was a king, who took account with his servant in
whom there was no mercy toward another (Matt. 18:23-35); in the parable
of the householder who let out his vineyard to husbandmen, and went
abroad, and the husbandmen seized the servants whom he sent, and beat
one with rods, and killed another, and stoned another; and at last he
sent his son, whom they cast out of the vineyard and killed; on hearing
which parable the Scribes and Pharisees recognized it as spoken of
themselves (Matt. 21:33-45; Mark 12:1-9; Luke 20:9-19); in the parable
of the man who gave talents to his servants, and he who received the one
talent went and hid it in the earth (Matt. 25:14-30; Luke 19:13-16); in
the parable of those who came to him that was wounded by the robbers
(Luke 10:30-37); in the parable of those who were invited to the great
supper, and all excused themselves, of whom the Lord says, I say to you
that none of those men who were bidden shall taste of my supper (Luke
14:16-24); in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus (Luke 16:19-31);
in the parable of those who despise others in comparison with themselves
(Luke 18:10-14); in the parable of the two sons, one of whom said, I
will go into the vineyard, but went not; and Jesus said, "Verily I say
unto you, that the publicans and harlots go into the kingdom of heaven
before you" (Matt. 21:28-32). \[3\] The quality of that nation the Lord
openly declared in Matthew 23:13-39, where He says: "Ye witness against
yourselves, that ye are the sons of them that killed the prophets, and
ye fill up the measure of your fathers" (Matt. 23:13-33). In Mark,
"Jesus said unto them, Rightly did Esaias prophesy of you, This people
honoreth Me with their lips, but their heart is far from Me; in vain do
they worship Me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men, forsaking
the commandments of God" (Mark 7:6-13). In John: The Jews answered Jesus
that they were the seed of Abraham; but Jesus said to them, "Ye are of
your father the devil, and the desires of your father ye will to do; he
was a murderer from the beginning, and stood not in the truth, because
the truth is not in him; when he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own;
because he is the speaker of a lie, and the father of it" (John 8:33,
44). Because they were such, they are also called an "evil and
adulterous generation" (Matt. 12:39), and the "offspring of vipers"
(Matt. 3:7; 23:33; Luke 3:7); "O offspring of vipers, how can ye, being
evil, speak good things?" (Matt. 12:34). \[4\] That not even any natural
good was left with that nation, is signified by the fig-tree spoken of
in Matthew: Jesus seeing a fig-tree in the way, came to it, but found
nothing thereon but leaves only; therefore He said unto it, Let no fruit
grow on thee henceforth forever, and presently the fig-tree withered
away (Matt. 21:19); that the fig-tree denotes natural good may be seen
above (n. 217). \[5\] From these passages it may be seen that goods and
truths were altogether destroyed with that nation. Goods and truths are
said to be destroyed when there are none interiorly. The goods and
truths which appear outwardly derive their being and their living from
those which are internal; and therefore such as are the internal ones,
such are the external, howsoever the latter may appear to the eyes of
man. There are some whom I knew in their bodily life, and who then
appeared as having zeal for the Lord, for the church, for their country
and the common good, and for justice and equity; and yet in the other
life these same are among the infernals, and (what astonished me) among
the worst there. The reason was, that their interiors had been foul and
profane, and that they had counterfeited that zeal for the sake of
reputation, in order to acquire honors and also to gain wealth; thus for
their own sakes, and not for the sake of what they professed with the
mouth. When therefore these externals are put off, which takes place
when men die, the internals are laid open and appear as they had been
within, and which during life they had hidden from the world. This is
what is meant by the goods and truths being altogether destroyed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4315.">4315.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense by "therefore the sons of Israel
eat not the nerve of that which was displaced which is upon the hollow
of the thigh," is signified that the posterity ought to know this, may
be seen from the fact that this was a memorial whereby they should
remember that such was their quality, thus that thereby they ought to
know this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4316.">4316.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense by "even unto this day" is
signified that they are such forever, is evident from the signification
of "even unto this day," which where mentioned in the Word means forever
(see n. 2838). That this posterity was such from the earliest times, may
be seen from the sons of Jacob themselves-from Reuben, in that he "lay
with Bilhah his father's concubine" (Gen. 35:22); from Simeon and Levi,
who killed Hamor and Shechem, and all the men of their city; and that
the rest of his sons came upon the pierced and plundered the city (Gen.
34:1-31). Therefore Jacob, then Israel, before he died, spoke of them
thus: of Reuben, "Thou shalt not excel, because thou wentest up on thy
father's bed; then didst thou make thyself unworthy; he went up on my
couch" (Gen. 49:3, 4); and of Simeon and Levi, "Into their secret let
not my soul come, with their assembly let not my glory be united; for in
their anger they slew a man, and in their set purpose they houghed an
ox. Cursed be their anger, for it was vehement, and their fury, for it
was grievous; I will divide them among Jacob, and scatter them among
Israel" (Gen. 49:5-7). \[2\] The quality of Judah may also be seen from
the fact that he took a Canaanitess for his wife (Gen. 38:1, 2), which
nevertheless was contrary to what had been commanded, as may be seen
from Abraham's words to his servant, whom he sent to betroth Rebekah to
his son Isaac (Gen. 24:3, 6); and from many other passages in the Word.
A third part of that nation was from this stock, that is, from his son
Shelah who was born of the Canaanitish mother (Gen. 38:11; 46:12; see
Num. 26:20; 1 Chron. 4:21, 22). The same may be further seen from the
wicked deed of these and the other sons of Jacob against Joseph (Gen.
37:18-36). The quality of their posterity in Egypt is manifest from what
is related of them when they were in the wilderness, where they were so
often rebellious; and afterwards in the land of Canaan, where they so
frequently became idolaters. Lastly, their quality in the Lord's time
has been shown just above (see n. 4314); and what they are at this day
is known, namely, opposed to the Lord, to the things of the church, to
charity toward the neighbor, and to one another. From all this it may be
seen that this nation has ever been of this nature. Let no one therefore
any longer entertain the opinion that there was any church among them,
or more than a representative of a church, and still less that they were
chosen in preference to others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4317.">4317.</span></span>

That in the internal historical sense, by "because he touched in the
hollow of Jacob's thigh the nerve of that which was displaced," is
signified because they had a heredity which could not be eradicated by
regeneration, because they would not allow this, is evident from the
signification of the "thigh," as being conjugial love, and consequently
every heavenly and spiritual love (see n. 4280); and because the "hollow
of the thigh" is where there is the conjunction of conjugial love, and
also of all heavenly and spiritual love, with natural good (n. 4277,
4280). Hence to "touch it," or to injure it so as to occasion halting,
is to destroy the good which is of these loves, and as this happened to
Jacob, it is signified that this nature passed from him to his
posterity, and thus was hereditary. That the "nerve of that which was
displaced" signifies falsity, may be seen above (n. 4303), here falsity
from hereditary evil. It follows from this and from the series, that
this heredity could not be eradicated from them by regeneration, because
they would not allow this. \[2\] That they had such a heredity and that
they could not be regenerated, is very evident from all that is related
of them in the Word, and particularly from these passages in Moses:
Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Ye have seen all things
that Jehovah hath done in your eyes in the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh
and unto all his servants, and unto all his land; and Jehovah hath not
given you a heart to know, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, even unto
this day (Deut. 29:2, 4). In the same: I know the figment of the people
which they do at this day, before I bring them into the land which I
sware (Deut. 31:21). And again: I will hide My faces from them, I will
see what is the last of them; for they are a generation of perversities,
sons in whom is no truth. I would exterminate them, I would cause their
memory to cease from man, were it not that I feared the indignation of
the enemy. For they are a nation that perisheth in counsels, and there
is no intelligence in them; for their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and
their grapes are of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are hemlock,
the clusters are bitter to them. Their wine is the poison of dragons,
and the cruel head of asps. Is not this laid up in store with Me, sealed
in My treasures? (Deut. 32:20, 26-34); and in many other places,
especially in Jeremiah. \[3\] That this was signified by the "touch upon
the hollow of Jacob's thigh," and his consequent lameness, is manifest
in Hosea: The controversy of Jehovah with Judah, to visit upon Jacob,
according to his ways, and according to his works He will render to him;
he supplanted his brother in the womb; in his grief he contended with
God, and contended toward the angel, and prevailed; he wept and
entreated him (Hos. 12:3-5). where "to contend with God," in the
internal historical sense, is to be urgent that the representative of a
church should be with them (see n. 4290, 4293). From this it is evident
that they had such a heredity from Jacob himself, and the same might be
shown from many more passages which must be passed over for the present.
\[4\] As regards heredity specifically, it is believed in the church at
this day that all hereditary evil is from the first parent, and that all
are therefore condemned in regard thereto. But the case is not so.
Hereditary evil derives its origin from everyone's parents and parents'
parents, or from grandparents and ancestors successively. Every evil
which they have acquired by actual life, even so that by frequent use or
habit it has become like a nature, is derived into the children, and
becomes hereditary to them, together with that which had been implanted
in the parents from grandparents and ancestors. The hereditary evil from
the father is more inward, and the hereditary evil from the mother is
more outward. The former cannot be easily rooted out, but the latter
can. When man is being regenerated, the hereditary evil inrooted from
his nearest parents is plucked up by the roots; but with those who are
not being regenerated, or who cannot be regenerated, it remains. This
then is hereditary evil (see also n. 313, 494, 2122, 2910, 3518, 3701).
This is also evident to everyone who reflects, and also from the fact
that every family has some peculiar evil or good by which it is
distinguished from other families; and that this is from parents and
ancestors is known. It is similar with the Jewish nation remaining at
this day, which is evidently distinct from other nations, and is known
from them, not only by its peculiar genius, but also by manners, speech,
and face. \[5\] But what hereditary evil is, few know; it is believed to
consist in doing evil; but it consists in willing and hence thinking
evil; hereditary evil being in the will itself and in the thought thence
derived; and being the very conatus or endeavor that is therein, and
which adjoins itself even when the man is doing what is good. It is
known by the delight that is felt when evil befalls another. This root
lies deeply hidden, for the very inward form that receives from heaven
(that is, through heaven from the Lord) what is good and true, is
depraved, and so to speak, distorted; so that when good and truth flow
in from the Lord, they are either reflected, or perverted, or
suffocated. It is from this cause that no perception of good and truth
exists at this day, but in place of it, with the regenerate, conscience,
which acknowledges as good and true what is learned from parents and
masters. It is from hereditary evil to love self more than others, to
will evil to others if they do not honor us, to perceive delight in
revenge, and also to love the world more than heaven; and from the same
source come all the derivative cupidities or evil affections. Man is
ignorant that such things are in hereditary evil, and still more that
they are opposite to heavenly affections; and yet it is manifestly shown
in the other life how much of evil from what is hereditary each one has
drawn to himself by actual life, and also how far he has removed himself
from heaven by evil affections from this source. \[6\] That hereditary
evil could not be eradicated from the posterity of Jacob by regeneration
because they would not allow it, is likewise manifest from the
historicals of the Word; for they gave way in all the temptations in the
wilderness as recorded by Moses: and also afterwards in the land of
Canaan, whenever they did not see miracles; and yet those temptations
were outward but not inward or spiritual. In respect to spiritual things
they could not be tempted, because as before shown they knew no internal
truths, and had no internal good; and no one can be tempted except as to
what he knows and what he has. Temptations are the veriest means of
regeneration. These things are signified by their not allowing
regeneration. As regards their state and lot in the other life, see
above (n. 939-941, 3481).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4318.">4318.</span></span>

CONTINUATI0N CONCERNING THE GRAND MAN AND CONCERNING CORRESPONDENCE,
HERE CONCERNING CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE SENSES IN GENERAL. It is the
main point of intelligence with the angels to know and perceive that all
life is from the Lord, and also that the universal heaven corresponds to
His Divine Human; and consequently that all angels, spirits, and men
correspond to heaven; and also to know and perceive the nature of this
correspondence. These are the first principles of the intelligence in
which angels are more than men; and from this they know and perceive
innumerable things that are in the heavens and hence also those which
are in the world; for the things which come forth in the world and its
nature are causes and effects from the former as beginnings; for
universal nature is a theater representative of the Lord's kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4319.">4319.</span></span>

It has been shown by much experience that not only a man, but a spirit,
and also an angel, thinks, speaks, and does nothing from himself, but
from others; nor these others from themselves, but again from others,
and so on; and thus all and each from the First of life, that is, from
the Lord, however completely this may appear to be as from themselves.
This has often been shown to spirits who in the life of the body had
believed and had confirmed themselves in the belief, that all things
were in themselves, or that they think, speak, and act from themselves
and their soul, in which life appears implanted. It has also been shown
by living experiences (such as exist in the other life but are
impossible in the world), that the evil think, will, and act from hell,
and the good from heaven (that is, through heaven from the Lord), and
that nevertheless both evils and goods appear as from themselves.
Christians know this from the doctrine which they draw from the
Word-that evils are from the devil, and goods from the Lord; but there
are few who believe it. And because they do not believe it, they
appropriate to themselves the evils which they think, will, and act; but
the goods are not appropriated to them; for they who believe goods to be
from themselves, claim and ascribe them to themselves, and thus place
merit in them. They also know from the doctrine in the church, that no
one can do anything good from himself, insomuch that whatever is from
himself and his own is evil, however much it may appear as good; but
this also few believe, although it is true. \[2\] The evil who had
confirmed themselves in this opinion - that they live from themselves,
and consequently that whatever they think, will, and act is from
themselves-when shown that the case is exactly in accordance with the
doctrine, said that they now believed. But they were told that knowing
is not believing, and that believing is internal, and is impossible
except in the affection of good and truth, consequently is possible to
none but those who are in the good of charity toward the neighbor. Being
evil, the same spirits insisted that they now believed because they saw.
But examination was made by an experience familiar in the other life,
namely, by their being looked into by angels; and when they were looked
into, the upper part of their head appeared to be withdrawn, and the
brain to be rough, hairy, and dark, which showed what is the inward
quality of those who have only a faith of memory knowledge, but not a
true faith; and that to know is not to believe. For the head of those
who know and believe appears as human, and the brain well ordered,
snow-white, and lucid; for heavenly light is received by them. But with
those who only know and suppose that they thereby believe, and yet do
not believe, because they live in evil, heavenly light is not received,
consequently neither are the intelligence and wisdom which are in that
light; and therefore when they draw near to angelic societies, that is,
to heavenly light, this light is turned with them into darkness. This is
the reason why their brain appeared dark.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4320.">4320.</span></span>

That the life which is from the Lord alone appears with everyone as if
it were in himself, is from the Lord's love or mercy toward the
universal human race, in that He wills to appropriate to each one what
is His own, and to give to everyone eternal happiness. It is known that
love appropriates to another what is its own; for it presents itself
within the other, and makes itself present in him. How much more the
Divine love! That the evil also receive the life which is from the Lord,
is as with objects in the world, all of which receive light from the
sun, and thereby colors, but according to their forms. Objects which
suffocate and pervert the light appear of a black or foul color, but yet
have their blackness and foulness from the sun's light. So is it with
the light or life from the Lord with the evil; but this life is not
life, but is (as it is called) spiritual death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4321.">4321.</span></span>

Although these things appear paradoxical and incredible to man, they
nevertheless are not to be denied, because experience itself dictates
them. If all things were denied the causes of which are not known,
innumerable things that come forth in nature would be denied, the causes
of which are known scarcely as to a ten-thousandth part; for the secret
things therein are so many and so great that those which man knows are
scarcely anything in comparison with those which he does not know. What
then must be the secret things that come forth in the sphere which is
above nature, that is, in the spiritual world! As for example these:
That there is one only life, and all live from it, and everyone
differently from another: that the evil also live from the same life,
and likewise the hells, and that the inflowing life acts according to
its reception: that heaven has been so ordered by the Lord as to bear
relation to a man, whence it is called the Grand Man; and that in
consequence all the things in man correspond thereto: that man without
influx therefrom into everything in him, cannot subsist even for a
moment: that all in the Grand Man keep in a constant situation according
to the quality and the state of the truth and good in which they are;
that situation there is not situation, but state, and therefore those
appear constantly at the left who are at the left, those at the right
who are at the right, in front those who are in front, behind those who
are behind, in the plane of the head, the breast, the back, the loins,
and the feet, above the head and below the soles of the feet, directly
and obliquely, and at a less or greater distance, those who are there,
however and to whatever quarter the spirit may turn himself: that the
Lord as a Sun appears constantly to the right, and there at a middle
height, a little above the plane of the right eye; and that all things
there have relation to the Lord as the Sun and center, and thus to their
only One from which they come forth and subsist, and as all appear
before the Lord constantly in their own situation, according to their
states of good and truth, they therefore appear in the same way to
everyone, for the reason that the Lord's life, and consequently the
Lord, is in all who are in heaven. Not to mention innumerable other
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4322.">4322.</span></span>

Who at this day does not believe that man comes into existence naturally
from the seed and the ovum? and that in the seed from the first creation
there is the ability to bring itself forth into such forms, first within
the ovum, next in the womb, and afterwards of itself; and that it is not
the Divine which brings things forth any longer? The reason why this is
so believed is that no one knows of there being any influx from heaven
(that is, through heaven from the Lord); and this because they do not
desire to know that there is any heaven. For in their private meetings
the learned discuss openly among themselves whether there is a hell, and
thus whether there is a heaven. And as they are in doubt about heaven,
they cannot receive as any first principle that there is an influx
through heaven from the Lord; which influx nevertheless brings forth all
things that are in the three kingdoms of the earth (especially those in
the animal kingdom, and in particular in man), and holds them together
in form according to their uses. Hence neither can they know that there
is any correspondence between heaven and man; and still less that this
is of such a nature that every several thing within him, nay, the
veriest singular ones, come forth from this source, and also subsist
from it, for subsistence is a perpetual coming forth, and consequently
preservation in connection and form is perpetual creation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4323.">4323.</span></span>

That there is a correspondence of every several thing in man with
heaven, I have begun to show at the end of the preceding chapters, and
this by living experience from the world of spirits and from heaven; to
the end that man may know whence he comes into existence and whence he
subsists, and that there is a continual influx into him therefrom. Later
it will be shown in like manner from experience that man rejects this
influx from heaven (that is, through heaven from the Lord), and accepts
the influx from hell; but that nevertheless he is continually kept by
the Lord in correspondence with heaven, in order that he may, if he
chooses, be led from hell to heaven, and through heaven to the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4324.">4324.</span></span>

The correspondence of the heart and lungs, and also of the brain with
the Grand Man, has already been treated of at the end of the chapters.
Here, in accordance with our plan, the correspondence with man's
external sensories is to be treated of, namely, with the sensory of
sight, or the eye; with the sensory of hearing, or the ear; with the
sensories of smell, taste, and touch; but first concerning
correspondence with sense in general.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4325.">4325.</span></span>

Sense in general, or general sense, is distinguished into voluntary and
involuntary. Voluntary sense is proper to the cerebrum, but involuntary
sense is proper to the cerebellum. In men these two kinds of general
sense are conjoined, but yet are distinct. The fibers which flow forth
from the cerebrum present the voluntary sense in general, and the fibers
which flow from the cerebellum present the involuntary sense in general.
The fibers of this double origin conjoin themselves together in the two
appendices which are called the medulla oblongata and the medulla
spinalis, and through these pass into the body, and shape its members,
viscera, and organs. The parts which encompass the body, as the muscles
and skin, and also the organs of the senses, for the most part receive
fibers from the cerebrum; and hence man has sense and motion in
accordance with his will. But the parts within this compass or
enclosure, which are called the viscera of the body, receive fibers from
the cerebellum; and consequently man has no sense of these parts, nor
are they under the control of his will. From this it may in some measure
appear what sense is in general, or the general voluntary sense, and the
general involuntary sense. Be it known further that there must be a
general in order that there may be any particular, and that the
particular can in no wise come into existence and subsist without the
general, and in fact that it subsists in the general; and that every
particular is circumstanced according to the quality and according to
the state of the general; and this is the case with sense in man, and
also with motion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4326.">4326.</span></span>

There was heard a sound as of muttered thunder that flowed down from on
high above the occiput, and continued around the whole of that region. I
wondered who they were, and was told that they were those who relate to
the general involuntary sense, and was told further that they could well
perceive a man's thoughts, but are not willing to expose and utter
them-like the cerebellum, which perceives all that the cerebrum does,
but does not publish it. When their manifest operation into all the
province of the occiput had ceased, it was shown how far their operation
extended. It was first determined into the whole face, then withdrew
itself toward the left side of the face, and at last toward the ear on
that side; by which was signified what was the nature of the operation
of the general involuntary sense from the earliest times with men on
this earth, and how it advanced. \[2\] Influx from the cerebellum
insinuates itself especially into the face, as is evident from the fact
that the animus has been inscribed on the face, and the affections
appear in the face, and this for the most part without the man's
will-such as fear, reverence, shame, various kind of gladness, and also
of sadness, besides many other things, which are thereby made known to
another in such manner that it is known from the face what affections
are in the man, and what changes of animus and of mind. These things
come from the cerebellum through its fibers, when there is no simulation
within. It was thus shown that in the earliest times, or with the most
ancient people, the general sense had possession of the whole face, and
successively after those times only of the left side of it, and at last
in still later times it emptied itself away from the face, so that at
this day there is scarcely any general involuntary sense left in the
face. The right side of the face together with the right eye corresponds
to the affection of good, and the left to the affection of truth, the
region where the ear is corresponding to obedience alone without
affection. \[3\] For with the most ancient people, whose age was called
the Golden Age, because they were in a certain state of perfection or
wholeness, and lived in love to the Lord and in mutual love as angels
live, all the involuntary of the cerebellum was manifest in the face,
and they did not at all know how to present anything in the countenance
other than exactly as heaven flowed into their involuntary conatus or
endeavors and thence into the will. But with the ancients, whose age was
called the Silver Age, because they were in a state of truth, and thence
in charity toward the neighbor, the involuntary of the cerebellum was
not manifest in the right side of the face, but only in the left. But
with their posterity, whose time was called the Iron Age, because they
lived not in the affection of truth, but in obedience to truth, the
involuntary was no longer manifest in the face, but betook itself to the
region around the left ear. I have been instructed that the fibers of
the cerebellum have thus changed their efflux into the face, and that
instead of them fibers from the cerebrum have been transferred thither,
which now control those which are from the cerebellum, and this from an
endeavor to form the expressions of the face according to the behests of
man's own will, all of which is from the cerebrum. It does not appear to
man that these things are so, but they are plainly manifest to the
angels from the influx of heaven and from correspondence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4327.">4327.</span></span>

Such is the general involuntary sense at this day with those who are in
the good and truth of faith. But with those who are in evil and thence
in falsity, there is no longer any general involuntary sense which
manifests itself, neither in face, speech, nor gesture; but there is a
voluntary which counterfeits what is involuntary (or natural as it is
called), which they have made such by frequent use or habit from
infancy. The nature of this sense with such persons has been shown by an
influx which was tacit and cold into the whole face, both into the right
side of it and into the left, and determining itself therefrom toward
the eyes, and extending itself from the left eye into the face; by which
was signified that the fibers of the cerebrum have intruded themselves
and control the fibers of the cerebellum, the result being that what is
fictitious, pretended, counterfeit, and deceitful reigns within, while
outwardly there appears what is sincere and good. Its being determined
toward the left eye, and from there also into the face, signified that
they have evil as their end, and use the intellectual part to obtain
their end; for the left eye signifies the intellectual. \[2\] These are
they who at this day constitute for the most part the general
involuntary sense. In ancient times it was these who were the most
celestial of all; but at this day it is these who are the most wicked of
all, and this especially from the Christian world. They are very
numerous, and appear beneath the occiput and at the back, where I have
often seen and perceived them. For those who at this day relate to this
sense are they who think deceitfully and devise evils against the
neighbor, and put on a friendly countenance, nay, most friendly, with
gestures of like import, and speak kindly as if endued with charity
above others, and yet are the bitterest enemies, not only of him with
whom they have interaction, but also of the human race. Their thoughts
have been communicated to me, and they were wicked and abominable, full
of cruelties and butcheries.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4328.">4328.</span></span>

I have also been shown how the case is in general with the voluntary (or
will part) and with the intellectual. The most ancients, who constituted
the Lord's celestial church (see n. 1114-1123), had a voluntary in which
was good, and an intellectual in which was the derivative truth, which
two with them made a one. But the ancients, who formed the Lord's
spiritual church, had the voluntary altogether destroyed, but the
intellectual entire, in which the Lord by regeneration formed a new
voluntary, and through this also a new intellectual (see n. 863, 875,
895, 927, 928, 1023, 1043, 1044, 1555, 2256). \[2\] How the case had
been with the good of the celestial church was shown by a column
descending from heaven, of an azure color, at the left side of which
there was a lucidity like the flaming glow of the sun. By this was
represented their first state; by the azure color their good voluntary;
and by the flaming glow their intellectual. And afterwards the azure of
the column passed into a dim flaminess by which was represented their
second state, and that their two lives-of the will and the
understanding-still acted as a one, but more dimly as to good from the
will; for what is azure signifies good, and a flaming glow truth from
good. \[3\] Presently the column became quite black; and around the
column there was a lucidity which was variegated by something of shining
white, presenting colors; by which was signified the state of the
spiritual church. The black column signified the voluntary as being
altogether destroyed, and as being nothing but evil; the lucidity
variegated by something of shining white signified the intellectual in
which was a new voluntary from the Lord; for the intellectual is
represented in heaven by what is lucid.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4329.">4329.</span></span>

There came spirits at some height who from the sound heard appeared to
be many, and it was discovered from the ideas of their thought and
speech as conducted to me, that they seemed to be in no distinct idea,
but in a general idea of many things. From this I supposed that nothing
distinct could be perceived by them, but only something general and
indistinct, and thus obscure; for I was of the opinion that what is
general cannot be otherwise. That their thought was general or in common
(that is, that of many together), I was able to plainly observe from the
things which flowed in from them into my thought. \[2\] But there was
given them an intermediate spirit, through whom they spoke with me; for
such a general thing could not fall into speech except through others.
When I spoke with them through the intermediate, I said (as was my
opinion), that generals cannot present a distinct idea of anything, but
only one so obscure that it is as it were no idea. But after a quarter
of an hour they showed that they had a distinct idea of generals, and of
many things in the generals; and especially by this, that they
accurately and distinctly observed all the variations and changes of my
thoughts and affections, together with the singulars of them, so that no
other spirits could do it better. From this I was able to conclude that
it is one thing to be in a general idea which is obscure, as are those
who have but little knowledge, and are thus in obscurity in regard to
all things; and that it is another thing to be in a general idea which
is clear, as are those who have been instructed in the truths and goods
which are insinuated into the general in their order and series, and are
so well-ordered as to be distinctly seen from the general. \[3\] These
are they who in the other life constitute the general voluntary sense,
and are those who by knowledges of good and truth have acquired the
faculty of looking at things from the general, and thence contemplating
things broadly together, and distinguishing instantly whether a thing is
so. They do indeed see the things as it were in obscurity, because they
see from the general the things that are therein, but as these are well
ordered in the general, they are for this reason nevertheless in
clearness to them. This general voluntary sense falls to none but the
wise. That these spirits were of this character was also proved, for
they viewed in me all things both in general and particular from which
inference could be drawn, and from these they drew inferences so
skillfully in regard to the interiors of my thoughts and affections that
I began to be afraid to think any more; for they disclosed things which
I did not know to be in me, and yet from the inferences made by them I
could not but acknowledge them. Hence I perceived in myself a torpor in
speaking with them, and when I took note of this torpor it appeared as
if it were a hairy thing, with something in it speaking mutely; and it
was said that by this was signified the general sensitive corporeal that
corresponds to these spirits. On the following day I again spoke with
them, and once more found that they had a general perception not
obscure, but clear; and that as the generals and the states of the
generals were varied, so were the particulars and their states varied,
because the latter relate in order and series to the former. \[4\] It
was said that general voluntary senses still more perfect exist in the
interior sphere of heaven; and that when the angels are in a general or
universal idea, they are at the same time in the singulars, which are
set in distinct order by the Lord in the universal; also that the
general and universal are not anything unless there are particulars and
singulars in them from which they exist and are so called, and that they
exist just insofar as these are in them; and that from this it is
evident that a universal providence of the Lord, without the veriest
singulars being in it, and from which it exists, is nothing at all; and
that it is stupid to maintain that there exists with the Divine a
universal, and then to take away the singulars from it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4330.">4330.</span></span>

As the three heavens together constitute the Grand Man, and (as before
said) all the members, viscera, and organs of the body correspond to
this man according to their functions and uses, there correspond to it
not only those which are external and are apparent to the sight, but
also those which are internal and not apparent to the sight;
consequently those which are of the external man, and those which are of
the internal man. The societies of spirits and angels to which the
things of the external man correspond, are for the most part from this
earth; but those to which the things of the internal man correspond are
for the most part from elsewhere. These societies act as a one in the
heavens just as with the regenerate man do the external and the internal
man. And yet at the present day few from this earth come into the other
life in whom the external man acts as one with the internal; for most
are sensuous, insomuch that there are few who believe otherwise than
that man's external is all there is of him; and that when this passes
away (as when he dies) there is scarcely anything left that lives; much
less do they believe that there is an internal which lives in the
external, and that when the external passes away, the internal eminently
lives. \[2\] It has been shown by living experience how these are
opposed to the internal man. There were present very many spirits from
this earth, who when they had lived in the world had been of this
character, and there came into their sight spirits who relate to the
internal sensuous man, and they at once began to infest them, almost as
irrational persons infest those who are rational, by constantly speaking
and reasoning from the fallacies of the senses, and from the illusions
thence arising, and from mere hypotheses, believing nothing but what
could be confirmed by external sensuous things, and moreover treating
the internal man with contumely. \[3\] But those who had relation to the
internal sensuous man cared nothing for such things, and wondered not
only at the insanity of the former spirits, but also at their stupidity;
and wonderful to say, when the external sensuous spirits drew near the
internal sensuous ones, and came almost into the sphere of their
thoughts, the external sensuous began to breathe with difficulty (for
spirits and angels breathe equally as do men, but their breathing is
relatively internal, n. 3884-3895), and thus to be almost suffocated, so
that they withdrew. And the further away they retired from the internal
sensuous spirits, because they breathed more easily, the more tranquil
and quiet it became with them; and again the nearer they approached, the
more intranquil and unquiet. \[4\] The cause was that when the external
sensuous are in their fallacies, phantasies, and hypotheses, and thence
in falsities, they have tranquillity; but when on the contrary such
things are taken away from them, which comes to pass when the internal
man flows in with the light of truth, they then have intranquility. For
in the other life there exist spheres of the thoughts and affections,
and these are mutually communicated according to presence and approach
(n. 1048, 1053, 1316, 1504-1512, 1695, 2401, 2489). This conflict lasted
for several hours; and it was thus shown how the men of this earth are
at the present day opposed to the internal man, and that the external
sensuous makes almost all with them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4331.">4331.</span></span>

Continuation concerning the Grand Man and concerning Correspondence at
the end of the following chapter; and there concerning Correspondence
with the senses specifically. Genesis 33 THE LAST JUDGMENT

<span class="margnote"><span id="4332.">4332.</span></span>

By way of preface to the preceding chapter there were unfolded the
things foretold by the Lord in Matthew, chapter 24, verses 32 to 35,
concerning His coming; by which is understood (as there and in other
places previously shown) the last period of the former church and the
first of a new church. The last period or end of the former church, and
the first period or beginning of a new church, have been treated of thus
far (see what precedes, chapter 31, n. 4056-4060, and chapter 32, n.
4229-4231). There are now to be unfolded the words that follow in the
same chapter of the Evangelist, from verses 36 to 42, namely these: But
of that day and hour knoweth no one, not the angels of the heavens, but
My Father only. And as were the days of Noah, so shall be the coming of
the Son of man. For as they were in the days before the flood, eating
and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah
entered into the ark, and knew not until the flood came, and took them
all away, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. Then shall two
be in the field; one shall be taken, and one shall be left. Two women
shall be grinding at the mill; one shall be taken, and one shall be left
(Matt. 24:36-42).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4333.">4333.</span></span>

What is signified by these words in the internal sense will appear from
the following explication-that there is described what the state will be
when the old church is being rejected and the new is being set up. That
the rejection of the old church and the setting up of the new is what is
meant by the "consummation of the age," and by the "coming of the Son of
man," and in general by the Last Judgment, has been already repeatedly
shown; and also that a Last Judgment has several times taken place on
this globe: first, when the Lord's celestial church, which was the Most
Ancient, perished in the antediluvians by an inundation of evils and
falsities, which in the internal sense is the "flood." \[2\] Second,
when the spiritual church, which was after the flood, and is called the
Ancient, being spread over much of the Asiatic world, ceased of itself.
\[3\] Third, when the representative of a church among the posterity of
Jacob was destroyed, which took place when the ten tribes were carried
away into perpetual captivity and dispersed among the nations; and
finally when Jerusalem was destroyed, and the Jews also were dispersed.
Because there was then a consummation of the age after the Lord's
coming, therefore also many things said by the Lord in the Evangelists
concerning the consummation of that age are also applicable to the
Jewish nation, and are likewise applied to them by many at this day.
Nevertheless the subject treated of in the above words is specifically
and especially the consummation of the age now at hand, <span
id="fr_125"></span>[4333-1](#fn_125) namely, the end of the Christian
Church, which is also treated of by John in Revelation. This will be the
fourth Last Judgment on this globe. What the words involve that are
contained in verses 36 to 42 adduced above, will appear from their
internal sense, which is as follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4334.">4334.</span></span>

But of that day and hour knoweth no one; signifies the state of the
church at that time as to goods and truths, that it would not appear to
anyone, neither on earth nor in heaven. For by "day and hour" here is
not meant day and hour, or time; but state as to good and truth. That
times in the Word signify states, see n. 2625, 2788, 2837, 3254, 3356;
as also do "days," n. 23, 487, 488, 493, 893, 2788, 3462, 3785; and
thence also hours, but specifically state. That it is here state as to
good and truth, is because the subject treated of is the church, for
good and truth make the church. \[2\] Not the angels of the heavens, but
My Father only; signifies that heaven does not know the state of the
church as to good and truth specifically, but the Lord alone, and also
when that state of the church will come. That the Lord Himself is meant
by the "Father," see n. 15, 1729, 2004, 2005, 3690; and that the Divine
Good in the Lord is what is called the "Father," and the Divine Truth
from the Divine Good "the Son," n. 2803, 3703, 3704, 3736; and therefore
they who believe that the Father is one and the Son another, and who
separate them from each other, do not understand the Scriptures. \[3\]
For as they were in the days before the flood; signifies the state of
vastation of those who are of the church, which is compared to the state
of vastation of the first or Most Ancient Church; the consummation of
the age or Last Judgment of which is described in the Word by the
"flood." That by the "flood" is signified an inundation of evils and
falsities and the consequent consummation of that age, see n. 310, 660,
662, 705, 739, 790, 805, 1120. That "days" signify states, see above.
\[4\] Eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage; signifies
their state as to the appropriation of evil and falsity, and the
consequent conjunction with these. That "to eat" denotes the
appropriation of good, and "to drink" the appropriation of truth, see n.
3168, 3513e, 3596; thus in the opposite sense the appropriation of evil
and falsity. That "to marry" denotes conjunction with evil, and "to give
in marriage," conjunction with falsity, may be seen from what has been
said and shown respecting marriage and conjugial love (n. 686, 2173,
2618, 2728, 2729, 2737-2739, 2803, 3132, 3155), namely, that in the
internal sense this is the conjunction of good and truth, but here in
the opposite sense the conjunction of evil and falsity. Whatever the
Lord spoke, being Divine, is not the same in the internal sense as in
the letter. Thus eating and drinking in the Holy Supper do not signify
in the spiritual sense eating and drinking, but the appropriation of the
good of the Lord's Divine love (n. 2165, 2177, 2187, 2343, 2359, 3464,
3478, 3735, 4211, 4217). And as when predicated of the church and the
Lord's kingdom the conjugial is the conjunction of the good of love with
the truth of faith, therefore from this conjunction the Lord's kingdom
is called in the Word the heavenly marriage. \[5\] Until the day that
Noah entered into the ark; signifies the end of the former church, and
the beginning of the new. For by "Noah" is signified the Ancient Church
in general which succeeded the Most Ancient after the flood (n. 773, and
elsewhere); and by the "ark," the church itself (n. 639). "Day," which
is mentioned several times in these verses, signifies state, as shown
just above. \[6\] And knew not until the flood came, and took them all
away; signifies that the men of the church will not then know that they
are inundated by evils and falsities, because on account of the evils
and falsities in which they are they will not know what the good of love
to the Lord is, and the good of charity toward the neighbor, and also
what the truth of faith, and that this is from that love and charity,
and is not possible except with those who live in this love and in this
charity. They will also be ignorant that the internal is what saves and
condemns, but not the external separate from the internal. \[7\] So
shall the coming of the Son of man be; signifies the Divine Truth, and
that they will not receive it. It has been said before (Mat. 24:27, 30),
that the "coming of the Son of man" is the Divine Truth which will then
be revealed (also in n. 2803, 2813, 3004-3009, and 3704). \[8\] Then
shall two be in the field; one shall be taken, and one shall be left;
signifies those within the church who are in good, and those within the
church who are in evil-that they who are in good will be saved, and that
they who are in evil will be condemned. That a "field" denotes the
church as to good, see n. 2971, 3196, 3310, 3317, 3766. \[9\] Two women
shall be grinding at the mill; one shall be taken, and one shall be
left; signifies those within the church who are in truth, that is, in
the affection of it from good, that they will be saved; and those within
the church who are in truth, that is, in the affection of it from evil,
that they will be condemned. That in the Word "to grind," and a "mill"
have this signification, will be evident from what now follows. From all
this it is now evident that by these words is described what the state
as to good and truth will be within the church when it is being
rejected, and a new church is being adopted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4335.">4335.</span></span>

That in the Word by "those who grind" are meant those within the church
who are in truth from the affection of good, and in the opposite sense
those within the church who are in truth from the affection of evil, may
be seen from the following passages. In Isaiah: Come down, and sit upon
the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon; sit in the earth, there is not a
throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans; take a millstone and grind meal,
uncover thy hair, make bare the foot, uncover the thigh, pass through
the rivers (Isa. 47:1-2); the "daughter of Babylon" denotes those whose
externals appear holy and good, but their interiors are profane and evil
(n. 1182, 1326); the "daughter of the Chaldeans," those whose externals
appear holy and true, but their interiors are profane and false (n.
1368, 1816); "to take a millstone and grind meal" denotes to hatch
doctrinal things from the truths which they pervert; for as meal is from
wheat or barley, it signifies truths from good, but in the opposite
sense truths which they pervert in order to mislead. In Jeremiah: I will
destroy from them the voice of joy and the voice of gladness, the voice
of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of the
millstones and the light of the lamp; and this whole land shall be for a
waste and a desolation (Jer. 25:10-11). \[2\] And in John: Every
craftsman of every craft shall not be found in Babylon any more, every
voice of the millstone shall not be heard therein any more; and the
light of a lamp shall not shine therein any more; and the voice of the
bridegroom and of the bride shall not be heard therein any more (Rev.
18:21-23); "the voice of a millstone being heard no more in Babylon"
denotes that there will be no truth; and "the light of a lamp shining no
more," that there will be no intelligence of truth. In Lamentations:
They ravished the women in Zion, the virgins in the cities of Judah;
princes were hanged up by their hand, the faces of the old men were not
honored; the young men were carried away to grind, and the children fall
in the wood (Lam. 5:11-14); "the young men being carried away to grind"
denotes to hatch falsities by applying truths, and thus persuading.
\[3\] In Moses: Every firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the
firstborn of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, to the firstborn of
the maidservant that is behind the mills (Exod. 11:5); the "firstborn of
Egypt" denotes the truths of faith separated from the good of charity,
which truths become falsities (n. 3325); the "firstborn of the
maidservant that is behind the mills" denotes the affection of such
truth, whence come falsities. These things were represented by these
historicals. \[4\] In the same: He shall not take in pledge the mills or
the millstone, for they are the soul of him that pledgeth (Deut. 24:6).
This law was enacted because by "mills" were signified doctrinal things,
and by a "millstone," the truths thereof, which are what are called the
"soul of him that pledgeth." It is manifest that this law would not have
been given, nor would it have been said that it was his "soul," unless
mills and a millstone had a spiritual signification. \[5\] That grinding
derives its signification from representatives that come forth in the
world of spirits, has been shown me; for I have seen there those who
were as if grinding without any end of use, and merely for their own
pleasure. And as in such a case truths are devoid of their own affection
from good, they do indeed appear as truths in the outward form; but as
there is no internal in them, they are phantasms; and if there is an
evil internal, they are then employed to confirm the evil; and thus by
application to evil they become falsities. GENESIS 33 1. And Jacob
lifted up his eyes, and saw, and behold Esau came, and with him four
hundred men. And he divided the children over unto Leah, and over unto
Rachel, and over unto the two handmaids. 2. And he put the handmaids and
their children first, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and
Joseph after. 3. And he himself passed over before them, and bowed
himself to the earth seven times, until he drew near even unto his
brother. 4. And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell upon
his neck, and kissed him; and they wept. 5. And he lifted up his eyes,
and saw the women and the children; and said, Who are these to thee? And
he said, The children whom God hath graciously bestowed upon thy
servant. 6. And the handmaids drew near, they and their children, and
they bowed themselves. 7. And Leah also and her children drew near, and
they bowed themselves; and afterwards Joseph and Rachel drew near, and
bowed themselves. 8. And he said, What to thee are all these camps which
I met? And he said, To find grace in the eyes of my lord. 9. And Esau
said, I have much my brother, be to thee what is to thee. 10. And Jacob
said, Nay I pray, if I pray I have found grace in thine eyes, then
accept my present from my hand; for because that I have seen thy faces
like seeing the faces of God, and thou hast accepted me. 11. Take I pray
my blessing that is brought to thee; because God hath graciously
bestowed upon me, and because I have all. And he urged him, and he took
it. 12. And he said, Let us journey, and go, and I will go close by
thee. 13. And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are
tender, and that the flocks and the herds are suckling with me, and if
they drive them on in one day, all the flocks will die. 14. Let my lord
I pray pass over before his servant, and I will proceed slowly to the
foot of the work that is before me, and to the foot of the children,
until I come unto my lord unto Seir. 15. And Esau said, Let me set I
pray with thee of the people who are with me. And he said, Wherefore is
this? Let me find grace in the eyes of my lord. 16. And Esau returned in
that day unto his way, unto Seir. 17. And Jacob journeyed to Succoth,
and built him a house, and made booths for his acquisition; therefore he
called the name of the place Succoth. 18. And Jacob came to Shalem, a
city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came thither
from Paddan-aram, and encamped to the faces of the city. 19. And he
bought the portion of the field, where he had stretched his tent, from
the hand of the sons of Hamor, Shechem's father, for a hundred kesitah.
20. And he erected there an altar, and he called it El Elohe Israel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4336.">4336.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. The subject here treated of in the internal sense is the
conjunction of Divine good natural which is "Esau," with the good of
truth which is "Jacob;" thus the submission of the latter, and its
instilling into Divine good natural. The process by which this is
effected is described. Lastly the acquisition of interior truths is
treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4337.">4337.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE. In the foregoing chapters, where "Jacob" is spoken
of, the subject treated of in the internal sense was the acquisition of
truth in the natural, which acquisition is made in order that this truth
may be conjoined with good, for all truth is for the sake of this end.
"Jacob," in the internal sense, is this truth, and "Esau" is the good
with which the truth is to be conjoined. Before the conjunction is
effected, truth appears to be in the first place; but after the
conjunction, good is actually in the first place (see n. 3539, 3548,
3556, 3563, 3570, 3576, 3603, 3701, 3995). This is also what is
signified by the prophecy of Isaac to Esau: "Upon thy sword shalt thou
live, and thou shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass when
thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shall break his yoke from off
thy neck" (Gen. 27:40). And this state is what is described in the
present chapter. For this reason Jacob calls Esau his "lord," and
himself his "servant" (verses 5, 8, 13, 14). \[2\] Be it known that
Jacob here represents the good of truth. But regarded in itself the good
of truth is only truth; for so long as truth is in the memory only, it
is called truth; but when in the will and thence in act, it is called
the good of truth; for to do truth is nothing else. Whatever proceeds
from the will is called good, for the essential of the will is love and
the derivative affection; and everything that is done from love and its
affection is named good. Neither can truth be conjoined with the good
that flows in through the internal man and is in its origin Divine
(which is here represented by Esau), until the truth is truth in will
and act; that is, the good of truth. For the good that flows in through
the internal man and is in its origin Divine, flows into the will, and
there meets the good of truth that has been instilled through the
external man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4338.">4338.</span></span>

Verses 1-3. And Jacob lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold Esau came,
and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children over unto
Leah, and over unto Rachel, and over unto the two handmaids. And he put
the handmaids and their children first, and Leah and her children after,
and Rachel and Joseph after. And he himself passed over before them, and
bowed himself to the earth seven times, until he drew near even unto his
brother. "And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and saw," signifies the
perception and attention of the good of truth, which is "Jacob;" "and
behold Esau came," signifies Divine good natural; "and with him four
hundred men," signifies the state; "and he divided the children over
unto Leah," signifies the arrangement of external truths under their
affection; "and over unto Rachel," signifies the arrangement of interior
truths under their affection; "and over unto the two handmaids,"
signifies under the affection of things that are of service to these
affections; "and he put the handmaids and their children first, and Leah
and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph after," signifies order
from the generals in which were the rest; "and he himself passed over
before them," signifies the universal, thus all things; "and bowed
himself to the earth seven times," signifies the submission of all
things; "until he drew near even unto his brother," signifies
conjunction on the part of the good from truth, which is "Jacob."

<span class="margnote"><span id="4339.">4339.</span></span>

And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and saw. That this signifies the
perception and attention of the good of truth, which is "Jacob," is
evident from the signification of "lifting up his eyes and seeing," as
being perception and attention. For lifting up the eyes is an external
that corresponds to elevation of the mind (which is an internal),
consequently to perception; and therefore "seeing" corresponds to
attention. (That Jacob here represents the good of truth may be seen
just above, n. 4337.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4340.">4340.</span></span>

And behold Esau came. That this signifies Divine good natural, is
evident from the representation of Esau, as being Divine good in the
natural (see n. 3576).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4341.">4341.</span></span>

And with him four hundred men. That this signifies its state, here the
state of the conjunction of Divine good with truth in the natural, is
because this conjunction is the subject treated of. "Four hundred" in
the Word signifies the state and duration of temptation (n. 1847, 2959,
2966); and as all the conjunction of good with truth is effected through
temptations, therefore it is a state of temptations which is here meant.
(That goods are conjoined with truths through temptations, see n. 2272,
3318; and that temptations come when good begins to act the first part,
n. 4248, 4249; and also that the union of the Lord's Divine essence with
His Human essence was effected through temptations, n. 1737.) \[2\] The
good itself which is to be conjoined with truth is not tempted, but the
truth. And moreover truth is not tempted by good, but by falsities and
evils, and also by fallacies and illusions and the affection of these,
which adhere to truths in the natural. For when good flows in, which is
effected by an internal way, or through the internal rational man, the
ideas of the natural man, formed from the fallacies of the senses and
the derivative illusions, cannot endure its approach, for they are in
disagreement with it, and hence comes anxiety in the natural, and
temptation. These are the things which are described in this chapter in
the internal sense by Jacob's coming into fear and thence into anxiety,
and consequently into a state of submission and humiliation, when Esau
came with four hundred men; for their conjunction is not effected in any
other way. From this it may be seen that by the "four hundred men" is
signified a state of temptations; by "four hundred," this state itself,
and by "men," the rational truths which are conjoined with good when it
flows into the natural. (That by "men" are signified intellectual and
rational things, may be seen n. 265, 749, 1007, 3134.) \[3\] But these
things are such as fall into obscurity with man, for the reason that
when he is living in the body, the distinction between the rational and
the natural does not appear-not at all to those who are not regenerate,
and very little even to those who are regenerate. For they do not
reflect upon it, nor indeed do they care about it, for the knowledges of
the interior things of man have been almost obliterated, and yet in old
time these made the all of intelligence with men within the church.
These things may however in some degree appear from what has been shown
before concerning the rational and its influx into the natural, namely,
that the natural is regenerated through the rational (n. 3286, 3288),
and that the rational receives truths before the natural (n. 3368,
3671). These truths, which inflow with good from the rational into the
natural, are what in the internal sense are signified by the "four
hundred men" who came with Esau.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4342.">4342.</span></span>

And he divided the children over unto Leah. That this signifies the
arrangement of external truths under their affection, is evident from
the signification of "dividing over unto," as being arrangement; from
the signification of "children" or "sons," as being truths (see n. 489,
491, 533, 1147, 2623, 3373); and from the representation of Leah, as
being the affection of exterior truth (see n. 3793, 3819). Hence the
"children" or "sons" here denote truths of exterior affection,
consequently external truths. Those truths are said to be external which
are called sensuous truths, that is, those which flow in immediately
from the world through the senses of the body. But interior truths
(which are signified by the children of Rachel) are those which are
interiorly in the natural, and are more nearly under the view of the
rational, and to which fallacies and their illusions do not so strongly
adhere as they do to sensuous truths. For the more interiorly truths go,
the more are they purified from worldly and earthly things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4343.">4343.</span></span>

And over unto Rachel. That this signifies the arrangement of interior
truths under their affection, is evident from the representation of
Rachel, as being the affection of interior truth (see n. 3758, 3782,
3793, 3819). Hence her "children" or "sons" here denote interior truths.
(Concerning interior truths see what was said just above, n. 4342.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4344.">4344.</span></span>

And over unto the two handmaids. That this signifies under the affection
of things that are of service to these affections, is evident from the
signification of "handmaids," as being the affections of
memory-knowledges and of knowledges (n. 1895, 2567, 3835, 3849), and as
being means that are of service for the conjunction of the external and
the internal man (see n. 3913, 3917); and from the representation of
Zilpah and Bilhah, who here are the "handmaids," as being exterior
affections that are of service as means (n. 3849, 3931).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4345.">4345.</span></span>

And he put the handmaids and their children first, and Leah and her
children after, and Rachel and Joseph after. That this signifies order
from more general things in which were all the rest, may be seen from
what has been said just above respecting the signification of the
"handmaids," of "Leah," of "Rachel," and of their "children"-namely,
that the "handmaids" denote the affections of memory-knowledges and of
knowledges; "Leah," the affection of exterior truth; and "Rachel," the
affection of interior truth. The affections of memory-knowledges and of
knowledges are the most external, for memory-knowledges and knowledges
themselves are things from which and in which are truths. The affection
of external truth follows from this, and is more interior, and the
affection of interior truth is still more interior. The more exterior
they are, the more general also they are; and the more interior, the
less general, and relatively are called particulars and singulars. \[2\]
With regard to generals, these are called generals because they consist
of particulars, consequently because they contain particulars within
them. Generals without particulars are not generals, but are so called
from particulars. The case herein is like that of a whole and its parts.
A whole cannot be called a whole unless there are parts, for the whole
consists of parts. For in the nature of things there is nothing which
does not come forth and subsist from other things, and because it comes
forth and subsists from other things it is called a general, and the
things of which it consists and from which it subsists are said to be
particulars. External things are what consist of internal things, and
therefore external things are relatively general. It is so with man and
his faculties; the more exterior these are, the more general they are;
for they consist of things more interior, and these of inmost things in
order. \[3\] The body itself, and the things of the body, such as those
called the external senses and the actions, are relatively the most
general. The natural mind and the things of this mind are less general,
because more interior, and relatively are called particulars. But the
rational mind and the things of this mind are still more interior, and
relatively are singulars. All this is manifest to the life when man puts
off the body and becomes a spirit; for it is then manifest to him that
his bodily things had been no other than the most general of the things
of his spirit, and that the bodily things had come forth and subsisted
from those of his spirit; thus that the things of the spirit had been
relatively particulars. And when the same spirit becomes an angel (that
is, when he is uplifted into heaven), it is manifest to him that the
same things which he had previously seen and felt in general, and thus
in obscurity, he now sees and feels in particular and in clearness; for
he now sees and feels innumerable things which he had previously seen
and felt as one. \[4\] This is also evident from man himself during his
life in the world-the things which he sees and feels in infancy are most
general; but those which he sees and feels in childhood and youth are
the particulars of these generals; and those which he sees and feels in
adult age are the singulars of these particulars. For as a man advances
in age, he instills particulars into the generals of infancy, and
afterwards singulars into the particulars. For he advances successively
toward things more interior, and infills the generals with particulars,
and the particulars with singulars. From this it may now be seen what is
meant by "order from the generals in which were all the rest," which is
signified by his placing the handmaids and their children first, and
Leah and her children after, and Rachel and her children after. \[5\]
When a man is being regenerated, or what is the same, when the truths in
him are being conjoined with good, the case is similar, and this is the
subject here treated of. Then general affections with their truths
(which here are the "handmaids" and their "children"), are first
instilled into good; then those less general (that is, those which are
relatively particulars), which here are "Leah" and her "children;" and
finally those still less general (that is, those which are relatively
singulars), which here are "Rachel" and "Joseph." For man then passes in
like manner as it were through ages, first being in his infancy, and
then in childhood and youth, and finally in adult age.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4346.">4346.</span></span>

And he himself passed over before them. That this signifies the
universal, thus all things, is evident from the representation of Jacob,
who here is "himself," as being the good of truth, that is, truth in
will and act (see n. 4337). The good of truth is the universal of all
things; for the generals, particulars, and singulars spoken of just
above, belong to it, because they are in it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4347.">4347.</span></span>

And bowed himself to the earth seven times. That this signifies the
submission of all things, is evident from the signification of "bowing
one's self to the earth," as being an effect of humiliation (n. 2153),
consequently submission. The highest degree of submission is signified
by "seven times," and the submission of all things by "Jacob's bowing
himself;" for Jacob represents the universal of all things (as stated
just above, n. 4346). \[2\] As regards humiliation and submission, few
know why this must be in presence of the Divine when man is in worship;
and consequently they do not know what it effects. They who are not in
the knowledge of interior things cannot believe otherwise than that the
Divine wills the humiliation and submission of man, as a man does who is
in the lust of glory; and consequently that the Divine wills glory
therefrom, and is affected with the glory which man ascribes to Him. But
the case is altogether different. The Divine is not in any affection of
glory, for what glory has the Divine from man? But He wills humiliation
and submission, not for His own, but for man's sake. For when man is in
humiliation he feels aversion for the evil and falsity in him (n. 2327,
2423, 3994), and thus removes them, and on their removal the Divine can
flow in with good and truth. Everyone may be aware of this in himself.
He who is of elated mind is in the love of self, and not only sets
himself above others, but also cares nothing for the Divine, and
consequently rejects the influx of good, and thence its conjunction with
truths. This is the genuine reason for man's humiliation before the
Divine. \[3\] It is therefore manifest that good cannot be conjoined
with truths, thus that man cannot be regenerated, unless he humbles and
submits himself. Humiliation and submission are predicated of truths
because truths flow in through the external man, but good through the
internal; and the things that inflow through the external man are
attended with fallacies and the consequent falsities with their
affections; whereas this is not the case with the things that inflow
through the internal man, because it is the Divine that flows in through
this, and comes to meet truths, in order that they may be conjoined.
From this it is now manifest what is meant by the submission of all
things, which is signified by Jacob's "bowing himself to the earth seven
times, until he drew near even unto his brother."

<span class="margnote"><span id="4348.">4348.</span></span>

Until he drew near even unto his brother. That this signifies
conjunction on the part of the good from truth which is "Jacob," is
evident from the signification of "drawing near," as being to conjoin
himself; from the representation of Esau, who here is the "brother," as
being Divine good in the natural (see above, n. 4337); and from the
representation of Jacob, as being the good of truth (see again n. 4337).
How these things are circumstanced has been explained just above (n.
4347).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4349.">4349.</span></span>

Verse 4. And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell upon his
neck, and kissed him; and they wept. "And Esau ran to meet him,"
signifies the influx of Divine good natural, "and embraced him,"
signifies the first conjunction of love; "and fell upon his neck,"
signifies the second conjunction of all things in that universal; "and
kissed him," signifies interior conjunction from love; "and they wept,"
signifies the effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4350.">4350.</span></span>

And Esau ran to meet him. That this signifies the influx of Divine good
natural, is evident from the signification of "running to meet," as
being influx; and from the representation of Esau, as being Divine good
natural (see n. 4337, 4340). That "to run to meet" here denotes influx,
is because Divine good flows in through the internal man, and comes to
meet the truth which is being instilled through the external man, in
order that they may be conjoined. The same is also manifest from what
follows; for it follows that he embraced him, fell upon his neck, and
kissed him; by which as will be seen is signified conjunction by love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_124"></span>[4303-1](ac087.htm#fr_124) The Latin word
nervus means both a nerve and a sinew. That in Gen. 32 the great nervus
ischiadicus or sciatic nerve is meant, see n. 5051. \[Reviser\]

<span id="fn_125"></span>[4333-1](ac087.htm#fr_125) That is, in the year
1762.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4351-4400](ac088)
