[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac121)  [Next](ac123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="6051.">6051.</span></span>

In order that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen. That this signifies,
so shall your residence be in the midst of the natural where are the
memory-knowledges of the church, is evident from the signification of
"to dwell," as being life, and thus the residence of life (see n. 1293,
3384, 4451); and from the signification of "Goshen," as being the midst
or inmost in the natural (n. 5910, 6028). That there are the
memory-knowledges of the church which are signified by "Egypt," is
plain, for Goshen was the best tract of land in Egypt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6052.">6052.</span></span>

For every shepherd of the flock is an abomination of the Egyptians. That
this signifies separation thus from perverted memory-knowledges, which
are opposed to the memory-knowledges of the church, is evident from the
signification of an "abomination of the Egyptians," as being the
separation of memory-knowledges; for the things which are an abomination
are separated, because the reason of their being abominated is that they
are contrary to accepted principles and loves, thus because they are
opposed; in the present case, opposed to the perverted memory-knowledges
which are signified by the "Egyptians" when it is said that "every
shepherd of the flock is an abomination to them;" and from the
signification of a "shepherd of the flock," as being one who leads to
good (of which above, n. 6044). The memory-knowledge which confirms good
is that to which perverted memory-knowledge is opposed. Perverted
memory-knowledges are those which destroy the truth of faith and the
good of charity, and are also those which invert order, such as the
magical things that existed in Egypt. For there are very many things
that are in accordance with order which those magicians abused, such as
correspondences and representatives, which were memory-knowledges more
cultivated among them than among others. These follow from order even
when the evil apply them, for in the application of them to the exercise
of command over others, and to the doing of injury to others, they are
perverted, because magical. In regard to their separation, which is here
treated of, this is effected by means of the bringing into order that
takes place when good with truths is in the midst or inmost, which is
signified by "Goshen;" for then the perverted memory-knowledges which
are opposed are cast out. Up to this point the subject treated of has
been the conjunction of truths with memory-knowledges, of which
conjunction be it further known that the conjunction of the internal or
spiritual man with the external or natural man cannot possibly be
effected unless truths are insinuated into memory-knowledges. For
memory-knowledges together with the delights of the natural affections
constitute the external or natural man; and therefore unless conjunction
is effected with memory-knowledges, it cannot be effected at all. And
yet in order that a man may be regenerated, his internal and external
must be conjoined together, for unless they are conjoined, all good
flowing in from the Lord through the internal man into the external or
natural man is either perverted, or suffocated, or rejected, and then
the internal man is also closed. The method in which this conjunction is
effected is what has been described in this chapter, which method is by
means of the insertion of truths into memory-knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6053.">6053.</span></span>

On influx, and on the interaction of the soul with the body. Nothing
whatever can be known or even thought about influx, and about the
interaction of the soul with the body, unless it is known what the soul
is, and also something of its nature. If nothing is definitely known
about the soul, nothing can be said about its influx and interaction.
For how can the communication of two parts be thought of in the total
absence of knowledge about the nature of one of them? That complete
ignorance prevails about the nature of the soul, especially in the
learned world, is evident from the fact that some believe it to be an
aerial thing, others something flaming or fiery, others a purely
thinking entity, others a general vital force, and others a natural
activity. And what is a still further proof of the prevailing ignorance
about the nature of the soul is that various places in the body are
assigned it, some placing it in the heart, some in the brain and its
fibers, others in the corpora striata, others in the ventricles, and
others in a small gland; some in every part, but in so doing they
conceive of a vitality such as is common to every living thing. From all
this it is evident that nothing is known about the soul, and this is the
reason why all that has been asserted on the subject is conjectural. And
as in this way men could have no idea about the soul, very many have not
been able to avoid the belief that the soul is a mere vital thing that
is dissipated when the body dies. And this is the reason why the learned
have less belief in the life after death than the simple; and because
they do not believe in it, neither can they believe in the things which
belong to that life, which are the heavenly and spiritual things of
faith and love. This also appears from the Lord's words in Matthew: Thou
hast hid these things from the wise and intelligent, and hast revealed
them unto babes (Matt 11:25). And again: Seeing they see not, and
hearing they hear not, neither do they understand (Matt. 13:13). For the
simple have no such thoughts about the soul; but believe that they will
have after death; in which simple faith, unknown to them, there is
hidden the belief that they will live there as men, will see angels,
will speak with them, and will enjoy happiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6054.">6054.</span></span>

As regards the soul of which it is said that it will live after death,
it is nothing else than the man himself who lives within the body, that
is, the interior man who in this world acts through the body, and who
causes the body to live. This man, when loosed from the body, is called
a spirit, and then appears in a complete human form; yet he cannot
possibly be seen with the eyes of the body, but only with the eyes of
the spirit; and before the eyes of the latter he appears like a man in
this world; he has senses (namely, touch, smell, hearing, sight) much
more exquisite than in this world; he has appetites, cupidities,
desires, affections, loves, such as there are in this world, but in a
more surpassing degree; he also thinks as in this world, but more
perfectly; he converses with others; in a word, he is there just as he
had been in this world, insomuch that if he does not reflect upon being
in the other life, he knows no otherwise than that he is in this world
(as I have sometimes heard spirits say), for the life after death is a
continuation of the life in this world. This then is the soul of man
which lives after death. \[2\] But lest in consequence of the
conjectures and hypotheses about it, the word "soul" should give rise to
the idea of the unknown, it is better to say man's "spirit," or if you
prefer it, the "interior man," for the spirit appears there exactly like
a man, with all the members and organs belonging to a man, and moreover
is the man himself, even in the body. That this is so, is also evident
from the angels that have been seen, as recorded in the Word, who were
all seen in the human form; for all the angels in heaven have the human
form, because the Lord has it, who after His resurrection appeared so
many times as a man. That an angel, as well as the spirit of man, is in
form a man, is because the universal heaven has from the Lord the
capacity of conspiring into the human form, whence the universal heaven
is called the Grand Man of which, and also of the correspondence of all
things of man therewith, I have treated at the close of many chapters.
And as the Lord lives in each one in heaven; and as by influx from the
Lord the universal heaven acts into each one, therefore every angel is
an image thereof, that is, is a form most perfectly human, and so in
like manner is a man after death. \[3\] All the spirits I have seen, who
are thousands and thousands, have appeared to me exactly like men; and
some of them have said that they are men just as in the world, and they
added that in the life of the body they had never believed that it would
be so. Many were sad because of the ignorance of men about their state
after death; and because they think so inanely and emptily about the
soul; and because most persons who have thought more deeply on the
subject have supposed the soul to be a kind of thin air, which idea must
needs lead into the insane error that it is dissipated after death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6055.">6055.</span></span>

He who does not know the interiors of man, cannot know about influx and
the interaction of the soul with the body; for the interaction and the
influx are effected by means of these interiors. In order to know the
interiors of man, it is necessary to know that there is an internal man
and an external man, and that the internal man is in the spiritual
world, and the external man in the natural world; thus that the former
is in the light of heaven, and the latter in the light of the world. It
is also necessary to know that the internal man is so distinct from the
external man that the former, being prior and interior, can subsist
without the latter; but that the latter or external man, being posterior
and exterior, cannot subsist without the former. It must be known,
further, that the internal man is what is properly called the
intellectual or rational man, because this is in the light of heaven,"
in which light are reason and understanding; whereas the external man is
what is properly to be called that of memory-knowledge, because in him
there are memory-knowledges, which for the most part derive their light
from those things which are of the light of the world, when this light
is enlightened and thus vivified by the light of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6056.">6056.</span></span>

It has been said that the internal man, being prior, can subsist without
the external, because this is posterior; but not the converse. For it is
a universal rule that nothing can subsist from itself, but from and
through something else, consequently that nothing can be kept in form
except from and through something else, which may also be seen from
everything in nature. The case is the same with man. In respect to his
external, man cannot subsist except from and through his internal.
Neither can the internal man subsist except from and through heaven. And
neither can heaven subsist from itself, but only from the Lord, who
alone subsists from Himself. Influx is according to existence and
subsistence, for all things subsist by means of influx. But that all
things in general and in particular subsist by influx from the Lord, not
only mediately through the spiritual world, but also immediately in both
mediates and ultimates, will be shown in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6057.">6057.</span></span>

Before any statement can be made about influx and the operation of the
soul into the body, it must be well understood that the internal man is
formed according to the image of heaven, and the external man according
to the image of the world; insomuch that the internal man is a heaven in
the least form, and the external man is a world in the least form, thus
is a microcosm. That the external man is an image of the world, may be
seen from the external or bodily senses; for the ear is formed according
to the whole nature of the modification of the air; the lungs according
to the whole nature of its pressure, as also is the general surface of
the body, which is held in its form by the circumpressure of the air;
the eye is formed according to the whole nature of ether and of light;
the tongue to the sense of the solvent and fluent parts in liquids; and,
together with the lungs, the trachea, the larynx, the glottis, the
fauces, and the lips, according to the power of suitably modifying the
air, whence come articulate sounds, or words, and harmonious sounds; the
nostrils are formed according to the sense of particles fluent in the
atmosphere; the sense of touch, which encompasses the whole body, is
according to the sense of the changes of state in the air, namely, to
the sense of its cold and heat, and also to the sense of liquids and to
that of weights. The interior viscera to which the aerial atmosphere
cannot enter are held in connection and form by a more subtle air, which
is called ether; not to mention that all the secrets of interior nature
are inscribed upon and applied to the external man, such as all the
secret things of mechanics, of physics, of chemistry, and of optics.
From all this it is evident that universal nature has contributed to the
conformation of the external of man; and hence it is that the ancients
called man a microcosm. \[2\] And just as the external man has been
formed according to the image of all things of the world, so has the
internal man been formed according to the image of all things of heaven,
that is, according to the image of the celestial and spiritual things
which proceed from the Lord and from which and in which is heaven. The
celestial things there are all those which are of love to the Lord and
of charity toward the neighbor; and the spiritual things there are all
those of faith, which in themselves are so many and of such a nature
that the tongue cannot possibly utter one millionth part of them. That
the internal man has been formed according to the image of all these
things, is strikingly shown in the angels, who when they appear before
the internal sight (as they have appeared before mine), affect the
inmosts by their mere presence; for love to the Lord and charity toward
the neighbor pour out of them and penetrate, and the derivative things
of faith shine forth from them and affect. By this and other proofs it
has been made plain to me that as the internal man has been created to
be an angel, he is a heaven in the least form. \[3\] From all this it is
now evident that in man the spiritual world is conjoined with the
natural world, consequently that with him the spiritual world flows into
the natural world in so vivid a manner that he can notice it, provided
he pays attention. All this shows the nature of the interaction of the
soul with the body, namely, that properly it is the communication of
spiritual things which are of heaven, with natural things which are of
the world, and that the communication is effected by means of influx,
and is according to the conjunction. This communication which is
effected by means of influx according to the conjunction is at this day
unknown, for the reason that each and all things are attributed to
nature, and nothing is known about what is spiritual, which at this day
is so far set aside that when it is thought of it appears as nothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6058.">6058.</span></span>

But influx is of such a nature that there is an influx from the Divine
of the Lord into every angel, into every spirit, and into every man, and
that in this way the Lord rules everyone, not only in the universal, but
also in the veriest singulars, and this immediately from Himself, and
also mediately through the spiritual world. In order to make known the
existence of this influx, much has already been said about the
correspondence of man's parts with the Grand Man, that is, with heaven;
and at the same time about the representation of spiritual things in
natural; at the close of chapters 23 to 43, and afterward about the
angels and spirits with man, at the close of chapters 44 and 45; and
this is now to be followed with a specific exposition of the subject of
influx and the interaction of the soul and the body. But this subject
must be illustrated by experiences, for otherwise things so much unknown
and rendered so obscure by hypotheses cannot be brought forth into the
light. The illustrative experiences shall be presented at the close of
some of the following chapters. Let what has been said thus far serve as
an introduction. Genesis 47 1. And Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and
said, My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and
all that they have, have come out of the land of Canaan; and behold they
are in the land of Goshen. 2. And from among his brethren he took five
men, and set them before Pharaoh. 3. And Pharaoh said unto his brethren,
What are your works? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are a
shepherd of the flock, both we and our fathers. 4. And they said unto
Pharaoh, To sojourn in the land have we come; for there is no pasture
for thy servants' flock; for the famine is grievous in the land of
Canaan; and now I pray let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen. 5.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren have
come unto thee: 6. The land of Egypt before thee is it; in the best of
the land make thy father and thy brethren dwell; let them dwell in the
land of Goshen; and if thou knowest, and there be among them, men of
activity, then set them as princes over my cattle. 7. And Joseph brought
Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh; and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
8. And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How many are the days of the years of
thy life? 9. And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my
sojournings are a hundred and thirty years; few and evil have been the
days of the years of my life, and they have not attained to the days of
the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their sojournings.
10. And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh. 11. And
Joseph made his father and his brethren dwell, and gave them a
possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of
Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded. 12. And Joseph sustained his father,
and his brethren, and all his father's house, with bread, according to
the mouth of the babe. 13. And there was no bread in all the land;
because the famine was very grievous, and the land of Egypt and the land
of Canaan labored by reason of the famine. 14. And Joseph gathered
together all the silver that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the
land of Canaan, for the produce which they bought; and Joseph brought
the silver into Pharaoh's house. 15. And when the silver was all spent
in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all Egypt came unto
Joseph, saying, Give us bread; for why should we die beside thee because
the silver faileth? 16. And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will
give you for your cattle, if silver fail. 17. And they brought their
cattle unto Joseph; and Joseph gave them bread \[in exchange\] for the
horses, and for the cattle of the flock, and for the cattle of the herd,
and for the asses; and he provided them with bread \[in exchange\] for
all their cattle in this year. 18. And when this year was ended, they
came unto him in the second year, and said to him, We will not hide from
my lord how that the silver is spent; and the herd of the beast is to my
lord; there is naught left before my lord besides our body and our
ground. 19. Wherefore should we die before thine eyes, both we and our
ground? buy us and our ground for bread, and we shall live, and our
ground, servants to Pharaoh; and give seed, that we may live, and not
die, and the ground be not laid waste. 20. And Joseph bought all the
ground of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold everyone his field,
because the famine grew strong upon them; and the land was Pharaoh's.
21. And as for the people, he removed it to the cities from one end of
the border of Egypt even to the other end thereof. 22. Only the ground
of the priests bought he not; because a portion was appointed for the
priests by Pharaoh, and they ate their appointed portion which Pharaoh
had given them; wherefore they sold not their ground. 23. And Joseph
said unto the people, Behold I have bought you this day and your ground
for Pharaoh; lo here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the ground. 24.
And it shall be in the in-gatherings that ye shall give a fifth to
Pharaoh, and four parts shall be for you, for seed of the field, and for
your food, and for them in your houses, and for food for your babes. 25.
And they said, Thou hast made us live; let us find grace in the eyes of
my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants. 26. And Joseph made it a
statute even unto this day, concerning the ground of Egypt, that Pharaoh
should have the fifth; only the ground of the priests, only theirs, was
not Pharaoh's. 27. And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the land of
Goshen; and they had a possession therein, and were fruitful, and
multiplied exceedingly. 28. And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt
seventeen years; so the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were seven
years, and a hundred and forty years. 29. And the days of Israel drew
near to die; and he called his son Joseph, and said to him, If I pray I
have found grace in thine eyes, put I pray thy hand under my thigh, and
do mercy and truth with me; bury me not I pray in Egypt. 30. And I will
lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me
in their sepulcher. And he said, I will do according to thy word. 31.
And he said, Swear to me: and he sware to him. Israel bowed himself upon
the bed's head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6059.">6059.</span></span>

The Contents. After spiritual good from the natural, which is "Israel,"
has been conjoined with the internal celestial, which is "Joseph," as
described in the foregoing chapter, the subject treated of in the
internal sense of this chapter is the insinuation of the truths of the
church, which are in the natural, into memory-knowledge. The truths of
the church which are in the natural are the sons of Jacob; general truth
itself therein is "Jacob;" the memory-knowledge into which these truths
are insinuated is "Pharaoh."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6060.">6060.</span></span>

Afterward, memory-knowledges are treated of, how they were brought into
order by the internal celestial which is "Joseph;" namely, that first
the truths of memory-knowledges, then the truths of good and goods of
truth, and at last the whole natural in respect to memory-knowledges,
were brought under their general.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6061.">6061.</span></span>

Lastly is described the regeneration of spiritual good from the natural,
which is "Israel."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6062.">6062.</span></span>

The Internal Sense. Verse 1. And Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said,
My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all
that they have, have come out of the land of Canaan; and behold they are
in the land of Goshen. "And Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said,"
signifies the presence of the internal celestial in the natural where
memory-knowledges are, and the consequent influx and perception; "My
father and my brethren," signifies spiritual good in the natural and the
truths of the church there; "and their flocks, and their herds,"
signifies the interior and exterior goods of truth; "and all that they
have," signifies whatever is thence derived; "have come out of the land
of Canaan," signifies that they are from the church; "and behold they
are in the land of Goshen," signifies that they are in the midst of the
natural where are memory-knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6063.">6063.</span></span>

And Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said. That this signifies the
presence of the internal celestial in the natural where
memory-knowledges are, and the consequent influx and perception, is
evident from the signification of "coming to" anyone, as being presence
(see n. 5934); from the representation of Joseph, as being the internal
celestial (n. 5869, 5877); from the signification of "telling," as being
influx (n. 5966); from the representation of Pharaoh, as being the
natural and the memory-knowledge in general (n. 5799, 6015); and from
the signification of "saying," in the historicals of the Word, as being
perception (n. 1791, 1815, 1819, 1822, 1898, 1919, 2080, 2619, 2862,
3509, 5687). Hence it is evident that by "Joseph came and told Pharaoh,
and said," is signified the presence of the internal celestial in the
natural where are memory-knowledges, and the consequent influx and
perception. \[2\] Frequent mention has already been made of the influx
of the internal into the natural or external, and of the perception of
the latter; and it has been shown that the natural subsists and lives by
virtue of influx from the internal, that is, through the internal from
the Lord. For without influx thence the natural has no life, because it
is in the nature of this world, and from this derives all that it has;
and the nature of this world is utterly devoid of life; and therefore in
order that the natural with man may live, there must be influx from the
Lord, not only immediate from Him, but also mediate through the
spiritual world, consequently into man's internal, for this is in the
spiritual world; and then from this there must be influx into the
natural, in order that this may live. The natural of man is formed to
receive life therefrom. This then is what is meant by the influx of the
internal celestial into the natural where memory-knowledges are. By
virtue of influx from the internal there comes forth perception in the
external or natural which is represented by Pharaoh; for influx and
perception correspond to each other (n. 5743).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6064.">6064.</span></span>

My father and my brethren. That this signifies spiritual good in the
natural, and the truths of the church there, is evident from the
representation of Israel, who is here the "father," as being spiritual
good in the natural (see n. 5801, 5803, 5806, 5812, 5817, 5819, 5826,
5833); and from the representation of the sons of Israel, as being the
truths of the church in the natural (n. 5414, 5879, 5951). The influx
and perception spoken of just above (n. 6063) have reference to these,
namely, to spiritual good and the truths of the church in the natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6065.">6065.</span></span>

And their flocks, and their herds. That this signifies the interior and
the exterior goods of truth, is evident from the signification of
"flocks," as being interior goods, and of "herds," as being exterior
goods (see n. 5913, 6048). The reason why the goods of truth are
signified, is that spiritual good, which is represented by Israel, is
the good of truth (n. 4598). The goods which are in heaven and with man
are from a double origin, namely, from an origin in the will and from an
origin in the understanding. In the good that originates in the will
were the most ancient people who were of the celestial church, but in
the good that originates in the understanding were the ancient people
who were of the spiritual church. In the former good are they who are in
the inmost or third heaven, but in the latter good are they who are in
the middle or second heaven. What and of what nature is the difference
has been frequently told in these explications. The good which
originates in the will is the good from which is truth; but the good
which originates in the understanding is the good which is from truth,
or the good of truth. In itself this good is nothing else than truth in
act.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6066.">6066.</span></span>

And all that they have, signifies whatever is thence derived (as above,
n. 6046).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6067.">6067.</span></span>

Have come out of the land of Canaan. That this signifies that they are
from the church, is evident from the signification of "coming out of any
land," as being to be from thence; and from the signification of the
"land of Canaan," as being the Lord's kingdom in the heavens and the
Lord's kingdom on earth, which latter is the church (see n. 1607, 3038,
3481, 3686, 3705, 4447, 4454, 5136).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6068.">6068.</span></span>

And behold they are in the land of Goshen. That this signifies that they
are in the midst of the natural where memory-knowledges are, is evident
from the signification of "Goshen," as being the midst or inmost in the
natural (see n. 5910, 6028, 6031). As regards being in the midst of the
natural, the case is this. When the goods and truths which are of the
church, that is, which are from the Word of the Lord, have been
acknowledged, and are received in the natural with faith, they then
occupy the middle place there. For those things which are directly under
the view are in the midst, but those things which are not directly under
the view are at the sides. Hence those things which are in the midst
appear clearly, but those which are at the sides appear obscurely. The
case herein is the same as it is with the sight of the eye. Those things
which are directly under the sight are in the midst, that is, in the
center, and appear clearly; but those which are not directly under the
sight are remote from the midst, that is, are at the sides, and appear
obscurely. For the internal eye, which is the intellectual mind, and
which has its sight from the light of heaven, views those things which
are in the natural outside of itself, which are memory-knowledges, just
as the external eye views objects or a field of objects outside of
itself. The internal sight is determined to those things which afford
the greatest delight and which are dear to the heart, and upon them it
fixes a direct view, as also does the external sight to like things in
its fields of objects. Thus the internal sight is determined to the
memory-knowledges which are most in accord with the truth and good in
which the man is; and then, with him, these memory-knowledges are in the
midst. The reason why the internal sight looks at memory-knowledges, is
that it is spiritual, and therefore is determined to spiritual things,
thus to memory-knowledges, for these fall under the spiritual view.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6069.">6069.</span></span>

Verses 2-6. And from among his brethren he took five men, and set them
before Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What are your works?
And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are a shepherd of the flock,
both we and our fathers. And they said unto Pharaoh, To sojourn in the
land have we come; for there is no pasture for thy servants' flock; for
the famine is grievous in the land of Canaan; and now I pray let thy
servants dwell in the land of Goshen. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph,
saying, Thy father and thy brethren have come unto thee; the land of
Egypt before thee is it; in the best of the land make thy father and thy
brethren dwell; let them dwell in the land of Goshen; and if thou
knowest, and there be among them, men of activity, then set them as
princes over my cattle. "And from among his brethren he took five men,"
signifies from the truths of the church some; "and set them before
Pharaoh," signifies insinuation into memory-knowledges; "and Pharaoh
said unto his brethren," signifies a perception about the truths of the
church in the natural; "What are your works?" signifies about services
and uses; "and they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are a shepherd of
the flock," signifies that they lead to good; "both we and our fathers,"
signifies that this is so from the ancients; "and they said unto
Pharaoh," signifies continuance of perception; "To sojourn in the land
have we come," signifies to seek life in memory-knowledges; "for there
is no pasture for thy servants' flock," signifies that memory-knowledges
are wanting in which are goods of truth; "for the famine is grievous in
the land of Canaan," signifies that there is a lack of such things in
the church; "and now I pray let thy servants dwell in the land of
Goshen," signifies that they may live in the midst of them; "and Pharaoh
said unto Joseph, saying," signifies perception in the natural where
memory-knowledges are; "Thy father and thy brethren have come unto
thee," signifies with respect to the influx of the internal celestial
into spiritual good from the natural, and into the truths of the church
there; "the land of Egypt before thee is it," signifies that the
memory-knowledges of the natural mind are under the auspices of the
internal celestial; "in the best of the land make thy father and thy
brethren dwell," signifies that they should live in the inmost of these;
"let them dwell in the land of Goshen," signifies where is the midst;
"and if thou knowest, and there be among them, men of activity,"
signifies the more excellent things in doctrine; "then set them as
princes over my cattle," signifies that they may be the primary things
of memory-knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6070.">6070.</span></span>

And from among his brethren he took five men. That this signifies from
the truths of the church some, is evident from the representation of the
sons of Jacob, who here are the "brethren," as being the truths of the
church (see n. 5403, 5419, 5427, 5458, 5512); and from the signification
of "five," as being some (n. 4638, 5291).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6071.">6071.</span></span>

And set them before Pharaoh. That this signifies insinuation into
memory-knowledges, is evident from the representation of Pharaoh, as
being memory-knowledge in general (see n. 5799, 6015). Insinuation is
signified by "setting before him," because the end in presenting them
was to insinuate them, that is, the truths of the church, for these are
the "sons of Jacob." As regards truths, that they must be insinuated
into the memory-knowledges of the church, see n. 6004, 6023, 6052; but
as at this day this is a subject about which nothing is known, it must
be illustrated further. At the present day the memory-knowledges of the
church are those which belong to the literal sense of the Word. Unless
truths from the internal sense are insinuated into these
memory-knowledges, the mind can be drawn into every heresy; but when
truths have been insinuated into them, the mind cannot be drawn into
heresies. \[2\] For example, he who has learned from the literal sense
of the Word that God is angry, that He punishes, leads into temptations,
casts into hell, and causes evil, may be drawn into false ideas about
God, as that from good itself, which is God, can come forth evil, thus
what is opposite to Him; when yet from good comes good, and from evil
comes evil. But this memory-knowledge appears with quite another aspect
if interior truths are insinuated into it, as for instance this truth:
that it is the evil with man that causes him to be angry, that leads
into temptations, punishes, casts into hell, and from itself is
continually producing evils; and that this matter is circumstanced as
are the laws in kingdoms, which laws are from the king, while the evils
of penalty are not from the king, but from those who do evils. \[3\]
Then again this truth: that hells exist, the source of all evil, and
that this is permitted because it is unavoidable for man's sake, seeing
that he is in evil and his life is thence derived, and therefore unless
he is left in evil he cannot be in freedom, thus cannot be reformed.
Nevertheless nothing but good comes from God, for insofar as man suffers
it, God bends evil into good. \[4\] Also this truth: that the most
general things are to be believed first, and that they are afterward to
be illustrated by individual truths; as for instance this general
memory-knowledge: that all things which take place are from God, thus
also the evils of penalty; but in what manner these are from God is to
be learned afterward, and also the nature and origin of that which is
done from permission. \[5\] In like manner this truth: that all worship
of God must needs begin with holy fear, within which is the thought that
God will reward the good and punish the evil. The simple and little
children must believe this, because they do not yet apprehend what
permission is-even according to the Lord's words, "Rather fear Him who
is able to destroy both body and soul in hell" (Matt. 10:28); and when
they begin by not daring through fear to do what is evil, there is
gradually insinuated love together with good, and then they begin to
know and perceive that nothing but good is from God, and that evil is
from themselves, and at last that all evil is from hell. \[6\] Moreover
they who are in heaven perceive that nothing but good is from God; but
they who are in hell say that all evil is from God, because He permits
it, and does not remove it. But to those who are in the world of spirits
it is said in reply, that if evil were taken away from them they would
have no life, neither would a man who is in evil; and that the evil
which is in them punishes itself according to law, and that by reason of
the evils of penalty they at last abstain from doing evils; and also
that the punishment of the evil is the protection of the good. Add to
this that they who are in evil, and also they who are in external
worship without internal, as were the Jews, must by all means be in fear
of God, and believe that He punishes; for from fear of God they are able
to do what is good, but in no wise from love. \[7\] When these and many
other truths are insinuated into the memory-knowledge above referred to,
it appears in a very different aspect; for then this memory-knowledge
becomes like a transparent vessel, in which the truths that shine
through cause the vessel to be seen no otherwise than as one general
truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6072.">6072.</span></span>

And Pharaoh said unto his brethren. That this signifies a perception
about the truths of the church in the natural, is evident from the
signification of "saying," as being perception (of which above, n.
6063); from the representation of Pharaoh, as being the natural and
memory-knowledge in general (of which also above, n. 6063); and from the
representation of the sons of Jacob, who here are the "brethren," as
being the truths of the church in the natural (of which above, n. 6064).
From all this it is evident that by "Pharaoh said unto his brethren" is
signified a perception of the natural about the truths of the church
therein.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6073.">6073.</span></span>

What are your works? That this signifies about services and uses, is
evident from the signification of "works," as being goods (n. 6048),
thus services and uses, for these are goods. All the goods which are
called goods of charity are nothing but uses, and uses are nothing but
works for the neighbor, for our country, for the church, for the Lord's
kingdom. Moreover regarded in itself charity itself does not become
charity until it comes into act and becomes work. For to love anyone,
and not do him good when we have the power, is not to love him; but to
do him good when we have the power, and to do it from our hearts, this
is to love him; and then all things of charity toward him are contained
within the very deed or work; for a man's works are the complex of all
things of his charity and faith, and are what are called spiritual
goods, and indeed become goods by exercise, that is, by means of uses.
\[2\] As the angels who are in heaven are in good from the Lord, they
long for nothing more than to perform uses. These are the very delights
of their life, and it is also according to uses that they enjoy bliss
and happiness (see n. 453, 454, 696, 997, 3645), which likewise the Lord
teaches in Matthew: The Son of man shall come in the glory of His Father
with His angels; and then shall He render to everyone according to his
works (Matt. 16:27); by "works" here are not meant works such as they
appear in the outward form, but such as they are in their inward form,
namely, such as is the charity contained in them; the angels regard
works in no other way. \[3\] And because a man's works are the complex
of all things of his charity and faith, and the life causes charity to
be charity and faith to be faith, thus good, therefore the Lord loved
John more than the rest of His disciples, and he lay on His breast at
supper (John 21:20); for by him were represented the goods or works of
charity (see prefaces to Gen. 18 and 22); for which reason also the Lord
said unto him, "Follow Me," and not to Peter, by whom was represented
faith (see the same prefaces). Wherefore faith, which is "Peter," said
with indignation, "Lord, what shall this man do? Jesus said unto him, If
I will that he remain till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou Me"
(John 21:21-23). By this was also foretold that faith would despise
works, and yet that these are near the Lord, as may also be clearly seen
from the Lord's words to the sheep and to the goats (Matt. 25:34-46),
wherein nothing but works are recounted. And that faith would reject the
Lord is evident from the representation by Peter when he denied Him
thrice; that he did this at night, signifies the last time of the
church, when there is no longer any charity (see n. 6000); that he did
it thrice signifies that this condition is then complete (n. 1825, 2788,
4495, 5159); that it was before the cock crew, signifies before newness
of the church would arise, for the twilight and morning which follow the
night signify the first of the church (n. 2405, 5962).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6074.">6074.</span></span>

And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are a shepherd of the flock.
That this signifies that they lead to good, is evident from the
signification of a "shepherd of the flock," as being one who leads to
good (see n. 6044), here the truths which lead to good, because the sons
of Jacob denote the truths of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6075.">6075.</span></span>

Both we and our fathers. That this signifies that this is so from the
ancients, is evident from the signification of "fathers," as being those
who were of the ancient churches (see n. 6050). In many passages of the
Word where the Jews and the Israelites are treated of, their fathers are
mentioned with praise. They who abide in the sense of the letter
understand by "fathers" in these passages no others than Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and also the sons of Jacob. But in the internal sense by
"fathers" there, when spoken of in a good sense, are not meant these
patriarchs, but they who were of the Most Ancient Church which was
before the flood, and they who were of the Ancient Church which was
after the flood. The men of both these churches were called "fathers"
because from them the church had descended, and the things of the church
had been derived. \[2\] By "fathers" are meant those who were of the
Ancient Churches, in Moses: Jehovah had delight in thy fathers to love
them, and He chose their seed after them (Deut. 10:15). And again:
Remember the days of eternity, understand the years of generation and
generation. When the Most High gave to the nations their inheritance,
when He separated the sons of man, He set the bounds of the peoples
according to the number of the sons of Israel. But when Jeshurun waxed
fat, he forsook God, they sacrifice to demons, to gods that came from
what is near, and that your fathers knew not (Deut. 32:7, 8, 15, 17).
This passage occurs in the prophetic song of Moses, in which the Ancient
Church is treated of from verse seven to verse fifteen, and the
posterity of Jacob from verse fifteen to verse forty-four. The state of
the Most Ancient Church which was before the flood is signified by the
"days of eternity;" and the state of the Ancient Church which was after
the flood by the "years of generation and generation;" the state of
their good by the "inheritance which the Most High gave to the nations;"
and the state of their truth by the "Most High separating the sons of
man, and setting the bounds of the peoples according to the number of
the sons of Israel." (That this number, or twelve, means all truths of
faith in the complex, may be seen above, n. 577, 2089, 2129, 2130, 3272,
3858, 3913.) From this it is plain that by "fathers" are signified those
who were of the Ancient Churches. \[3\] In like manner in the following
passages. In Isaiah: Our house of holiness, and our ornament, where our
fathers praised Thee, is become a burning of fire (Isa. 64:11). In
Jeremiah: Did not thy father eat and drink? but he did judgment and
justice; then it was well with him (Jer. 22:15). Again: They sinned to
Jehovah, the habitation of justice, and the hope of their fathers, to
Jehovah (Jer. 50:7). In David: We have heard with our ears, O God, our
fathers have told us, the work Thou didst in their days, in the days of
antiquity (Ps. 44:1). "Fathers" have the like signification in Daniel
11:24, 37, 38. That they who were of the Ancient Churches are meant by
"fathers" in these passages, is not seen in the sense of the letter, but
only from the internal sense, in which the church and its goods and
truths are treated of. Moreover the church itself, being the heavenly
marriage, that is, the marriage of good and truth, is called in the Word
"father" as to good, and "mother" as to truth (n. 3703, 5581).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6076.">6076.</span></span>

And they said unto Pharaoh. That this signifies continuance of
perception, is evident from the signification of "saying," as being
perception (see n. 6063); and from the representation of Pharaoh, as
being the natural in general (as above). Continuance of perception by
the natural is signified, because the expression "they said unto
Pharaoh" was also used just above (n. 6074), and now here again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6077.">6077.</span></span>

To sojourn in the land have we come. That this signifies to seek life in
memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification of "to sojourn," as
being to be instructed, and also to live (see n. 1463, 2025); thus "to
come to sojourn" means to seek life; and from the signification of
"land," here the land of Egypt, as being where memory-knowledge is, thus
as being memory-knowledge. (That "Egypt" denotes memory-knowledge has
been frequently shown above.) In regard to the life of truth being in
memory-knowledges, or to truths seeking their life in memory-knowledges,
be it known that all things which are in the spiritual world, and hence
all things which are in the natural world, seek something ulterior in
which to be, and to act as cause in effect, to the end that they may
continually be producing something. This ulterior thing is as it were a
body, and that which seeks to be in it is as it were a soul. This effort
ceases only in the ultimates of nature, where things inert have place.
In the natural world this is seen in everything; and it is also seen in
the spiritual world, in that good seeks to live in truths, and truths
seek to live in memory-knowledges, and memory-knowledges in things of
sense, and things of sense in the world. \[2\] As to what specifically
regards truths being in memory-knowledges, be it known that interior
truths may indeed be insinuated into memory-knowledges, but the truths
have no life therein until there is good in the memory-knowledges; for
in good there is life, and in truths from good, and thus in
memory-knowledges from good through truths. Then good is like a soul to
truths, and through truths to memory-knowledges, which are like a body.
In a word, charity toward the neighbor vivifies and animates faith, and
through faith the memory-knowledges that belong to the natural mind.
\[3\] There are few at this day who know that truths and
memory-knowledges are distinct from each other. The reason is that few
are in the truths of faith from charity, and truths of faith in which
there is not charity are nothing else than memory-knowledges, for they
are in the memory exactly as are other things which are there. But when
truths of faith are from charity, or when charity is in them, they then
perceptibly distinguish themselves from memory-knowledges, and sometimes
elevate themselves from them, and they then view the memory-knowledges
as beneath them. This may be very clearly seen from the state of man
after death. He can then think and speak rationally about the truths and
goods of faith, and this with more perspicuity than in the life of the
body, but he cannot recall any memory-knowledges from the memory, these
being then with him as things forgotten and obliterated, although he has
them all with him (see n. 2475-2486). From this it is evident that
truths of faith, which in themselves are spiritual, and
memory-knowledges, which in themselves are natural, are distinct from
each other; and that truths of faith are elevated from memory-knowledges
toward heaven by means of the affection of the good of charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6078.">6078.</span></span>

For there is no pasture for thy servants' flock. That this signifies
that memory-knowledges are wanting in which are the goods of truth, is
evident from the signification of "pasture for a flock," as being the
memory-knowledges in which are goods of truth; thus "no pasture" is
memory-knowledges in which there are no goods of truth. "Pasture" in the
internal sense is that which sustains the spiritual life, and especially
is it the truth of memory-knowledge, for the soul of man desires this as
the body desires food. This truth nourishes, and therefore "to feed"
denotes to be instructed (see n. 5201). That memory-knowledges and
truths sustain the soul of man is very evident from man's longing to
know things, and also from the correspondence of food with
memory-knowledges (n. 1480, 3114, 4792, 5147, 5293, 5340, 5342, 5576,
5579, 5915), which correspondence also shows itself in man when he is
partaking of food, for if this is done while he is speaking and
listening, the vessels which receive the chyle are opened, and he is
more fully nourished than if he is alone. Spiritual truths and
instructions in them would have the same effect with men if they were in
the affection of good. That truths nourish the spiritual life is
especially manifest with good spirits and with the angels in heaven, for
both good spirits and angels have a constant longing to know things and
to be wise; and when they lack this spiritual food they feel desolate,
their life is languid, and they are hungry; and they are not restored
and raised into the bliss of their life until their longing is
satisfied. But in order that memory-knowledges may yield healthful
nourishment to the soul, there must be in them life from the goods of
truth. If there is no life from this source, the memory-knowledges do
indeed sustain the man's interior life, but only his natural life, and
not his spiritual life. \[2\] That "pasture" in the internal sense
denotes that which sustains man's spiritual life, is also evident from
other passages in the Word; as in Isaiah: I gave thee for a covenant of
the people, to restore the land; to say to them that are bound, Go
forth; to them that are in darkness, Be ye revealed. They shall feed
upon the ways; and on all hillsides shall be their pasture (Isa. 49:8,
9); "to feed upon the ways" denotes to be instructed in truths (that
"ways" are truths, see n. 627, 2333; and that "to feed" is to be
instructed, n. 5201); "pasture on all hillsides" denotes to be sustained
from good, for "hills," like "mountains," are the goods of love (n. 795,
796, 1430, 2722, 4210). \[3\] In Jeremiah: Woe to the shepherds that
destroy and scatter the flock of My pasture where "pasture" denotes such
things as sustain spiritual life. Again: The princes of Zion are become
like harts; they have found no pasture (Lam. 1:6); "they have found no
pasture" denotes no truth of good. \[4\] In Ezekiel: I, even I, will
search for My flock, I will feed them in a good pasture, and in the
mountains of the height of Israel shall their fold be; thus shall they
lie down in a good fold, and in fat pasture shall they feed upon the
mountains of Israel (Ezek. 34:11, 14); where "good and fat pasture upon
the mountains of Israel" denotes the goods of truth. Again: Seemeth it a
small thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must
tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures (Ezek. 34:18);
where the signification is similar. In Hosea: I knew thee in the
wilderness, in the land of drought. When they had their pasture, then
were they sated; they were sated, and their heart was elated (Hos. 13:5,
6). In Joel: The beast groaneth, the herds of the ox are perplexed,
because they have no pasture, yea, the flocks of small cattle are made
desolate (Joel 1:18). In David: Jehovah is my shepherd; in pasture of
herb He will make me lie down; to the waters of rest He will lead me; He
will restore my soul (Ps. 23:13). Again: Jehovah hath made us, and not
we ourselves; His people, and the flock of His pasture. \[Or,\]
therefore we are His; His people, and the flock of His pasture (Ps.
100:3). \[5\] "Pasture" in these passages denotes the truths in which
man is instructed, here such things as regard spiritual life; for
spiritual life is such that if this pasturage fails, it languishes and
as it were pines away as does the body when it lacks food. That
"pasture" denotes the good and truth which restore and sustain the soul
or spirit of man, is clear from the Lord's words in John: I am the door;
by Me if anyone enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and go out,
and shall find pasture (John 10:9); where "pasture" denotes the goods
and truths which those have who acknowledge the Lord, and seek life from
Him alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6079.">6079.</span></span>

For the famine is grievous in the land of Canaan. That this signifies
that there is a lack of such things in the church, is evident from the
signification of "famine," as being a lack of good (see n. 5893); and
from the signification of the "land of Canaan," as being the church (of
which above, n. 6067).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6080.">6080.</span></span>

And now I pray let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen. That this
signifies that they may live in the midst of them, is evident from the
signification of "dwelling," as being to live (see n. 1293, 3384, 3613,
4451, 6051); and from the signification of the "land of Goshen," as
being the midst or inmost in the natural (n. 5910, 6028, 6031, 6068).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6081.">6081.</span></span>

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, saying. That this signifies perception in
the natural where memory-knowledges are, is evident from the
signification of "saying," as being perception (of which often before);
from the representation of Pharaoh, as being the natural where is
memory-knowledge (see n. 5799, 6015, 6063); and from the representation
of Joseph, as being the internal, from which the natural has perception
(n. 5469).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6082.">6082.</span></span>

Thy father and thy brethren have come unto thee. That this signifies
with respect to the influx of the internal celestial into spiritual good
from the natural, and into the truths of the church there, is evident
from the representation of Israel, who is here the "father," as being
spiritual good from the natural (see n. 5801, 5803, 5807, 5812, 5817,
5819, 5826, 5833); and from the representation of his sons, who are here
the "brethren," as being the truths of the church in the natural (n.
5414, 5879, 5951). That the influx of the internal celestial is
signified, is because these things were said to Joseph, by whom is
represented the internal celestial (n. 5869, 5877), and influx into the
natural or into the external comes from the internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6083.">6083.</span></span>

The land of Egypt, before thee is it. That this signifies that the
memory-knowledges of the natural mind are under the auspices of the
internal celestial, is evident from the signification of the "land of
Egypt," as being the natural mind where memory-knowledges are (see n.
5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301); and from the signification of "before
thee," as being under the auspices of the internal celestial, which is
"Joseph" (n. 5869, 5877).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6084.">6084.</span></span>

In the best of the land make thy father and thy brethren dwell. That
this signifies that they shall live in the inmost of these, namely, of
memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification of the "best of the
land," as being the inmost of the natural mind where memory-knowledges
are (of which in what follows, for the "land of Egypt" is this mind; as
just above, n. 6083); from the signification of "dwelling," as being to
live (n. 1293, 3384, 3613, 4451, 6051); and from the representation of
Israel and his sons, who are here the "father and brethren" who shall
live therein, as being spiritual good from the natural and the truths of
the church there (see above, n. 6082). \[2\] That the "best" denotes the
inmost is because that is the best which is kept directly in view; for
the eye is ever directed to that which most affects and delights; and
that which is kept directly in view is also the inmost, because it is in
the center, and is therefore before the eyes in the strongest light;
while other things are round about in the circumference, and are
therefore less clear, and at last obscure, because they do not delight
and affect so much. This is the case with memory-knowledges before the
internal sight, the objects of this sight being no other than
memory-knowledges and truths. That which is delightful and good in the
objects is what directs the sight toward them. But be it known that
truths and the memory-knowledges which agree with them come directly
under the view (that is, are in the inmost) with those who are delighted
and affected with spiritual and celestial truths, for to them these
truths are the best things; but falsities and the memory-knowledges
which agree with them come directly under the view (that is, are in the
inmost) with those whom the evils of love of self and of the world
affect and delight. (See also what has been said above, n. 6068.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="6085.">6085.</span></span>

Let them dwell in the land of Goshen. That this signifies where the
midst is, is evident from the signification of "dwelling," as being to
live (as just above, n. 6084); and from the signification of the "land
of Goshen," as being the midst or inmost in the natural (n. 5910, 6028,
6031, 6068).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6086.">6086.</span></span>

And if thou knowest, and there be among them, men of activity. That this
signifies the more excellent things in doctrine, is evident from the
signification of "men of activity," as being things more excellent in
doctrine, for "man" \[vir\] signifies one who is intelligent, and also
truth (see n. 158, 265, 749, 1007, 3134, 4823), consequently doctrine;
and "active" signifies excellent; for in the original tongue "activity"
is expressed by a word that also signifies forces and valor, which in
the internal sense are things which have power, and thus surpass in
excellence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6087.">6087.</span></span>

Then set them as princes over my cattle. That this signifies that they
may be the primary things of memory-knowledges, is evident from the
signification of "princes," as being primary things (see n. 1482, 2089,
5044); and from the signification of "cattle," as being truths from
which is good (n. 6016, 6045, 6049), here memory-knowledges in which
these truths are, because it is said "over my cattle," namely,
Pharaoh's, by whom are represented, not truths in which is good, but
memory-knowledges in which are truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6088.">6088.</span></span>

Verses 7-10. And Joseph brought Jacob his father, and set him before
Pharaoh; and Jacob blessed Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How
many are the days of the years of thy life? And Jacob said unto Pharaoh,
The days of the years of my sojournings are a hundred and thirty years;
few and evil have been the days of the years of my life, and they have
not attained to the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the
days of their sojournings. And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from
before Pharaoh. "And Joseph brought Jacob his father," signifies the
presence of general truth from the internal; "and set him before
Pharaoh," signifies insinuation into what is general of
memory-knowledges; "and Jacob blessed Pharaoh," signifies a devout wish
for conjunction, and the consequent fructification; "and Pharaoh said
unto Jacob," signifies perception in the natural where memory-knowledges
are, concerning the general truth of the church; "How many are the days
of the years of thy life?" signifies concerning the state of life of the
natural from the spiritual; "and Jacob said unto Pharaoh," signifies the
answer; "The days of the years of my sojournings," signifies concerning
what is successive of life; "are a hundred and thirty years," signifies
the state and quality; "few and evil have been the days of the years of
my life," signifies that the state of life of the natural has been full
of temptations; "and they have not attained to the days of the years of
the life of my fathers," signifies that it has not been uplifted to the
state of life of those who were before; "in the days of their
sojournings," signifies in respect to the state of their life; "and
Jacob blessed Pharaoh," signifies as before, a devout wish for
conjunction and the consequent fructification; "and he went out from
before Pharaoh," signifies separation in respect to time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6089.">6089.</span></span>

And Joseph brought Jacob his father. That this signifies the presence of
general truth from the internal, is evident from the signification of
"causing to come," or "bringing," as being to make present, and of
"coming unto" anyone, as being presence (see n. 5934, 6063); and from
the representation of Jacob, as being the doctrine of natural truth, and
also natural truth (n. 3305, 3509, 3525, 3546, 4538), here truth in
general, because his sons represent truths in particular. That it is
from the internal, is because "Joseph" is the internal, from which is
truth in the natural. General truth is called the "father" of Joseph,
because general truth is insinuated with man first of all. This is
afterward enriched with particular truths, and lastly there comes forth
the view of them from the internal, that is, there come forth reason and
understanding. This is very manifest in the case of man, for his
judgment increases from infancy. It is the same with spiritual truths
and goods, when a man is being born anew, or is being regenerated. But
after the internal has come forth from general truth in the natural, the
state is changed, and the internal no longer acknowledges truth in the
natural as father, but as servant. That it becomes a servant is declared
by Joseph's dream about his father: that the sun and the moon and eleven
stars made obeisance to him; wherefore his father said, "What is this
dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren
indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?" (Gen. 37:9,
10); and therefore also his father is so often called by his sons, in
the presence of Joseph, his "servant" (Gen. 43:28; 44:24, 27, 30, 31);
and moreover Joseph was lord in all the land of Egypt, thus also over
his father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6090.">6090.</span></span>

And set him before Pharaoh. That this signifies insinuation into what is
general of memory-knowledges, is evident from the things unfolded above
(n. 6071).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6091.">6091.</span></span>

And Jacob blessed Pharaoh. That this signifies a devout wish for
conjunction and the consequent fructification, is evident from the
signification of "to bless," as here being a devout wish for
conjunction, namely, of truth with memory-knowledge in the natural, for
this conjunction is here treated of. "To bless" signifies many things:
in the spiritual sense it involves all things that are good and also all
that are prosperous; and from this it signifies to be gifted with the
good of love and of charity (see n. 3185, 4981); and it also signifies
conjunction (n. 3504, 3514, 3530, 3565, 3584); and likewise
fructification from the affection of truth (n. 2846); also a devout wish
for prosperity (n. 3185); here therefore a devout wish for that which is
here treated of, namely, for conjunction, and thus for fructification.
For fructification follows from conjunction, because when conjunction
has been effected, good increases and truth is multiplied, for there is
then a marriage of good and truth, from which such effects are produced.
This cannot be effected before, except as from whoredom; but the good
from this source is spurious, and also the truth, the good having regard
to self, and the truth deriving its savor from this good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6092.">6092.</span></span>

And Pharaoh said unto Jacob. That this signifies perception in the
natural where memory-knowledges are, concerning the general truth of the
church, is evident from the signification of "saying," as being
perception (of which above, see n. 6063); from the representation of
Pharaoh, as being the natural where memory-knowledges are (see n. 5799,
6015); and from the representation of Jacob, as being the general truth
of the church (of which above, n. 6089).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6093.">6093.</span></span>

How many are the days of the years of thy life? That this signifies
concerning the state of life of the natural from the spiritual, is
evident from the signification of "days," and also of "years," as being
states (see n. 23, 487, 488, 493, 893, 2788, 3462, 3785, 4850); and from
the signification of "life," as being spiritual life (n. 5407, 5890),
here spiritual life in the natural, that is, the natural from the
spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6094.">6094.</span></span>

And Jacob said unto Pharaoh. That this signifies the answer, is evident
without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6095.">6095.</span></span>

The days of the years of my sojournings. That this signifies concerning
what is successive of life, is evident from the signification of "days"
and "years," as being states (of which just above, n. 6093); and from
the signification of "sojournings," as being life and instruction (n.
1463, 2025, 3672), thus the successive state of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6096.">6096.</span></span>

Are a hundred and thirty years. That this signifies the state and
quality, is evident from the fact that all numbers in the Word signify
things (see n. 575, 647, 648, 755, 813, 1963, 2075, 2252, 3252, 4264,
4495, 4670, 5265), thus the state and quality of the thing which is
being treated of. Wherefore this number specifically signifies the state
and quality of the life which had appertained to Jacob hitherto, that
is, the state and quality of the spiritual life which the natural at
this time had from the spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6097.">6097.</span></span>

Few and evil have been the days of the years of my life. That this
signifies that the state of life of the natural has been full of
temptations, is evident from the signification of "days" and "years," as
being states (as above, n. 6093, 6095); and from the signification of
the "life of Jacob," as being spiritual life in the natural (n. 6093).
Temptations in this state are signified by the days having been "evil."
All temptations appear evil, for the reason that they are interior
anxieties and griefs, and as it were damnations; for the man is then let
into the state of his evils, consequently among evil spirits, who accuse
him, and thus torment the conscience; nevertheless the angels defend
him, that is, the Lord through angels, for the Lord keeps him in hope
and trust, which are the forces of combat from within whereby he
resists. Especially is the natural let into temptations when it is
receiving the spiritual, because in the natural reside evils of life and
falsities of doctrine. For this reason Jacob says this of himself,
because by him is here represented the natural as to truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6098.">6098.</span></span>

And they have not attained to the days of the years of the life of my
fathers. That this signifies that it has not been uplifted to the state
of their life, is evident from the signification of "attaining to," as
here being to be uplifted (of which in what follows) and from the
signification of "days" and of "years of life," as being states of
spiritual life (see n. 6093, 6095, 6097). That "attaining to" is here to
be uplifted, is because his fathers Isaac and Abraham represented more
uplifted, that is, more interior things, than he; for in the supreme
sense Abraham represented the Lord's Divine Itself, Isaac the Lord's
Divine rational, and Jacob His Divine natural. (That Abraham represented
the Lord's Divine Itself, see n. 1965, 1989, 2011, 3245, 3251, 3305,
3439, 3703, 4615; that Isaac represented the Divine rational, n. 1893,
2066, 2072, 2083, 2630, 2774, 3012, 3194, 3210, 4615; and that Jacob
represented the Divine natural as to truth and as to good, n. 3305,
3509, 3525, 3546, 3576, 3599, 4286, 4538, 4570, 4615.) Therefore also by
Abraham is represented the celestial with man, by Isaac the spiritual,
and by Jacob the natural, for the reason that the regeneration of man is
an image of the glorification of the Lord (see n. 3138, 3212, 3296,
3490, 4402, 5688). From all this it is now plain that by the words "and
they have not attained to the days of the years of the life of my
fathers" is signified that it has not been uplifted to the state of
their life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6099.">6099.</span></span>

And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, signifies a devout wish for conjunction and
the consequent fructification (as above, n. 6091).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6100.">6100.</span></span>

And he went out from before Pharaoh. That this signifies separation in
respect to time, is evident from the signification of "going out," as
being to be separated, here to be separated in respect to time from the
natural where memory-knowledges are, which are represented by Pharaoh.
In regard to this, that by "going out" is signified separation in
respect to time, the case is this. In the foregoing pages the subject
treated of has been the conjunction of spiritual good from the natural,
which is "Israel," and also of the truths of the church in the natural,
which are his "sons," with the internal celestial, which is "Joseph;"
but conjunction with the natural has not yet been treated of, but only
insinuation. But in what now follows this conjunction is treated of,
from verse thirteen to verse twenty-seven of this chapter (see the
Contents, n. 6059, 6060). Hence it is that by "Jacob went out from
before Pharaoh" is signified separation in respect to time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6101-6150](ac123)
