[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac148)  [Next](ac150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="7401.">7401.</span></span>

That thou mayest know that there is none like Jehovah our God. That this
signifies that there is one God, and none besides Him, is evident from
the fact that when in the historical sense it is said that "there is
none like Jehovah God," in the internal sense it is meant that there is
no God besides Him, and because there is none besides Him, that there is
one God. In the Word it is sometimes said that "there is none like
Jehovah God," and also that "there is no God like Him." It was so said
in the Word, because at that time in the land where the church was, as
also in the lands where the church was not, they worshiped many gods,
and everyone preferred his own god to the god of another. They
distinguished these gods by names, and the God of the Israelites and
Jews by the name "Jehovah." The Jews and Israelites themselves also
believed that there were many gods, but that Jehovah was greater than
the rest on account of the miracles; and therefore when the miracles
ceased, they at once fell away into the worship of other gods, as is
manifest from the historical parts of the Word. That there is one God
and none besides Him, they indeed said with the mouth, but did not
believe with the heart. This then is the reason why it is said in the
Word that "Jehovah is greater than the other gods," and "there is none
like Him," as in David: Who is a great God like Thee? Thou art the God
that doest wonders (Ps. 77:13-14). Who is like unto Jehovah our God?
(Ps. 113:5.) Jehovah is a great God, and a great king above all gods
(Ps. 95:3). Jehovah is great and greatly to be praised, He is to be
feared above all gods (Ps. 96:4). Therefore also Jehovah is called God
of gods, and Lord of lords (Ps. 136:2-3; Dan. 2:47). That this
nevertheless means in the internal sense that there is one God, and none
besides Him, is plain in Isaiah: Remember the former things from an age,
for I am God, and there is no God else, and there is none like Me (Isa.
46:9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7402.">7402.</span></span>

And the frogs shall be removed from thee, and from thy houses, and from
thy servants, and from thy people. That this signifies that they should
not be driven to reason from mere falsities, is evident from the
signification of the frogs being removed," as being not to be driven to
reason from mere falsities (of which above, n. 7392); from the
representation of Pharaoh, as being those who are in falsities and
infest (of which also above); from the signification of "houses," as
being the things of the natural mind (see n. 7397); and from the
signification of "his servants and people," as being all and each who
are in falsities and infest (of which also above, n. 7396).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7403.">7403.</span></span>

Only in the river shall they be left. That this signifies that they
should remain with falsities where these are, is evident from what was
said above (n. 7398), where are the same words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7404.">7404.</span></span>

And Moses and Aaron went out from before Pharaoh. That this signifies
separation from those who had reasoned from falsities, is evident from
the signification of "going out," as being to be separated; from the
representation of Moses and Aaron, as being the law Divine, Moses the
internal law, and Aaron the external (see n. 7381); and from the
representation of Pharaoh, as being those who are in falsities and
infest (see n. 7396), here those who infest by means of reasonings from
mere falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7405.">7405.</span></span>

And Moses cried unto Jehovah upon the word of the frogs which He had
laid on Pharaoh. That this signifies intercession, is evident from what
goes before, thus without further explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7406.">7406.</span></span>

And Jehovah did according to the word of Moses. That this signifies that
it was so done according to the word of the Lord, is evident from the
fact that what Moses supplicated was indeed from the mouth of Moses, but
still was from the Lord; for whatever a man thinks and then speaks, and
whatever he wills and then does, flows in, the man being merely a
recipient organ (see n. 6189-6215, 6307-6327, 6466-6495, 6598-6606,
6613-6626); just so it was with what Moses spoke and did; therefore here
by "Jehovah did according to the word of Moses" is signified that it was
so done according to the word of the Lord. (That "Jehovah" in the Word
denotes the Lord, see n. 1343, 1736, 2921, 3023, 3035, 5663, 6281, 6303,
6905.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7407.">7407.</span></span>

And the frogs died out of the houses, out of the courts, and out of the
fields. That this signifies that reasonings from mere falsities ceased
with them everywhere in the natural, is evident from the signification
of "dying," as being to cease; from the signification of "frogs," as
being reasonings from mere falsities (of which above); from the
signification of "the houses," as being the things of the natural mind
(of which above, n. 7397), here which are interior there; from the
signification of "the courts," as being the outward things of the
natural mind (that the natural is interior and exterior, see n. 3293,
3294, 4570, 5118, 5497, 5649); and from the signification of "the
fields," as being things more general, thus still more outward, for
"fields" are outside the houses and the courts. Thus by "the frogs dying
out of the houses, out of the courts, and out of the fields," is
signified that reasonings from mere falsities ceased everywhere in the
natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7408.">7408.</span></span>

And they gathered them together in heaps and heaps. That this signifies
that these false reasonings were arranged in bundles in the natural, is
evident from the signification of "being gathered together in heaps and
heaps," as being to be arranged in bundles. That "to be gathered
together in heaps" denotes these things, is because all things in the
mind of man have been arranged into series, and as it were into bundles;
and into series within series, or into bundles within bundles (see n.
5339, 5530, 5881). That there is such an arrangement, is plain from the
arrangement of all things in the body, where fibers are seen arranged
into bundles, and glandules into clusters, and this everywhere in the
body, and still more perfectly in the purer parts not discernible by the
naked eye. This bundling is especially to be seen in the brain, in the
two substances there, one of which is called cortical and the other
medullary. It is not dissimilar in the purer things, and finally in the
purest of all, where the forms which receive them are the very forms of
life. \[2\] That forms or substances are recipient of life can be seen
from every single thing that appears in living creatures; and also that
recipient forms or substances are arranged in the way most suitable for
the influx of life. Without the reception of life in substances, which
are forms, there would be no living thing in the natural world, nor in
the spiritual world. Series of the purest filaments, like bundles,
constitute these forms. It is the same with those things therein which
are highly modified; for modifications receive their form from the forms
which are the substances in which they are, and from which they flow,
because the substances or forms are the determining subjects. The reason
why the learned have regarded the things belonging to man's life, that
is, to his thought and will, as being devoid of recipient substances or
forms, has been that they believed life or the soul to be something
either flamy or ethereal, thus such as after death would be dissipated;
hence comes the insane notion of many, that there is no life after
death. From all this it is evident how it is to be understood that the
reasoning falsities were arranged in groups in the natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7409.">7409.</span></span>

And the land stank. That this signifies what is foul and loathsome
therefrom, is evident from the signification of "to stink," as being
that which is foul and loathsome (n. 4516, 7161, 7319); and from the
signification of "land," here the land of Egypt, as being the natural
mind (n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7410.">7410.</span></span>

Verses 11-15. And Pharaoh saw that there was breathing, and he made
heavy his heart, and heard them not, as Jehovah had spoken. And Jehovah
said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust
of the land, and it shall become lice in all the land of Egypt. And they
did so; and Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the
dust of the land, and there was louse on man and on beast; all the dust
of the land became louse in all the land of Egypt. And the magicians did
so with their enchantments, to bring forth lice, and they could not; and
there was louse on man and on beast. And the magicians said unto
Pharaoh, This is the finger of God; and Pharaoh's heart was made firm,
and he heard them not, as Jehovah had spoken. "And Pharaoh saw that
there was breathing," signifies that the weariness ceased; "and he made
heavy his heart," signifies obstinacy; "and he heard them not,"
signifies no obedience; "as Jehovah had spoken," signifies according to
the prediction; "and Jehovah said unto Moses," signifies instruction
anew; "Say unto Aaron," signifies the influx of the internal law into
the external law; "stretch out thy rod," signifies that he should show
Divine power; "and smite the dust of the land," signifies that he should
remove the things in the natural that had been damned; "and it shall
become lice," signifies that evils will rise up therefrom; "in all the
land of Egypt," signifies through the whole natural mind; "and they did
so," signifies the effect; "and Aaron stretched out his hand with his
rod," signifies the power of internal truth through external truth; "and
smote the dust of the land," signifies that things damned were removed;
"and there was lice on man and on beast," signifies the interior and
exterior evils of cupidities thence derived; "all the dust of the land
became louse in all the land of Egypt," signifies that these evils were
from the things that had been damned; "and the magicians did so with
their enchantments, to bring forth lice," signifies an endeavor to
pervert Divine order, and to portray the like in these things also; "and
they could not," signifies in vain; "and there was louse on man and on
beast," signifies the interior and exterior evils of cupidities; "and
the magicians said unto Pharaoh," signifies perception and its
communication with those who were in evils; "This is the finger of God,"
signifies that the power was from the Divine; "and Pharaoh's heart was
made firm," signifies obstinacy; "and he heard them not," signifies
disobedience; "as Jehovah had spoken," signifies according to the
prediction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7411.">7411.</span></span>

And Pharaoh saw there was breathing. That this signifies that the
weariness ceased, is evident from the signification of "there being
breathing," as being that there was no longer what was undelightful,
thus that there was no longer weariness. (That it was wearisome and
undelightful to them to reason from mere falsities, see above, n. 7392.)
That which is delightful causes man to breathe freely and fully; but
that which is undelightful causes him to breathe neither freely nor
fully; hence it is that by "there being breathing," is signified that
what was undelightful or wearisome ceased.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7412.">7412.</span></span>

And he made heavy his heart. That this signifies obstinacy, is evident
from the signification of the "heart being made heavy," and also of
"being hardened," and "being made firm," as being obstinacy (see n.
7272, 7300, 7305).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7413.">7413.</span></span>

And he heard them not. That this signifies no obedience, is evident from
what was said above (see n. 7224, 7275, 7301, 7339), where are the like
words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7414.">7414.</span></span>

As Jehovah had spoken. That this signifies according to the prediction,
see above (n. 7302, 7340).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7415.">7415.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses. That this signifies instruction anew, see
n. 7186, 7226, 7267, 7304, 7380.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7416.">7416.</span></span>

Say unto Aaron. That this signifies the influx of the internal law into
the external law, see above (n. 7381).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7417.">7417.</span></span>

Stretch out thy rod. That this signifies that he should show Divine
power, is evident from the signification "to stretch out," as being to
exercise and to show (as above); and from the signification of a "rod,"
as being power (see n. 4013, 4015, 4876, 4936, 6947, 7011, 7026); which
power was Divine because Aaron had no power, still less was there power
in the rod; but the power was exercised through Aaron and his rod. That
it was exercised through the rod was because the things done by Divine
command within the church were done by means of representatives (this
was before the Lord's Coming), thus by the stretching out of the hand
and of the rod; because the arm and the hand correspond to power, and
from this also the rod. The reason why before the Coming of the Lord the
things done within the church by Divine command were done by means of
representatives, was that all things and each represented the Lord and
His kingdom in the heavens, and His kingdom on earth, that is, the
church. That this is so can also be seen from the Word, in which all
things and each in the supreme sense treat of the Lord, and in the
internal sense treat of His kingdom and church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7418.">7418.</span></span>

And smite the dust of the land. That this signifies that he should
remove the things in the natural that had been damned, is evident from
the signification of "smiting," as being to remove; from the
signification of "dust," as being that which is damned (of which in what
follows); and from the signification of "the land," here the land of
Egypt, as being the natural mind (n. 7409). That "dust" denotes that
which is damned is because the places where evil spirits are, at the
sides beneath the soles of the feet, appear as land, and in fact as land
untilled and dry, under which are certain hells. This land is called
"damned land," and the dust there signifies that which is damned. It has
sometimes been granted me to see that the evil spirits shook off the
dust there from their feet, when they desired to give anyone to
damnation. This was seen to the right a little in front, in the border
toward the hell of the magicians, where spirits are cast into their hell
who during their life in the world have been in the knowledge of faith,
and yet have led a life of evil. From this then it is that by "dust" is
signified what is damned, and by "shaking off the dust" damnation. \[2\]
It was from this signification that the Lord commanded His disciples to
shake off the dust of their feet if they were not received, as in
Matthew: Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye
depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.
Verily I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom
and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city (Matt. 10:14-15;
Mark 6:11; Luke 9:5; 10:10-12); by the "disciples" here are not meant
disciples, but all things of the church, thus all things of faith and
charity (n. 2089, 2129, 2130, 3354, 3858, 3913, 6397); by "not
receiving, and not hearing," is signified to reject the truths of faith
and the goods of charity; and by "shaking off the dust of the feet,"
damnation. That "it would be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than
for that city," is because by "Sodom and Gomorrah" are meant those who
are in evil of life, but who have known nothing of the Lord and the
Word, and thus could not receive. From this it can be seen that there is
not meant a house or city which would not receive the disciples, but
those who are within the church and do not live the life of faith.
Everyone can see that a whole city could not be damned because they did
not receive the disciples and at once acknowledge the new doctrine which
they preached. \[3\] By the "dust" also which was formerly put on the
head when in grief and repentance, is signified that which is damned, as
in these passages: The elders of the daughter of Zion sit on the earth,
they keep silence; they have made dust come up upon their head; they
have girded themselves with sackcloth; the virgins of Jerusalem have
made their head come down to the earth (Lam. 2:10). They shall cry
bitterly, and shall make dust come up upon their heads, they shall roll
themselves in the ashes (Ezek. 27:30). Weeping weep not in the house of
Aphrah; roll thyself in the dust (Micah 1:10). They cast dust on their
heads, and cried, weeping and wailing (Rev. 18:19); and also in the
historical parts of the Word throughout. By dust upon the heads, and
also by the casting down of the body and of the head to the earth, and
there rolling in the dust, was represented humiliation, which when
genuine is such that the person acknowledges and perceives himself to be
damned, but to be received from damnation by the Lord (n. 2327, 3994,
4347, 5420, 5957). \[4\] By the "dust" into which the golden calf which
they made in the wilderness was beaten and ground, is also signified
what is damned, of which we read thus in Moses: I took your sin, the
calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire and I beat it, grinding
it well, even until it was reduced unto dust; and I cast the dust
thereof into the brook that descended out of the mountain (Deut. 9:21).
By "dust" is also signified what is damned in the following passages:
Jehovah God said unto the serpent, Upon thy belly shalt thou walk, and
dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life (Gen. 3:14). Feed Thy
people as in the days of eternity, the nations shall see, and blush at
all their power, they shall lick the dust like a serpent (Micah 7:14,
16-17). Dust shall be the serpent's meat (Isa. 65:25). Come down, and
sit upon the dust, O virgin daughter of Babel (Isa. 47:1). Our soul is
bowed down to the dust, our belly hath cleaved to the earth (Ps. 44:25).
My soul cleaveth to the dust, quicken Thou me (Ps. 119:25). "Dust" in
the Word signifies also the grave, likewise what is lowly, and what is
numerous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7419.">7419.</span></span>

And it shall become lice. That this signifies that evils will rise up
therefrom, is evident from the signification of "lice," as being evils;
but what evils they are, and from what origin, can be seen from the
correspondence of evils with such vermin, in that they are especially
the evils which are in the sensuous, that is, in the wholly external
man. The correspondence is from this, that lice are in the outermost
skin, and within dirt there, and beneath a scab. Such also is the
sensuous of those who have been in the knowledge of faith, but in a life
of evil. When this knowledge is taken away from them, as is done with
such in the other life, they are then of a gross and stupid mind; they
have sometimes appeared; they are foul and loathsome. Infestations by
evils are signified by their biting. That such is the signification of
"lice" cannot be confirmed by other passages from the Word, for they are
mentioned elsewhere only in David when speaking of Egypt (Ps. 105:31).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7420.">7420.</span></span>

In all the land of Egypt. That this signifies through the whole natural
mind, is evident from the signification of "the land of Egypt," as being
the natural mind (see n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7421.">7421.</span></span>

And they did so. That this signifies the effect, is evident without
explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7422.">7422.</span></span>

And Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod. That this signifies the
power of internal truth through external truth, is evident from what was
said above (n. 7382), where are like words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7423.">7423.</span></span>

And smote the dust of the land. That this signifies that things damned
were removed, is evident from what was said above (n. 7418).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7424.">7424.</span></span>

And there was louse on man and on beast. That this signifies that
interior and exterior evils of cupidities were thence derived, is
evident from the signification of "lice," as being evils (see n. 7419);
and from the signification of "man," as being good (n. 4287, 5302), thus
in the opposite sense evil; and from the signification of "beast," as
being the affection of good, and in the opposite sense the affection of
evil, or cupidity (n. 45, 46, 142, 143, 246, 714, 715, 719, 776, 2179,
2180, 3218, 3519, 5198); but when "man and beast" are mentioned
together, then by "man" is signified interior good, and in the opposite
sense interior evil; and by "beast" exterior good, and in the opposite
sense exterior evil. The reason why by "man" is signified interior good,
or evil, is that he is man from his internal man and its quality, but
not from the external man; for the external man is not man without the
internal; and in order that the external may also be man, it must be
wholly subordinated to the internal, insomuch that it does not act from
itself, but from the internal man. The reason why by "beast" is
signified exterior good, and in the opposite sense exterior evil, is
that beasts have no internal such as man has; the internal which they
have has been immersed in the external, insomuch that it is one with it,
and together with it looks downward or toward the earth, without any
elevation toward what is interior. It is said "evils of cupidities"
because all evils belong to cupidities, because cupidities belong to
loves. Interior evils are distinguished from exterior by the fact that
interior evils are those which are of the thought and will; and exterior
evils are those which are of act. That there may be evils which are
interior and not exterior, is evident from the fact that a man may be
evil, and yet in the outward form may appear as an upright man, and even
as a man of faith and conscience. Some also know how to counterfeit
angels, when yet inwardly they are devils. So far can the inward form
which is of the spirit differ from the outward form which is of the
body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7425.">7425.</span></span>

All the dust of the land became louse in all the land of Egypt. That
this signifies that these evils were from the things that had been
damned, is evident from the signification of "the dust of the land," as
being what is damned (of which above, n. 7418); from the signification
of "lice," as being evils (n. 7419); and from the signification of "the
land of Egypt," as being the natural mind (of which also above, n.
7420).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7426.">7426.</span></span>

And the magicians did so with their enchantments, to bring forth lice.
That this signifies an endeavor to pervert Divine order, and to portray
the like in these things also, is evident from the signification of
"they did," as being an endeavor to do the same thing, for it follows
that "they could not;" from the signification of "magicians" and
"enchantments," as being to pervert Divine order and to portray the like
in the external form (see n. 7296, 7297, 7337); and from the
signification of "bringing forth lice," as being to produce the evils
signified by the "lice" (n. 7419).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7427.">7427.</span></span>

And they could not. That this signifies in vain, is evident without
explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7428.">7428.</span></span>

And there was louse on man and on beast. That this signifies evils
interior and exterior, is evident from what was said above (n. 7424),
where are like words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7429.">7429.</span></span>

And the magicians said unto Pharaoh. That this signifies perception and
communication with those who were in evils, is evident from the
signification of "saying," as being perception (see n. 1791, 1815, 1819,
1822, 1898, 1919, 2080, 2619, 2862, 3509, 5743), and also communication
(n. 3060, 4131, 6228, 7291, 7381); from the signification of
"magicians," as being those who pervert Divine order and portray the
like in the external form (of which just above, n. 7426); and from the
representation of Pharaoh, as being those who are in falsities and
infest (n. 6651, 6679, 6683, 7107, 7110, 7126, 7142, 7317), here those
who are in evils, because they are now in a state of evil, after false
reasonings have been taken away, as is plain from what goes before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7430.">7430.</span></span>

This is the finger of God. That this signifies that the power was from
the Divine, is evident from the signification of "the finger of God," as
being power from the Divine; that "finger" denotes power is because the
fingers belong to the hands, and by "hands" is signified power (see n.
878, 4931-4937, 6344, 6424, 6948). That "finger" denotes power, is
evident also from the following passages: When I behold the heavens, the
work of Thy fingers, the moon and the stars which Thou hast prepared
(Ps. 8:3). Jesus said, If I by the finger of God cast out demons, surely
the kingdom of God is come unto you (Luke 11:20). That Jesus took the
deaf man who had an impediment in his speech apart from the people, and
put His finger into his ears, and spat, and touched his tongue (Mark
7:32-33); was also a representative of Divine power. \[2\] That a finger
represents power is plain also from the rites of the church among the
Jews, in that blood should be put upon the thumb, and that the priest
should sprinkle the blood with his finger, concerning which it is thus
written in Moses: Thou shalt kill the ram, and put of the blood upon the
thumb of the hand of Aaron and his sons, and upon the great toe of their
right foot (Exod. 29:20). The priest shall take of the blood of the
guilt-offering, and the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right
ear of him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy, and upon the thumb
of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot. Afterward
the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil which is upon the palm
of his left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven
times before Jehovah; and of the rest of the oil, which is upon the palm
of his hand, the priest shall put upon the tip of the right ear of him
that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon
the great toe of his right foot (Lev. 14:14, 16-17). Thou shalt take of
the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with
thy finger (Exod. 29:12; Lev. 4:6; 9:9). \[3\] That all these things
signified secrets of heaven and holy things, is evident from the fact
that the Word is from the Divine, and is inspired as to every point \[in
the original\] (Luke 16:17), thus also as to these details in Moses.
That the "thumb" and the "finger" denote the power of good through
truth, is here plain from the internal sense. Power is also signified by
"finger" in David: Blessed be Jehovah who teacheth my hands to fight,
and my fingers war (Ps. 144:1); And in Isaiah: He shall not look to the
altars, the work of his hands, and that which his fingers have made
(Isa. 17:8); "altars" denote worship in general (n. 4541); "the work of
the hands, and what the fingers have made" denote such things as are
from what is man's own, thus which are from his own power. 7430a. And
Pharaoh's heart was made firm. That this signifies obstinacy, see n.
7272.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7431.">7431.</span></span>

And he heard them not. That this signifies disobedience, see above (n.
7224, 7275, 7301, 7339).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7432.">7432.</span></span>

As Jehovah had spoken. That this signifies according to the prediction,
see above (n. 7302, 7340, 7414).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7433.">7433.</span></span>

Verses 16-20. And Jehovah said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning,
and stand before Pharaoh; lo he goeth forth unto the waters; and say
unto him, Thus saith Jehovah, Let My people go, that they may serve Me.
For if thou let not My people go, behold I send against thee, and
against thy servants, and against thy people, and into thy houses, the
noisome fly; and the houses of the Egyptians shall be filled with the
noisome fly, and also the land whereon they are. And I will sever in
that day the land of Goshen, upon which My people stands, that no
noisome fly be there; to the end that thou mayest know that I am Jehovah
in the midst of the land. And I will set redemption between My people
and thy people; unto the morrow shall this sign be. And Jehovah did so;
and there came the grievous noisome fly into the house of Pharaoh, and
into the house of his servants, and into all the land of Egypt; the land
was destroyed from before the noisome fly. "And Jehovah said unto Moses"
signifies instruction again; "Rise up early in the morning" signifies
elevation to a still greater sign of power; "and stand before Pharaoh"
signifies the appearance of the Divine to those who are in evils; "lo he
goeth forth to the waters" signifies that from these evils they again
think falsities; "and say unto him, Thus saith Jehovah" signifies
command; "Let My people go, that they may serve Me" signifies that they
should leave those who are of the spiritual church in order that they
may worship their God in freedom; "for if thou let not My people go"
signifies if they would not release them; "behold I send against thee,
and against thy servants, and against thy people, and into thy houses,
the noisome fly" signifies that they would have malevolent falsity in
all things and in each; "and the houses of the Egyptians shall be filled
with the noisome fly, and also the land whereon they are" signifies that
the falsities of malevolence will take possession of all things of the
natural mind; "and I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, upon
which My people stands, that no noisome fly be there" signifies that
they shall not be able to infest by falsities of malevolence those who
are of the spiritual church, although they will be near them; "to the
end that thou mayest know that I am Jehovah in the midst of the land"
signifies a consequent noticing that the Lord is the only God of the
church; "and I will set redemption between My people and thy people"
signifies the liberation of those who are of the spiritual church from
those who are near in the hells; "unto the morrow shall this sign be"
signifies the manifestation of Divine power from this forever; "and
Jehovah did so" signifies that as said, so it was done; "and there came
the grievous noisome fly into the house of Pharaoh, and into the house
of his servants, and into all the land of Egypt" signifies that
malevolent falsities burst forth from all sides among them; "the land
was destroyed from before the noisome fly" signifies that the natural
mind was corrupted in respect to truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7434.">7434.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses. That this signifies instruction again is
evident from the signification of "saying" when by Jehovah to Moses, as
being instruction (see n. 7186, 7226, 7267, 7304, 7380, 7415), here
instruction again, because he was again told what he should do.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7435.">7435.</span></span>

Rise up early in the morning. That this signifies elevation to a still
greater sign of power, is evident from the signification of "rising in
the morning," as being elevation. (That "rising" denotes elevation see
n. 2401, 2785, 2912, 2927, 3171, 4103; and also that the "morning"
denotes elevation, n. 7306.) Properly by "rising in the morning" is
signified a state of enlightenment (n. 3458, 3723), but as the
enlightenment which is effected from the Divine by the influx of good
and truth does not exist with the evil who are represented by Pharaoh
and the Egyptians; but elevation to attention, therefore by "rising up
early in the morning" is here signified such elevation. That it denotes
to a still greater sign of power is plain from what follows, where still
another new sign is treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7436.">7436.</span></span>

And stand before Pharaoh. That this signifies the appearance of the
Divine to those who are in evils, is evident from the signification of
"standing before" anyone, as being presence, here the appearance of the
Divine, because Moses was to stand, who denotes the truth from the
Divine through which the Divine appears; and from the representation of
Pharaoh, as being those who are in falsities, here those who are in
evils (as above, n. 7429).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7437.">7437.</span></span>

Lo he goeth forth to the waters. That this signifies that from these
evils they again think falsities, is evident from the signification of
"going forth," as being thought from evils to falsities, for when those
who are in evils think from them to falsities, they are said to "go
forth," for as evil is of the will it is inmost, and falsity is outside
of it, because falsity is of the understanding, consequently of the
thought; this is signified by "going forth" in the spiritual sense, and
also evil action from an evil will, as in Mark 7:21-23; and from the
signification of "waters," as being truths, and in the opposite sense
falsities (see n. 739, 790, 2702, 3058, 3424, 4676, 5668), and also
because the waters of the river of Egypt, to which Pharaoh would go
forth, denote falsities (n. 7307). \[2\] As regards thought from evils
to falsities, be it known that they who are in evils cannot do otherwise
than think from them to falsities; for evils are of their will and
consequently of their love, and falsities are of their thought and
consequently of their faith. For what a man wills, he loves; and what he
loves, he confirms and defends; and evils cannot be confirmed and
defended except by means of falsities; and therefore in the Word, where
evil is compared to a city, falsities are compared to the walls round
about the city. That they who are in evils think to the falsities by
which they defend the evils, is because evils are the very delights of
their life, insomuch that they are their very life. And therefore when
they apprehend from others that they are evils, then in order to prevent
their appearing so, they devise falsities by which they may cause the
evils not to be believed to be evils; but if the evils dare not appear
through falsities, they are hidden in the interiors, nor do they show
themselves except when the fear of the law, or of the loss of reputation
for the sake of gain or of acquiring honors, ceases; and then the evils
burst forth either under the form of artifices, or of open hostilities.
\[3\] From all this it can be seen that they who are in evils cannot do
otherwise than think from evils to falsities. It is the same also with
those who are in a state of good, in that they cannot do otherwise than
think from good to truths; for good and truth are conjoined, and also
evil and falsity, insomuch that he who knows that anyone is in good, can
know that he is in the truth of his good; and that he who is in evil is
in the falsity of his evil; and that he is in this falsity in proportion
as he excels in the gift of reasoning and perverting, and also in
proportion as he is in the fear of the loss of reputation for the sake
of gain and honors, and in proportion as he desires to be in the freedom
of doing evil. Strange to say, after such persons have for some time
defended evils by means of falsities, they at last persuade themselves
that evils are goods, and that falsities are truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7438.">7438.</span></span>

And say unto him, Thus saith Jehovah. That this signifies command, see
n. 7036, 7310.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7439.">7439.</span></span>

Let My people go, that they may serve Me. That this signifies that they
should release those who are of the spiritual church in order that they
may worship their God in freedom, is evident from the signification of
"letting go," as being to release; from the representation of the sons
of Israel, here "My people," as being those who are of the spiritual
church (n. 6426, 6637, 6862, 6868, 7035, 7062, 7198, 7201, 7215, 7223);
and from the signification of "serving Jehovah," as being to worship.
That they should worship in freedom is plain from what follows (verses
21-23), and also from the fact that all worship which is truly worship
must be in freedom. \[2\] The sons of Israel being called "the people of
Jehovah" was not because they were better than other nations, but
because they represented the people of Jehovah, that is, those who are
of the Lord's spiritual kingdom. That they were not better than other
nations is plain from their life in the wilderness, in that they did not
at all believe in Jehovah, but in their hearts believed in the gods of
the Egyptians, as is evident from the golden calf which they made for
themselves, and which they called their gods who had brought them forth
out of the land of Egypt (Exod. 32:8). The same is evident also from
their subsequent life in the land of Canaan, as described in the
historicals of the Word, and from what was said of them by the prophets,
and finally from what was said of them by the Lord. \[3\] For this
reason also few of them are in heaven, for they have received their lot
in the other life according to their life. Therefore do not believe that
they were elected to heaven in preference to others; for whoever so
believes, does not believe that everyone's life remains with him after
death, nor that man must be prepared for heaven by his whole life in the
world, and that this is done of the Lord's mercy, and that none are
admitted into heaven from mercy alone, regardless of how they have lived
in the world. Such an opinion about heaven and the Lord's mercy is
induced by the doctrine of faith alone, and of salvation by faith alone
without good works; for those who hold this doctrine have no concern
about the life, and so believe that evils can be washed away like dirt
by water, and thus that man can in a moment pass into the life of good,
and consequently be admitted into heaven. For they do not know that if
the life of evil were taken away from the evil, they would have no life
whatever, and that if they who are in a life of evil were admitted into
heaven, they would feel hell in themselves, and this the more
grievously, the more interiorly they were admitted into heaven. \[4\]
From all this it can now be seen that the Israelites and Jews were by no
means elected, but only accepted to represent the things that belong to
heaven; and that this must needs be done in the land of Canaan, because
the Lord's church had been there from the most ancient times, and from
this all the places there became representative of heavenly and Divine
things. In this way also the Word could be written, and the names in it
could signify such things as belong to the Lord and His kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7440.">7440.</span></span>

For if thou let not My people go. That this signifies if they would not
release them, is evident from the signification of "letting go," as
being to release; and from the signification of the "people of Jehovah,"
as being those who are of the Lord's spiritual church (as just above, n.
7439).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7441.">7441.</span></span>

Behold I send against thee, and against thy servants, and against thy
people, and into thy houses, the noisome fly. That this signifies that
they would have the falsity of malevolence in all things and in each, is
evident from the signification of "Pharaoh, his servants, and his
people," as being all things and each that belong to the natural mind
(see n. 7396), and as "into thy houses" is added, there is also
signified into the interiors of this mind (as above, n. 7407); and from
the signification of "the noisome fly," as being the falsities of that
evil which was signified by the portent which precedes, thus the
falsities of malevolence. What falsities, therefore, and of what kind,
are here signified by "the noisome fly," is clear from the evils from
which these falsities come. That these evils were the evils that are in
the outermost parts of the natural mind, thus that are in the sensuous,
see above, n. 7419; and the falsities that are from these evils are of
the same kind, and are the falsities which are signified also by the
"flies of Egypt" in Isaiah: It shall come to pass in that day, that
Jehovah shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the
rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Asshur; and they
shall come, and shall rest all of them in the rivers of desolations and
in the clefts of the rocks (Isa. 7:18-19); here "the fly in the
uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt" denotes the falsities that are in
the outermost parts of the natural mind, thus that are in the sensuous
nearest the body. These falsities are compared to such an insect,
because the things in this part of the mind are like insects flying in
the air, obscuring interior things and also inflicting injury on them;
for they are mostly imaginary, and are fallacies, the reasonings from
which are like castles in the air. The "noisome fly" of this kind is
mentioned only in David (Ps. 78:45, and 105:31), where Egypt is also
spoken of. Be it known that all the flying things mentioned in the Word
signify things of the intellect, and consequently truths, and in the
opposite sense falsities (n. 40, 745, 776, 778, 866, 988, 3219, 5149);
but flying things of the lowest sort, which are insects, signify truths,
and in the opposite sense falsities, which are more ignoble and obscure
in proportion as they belong to the sensuous, for unless these things
are enlightened by things more interior they are in total obscurity and
darkness, being next the body, and consequently near to earthly things,
where heavenly things terminate, and are immersed in thick darkness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7442.">7442.</span></span>

And the houses of the Egyptians shall be filled with the noisome fly,
and also the land whereon they are. That this signifies that the
falsities of malevolence will take possession of all things of the
natural mind, is evident from the signification of "filling," as being
to take possession of; from the signification of "the house of the
Egyptians," as being the interiors of the natural mind (of which above,
n. 7407); from the signification of "the noisome fly," as being
falsities of malevolence (of which just above, n. 7441); and from the
signification of "the land of Egypt," as being the natural mind in
general (see n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301). \[2\] How it is that the
interiors also of the natural mind shall be taken possession of by the
falsities of evil which are in the outermost parts of this mind, must be
briefly told. The things that flow in with man through heaven from the
Lord, flow into his interiors, and advance down to the ultimates or
outermost parts, and there they are presented to man in a sensible form,
consequently they flow down into the sensuous, and through this into the
things of the body. If the sensuous has been filled with phantasies from
fallacies and appearances, and especially if it has been filled with
phantasies from falsities, then the truths which flow in are there
turned into similar things, for they are received there according to the
form that is induced on them (see n. 7343). Insofar also as truths are
turned into falsities, so far the interiors through which they pass are
closed, and at last there is no opening beyond that which is necessary
for a sufficient transflux to confer the faculty of reasoning, and of
confirming evils by means of falsities. \[3\] Such being the case with
man, it must needs be that while he is being regenerated his natural
must be regenerated down to the sensuous; for unless this is
regenerated, there is no reception of truth and good, because, as before
said, the inflowing truth is there perverted, and then the interiors are
closed. And therefore when the exteriors have been regenerated, the
whole man has been regenerated, as was signified by the Lord's words to
Peter when He washed his feet: Simon Peter said unto Him, Lord, wash
Thou not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. Jesus said to him,
He that hath been bathed needeth not save to have his feet washed, and
is clean every whit (John 13:9-10); by the "feet" are signified natural
things (n. 2162, 3761, 3986, 4280, 4938-4952); by "washing" is signified
purifying (n. 3147, 5954); by "hands" are signified the interiors of the
natural; and by the "head" spiritual things; hence is plain what is
meant by "him that hath been bathed needing only to have his feet
washed, and being clean every whit," namely, that a man has already been
regenerated when he has been regenerated also in respect to the
exteriors that belong to the natural. When therefore man has been
regenerated also in respect to the natural, then all things therein have
been made subordinate to the more interior things; and when these flow
in there, they flow as into their generals, by which they present
themselves to man in a sensible form. When this is the case with a man,
he sensibly feels the affection of the truth that is of faith, and the
affection of the good that is of charity. \[4\] But the sensuous itself,
which is the ultimate of the natural, can with difficulty be
regenerated, because it has been filled with material ideas from things
earthly, bodily, and worldly. Therefore the man who is being
regenerated, especially at this day, is not regenerated as to the
sensuous, but as to the natural which is next above the sensuous, to
which he is elevated by the Lord from the sensuous, when he is thinking
about the truths and goods of faith. The man who is being regenerated by
the Lord is endowed with the capacity of elevation from the sensuous.
With respect to the nature of the sensuous, and the elevation of the
thought above it, see n. 5084, 5089, 5094, 5125, 5128, 5767, 6183, 6201,
6310, 6311, 6313, 6314, 6316, 6318, 6564, 6598, 6612, 6614, 6622, 6624,
6844, 6845, 6948, 6949.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7443.">7443.</span></span>

And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, upon which My people
stands, that no noisome fly be there. That this signifies that they
shall not be able to infest by falsities of malevolence those who are in
the spiritual church, although they are near them, is evident from the
signification of "severing," as being to separate so that there is no
communication; from the signification of "day," as being state (see n.
23, 487, 488, 493, 893, 2788, 3462, 3785, 4850), and therefore "to sever
in that day" denotes to separate in that state; from the signification
of "the land of Goshen," as being the midst or inmost in the natural (n.
5910, 6028, 6031, 6068), and as the sons of Israel were in Goshen, as
being also the church (n. 6649); from the representation of the sons of
Israel who are here the "people of Jehovah," as being those who are of
the spiritual church (see above, n. 7439); and from the signification of
the "noisome fly," as being the falsity of malevolence (n. 7441). Thus
"no noisome fly being there," denotes that they could not flow in,
consequently could not infest by means of these falsities. That they
could not infest by means of these falsities, is because these falsities
are falsities from the evils in the outermost parts of the natural mind,
that is, in the sensuous, from which sensuous, thus from the falsities
therein, they who are in good and truth can be elevated (according to
what was said just above, n. 7442); and when they are being elevated,
they are then also separated from those who are in falsities there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7444.">7444.</span></span>

To the end that thou mayest know that I am Jehovah in the midst of the
land. That this signifies a noticing that the Lord is the only God of
the church, is evident from the signification of "knowing," as being to
notice; and from the signification of "the midst of the land," as being
where truth and good are with those who are of the Lord's church; the
inmost being where truth from good is (n. 3436, 6068, 6084, 6103); thus
by "the midst of the land" is signified the church, the same as by "the
land of Goshen" just above spoken of (n. 7443); by "I am Jehovah" is
signified that He only is the I AM, thus that He only is God. (That
"Jehovah" in the Word denotes the Lord, see n. 1343, 1736, 2921, 3023,
3035, 5663, 6303, 6905, 6945, 6956.) Hence it is evident that by "that
thou mayest know that I am Jehovah in the midst of the land" is
signified a noticing that the Lord alone is the God of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7445.">7445.</span></span>

And I will set redemption between My people and thy people. That this
signifies the liberation of those who are of the spiritual church from
those who are near in the hells, is evident from the signification of
"redemption," as being a bringing forth from hell (see n. 7205), and as
being specifically said of those who are being liberated from vastation
(n. 2959); from the representation of the sons of Israel, who here are
"My people," as being those who are of the spiritual church (n. 7439);
and from the representation of the Egyptians, who here are "thy people,"
as being those who are near in the hells and infest (n. 7090). Hence it
is plain that by "I will set redemption between My people and thy
people" is signified the liberation of those who are of the spiritual
church from those who are in the hells.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7446.">7446.</span></span>

Unto the morrow shall this sign be. That this signifies the consequent
manifestation of Divine power forever, is evident from the signification
of "the morrow," as being forever (see n. 3998); and from the
signification of a "sign," as being the confirmation of truth, and thus
knowledge (n. 6870), consequently the manifestation of Divine power; for
truth was formerly made manifest by means of signs, and the Divine power
at the same time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7447.">7447.</span></span>

And Jehovah did so. That this signifies that, as said, so it was done,
is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7448.">7448.</span></span>

And there came the grievous noisome fly into the house of Pharaoh, and
into the house of his servants, and into all the land of Egypt. That
this signifies that malevolent falsities burst forth from all sides
among them, is evident from the signification of "the noisome fly," as
being the falsities of malevolence (of which above, n. 7441); and from
the signification of "the house of Pharaoh, and the house of his
servants, and all the land," as being all things and each in the natural
(see n. 7396, 7441, 7442), here from all things and each, or from all
sides, because it is signified that these falsities burst forth. By "the
noisome fly coming into the house" is proximately signified that
falsities entered where evils were, and that they conjoined themselves
with evils; but when falsities have been conjoined with evils, then
evils burst forth by means of falsities. From this it is that by "the
noisome fly came into the house of Pharaoh, and into the house of his
servants, and into all the land of Egypt," there is signified that
malevolent falsities burst forth, and indeed from all sides.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7449.">7449.</span></span>

The land was destroyed from before the noisome fly. That by this is
signified that the natural mind was corrupted in respect to all truth,
is evident from the signification of "being destroyed," as being to be
corrupted; from the signification of "the land of Egypt," as being the
natural mind (see n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301); and from the
signification of "the noisome fly," as being the falsity of malevolence
(n. 7441). It is said that it was corrupted in respect to all truth,
because truth is wholly corrupted by means of falsity from evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7450.">7450.</span></span>

Verses 21-28. And Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said, Go ye,
sacrifice to your God in the land. And Moses said, It is not meet to do
so, for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to Jehovah
our God; lo, we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians unto
their eyes, and will they not stone us? We will go a way of three days
into the wilderness, and will sacrifice to Jehovah our God, as He hath
said unto us. And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, and ye shall
sacrifice to Jehovah your God in the wilderness; only ye shall not go
very far away: supplicate for me. And Moses said, Behold, I go forth
from thee, and I will supplicate unto Jehovah that He may remove the
noisome fly from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people,
tomorrow; only let not Pharaoh mock any more in not letting the people
go to sacrifice to Jehovah. And Moses went out from before Pharaoh, and
he supplicated unto Jehovah. And Jehovah did according to the word of
Moses; and He removed the noisome fly from Pharaoh, from his servants,
and from his people; there was not one left. And Pharaoh made heavy his
heart this time also, and he did not let the people go. "And Pharaoh
called Moses and Aaron" signifies the presence of the law Divine; "and
said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land," signifies that they
would not oppose their worshiping their God, but it must be done in
their neighborhood; "and Moses said," signifies the answer; "it is not
meet to do so, for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians
to Jehovah our God," signifies that infernal foulness and filthiness
would flow in; "lo, we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians
before their eyes," signifies that Divine worship would be infested by
such if done in their presence; "and will they not stone us?" signifies
that thus they would extinguish the truths of faith which are of
worship; "we will go a way of three days into the wilderness," signifies
that they would utterly depart so as to be in freedom; "and will
sacrifice to Jehovah our God," signifies that in this way there would be
worship; "as He hath said unto us," signifies as He has commanded; "and
Pharaoh said, I will let you go, and ye shall sacrifice to Jehovah your
God in the wilderness," signifies that they would leave them, and not
infest them, so that they may worship their God in freedom; "only ye
shall not go very far away," signifies although they are in the
neighborhood; "supplicate for me," signifies that they should intercede;
"and Moses said, Behold, I go forth from thee," signifies the removal of
the appearance of truth Divine among them; "and I will supplicate unto
Jehovah," signifies intercession; "that He may remove the noisome fly
from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people" signifies that
there may be an end of this state in respect to the falsities of
malevolence; "tomorrow," signifies forever; "only let not Pharaoh mock
anymore in not letting the people go to sacrifice to Jehovah," signifies
provided he does not deceive by a lie, and does not \[fail to\] leave
them to worship their God in freedom; "and Moses went out from Pharaoh"
signifies the removal of the appearance of truth Divine among those who
are in falsities of malevolence; "and he supplicated unto Jehovah,"
signifies intercession; "and Jehovah did according to the word of
Moses," signifies that it was so done according to the word of the Lord;
"and he removed the noisome fly from Pharaoh, from his servants, and
from his people," signifies the end of this state of falsity; "there was
not one left," signifies a full removal; "and Pharaoh made heavy his
heart this time also," signifies obstinacy again; "and he did not let
the people go," signifies that they would not leave those who were of
the spiritual church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7451-7500](ac150)
