[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac140)  [Next](ac142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="7001.">7001.</span></span>

And he will see thee. That this signifies perception, is evident from
the signification of "seeing," as being to understand and perceive (see
n. 2150, 2807, 3764, 3863, 4567, 4723).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7002.">7002.</span></span>

And he will be glad in his heart. That this signifies the affection of
love, is evident from the signification of "being glad in heart," as
being the pleasantness and delight from the affection which is of love;
for all gladness proceeds from the affection of love. That the affection
of love is said of the doctrine of good and truth, and not of those who
are in the doctrine, is from angelic speech, for so the angels speak,
because they are unwilling to speak of persons, because speech about
persons would avert the ideas from a universal view of things, thus from
the comprehension of innumerable things together. For this reason they
attribute to doctrine what is pleasant and enjoyable, also affection and
the like. These things also are in doctrine when the man applies it to
himself, because in doctrine there is truth Divine proceeding from the
Lord, and in truth Divine proceeding from the Lord there is love, thus
what is pleasant and enjoyable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7003.">7003.</span></span>

And thou shalt speak unto him. That this signifies influx, is evident
from the signification of "speaking," as being influx (see n. 2951,
5481, 5743, 5797).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7004.">7004.</span></span>

And shalt put the words in his mouth. That this signifies that what he
utters will proceed from the Divine Human, is evident from the
representation of Moses, who was to put words in Aaron's mouth, as being
the Lord as to the Divine truth which proceeds from His Divine Human (of
which above); and from the signification of "mouth," as being voice and
utterance (see n. 6987). Thus "to put in the mouth" denotes to give to
utter; but when said of the Lord, it denotes to proceed, because the
Word which is uttered by a spirit or angel, proceeds from the Lord's
Divine Human. Aaron, moreover, represents the doctrine of good and
truth, which is uttered. The case herein is this. \[2\] From the Lord
proceeds Divine truth immediately and mediately; that which proceeds
immediately is above all the understanding of angels; but that which
proceeds mediately is adapted to the angels in the heavens and also to
men, for it passes through heaven and thereby puts on the angelic and
the human quality; but into this truth also the Lord flows immediately,
and thus leads angels and men both mediately and immediately (n. 6058).
For each and all things are from the First being, and the order has been
so instituted that the First being may be present in the derivatives
both mediately and immediately, thus alike in the ultimate of order and
in its first; for the Divine truth itself is the one only substantial,
the derivatives being nothing but successive forms thence derived. From
this also it is plain that the Divine flows immediately also into each
and all things, because all things have been created from the Divine
truth, the Divine truth being the one only essential (n. 6880), thus
that from which all things are. The Divine truth is what is called "the
Word" in John: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and God was the Word; all things were made by Him, and without Him was
not anything made that was made (John 1:1-2). By such influx the Lord
leads man not only by providence in the universal, but also in every
singular, nay, in the veriest singulars of all. For these reasons it is
said that the things which are uttered proceed from the Divine Human.
\[3\] That there is an immediate influx of the Lord where there is also
a mediate, thus in the last of order equally as in the first of order,
has been told me from heaven, and a living perception of it has been
given; also that what is effected by mediate influx, that is, through
heaven and the angels there, is relatively very little; and further,
that the Lord leads heaven by means of immediate influx, and at the same
time by means of it keeps all things there in their connection and
order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7005.">7005.</span></span>

And I will be with thy mouth. That this signifies that truth Divine will
proceed through the Divine Human from the Divine Itself, is evident from
the representation of Moses, as being the Lord as to truth Divine (of
which above); and from the signification of "being with his mouth," as
being to be in the truth Divine which proceeds from the Divine Human.
The Divine Itself, which is called the "Father," is meant by "I," or
Jehovah. Hence it is evident that by "I will be with thy mouth" is
signified that truth Divine proceeds through the Divine Human from the
Divine Itself; which is the same as that the holy of the spirit proceeds
from the Son, and the Son from the Father, according to the doctrine of
the church; which however is to be understood in this way: that this
Trine is in the Lord and is one in Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7006.">7006.</span></span>

And with his mouth. That this signifies thus with the things thence
derived, is evident from the representation of Aaron, as being the
doctrine of good and truth (see n. 6998); and from the signification of
"being with his mouth," as being the Divine with this doctrine, and in
it; and as this doctrine is from the Divine truth which proceeds
immediately from the Divine Human (of which just above, n. 7005),
therefore by "being with his mouth" is signified with the things thence
derived. (That the doctrine of good and of truth proceeds mediately and
immediately from the Divine Human of the Lord, see above, n. 7004.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7007.">7007.</span></span>

And will teach you what ye shall do. That this signifies thus the Divine
in each and all things which shall be done, is evident from the
signification of "teaching," as being to flow in, and when as here said
of the Divine, as being to proceed (see above, n. 6993); and from the
signification of "what ye shall do," as being what shall be done. That
it denotes in each and all things, is because it is said of the Divine.
Something shall here be said about the Divine being in each and all
things that take place with man. That such is the case appears to man to
be far from the truth, because he thinks, "If the Divine were in each
and all things that take place, evils would not happen, neither would
anyone suffer damnation;" also that the justice of a cause would always
triumph; that the upright would be happier in the world than the wicked;
with many like things; and as they see the contrary, they do not believe
that the Divine is in each and all things. Hence it is that they
attribute to themselves and their own sagacity the singulars, and to the
Divine only the universal government; and all other things they call
fortune and chance, which they conceive to be blind things of nature.
\[2\] But man so thinks because he does not know the secrets of heaven,
which are that the Lord leaves to everyone his own freedom; for unless
man is in freedom, he can never be reformed. Compulsion does not reform,
because it inroots nothing, for that which is compulsory is not of man's
will; but that which is free is of his will. Nevertheless good and
truth, in order to be man's as his own, must be inrooted in his will,
for that which is outside the will is not the man's. And as for this
reason everyone is left to his freedom, man is allowed to think evil,
and to do evil, insofar as external fears do not restrain. And also for
the same reason, in this world the wicked man is apparently glad and in
his glory more than the upright; but the glorying and gladness of the
wicked are external, or of the body, which in the other life are turned
into infernal unhappiness; whereas the glorying and gladness of the
upright are internal, or of the spirit, and remain and become heavenly
happiness. \[3\] Moreover, in eminence and opulence there is worldly,
but not eternal happiness; and therefore both the wicked and the upright
have it, or if the latter do not have it, it is that they may not be
turned away from good by such things; and as men make the Divine
blessing to consist in worldly goods and happinesses, when they see the
contrary their weakness drives them into errors with respect to the
Divine Providence. They also come to conclusions from the present things
which they see, without considering that the Divine Providence looks to
what is eternal, especially that all things may be in order in heaven,
and also in hell; thus that heaven may constantly bear relation to a
Man, and that hell may be in the opposite, whence comes equilibrium; and
that this cannot possibly exist except by means of the Divine Providence
in the veriest singulars of all, thus unless the Divine continually
guides and bends man's freedom. \[4\] In regard to the other points, see
what has been already said and shown about the Divine Providence,
namely: That the providence of the Lord cannot be universal unless it is
in the veriest singulars (n. 1919, 4329, 5122, 5894, 6481-6486, 6490):
That the providence of the Lord has regard to what is eternal (n. 5264,
6491): That evil is foreseen by the Lord, and good is provided (n. 5155,
5195, 6489): That the Lord turns into good the evil which He foresees
(n. 6574): That contingent things are of providence (n. 5508, 6493,
6494): That man's own prudence is like a few specks of dust in the
atmosphere, and Providence like the whole atmosphere (n. 6485): That
many fallacies attack the Divine Providence in singulars (n. 6481).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7008.">7008.</span></span>

And he shall speak for thee unto the people. That this signifies that he
will be doctrine to the spiritual church, is evident from the
representation of Aaron, of whom it is said that "he shall speak for
Moses to the people," as being the doctrine of good and truth (see n.
6998); from the signification of "speaking," as being confession and
preaching (n. 6999); and from the representation of the sons of Israel,
who are here the "people," as being the spiritual church (n. 6426).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7009.">7009.</span></span>

And it shall be that he shall be to thee for a mouth. That this
signifies the truth of doctrine, which also proceeds mediately from the
Lord, is evident from the representation of Aaron, who was to be "to
Moses for a mouth," as being doctrine (see n. 6998); and from the
signification of "being to Moses for a mouth," as being his utterance or
preaching (n. 6987). It is said the truth of doctrine which also
proceeds mediately from the Lord, because the truth of doctrine, which
is represented by Aaron, is such as is heard and perceived by angels and
men. This truth is what proceeds mediately from the Lord; but the truth
which is represented by Moses, is that which proceeds from the Lord
immediately, and is not heard or perceived by men, nor even by angels
(n. 6982, 6985, 6996, 7004).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7010.">7010.</span></span>

And thou shalt be to him for God. That this signifies the Divine truth
which proceeds from the Lord immediately, is evident from the
representation of Moses, as being the Lord as to Divine truth (see n.
6752). That it denotes the Divine truth which proceeds immediately from
the Lord, is signified by that he was "to Aaron for God;" for by "God"
in the Word is meant the Lord as to Divine truth, and by "Jehovah," the
Lord as to Divine good. That in the Word the Lord is called "God" where
truth is treated of, but "Jehovah" where good is treated of, see n.
2586, 2769, 2807, 2822, 3921, 4402: That the angels are called "gods"
from the truths in which they are from the Lord (n. 4402): And that in
the opposite sense the "gods of the nations" denote falsities (n. 4402,
4544).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7011.">7011.</span></span>

And thou shalt take in thy hand this rod. That this signifies Divine
power herein, is evident from the signification of "rod," as being power
(see n. 4013, 4015, 4876, 4936), and in fact when it is in the hand; for
by "hand" is signified spiritual power, and by "rod" natural power. As
the natural has no power except from the spiritual, so a rod has no
power unless it is in the hand; and therefore it is said that "he should
take it in his hand." (That the "hand," when predicated of the Lord
denotes the power proceeding from His Divine rational, and a "rod" the
power proceeding from His Divine natural, may be seen above, n. 6947.)
It is said "the Divine power therein," namely, in truths (of which
above), because power is predicated of truth (n. 3091, 6344, 6423,
6948).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7012.">7012.</span></span>

Wherewith thou shalt do the signs. That this signifies the consequent
enlightenment and confirmation of truths, is evident from the
signification of a "sign," as being the confirmation of truths (see n.
6870); that it also denotes enlightenment, is because the confirmation
of truths is effected by means of enlightenment from the Lord when a man
studies the Word with the end of knowing truths. As regards
enlightenment and the consequent confirmation of truths, be it known
that they who are in externals without an internal (as were the Jews and
the Israelites) cannot be enlightened; thus neither can they be
confirmed in truths, whereas when they who are in externals and at the
same time in internals read the Word, they are enlightened, and in their
enlightenment see truths, in which they are afterward more and more
confirmed; and, wonderful to say, everyone has such enlightenment as is
his affection of truth; and such affection of truth as is his good of
life. Hence also it is that they who are in no affection of truth for
the sake of truth, but for the sake of their own advantage, are not at
all enlightened when they read the Word, but are only confirmed in
doctrinal things, no matter of what kind, whether false, as heresies
are, or entirely contrary to truths, as are the Jewish ones; for they do
not seek the kingdom of the Lord, but the world; not faith, but fame;
thus not heavenly riches, but only earthly; and if perchance they are
seized with a desire of knowing truths from the Word, falsities present
themselves instead of truths, and at last there is denial of all things.
These things have been said in order that it may be known what
enlightenment is, and the consequent confirmation of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7013.">7013.</span></span>

Verses 18-20. And Moses went, and returned to Jethro his father-in-law,
and said to him, Let me go, I pray, and return into my brethren who are
in Egypt, and I shall see whether they yet live. And Jethro said to
Moses, Go in peace. And Jehovah said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return
into Egypt; because all the men seeking thy soul are dead. And Moses
took his wife and his sons, and made them ride upon the ass, and he
returned to the land of Egypt; and Moses took the rod of God in his
hand. "And Moses went, and returned," signifies continuation of the
former life; "to Jethro his father-in-law," signifies in simple good;
"and said to him, Let me go I pray, and return unto my brethren who are
in Egypt," signifies elevation to more interior and more spiritual life
in the natural; "and I shall see whether they yet live," signifies the
perception of that life; "and Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace,"
signifies assent and a devout wish; "and Jehovah said unto Moses in
Midian," signifies enlightenment and confirmation from the Divine in
this state; "Go, return into Egypt," signifies spiritual life in the
natural; "because all the men seeking thy soul are dead," signifies the
removal of the falsities that are endeavoring to destroy the life of
truth and good; "and Moses took his wife," signifies good adjoined; "and
his sons," signifies truths thence derived; "and made them ride upon the
ass," signifies which would be of service to new intelligence; "and he
returned into the land of Egypt," signifies in the natural mind; "and
Moses took the rod of God in his hand," signifies that these things were
from Divine power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7014.">7014.</span></span>

And Moses went, and returned. That this signifies continuation of the
former life, is evident from the signification of "going," as being life
(see n. 4882, 5493, 5605); from the signification of "returning," or
"going back," as being to live where he lived before; and from the
representation of Moses, as being the Lord as to the law or truth from
the Divine (n. 6771, 6827). When Moses was in Mount Horeb with Jehovah
seen in a flame, he then represented the Lord as to Divine truth; but
now with Jethro his father-in-law, who is the good of the church which
is in the truth of simple good, he represents the Lord as to truth from
the Divine. Here and elsewhere in the Word, in the internal sense, are
described all the states of the Lord's life in the world, how He then
made His Human Divine. That the states were successive, can be seen from
the fact that the Lord when an infant was like an infant, and that He
afterward grew in intelligence and wisdom, and continually instilled
into these the Divine love, even until He became the Divine love, that
is, the Divine being or Jehovah, as to His Human also. And as the Lord
in this way successively put on the Divine, He therefore first made
Himself truth from the Divine, afterward Divine truth, and at last the
Divine good. These were the steps of the glorification of the Lord which
are described here and elsewhere in the internal sense of the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7015.">7015.</span></span>

Unto Jethro his father-in-law. That this signifies in simple good,
namely, continuation of life, is evident from the representation of
Jethro, who being the priest of Midian denotes the good of the church
which is in the truth of simple good (see n. 6827); this good is meant
by "simple good;" and from the signification of "father-in-law," as
being that from which comes the conjunction of good and truth (n. 6827).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7016.">7016.</span></span>

And said to him, Let me go, I pray, and return unto my brethren who are
in Egypt. That this signifies elevation to more interior and more
spiritual life in the natural, is evident from the signification of
"going and returning," as being what is successive of life, and here the
successive of life is elevation to interior and more spiritual life,
thus nearer to the Divine, for when "going and returning" are said of
the Lord, who is represented by Moses, there is meant elevation to the
Divine being or Jehovah who is in Him, and from whom He is; from the
representation of the sons of Israel, who are here the "brethren," as
being the Lord's spiritual kingdom, and thence the spiritual church (see
n. 6426, 6637); and from the signification of "Egypt" as being the
natural (n. 6147, 6252). Hence it is plain that by "let me go and return
unto my brethren who are in Egypt," is signified elevation to more
interior and more spiritual life in the natural. For as the dwelling of
Moses in Midian signified life with those who are in the truth of simple
good, thus in simple good (see n. 7015), so now dwelling with the sons
of Israel signifies life with those who are in the truth and good of the
spiritual church, which life is more interior and spiritual than the
former. (That the good and truth of this church are in the natural, see
n. 4286, 4402.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7017.">7017.</span></span>

And I shall see whether they yet live. That this signifies the
perception of that life, is evident from the signification of "seeing,"
as being to understand and perceive (see n. 2325, 2807, 3764, 3863,
4403-4421, 4567, 4723, 5400); and from the signification of "living," as
being spiritual life (n. 5407). By the perception of that life is meant
the perception which precedes; for when anyone proposes anything to
himself, he perceives it as present, because he puts his mind into the
state of that thing; and from this there are longings and consequent
delight as if the thing were present. Thus the mediate ends conjoin
themselves with the ultimate end, and make as it were one end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7018.">7018.</span></span>

And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace. That this signifies assent and a
devout wish, is evident from the signification of "Jethro said to
Moses," as being the answer; that it denotes assent, and also a devout
wish, is signified by "Go in peace."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7019.">7019.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses in Midian. That this signifies enlightenment
and confirmation from the Divine in this state, is evident from the fact
that Jehovah said to Moses that he should return to Egypt, when yet this
had previously been commanded Moses by Jehovah (chapter 3:10, and above
in this chapter, verse 12), and when, in consequence of this command,
Moses had already prepared himself for the way. From this it can be seen
that by this command are signified enlightenment and confirmation from
the Divine. That the enlightenment and confirmation were in this state,
namely, in a state of the truth of simple good, is signified by its
being said by Jehovah to Moses in Midian. (That "Midian" denotes the
truth of simple good, see n. 3242, 4756, 4788, 6773.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7020.">7020.</span></span>

Go, return into Egypt. That this signifies spiritual life in the
natural, is evident from the signification of "going and returning," as
being more interior and spiritual life (of which above, n. 7016); and
from the signification of "Egypt," as being the natural (n. 6147, 6252).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7021.">7021.</span></span>

Because all the men seeking thy soul are dead. That this signifies the
removal of the falsities that are endeavoring to destroy the life of
truth and good, is evident from the signification of "being dead," as
being that they are removed, for they who are dead have also been
removed; from the signification of the "Egyptians," who here are "the
men," as being those who are in falsities (see n. 6692); and from the
signification of "those seeking the soul," as being those who are
endeavoring to destroy the life. And as spiritual life is the life of
the truth that is of faith, and of the good that is of charity, it is
therefore said "the life of truth and good." From this it is evident
that by "all the men seeking thy soul are dead" is signified the removal
of the falsities that are endeavoring to destroy the life of truth and
good. By "soul" in the Word is meant every living thing, and it is
attributed also to animals, but "soul" is properly predicated of man,
and when of man, the term is used in various senses. Man himself is
called a "soul," because his life in general is so called, also
specifically his intellectual life, or understanding, and likewise his
voluntary life, or will. \[2\] But in the spiritual sense by "soul" is
meant the life of the truth which is of faith, and of the good which is
of charity, and in general the man himself as to his spirit which lives
after death, in which sense it is used in these passages: Be not afraid
of those who are able to kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul (Matt. 10:28). What doth it profit a man, if he gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? Or what price shall a man give sufficient
for the redemption of his soul? (Matt. 16:26). The Son of man is not
come to destroy men's souls, but to save them (Luke 9:56). Ye have
profaned Me among My people, to slay the souls that ought not to die,
and to make the souls to live that ought not to live (Ezek. 13:19). In
these passages the "soul" denotes the spiritual life of man, which life
is that of his spirit after death. "To kill the soul," "to lose the
soul," "to destroy the soul," denote to die spiritually, that is, to be
damned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7022.">7022.</span></span>

And Moses took his wife. That this signifies good adjoined, is evident
from the representation of Moses, as being the Lord as to the law, or
truth, from the Divine (of which above); and from the signification of
"wife," as being good adjoined (see n. 4510, 4823). In the internal
sense, and also in the supreme sense in which the Lord is treated of, by
the wife of Moses is represented good conjoined with truth, because in
each and all things in the spiritual world and in the natural, there is
a likeness of a marriage. There is a likeness of a marriage where there
is what is active and what is passive; and there must be the active and
at the same time the passive where anything has to come into existence;
for without the conjunction of these two nothing can possibly be
produced. That there is in all things a likeness of a marriage, is
because all things bear relation to good and truth, thus to the heavenly
marriage, which is that of good and truth; and the heavenly marriage
bears relation to the Divine marriage, which is that of Divine good and
Divine truth. And because as before said nothing can come into existence
and be produced unless there is an active and a passive, thus unless
there is a likeness of a marriage, it is very evident that the truth
which is of faith without the good which is of charity cannot produce
anything, nor the good which is of charity without the truth which is of
faith; but that there must be a conjunction of both to produce fruits,
and to make the life of heaven in man. That in all things there is a
likeness of a marriage, see n. 1432, 2173, 2176, 5194; and that in every
detail of the Word there is the marriage of good and truth, see n. 683,
793, 801, 2516, 2712, 4138, 5138, 6343; consequently in every detail of
the Word there is heaven, for heaven is this marriage itself; and as in
every detail of the Word there is heaven, in every detail of the Word
there is the Lord, because the Lord is the all in all things of heaven.
From all this it can be seen why the wife of Moses represents good
conjoined with truth, even in the supreme sense, in which the Lord is
treated of; in like manner as does Sarah the wife of Abraham (n. 2063,
2065, 2172, 2173, 2198); and also Rebecca the wife of Isaac (n. 3012,
3013, 3077).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7023.">7023.</span></span>

And his sons. That this signifies the truths thence derived, is evident
from the signification of "sons," as being truths (n. 489, 491, 533,
1147, 2623, 3373); it is said "thence derived," because from the
marriage just spoken of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7024.">7024.</span></span>

And he made them ride upon the ass. That this signifies the things that
would be of service to new intelligence, is evident from the
signification of "riding," as being the things of the intellect, here of
new intelligence, which must be of life among those who are in the
spiritual church (see n. 7016); that these things are signified by
"riding" is because a "horse" signifies the intellectual (of which see
n. 2761, 2762, 3217, 5321, 6534); and from the signification of an
"ass," as being the truth that is of service, here to new intelligence
(n. 2781, 5741), and also as being memory-knowledge (n. 5492).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7025.">7025.</span></span>

And he returned unto the land of Egypt. That this signifies in the
natural mind, is evident from the signification of "the land of Egypt,"
as being the natural mind (see n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7026.">7026.</span></span>

And Moses took the rod of God in his hand. That this signifies that
these things were from Divine power, is evident from the signification
of "rod," as being power (n. 4013, 4015, 4876, 4936) thus "the rod of
God" denotes Divine power. (That "rod" denotes the power of the natural,
and "hand" the power of the spiritual, and that the natural has power
from the spiritual, thus that by "rod" is signified power when it is in
the hand, see n. 7011.) That a "rod" denotes power, originates from the
representatives in the other life, for in that life they who practice
magical arts appear with rods, which also serve them for powers. Hence
also the Egyptian magicians had rods, whereby they performed what
appeared like miracles; and from this the ancients in their writings
everywhere assign rods to magicians. From all this it can be seen that a
rod is a representative of power, and that it is also a real
correspondence, for power is actually exercised by means of rods; but
with magicians this is an abuse of correspondence, neither is it of
avail except within the hells where they are, and it avails there
because illusions and phantasies reign there. And because there is a
real correspondence of a rod with power, Moses was commanded to take a
rod in his hand, and by it to do signs; and for the same reason also
kings have a scepter, which is a short rod, and by it is signified royal
power. The correspondence of a rod and of power, is from the fact that a
rod or staff supports the hand and arm, thus at the same time the body,
and in the Grand Man the hand and arm correspond to power (n. 878, 3387,
4931-4937, 5327, 5328, 5544, 6947, 7011).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7027.">7027.</span></span>

Verses 21-23. And Jehovah said unto Moses, When thou goest to return
into Egypt, see all the wonders which I have put in thy hand, and thou
shalt do them before Pharaoh; and I will harden his heart, and he will
not send away the people. And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith
Jehovah, My son, My firstborn, is Israel, and I say unto thee, Send My
son away, that he may serve Me; and if thou refuse to send him away,
behold I will slay thy son, thy firstborn. "And Jehovah said unto
Moses," signifies perception from the Divine; "When thou goest to return
into Egypt," signifies spiritual life in the natural; "see all the
wonders which I have put in thy hand," signifies means of power from the
spiritual then; "and thou shalt do them before Pharaoh," signifies
against infesting falsities; "and I will harden his heart, and he will
not send away the people," signifies obstinacy, and thus not yet
liberation; "and thou shalt say unto Pharaoh," signifies exhortation;
"Thus said Jehovah," signifies from the Divine; "My son, My firstborn,
is Israel," signifies that they who are in spiritual truth and good have
been adopted; "and I say unto thee," signifies command; "Send My son
away," signifies that they should abstain from infesting the truths of
the church; "that he may serve Me," signifies elevation into heaven in
order to perform uses therefrom; "and if thou refuse to send him away,"
signifies obstinacy even to the last; "behold I will slay thy son, thy
firstborn," signifies the extinction of faith without charity, and the
consequent devastation of truth with them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7028.">7028.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses. That this signifies perception from the
Divine, is evident from the signification of "saying," in the
historicals of the Word, as being perception (of which frequently
above); that it denotes from the Divine, is signified by "Jehovah said."
The reason why it is again said, "Jehovah said unto Moses," is that a
new perception is signified (see n. 2061, 2238, 2260, 2506, 2515, 2552).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7029.">7029.</span></span>

When thou goest to return into Egypt. That this signifies spiritual life
in the natural, is evident from the signification of "going and
returning," as being elevation to a more interior and spiritual life;
and from the signification of "Egypt," as being the natural (of which
above, n. 7016).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7030.">7030.</span></span>

See all the wonders which I have put in thy hand. That this signifies
means of power from the spiritual then, is evident from the
signification of "wonders" or "miracles," as being means of Divine power
(see n. 6910); and from the signification of "hand," as being spiritual
power (n. 7011). From this it is evident that by "see all the wonders
which I have put in thy hand" are signified means of power from the
spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7031.">7031.</span></span>

And thou shalt do them before Pharaoh. That this signifies against the
infesting falsities, is evident from the representation of Pharaoh as
being falsity infesting the truths of the church (see n. 6651, 6679,
6683, 6692). That "thou shalt do them before Pharaoh" denotes against
these falsities, is because it follows in a series from the things that
precede; for there by "See all the wonders which I have put in thy hand"
is signified the means of power from the spiritual, thus against the
infesting falsities; and in the internal sense those things follow in a
series to which the words of the sense of the letter are applied.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7032.">7032.</span></span>

And I will harden his heart, and he will not send away the people. That
this signifies obstinacy, and thus not yet liberation, is evident from
the signification of "hardening," as being obstinacy, and from the
signification of the "heart," as being the will (see n. 2930, 3888),
thus by these words is signified obstinacy from the will, consequently
from the delight of doing evil, because that which is of the will is
delightful, and this is from the love; and from the signification of
"not sending away the people," as being from obstinacy not to be willing
to set at liberty, thus not yet liberation. It is said here and in what
follows that "Jehovah hardened the heart of Pharaoh." This is so said
from the appearance, and from the common notion of the Divine as doing
all things; but this is to be understood in the same way as when evil,
anger, fury, devastation, and other like things are attributed to
Jehovah or the Lord (see n. 2447, 6071, 6991, 6997). \[2\] As regards
the obstinacy of those who are in falsities and the derivative evils,
and in evils and the derivative falsities, be it known that the
obstinacy is such as cannot be described; for they never desist except
through grievous punishments and the consequent fears; exhortations and
threats are of no avail whatever, because the delight of their life is
to do evil. They contracted this delight during their life in the world,
especially from the fact that they loved themselves only and not the
neighbor, thus being in no Christian charity. As people of this kind do
not suffer themselves to be led by the Lord, they act from their own
proper will, which is evil by heredity, and also by actual life; and
they who act from their own will, do evil from love; for that which is
of the will is of the love; and from this they have the delight of doing
evil, and so far as they are in this delight, so far they are in
obstinacy. \[3\] That this is so does not appear in the world, because
in the world they are withheld by the love of self and the love of the
world, for they fear the loss of reputation, and of the consequent gain
and honor, if they were to do evil openly. Moreover, the laws and the
fear of the loss of life restrain them; but if these did not stand in
the way, they would rush to destroy all who do not favor them, and would
plunder them of all their property, and would mercilessly kill anyone.
Such is man interiorly, that is, such is man as to his spirit, however
much in this world he may appear different. This can be very plainly
seen from them in the other life, for then the externals are taken away
from those who have been such in the world, and they are left to their
will, thus to their loves; and when they are left to these, they
perceive nothing more delightful than to do evil, which also they do
with such obstinacy that, as before said, they never desist except
through punishments, and afterward by repeated sinkings down into hell.
From all this it can be seen what a man is who is in no charity toward
the neighbor; and also that everyone's life awaits him; not the civil
life which was external and apparent in the world, but the spiritual
life which was internal and did not appear in the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7033.">7033.</span></span>

And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh. That this signifies exhortation, is
evident from the signification of "saying," when done by Divine command,
as being exhortation; and from the representation of Pharaoh, as being
falsity infesting the truths of the church, thus those who are in
falsity and who infest (see n. 6651, 6679, 6683, 6692).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7034.">7034.</span></span>

Thus saith Jehovah. That this signifies from the Divine, that is,
exhortation, is evident from what has been already said, and also from
what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7035.">7035.</span></span>

My son, My firstborn, is Israel. That this signifies that they who are
in spiritual truth and good have been adopted, is evident from the
signification of "son," when said by Jehovah, or the Lord, of those who
are of the spiritual church, as being to be adopted (of which
presently); from the signification of "firstborn," as being the faith of
charity, which is of the spiritual church (see n. 367, 2435, 3325, 4925,
4926, 4928, 4930); and from the representation of Israel, as being the
spiritual church (n. 6637). That " My son, My firstborn, Israel," or
those who are in spiritual truth and good, that is, who are of the
spiritual church, have been adopted, and thus acknowledged as sons, is
because the Lord by His coming into the world saved them (n. 6854,
6914); hence also, and likewise by virtue of faith in the Lord, they are
called the "firstborn son." These are also meant by the Lord in John:
And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also I must
bring, and they shall hear My voice, and there shall be one flock, and
one Shepherd (John 10:16).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7036.">7036.</span></span>

And I say unto thee. That this signifies command, is evident from the
signification of "saying," when by Jehovah, as being command.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7037.">7037.</span></span>

Send My son away. That this signifies that they should abstain from
infesting the truths of the church, is evident from the representation
of Pharaoh, as being the falsity infesting the truths of the church (see
n. 6651, 6679, 6683, 6692); from the signification of "sending away," as
being a command to abstain; and from the signification of "son," as
being those who are in spiritual truth and good, and have been adopted
(of which just above, n. 7035). Hence it is plain that by "Send My son
away" is signified that they should abstain from infesting those who are
in the truths of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7038.">7038.</span></span>

That they may serve Me. That this signifies elevation into heaven in
order to perform uses therefrom, is evident from the signification of
"serving Jehovah," or the Lord, as being to perform uses; and as this is
said of those of the spiritual church who have been saved by the coming
of the Lord, and who before His coming were in the lower earth, and were
afterward elevated into heaven (n. 6854, 6914), and thereby came into a
state of performing uses, therefore by "that they may serve Me" is
signified elevation into heaven in order to perform uses therefrom. That
"to serve the Lord" denotes to perform uses, is because true worship
consists in the performance of uses, thus in the exercises of charity.
He who believes that serving the Lord consists solely in frequenting a
place of worship, in hearing preaching there, and in praying, and that
this is sufficient, is much mistaken. The very worship of the Lord
consists in performing uses; and during man's life in the world uses
consist in everyone's discharging aright his duty in his station, thus
from the heart being of service to his country, to societies, and to the
neighbor, in dealing sincerely with his fellow, and in performing kind
offices with prudence in accordance with each person's character. These
uses are chiefly the works of charity, and are those whereby the Lord is
chiefly worshiped. Frequenting a place of worship, hearing sermons, and
saying prayers, are also necessary; but without the above uses they
avail nothing, because they are not of the life, but teach what the life
must be. The angels in heaven have all happiness from uses, and
according to uses, so that to them uses are heaven. \[2\] That happiness
is from Divine order according to uses, can be seen from the things in
man which correspond to those which are in the Grand Man; as those from
the external senses, namely, from sight, hearing, taste, smell, and
touch, which as has been shown at the end of many chapters, are
correspondent. These senses therefore have delights exactly in
accordance with the uses which they perform; the most delightful is the
sense of conjugial love, on account of its greatest use, because from
this comes the propagation of the human race, and from the human race,
heaven; the delight of taste follows next, because it serves for the
nourishment and thereby for the health of the body, in accordance with
which is the sound action of the mind; the delight of smell is less,
because it merely serves for recreation: and thus also for health; the
delight of hearing and that of sight are in the last place, because they
merely take up those things which will be of service to uses, and wait
upon the intellectual part, and not so much the will part. \[3\] From
these and other like facts it becomes plain that it is uses according to
which happiness is given in heaven by the Lord; and that it is uses
through which the Lord is mainly worshiped. From this it is that John
lay on the Lord's breast at table, and that the Lord loved him more than
the rest; but this was not for his own sake, but because he represented
the exercises of charity, that is, uses. (That John represented these,
see the preface to Gen. 18 and 22, and n. 3934.) 7038a. And if thou
refuse to send him away. That this signifies obstinacy even to the last,
is evident from the signification of "refusing to send him away," as
being not to liberate in consequence of obstinacy (as above, n. 7032).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7039.">7039.</span></span>

Behold I will slay thy son, thy firstborn. That this signifies the
extinction of faith without charity, and the consequent devastation of
truth with them, is evident from the signification of "slaying," as
being extinction; and from the signification of "son, the firstborn,"
namely, of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, as being faith without charity
(see n. 3325). For by Pharaoh and the Egyptians are represented the
memory-knowledges which are of the church (n. 4749, 4964, 4966, 6004),
thus which are of faith, for these are of the church. But because they
turned these memory-knowledges into magic (n. 6692), and from this their
works were evil, and devoid of any charity, therefore by their
"firstborn" are signified such things as are of the memory-knowledge of
faith, thus faith without charity. That these are signified by the
"firstborn of Egypt," is evident from the signification of the
"firstborn of Israel," as being the faith of charity (of which above n.
7035). \[2\] It is said "faith without charity," but by "faith" is here
meant the memory-knowledge of such things as are of faith, for there is
no faith where there is no charity. With those who are not in charity
the things of faith are merely things of memory, and are in the memory
under no other form than is any other memory-knowledge; and there is not
there even the memory-knowledge of truth which is of faith, because it
is defiled with ideas of falsity, and also serves as a means to defend
falsities. As this is the case with faith without charity, it is
therefore extinguished with the evil in the other life, and they are
completely devastated as to truth, in order to prevent truths from being
made into means for their evils, and thus lest hell should in some way
have dominion in them over such things as are of heaven, and lest they
should thereby hang between heaven and hell. This extinction and this
devastation of truth are what is signified by the firstborn in Egypt
being slain. That the Egyptians afterward perished in the sea Suph
represented the subsequent state of damnation or the spiritual death of
such persons, for as soon as the things of faith or of truth are taken
away from them (which had been like wings that lifted them up), they
soon sink down like weights into hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7040.">7040.</span></span>

Verses 24-26. And it came to pass in the way, in the inn, that Jehovah
met him, and sought to kill him. And Zipporah took a stone, and cut off
the foreskin of her son, and made it touch his feet; and she said,
Because a bridegroom of bloods art thou to me. And He ceased from him.
Then she said, A bridegroom of bloods as to circumcisions. "And it came
to pass in the way, in the inn," signifies that the posterity of Jacob
were in externals without an internal; "that Jehovah met him," signifies
opposition; "and sought to kill him," signifies that a representative
church could not be instituted with that posterity; "and Zipporah took a
stone," signifies the quality shown by the representative church by
means of truth; "and cut off the foreskin of her son," signifies the
removal of filthy loves, and thereby the laying bare of the internal;
"and made it touch his feet," signifies that the quality of the natural
was then shown; "and she said, Because a bridegroom of bloods art thou
to me," signifies that it was full of all violence and hostility against
truth and good; "and He ceased from him," signifies that it was
permitted that they should represent; "then she said, A bridegroom of
bloods as to circumcisions," signifies that although the internal was
full of violence and hostility against truth and good, still
circumcision was to be received as a sign representative of purification
from filthy loves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7041.">7041.</span></span>

And it came to pass in the way, in the inn. That this signifies that the
posterity of Jacob were in externals without an internal, is evident
from the representation of Moses here. In what precedes, and in what
follows, the subject treated of in the internal sense is the spiritual
church, which is meant by the "sons of Israel;" but in these three
verses it is that this church was to have been instituted among the
posterity of Jacob, but that it could not be instituted among them
because they were in externals without an internal. For this reason
Moses here does not represent the law or the Word, but that nation or
posterity from Jacob of which he was to be the leader; thus he also
represents the worship of that nation, for everywhere in the Word a
leader or judge, and also a king, represents the nation and people of
which he is the leader, judge, or king, because he is its head (see n.
4789). This is the reason why Moses is not here named, and yet by its
coming to pass in the way, in the inn, he is meant, and that Jehovah
then met him, and sought to kill him, when yet He had before so
expressly commanded that he should go and return to Egypt. By "being in
the way" is signified what is instituted; and by the "inn" is signified
the external natural or sensuous (n. 5495). And because as before said
the subject treated of is the church to be instituted among that
posterity, therefore that is signified which belonged to that nation,
namely, an external without an internal, thus also an external natural
or sensuous, but separated. (That the sensuous separated from the
internal is full of fallacies and the consequent falsities, and that it
is against the truths and goods of faith, see n. 6948, 6949.) \[2\]
Before the things which follow are unfolded, see what has been already
shown concerning that posterity, namely, that with them there was the
representative of a church, but not a church (see n. 4281, 4288, 6304);
that Divine worship among them was merely external separate from
internal, and that to this worship they were driven by external means
(n. 4281, 4433, 4844, 4847, 4865, 4899, 4903); that they were not
chosen, but that they obstinately insisted upon being a church (n. 4290,
4293); that they were of such a nature that they could represent holy
things, although they were in bodily and worldly loves (n. 4293, 4307);
that that nation was such from its first origins (n. 4314, 4316, 4317);
and many other things which have been shown concerning that nation (see
n. 4444, 4459, 4503, 4750, 4815, 4818, 4820, 4825, 4832, 4837, 4868,
4874, 4911, 4913, 5057, 6877).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7042.">7042.</span></span>

That Jehovah met him. That this signifies opposition, is evident from
the signification of "meeting," as being opposition, namely, to the
possibility of any church being instituted with that nation. That it
denotes opposition against the Divine, is signified by "Jehovah met
him." From the sense of the letter it appears as if Jehovah or the
Divine set Himself in opposition, because it is said that "Jehovah met
him;" but the internal sense is that the opposition was against the
Divine. For the Divine never opposes itself to anyone, but it is the
man, or the nation, which opposes itself to the Divine; and when it
opposes itself, as it cannot endure the Divine, it appears as if there
were resistance by the Divine. How the case herein is can be seen from
those who come into the other life, and desire to come into heaven, and
yet are not such as to be capable of being there. When they are
permitted to attempt what they desire, even when they are in the way and
near to the entrance into heaven, they appear to themselves as monsters,
and begin to be in anguish and torment, because they cannot endure the
truth and good which are there; and they believe that heaven and the
Divine have opposed themselves to them; when yet it is they who bring
this upon themselves, because they are in what is the opposite. From
this also it can be seen that the Divine does not oppose itself to
anyone, but that it is the man who opposes himself to the Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7043.">7043.</span></span>

And sought to kill him. That this signifies that a representative church
could not be instituted with that posterity, is evident from the
signification of "seeking to kill," as being not to receive (see n.
3387, 3395); here therefore not to receive or choose that nation, in
order that a representative church might be instituted with it. That in
these three verses that nation is constantly meant by "Moses," who was
about to be its leader and head, may be seen above (n. 7041); and that
that nation was not chosen, but that it obstinately insisted upon being
a church (n. 4290, 4293); and also that no church, but only the
representative of a church, was instituted with it (n. 4281, 4288,
6304); and that those things which are of the church, and are holy, can
be represented even by the evil, because representation does not regard
the person but the thing (n. 3670, 4208, 4281). The same is meant in the
internal sense by its being said that Jehovah willed wholly to destroy
that nation, and in its stead to raise up another nation from Moses
(Num. 14:12); and also that Jehovah repented of bringing in that nation,
and of having brought them into the land of Canaan.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7044.">7044.</span></span>

And Zipporah took a stone. That this signifies the quality shown by the
representative church by means of truth, is here evident from the
representation of Zipporah, as being the representative church; and from
the signification of a "stone," as being the truth of faith. That
circumcision was performed with knives of stone, signified that
purification from filthy loves was effected by means of the truths of
faith (n. 2039, 2046, 2799); for circumcision was representative of
purification from these loves (n. 2799). The reason why purification is
effected by means of the truths of faith, is that these teach what is
good, and also what is evil, and thus what ought to be done, and what
ought not to be done; and when man knows these truths, and wills to act
according to them, he is then led by the Lord, and is purified by His
Divine means. As the truths of faith teach what is evil and what is
good, it is evident that by "Zipporah took a stone" is signified the
quality shown by means of truth. That Zipporah represents the
representative church is evident from what follows in these verses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7045.">7045.</span></span>

And cut off the foreskin of her son. That this signifies the removal of
filthy loves, and thereby the laying bare of the internal, is evident
from the signification of "cutting off," as being to remove; from the
signification of "the foreskin," as being earthly and bodily love, which
defiles spiritual and celestial love (see n. 3412, 4462); and from the
signification of "son," as being the truth of the representative church.
That a "son" denotes truth may be seen above (n. 489, 491, 533, 1147,
2623, 3373); and that it denotes the truth of that church, is because
Zipporah represents that church, and calls him her "son," and by him
shows the quality of that nation, and hence the quality of its worship.
That by the "foreskin" are signified filthy loves, is because the loins
with the genitals correspond to conjugial love (n. 5050-5062); and
because they correspond to conjugial love, they correspond to all
celestial and spiritual love (n. 686, 4277, 4280, 5054); and therefore
the foreskin corresponds to the most external loves, which are called
bodily and earthly. If these loves are devoid of internal loves, which
are called spiritual and celestial, they are filthy, as was the case
with that nation, which was in externals without an internal. It is said
"without an internal," and by this is meant no acknowledgment of truth,
and no affection of good, thus no faith, and no charity, for these are
of the internal man, and from them proceed the activities of charity,
which are external goods. This internal, which is devoid of faith and
charity, and yet is full of evils and falsities, is called by the Lord
"empty" (Matt. 12:43-45); hence it is said, "an external without an
internal." Now as by the "foreskin" are signified loves the most
external, therefore when they are removed, as is signified by Zipporah's
cutting off the foreskin, the quality of these loves appears, thus the
laying bare of the internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7046.">7046.</span></span>

And made it touch his feet. That this signifies that the quality of the
natural was then shown, is evident from the signification of "making it
touch," as being to show, for a thing is shown by the touch; and from
the signification of the "feet," as being the natural (see n. 2162,
3147, 3761, 3986, 4280, 4938-4952). By the quality of the natural being
shown, is meant the quality of that nation interiorly, which appears
when the exterior is removed. The interior with man in the world cannot
appear until the exterior has been removed; because with the evil the
exterior acts quite differently from what the interior wills and thinks;
for the man feigns what is honorable, what is just, and also Christian
good or charity; and this in order that it may be believed that he is
such inwardly. He is compelled so to act by fears of the loss of gain,
of reputation, and of honor, and fears of the penalties of the law and
of the loss of life. But when these fears have been removed, and he acts
from his interior, then like a madman he plunders another's property,
and breathes the destruction and death even of his fellow-citizens, as
is the case in civil wars. That the interiors are such is still more
manifest from the evil in the other life, for the externals are then
taken away from them, and the internals are laid bare (see n. 7039), and
then it is discovered that many who in the world have appeared as
angels, are devils. \[2\] This great disagreement between the interiors
and exteriors is an indication that the state of man has been utterly
perverted; for such a disagreement has no existence with a man who is in
what is sincere, just, and good; he speaks as he thinks, and thinks as
he speaks. But it is far otherwise with those who are not in what is
sincere, not in what is just, and not in what is good; with these the
interiors disagree with the exteriors. That the Jewish nation was of
this character is described by the Lord in Matthew in these words: Woe
unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye make clean the
outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of
robbery and intemperance. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside
of the cup and of the platter, that the outside may be clean also. Woe
unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye make yourselves like
unto whited sepulchers, which outwardly indeed appear beautiful, but
inwardly are full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so
ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but inwardly ye are full of
hypocrisy and iniquity (Matt. 23:25-28).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7047.">7047.</span></span>

And she said, For a bridegroom of bloods art thou to me. That this
signifies that it was full of all violence and hostility against truth
and good, is evident from the signification of "bridegroom," as here
being a representative of the church, or its external, when the
representative church itself is the "bride" (that in these three verses
Moses represents that nation, and the representative of a church among
them, see n. 7041; and that Zipporah represents the representative
church, n. 7044). As Zipporah represents this church, and Moses its
external, therefore Zipporah does not call him her "husband," or "man,"
but her "bridegroom," for a bride and a bridegroom can represent what is
diverse, but not a man, or husband, and a wife, because the conjugial
makes a one. And from the signification of "blood," as being violence
done to charity, (n. 374, 1005), and as being truth falsified and
profaned (n. 4735, 6978), thus hostility against truth and good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7048.">7048.</span></span>

And He ceased from him. That this signifies that it was permitted that
they should represent, is evident from the signification of "ceasing
from him," namely, from killing him, as being permission that they
should represent; for that "Jehovah sought to kill him," signified that
a representative church could not be instituted with that nation (see n.
7043); and therefore when it is now said that "He ceased from him," it
signifies that it was permitted that they should represent, that is,
that there should be instituted with that nation the representative of a
church, but not a church. That it is one thing to represent a church,
and another to be a church, is evident from the fact that even the evil
can represent a church, but none except the good can be a church; for to
represent a church is merely external (n. 3670, 4208, 4281).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7049.">7049.</span></span>

Then she said, A bridegroom of bloods as to circumcisions. That this
signifies that although the internal was full of violence and hostility
against truth and good, still circumcision was to be received as a sign
representative of purification from filthy loves, is evident from the
signification of a "bridegroom of blood," as being what is full of all
violence and hostility against truth and good (of which above, n. 7047);
and from the signification of "circumcision," as being a sign
representative of purification from filthy loves (see n. 2039, 2632,
3412, 3413, 4462, 4486, 4493). This is said by Zipporah, because it was
now permitted that nation to represent the church, which is signified by
"ceasing from killing him" (n. 7048). Circumcision was made a sign
representative of purification, because by "cutting off the foreskin"
was signified the removal of filthy loves, and thereby the laying bare
of the internal (n. 7045); and therefore when the internal is not at all
attended to, as was the case with that nation, which was in externals
without an internal, there then remains the signification of
circumcision or the cutting off of the foreskin, namely, the removal of
filthy loves, thus purification, for which reason it could serve as a
representative sign.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7050.">7050.</span></span>

That in these three verses there are secrets which cannot possibly be
known without the internal sense, is evident from the details in them;
for who would know what is signified by Jehovah, after He had commanded
Moses to go to Egypt, presently, when he was in the way, meeting him,
and seeking to kill him? Who would know what is signified by Zipporah,
when she had cut off the foreskin of her son, making it touch his feet,
and saying to Moses that he was a bridegroom of bloods to her, and also
afterward by her saying that he was a bridegroom of bloods as to
circumcisions? Who does not see that secrets have been stored up in
these things, and that these secrets cannot possibly be disclosed except
from the internal sense?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7051-7100](ac142)
