[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac150)  [Next](ac152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="7501.">7501.</span></span>

For if thou refuse to let them go, and if thou still withhold them. That
this signifies if they should still be determined to infest, is evident
from the signification of "refusing," as being to be determined; hence
"to refuse to let go" denotes to be determined not to leave; and from
the signification of "withholding," as being still to infest; for they
who are infested are withheld by the evil spirits who infest. In regard
to those who are infested being withheld by evil spirits, the case is
this. When evil spirits assault anyone, they know how to instill
themselves into the delights that belong to his cupidities, and also
into the pleasant feelings connected with his principles, thus into all
things of his love; and so long as they are engaged in this instilling
they withhold the man whom they are infesting as if bound, nor can he be
loosed, however he struggles, except with the Lord's Divine aid, for
love and instilling into the delight of the love conjoin. Such is the
art employed by evil spirits and genii in the other life. The same thing
is seen in this world; for he who instills himself into another's
delight which is of his love, holds him bound and also leads him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7502.">7502.</span></span>

Behold the hand of Jehovah shall be on thy cattle which is in the field.
That this signifies the vastation of the truth and good of faith which
they have from the church wherein they had been, is evident from the
signification of "the hand of Jehovah being on anyone," as being a
plague or punishment; for by "hand" is signified power (see n.
4931-4937, 6292, 6947, 7188, 7189), and by "the hand of Jehovah,"
omnipotence (n. 878, 3387); and because by those who are in the
externals of the church it is believed from the appearance that every
plague or punishment comes from Jehovah (for they attribute all things
to His power), therefore by "the hand of Jehovah being on anyone" is
signified punishment, here vastation, for the degrees of the vastation
of those who infested were punishments: from the signification of
"cattle," as being the truths and goods of faith (n. 6016, 6045, 6049);
and from the signification of "field" as being the church (n. 2971,
3310). That "field" denotes the church is because the seeds sown in a
field signify the truths which are of faith, and also because the
produce from the field, such as wheat, barley, spelt, and so forth,
denotes the goods which are of charity, and the truths which are of
faith, thus such things as belong to the church. \[2\] As regards the
infernal spirits who infest the upright in the other life being vastated
as to the truths of faith that belong to the church, be it known that
those who infest the upright in the other life are those who when living
in the world had belonged to the church; for those who have not belonged
to the church, cannot infest others who do belong to it, because
falsities contrary to the truths of faith of the church are the means by
which they infest. Those who have been outside the church cannot infest
anyone by means of such things, because they had not known them. (That
they who have made a profession of faith and have lived a life of evil,
in the other life turn to falsities and infest the upright, see n. 7097,
7127, 7317.) Lest therefore the truth of faith, which they have had from
the doctrine of their church when they lived in the world (for they
carry with them into the other life all that they had known in the life
of the body, nor is anything wanting) should give them any light from
heaven, and lest they should apply the things of light to defend the
falsities and evils which are of hell, every such thing is taken away
from them, and they are finally left to the evils of their life and the
falsities thence derived. It is this vastation that is here treated of.
\[3\] The reason why those who have been of the church and have lived a
life of evil are thus gradually vastated before they are cast into hell,
is that they had known the truths of faith, and thereby had had
communication with heaven. The heavenly societies with which they have
had communication, and also still have it in the other life, cannot be
separated from them except by degrees. For such is the order in heaven
from the Lord that nothing is done violently, but all things in freedom
as from themselves; therefore those heavenly societies are not wrested
from them, but are gradually separated, so that the evil spirits seem to
depart of their own accord. From all this it is now evident how the case
is with the vastation of those who have known the truths of faith that
belong to the church, and yet have led a life of evil. \[4\] That such
is the case no one can know except from revelation, for man has no
knowledge of the things that exist in the other life except from
revelation; and as man is but little solicitous to explore the truths
and goods which are of faith from the Word (for he is in no affection of
truth for its own sake, still less for the sake of life), therefore such
things are not revealed to him; nevertheless they stand forth in the
Word (and this in respect to every series and process) in its internal
sense. As therefore the man of the church is in no affection of knowing
truth from the Word, but only in the affection of confirming the
doctrinal things of his own church whether true or false, for worldly
reasons, therefore he knows nothing whatever about the state after
death, nothing about heaven, and nothing about hell; he does not even
know what makes heaven and what makes hell with man. Nay, so ignorant
are men that they teach and believe that everyone can be admitted into
heaven; some by a power which they have arrogated to themselves; some by
the mercy of the Lord, no matter how they had lived; and scarcely any
know that heaven is given to man by means of a life of charity and faith
during his life in the world, and that this life remains. These things
have been said in order that the quality may be known of that man of the
church who professes faith alone and cares not about the life of faith;
for these are they who are represented by the Egyptians here and in what
follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7503.">7503.</span></span>

On the horses, on the asses, on the camels. That this signifies the
intellectual things and the memory-knowledges of the truth that is of
faith, is evident from the signification of "horses," as being things of
the intellect (n. 2761, 2762, 3217, 5321, 6125, 6534); from the
signification of "asses," as being things that are of service to the
intellect, thus also memory-knowledges (n. 5492, 7024); and from the
signification of "camels," as being memory-knowledges in general (n.
3048, 3071, 3143, 3145). These three animals signify things that belong
to the intellectual part; the other animals, which pertain to the herd
and to the flock, signify things that are of the will part. As regards
the intellectual part, it is this which receives the truths of faith;
for the intellect is the internal sight, which is enlightened by the
light of heaven, and insofar as it is enlightened, it notices, sees, and
acknowledges the truths of faith when it reads the Word. Hence it is
that they who are in perception of the truth of faith, are called
"intelligent" and "wise," and also "enlightened." (That the intellectual
is the recipient of the truth of faith, see n. 5114, 6125, 6222.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7504.">7504.</span></span>

On the herd, and on the flock. That this signifies the things of the
will, is evident from the signification of "the herd," as being the good
of the exterior natural; and from the signification of "the flock," as
being the good of the interior natural (see n. 5913); and as good is
signified by these, that which is of the will is signified, for all good
has relation to the will, and all truth to the understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7505.">7505.</span></span>

A very grievous pestilence. That this signifies a consumption in
general, is evident from the signification of "pestilence," as being the
vastation of truth; and because it is called "a very grievous
pestilence," there is signified the consumption of truth. That a
"pestilence" signifies the vastation of truth is plain from the
following passages in the Word: When I send My four evil judgments upon
Jerusalem; the sword, and the famine, and the evil beast, and the
pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast (Ezek. 45:21); "to cut off
man and beast" denotes to vastate interior and exterior good. The sword
is without, and the pestilence and the famine within; he that is in the
field shall die by the sword; but he that is in the city, famine and
pestilence shall devour him (Ezek. 7:15); where "pestilence" denotes the
vastation of good. Therefore because thou hast defiled My sanctuary with
all thine abominations, a third part of thee shall die with the
pestilence, and they shall be consumed in the midst of thee (Ezek.
5:11-12); where "pestilence" denotes the wasting away of good. In Amos:
I have sent among you the pestilence in the way of Egypt: your young men
have I slain with the sword, with the captivity of your horses (Amos
4:10); where "the pestilence in the way of Egypt" denotes the vastation
of good and truth by means of falsities, which are "the way of Egypt;"
"your young men have I slain with the sword, with the captivity of
horses" denotes the vastation of truth; "young men" denote truths, and
"horses" intellectual things (as above, n. 7503). In David: Thou shalt
not be afraid for the terror of the night, for the arrow that flieth by
day; for the pestilence that creepeth in thick darkness, for the death
that wasteth at noonday (Ps. 91:5-6); where "the pestilence that
creepeth in thick darkness" denotes the evil which vastates in secret;
"the death that wasteth at noonday" denotes the evil that vastates
openly; besides other passages.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7506.">7506.</span></span>

And Jehovah shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of
the Egyptians. That this signifies the difference between the truths and
goods of faith of those who are of the spiritual church, and the truths
and goods of faith which are of the church with those who infest, is
evident from the signification of "severing," as being difference; from
the signification of "cattle," as being the truths and goods of faith
(as above, n. 7502); from the representation of the sons of Israel, as
being those who are of the spiritual church (also above, n. 7500); and
from the signification of "the cattle of the Egyptians," as being the
goods and truths of the church which are with those who infest. (That
"the Egyptians" denote those who had been of the church, and
consequently in the knowledge of the truth and good of faith; but in a
life of evil, and who in the other life infest, see n. 7097, 7127, 7317,
7502.) \[2\] What the difference is between the truths and goods of
faith of those who are of the church and are saved, and the truths and
goods of faith of those who are of the church and are condemned, shall
be told in brief. The truths and goods of faith with those who are of
the church and are saved, are from the good of charity; and as the
affection of charity is the spiritual itself, these truths and goods are
spiritual, and flow in through heaven from the Lord, for the interiors
of those who receive them are open to heaven. But the truths and goods
of those who are of the church and are condemned, are not from the good
of charity, and thus are not spiritual; they indeed flow in through
heaven, but are received in cold and thick darkness-in cold because
there is no good of charity, in thick darkness because the light by
which they receive them is as it were a light of winter, which compared
to the light of heaven is thick darkness. Nor are their interiors open
to heaven, but to the world, into which they determine the influx of
truth and good from heaven; from this also the ideas they have of the
good and truth of faith are merely natural, nay, material, which in the
spiritual world are represented as ugly, and having no human likeness.
But the ideas of the truth and good of faith of those who are of the
church and are saved, are spiritual, and although they terminate in
material things of the world, yet they are separate from them, for they
can be elevated from them. In the spiritual world the ideas of these
persons are represented as beautiful, and have the likeness of a man.
Such is the difference, however much they may appear alike in the
outward form, that is, in discourse and preaching. \[3\] The cause of
such a difference is the life; for when the good of life which is from
charity flows into the intellectual which is the receptacle of truth, it
forms beautiful ideas with respect to the goods and truths of faith;
whereas when the evil of life which is contrary to charity flows into
the intellectual, it makes ugly ideas in respect to the goods and truths
of faith, and such as are not acknowledged in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7507.">7507.</span></span>

And there shall nothing die of all that belongeth to the sons of Israel.
That this signifies that they shall not be consumed, is evident from the
signification of "not anything dying," as being not to be consumed; from
the signification of "cattle," of which it is said that "they shall not
die," as being the truth and good of faith (of which above, n. 7502);
and from the representation of the sons of Israel, as being those who
are of the spiritual church. That the goods and truths of faith which
are with those who are of the church cannot die, is because they have
been conjoined with the Divine by means of charity, and the Divine is
life itself, and is eternal; and that which has been conjoined with life
itself and with what is eternal, cannot die or be consumed; but remains
to eternity, and is continually being perfected; the things that are of
faith with those who are of the church and are being condemned, not
having been conjoined with the Divine, and consequently having no life
in them, die; for they are like images devoid of life, and which, not
being alive, in the other life are consumed, that is, are carried off.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7508.">7508.</span></span>

And Jehovah appointed a set time. That this signifies predetermination,
is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7509.">7509.</span></span>

Saying, Tomorrow Jehovah shall do this word in the land. That this
signifies that this is theirs forever in respect to the things that
belong to the truth and good of the church, is evident from the
signification of "tomorrow," as being forever (see n. 3998); that it
denotes in respect to the things that belong to the truth and good of
the church, is plain from what goes before in regard to this good and
truth, namely, that they will be consumed with those who are meant by
the "Egyptians;" and that they will be lasting with those who are
represented by the sons of Israel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7510.">7510.</span></span>

And Jehovah did this word on the morrow. That this signifies the effect
according to the predetermination, is evident from the signification of
"doing this word," as being the effect; and from the signification of a
stated time, here "the morrow," as being predetermination (as above, n.
7508). When predetermination by the Divine has reference to what is
perpetual, it is expressed by "the morrow."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7511.">7511.</span></span>

And all the cattle of the Egyptians died. That this signifies the
consumption of the truth and good of faith with those who infest, is
evident from the signification of "dying," namely, by the pestilence, as
being a consumption (as above, n. 7505, 7507); and from the
signification of "the cattle of the Egyptians," as being the truths and
goods of the church with those who infest (as also above, n. 7506).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7512.">7512.</span></span>

And of the cattle of the sons of Israel died not one. That this
signifies that nothing of faith was consumed with those who were of the
spiritual church, is evident from what has been unfolded just above (n.
7506, 7507).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7513.">7513.</span></span>

And Pharaoh sent, and behold there was not so much as one of the cattle
of Israel dead. That this signifies that this was made known to those
who infest, is evident from the representation of Pharaoh, as being
those who infest (of which above, n. 7498). That this was made known to
them, namely, that nothing of the goods and truths of faith had perished
among those who were of the spiritual church, is plainly signified by
"he sent and found that there was not anything dead of the cattle of
Israel."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7514.">7514.</span></span>

And Pharaoh's heart was heavy, signifies obstinacy (as above, n. 7272,
7300, 7305).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7515.">7515.</span></span>

And he did not let the people go. That this signifies that they did not
leave them, namely, those of the spiritual church whom they were
infesting, see n. 7474, where are the same words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7516.">7516.</span></span>

Verses 8-12. And Jehovah said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you in
the fullness of your fists ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle
it toward heaven unto the eyes of Pharaoh. And it shall be dust over all
the land of Egypt, and it shall be upon man and upon beast a sore
breaking forth in pustules in all the land of Egypt. And they took ashes
of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it toward
heaven, and it became a sore of pustules breaking forth on man and on
beast. And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the
sore; for the sore was on the magicians and on all the Egyptians. And
Jehovah made firm the heart of Pharaoh, and he heard them not, as
Jehovah had spoken unto Moses. "And Jehovah said unto Moses and unto
Aaron," signifies instruction anew; "take to you in the fullness of your
fists," signifies power given, as much as could be received; "ashes of
the furnace," signifies of exciting the falsities of cupidities through
presence with those who infest; "and let Moses sprinkle it toward
heaven," signifies these falsities shown to those who are in heaven;
"unto the eyes of Pharaoh," signifies in the presence; "and it shall be
dust over all the land of Egypt," signifies the damnation of these
falsities in the natural mind; "and it shall be upon man and upon
beast," signifies which are from evil interior and exterior; "a sore
breaking forth in pustules," signifies filthy things together with the
consequent blasphemies; "in all the land of Egypt," signifies in the
whole natural mind; "and they took ashes of the furnace," signifies
falsities of cupidities; "and stood before Pharaoh," signifies in the
presence of those who infest; "and Moses sprinkled it toward heaven,"
signifies these things shown to those who are in heaven; "and it became
a sore of pustules breaking forth on man and on beast," signifies filthy
things together with blasphemies from evil interior and exterior; "and
the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the sore,"
signifies that those could not be present who abused Divine order by
portraying the like in the outward form; "for the sore was on the
magicians," signifies that the like filthy things came forth from them;
"and on all the Egyptians," signifies as were in those who were
infesting; "and Jehovah made firm the heart of Pharaoh," signifies that
they were determined; "and he heard them not," signifies that they did
not obey; "as Jehovah had spoken unto Moses," signifies according to the
prediction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7517.">7517.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses and unto Aaron. That this signifies
instruction anew, is evident from the signification of "Jehovah said,"
as being instruction (as above, n. 7497); that it is instruction anew,
is because a new state is now treated of, the former being ended. The
instruction which is from Jehovah is given by means of the truth which
proceeds from Him. The truth which proceeds from Jehovah is represented
by Moses and Aaron; internal truth by Moses, and external truth by Aaron
(n. 7382).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7518.">7518.</span></span>

Take to you in the fullness of your fists. That this signifies power
given, as much as could be received, is evident from the signification
of the "fists," or palms of the hands, as being power; that the "fists,"
or palms of the hands, denote power, is because the "hands" signify
power (of which below); as much as can be received is signified by
"fullness." As regards the signification of the "fists," or the palms of
the hands, be it known that the arms in the Grand Man correspond to
power; and from this not only do the arms themselves signify power, but
also the shoulders, and likewise the hands, down to the fingers. (That
the "arms" denote power, see n. 878, 4932, 4934, 4935, 7205; and the
"shoulders," n. 1085, 4937; and the "hands," n. 878, 3387, 5327, 5328,
5544, 6292, 6947, 7011, 7188, 7189; also the "fingers," n. 7430; for
their correspondence in general, see above, n. 4931-4937.) The reason
why all things that pertain to the arm correspond to power, is that the
body exercises its power by means of them. From all this it can be seen
what is signified by "sitting at the right hand": Jesus said, Henceforth
ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power (Matt.
26:64); From henceforth shall the Son of man be seated at the right hand
of the power of God (Luke 22:69); namely, the omnipotence which is the
Lord's; and therefore it is said "at the right hand of power;" as also
in David: Thou hast a mighty arm, strong is Thy hand, exalted shall be
Thy right hand (Ps. 89:13). All this shows what light is given in the
Word by the internal sense, for unless it were thereby known that by the
"right hand" is signified power, it would be understood according to the
words, that the Lord would sit at the right hand of Jehovah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7519.">7519.</span></span>

Ashes of the furnace. That this signifies of exciting the falsities of
cupidities through presence with those who infest, is evident from the
signification of "ashes of the furnace," as being the falsities of
cupidities (of which below). That it denotes excitation by presence with
those who infest, is evident from what follows in this verse, for it is
said that "Moses sprinkled it toward heaven in the eyes of Pharaoh." By
"in the eyes" is signified presence, and by "Pharaoh" are signified
those who infest (as often shown). \[2\] How the case is with these
things cannot be known without revelation, for they are such as take
place in the other life, and are not known in the world. So long as evil
or infernal spirits are removed and separated from heaven, that is, from
the good of love and the truth of faith which are there, they do not
know that they are in evils and falsities, for they then believe
falsities to be truths, and evils to be goods; but as soon as heaven
comes nearer to them, that is, some heavenly society, they notice the
falsities and evils; for the truth of faith which then flows in causes
them to notice the falsities; and the good of love which flows in causes
them to notice the evils; and the nearer that heaven comes, or the more
presently there inflows its good of love and truth of faith (seeing that
they cannot endure these), the more grievously are they reproached by
their own evils and falsities. \[3\] From all this it can now be seen
why it was commanded that Moses should take ashes of the furnace and
sprinkle them toward heaven, and that he should do this in the eyes of
Pharaoh; also why it was commanded that he, and not Aaron, should
sprinkle the ashes toward heaven. For by ashes being sprinkled toward
heaven is signified the influx of heaven; by this being done in the eyes
of Pharaoh is signified in the presence of those who infest; that Moses
was to do this, and not Aaron, is because the truth proceeding
immediately from the Divine presents this effect with the evil; Moses
being the truth which proceeds immediately from the Divine, and Aaron
that which proceeds mediately (n. 7010). From all this it is evident
what is meant in the internal sense by the contents of this verse and of
that next following, namely, that there would be excited filthy and
loathsome things of cupidities together with blasphemies, which are
signified by the "sore breaking forth in pustules." These things are
excited when Divine truth flows in, and heaven comes nearer. \[4\]
Everyone can see that such things would never have been commanded by
Jehovah to Moses unless there were a heavenly secret therein; that is to
say, that Moses should take ashes of the furnace and sprinkle them
toward heaven. Such means of producing the effect would never have been
ordered by Jehovah unless they had contained something heavenly, to
which these means correspond. From this can be seen the nature of the
Word, that it is crowded with secret things, but with such as do not
stand forth in the sense of the letter. \[5\] That "ashes of the
furnace" signify falsities of cupidities, is because they are from burnt
things; and "burning," as also "fire" itself, in the Word, in a good
sense, signify the good of heavenly affections; but in the opposite
sense, the evil of infernal cupidities. That "fire" has this
signification see n. 934, 1861, 2446, 4906, 5071, 5215, 6314, 6832,
6834, 6849, 7324; and that "burning" denotes the evil of cupidities, n.
1297, 5215; hence it is that "ashes" signify falsities, for falsities
are from the evils of cupidities. And as the evils of cupidities are
signified by "fire," they are also signified by a "furnace," which is
the containant, and this frequently involves the same as that which it
contains. \[6\] That a "furnace" has this signification is evident from
these passages: Behold, the day cometh, burning as a furnace; and all
the proud, and everyone that worketh wickedness, shall be stubble; and
the day that cometh shall set them on fire, it shall leave them neither
root nor branch (Mal. 4:1); where "burning as a furnace" denotes the
cupidities of evil; "setting them on fire," a kindling with cupidities.
\[7\] In Genesis: Abraham looked toward the faces of Sodom and Gomorrah,
and toward the faces of all the land of the plain, and he saw, and the
smoke of the land went up, as the smoke of a furnace (Gen. 19:28); where
"the smoke of a furnace" denotes falsities from the evils of cupidities,
for "Sodom" denotes the evil of cupidities from the love of self, and
"Gomorrah" the falsity thence derived (see n. 2220, 2245, 2322). In
John: There went up a smoke out of the pit of the abyss, as the smoke of
a furnace (Rev. 9:2); where "the smoke of a furnace" in like manner
denotes falsities from evils of cupidities; "the pit of the abyss"
denotes hell. \[8\] In Matthew: The Son of man shall send His angels,
who shall gather out of His kingdom all things that cause stumbling, and
them that do iniquity, and shall send them into the furnace of fire
(Matt. 13:41-42); where "the furnace of fire" denotes the evils of
cupidities; for the fire of cupidities is what is meant in the Word by
the "fire of hell;" moreover, loves are nothing else than the fires of
life, and cupidity is what is continuous of love. \[9\] In Nahum: Draw
thee waters for the siege, strengthen thy fortress; go into the mire,
and tread the clay, repair the brick kiln; there shall the fire devour
thee; the sword shall cut thee off (Nah. 3:14-15); where "going into the
mire" denotes into falsity; "treading the clay," evil (n. 6669); "the
brick kiln," or "furnace for brick," denotes the falsities which they
invent, and which are injected by the evil (n. 1296, 6669, 7113); "fire"
denotes the cupidity of evil (n. 1861, 2446, 5071, 5215, 6832, 7324);
"the sword" denotes falsity (n. 4499). \[10\] In Jeremiah: Take great
stones in thy hand, and hide them in clay in the furnace for brick which
is at the door of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in the eyes of the men
of Judah; and say unto them, Behold I will send and take Nebuchadnezzar,
the king of Babylon, and I will set his throne upon these stones that I
have hid, so that he may spread his tent over them; he shall come and
shall smite the land of Egypt (Jer. 43:9-11); what these words signify
cannot be known without the internal sense; "great stones" denote
falsities; the "furnace for brick" denotes the cupidity of falsity from
evil; "Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon" denotes the devastator of truth
and good; "his throne and tent being set over these stones" denotes that
he will cause falsities to reign; "the land of Egypt which he will
smite" denotes the natural mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7520.">7520.</span></span>

And let Moses sprinkle it toward heaven. That this signifies these
falsities shown to those who are in heaven, is evident from the
signification of "ashes," as being falsities (of which in what follows);
and from the signification of "sprinkling toward heaven," as being to
show them to those who are in heaven. That "to sprinkle" denotes to
show, is plain, for by this they are made to appear. By "heaven" in the
internal sense is meant the angelic heaven. What these words signify is
plain from what was said just above (see n. 7519), namely, that by means
of truth from the Divine, which is represented by Moses, the falsities
of cupidities of those who infest were shown and manifested to heaven,
whence came the presence of heaven, and by its presence the occurrence
of such things with the evil as are signified by the "sore breaking
forth in pustules." That "ashes" \[favilla\] denote falsity, may be
confirmed from the passages where another word for "ashes" \[cinis\] is
used, for these ashes have a like origin, and hence a like signification
(as in Isa. 44:15, 20; 58:5; Jer. 6:26; Ezek. 27:30; 28:18; Jonah 3:6;
Ps. 102:9; Job 2:8; 30:19).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7521.">7521.</span></span>

Unto the eyes of Pharaoh. That this signifies in the presence, is
evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7522.">7522.</span></span>

And it shall be dust in all the land of Egypt. That this signifies the
damnation of these falsities in the natural mind, is evident from the
signification of "dust," as being that which is damned (of which above,
n. 7418); from the signification of "ashes of the furnace," which were
made dust, as being the falsities of cupidities (of which just above, n.
7519, 7520); and from the signification of "the land of Egypt," as being
the natural mind (n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301). That "dust" denotes
that which is damned, is plain not only from the passages already quoted
from the Word (n. 7418), but also from this in Moses: If thou wilt not
obey the voice of Jehovah thy God, cursed shalt thou be in the city, and
cursed shalt thou be in the field; Jehovah shall make the rain of thy
land fine dust and coarse dust; from heaven shall it come down upon
thee, until thou be destroyed (Deut. 28:15-16, 24).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7523.">7523.</span></span>

And it shall be upon man and upon beast. That this signifies which are
from evil interior and exterior, is evident from the signification of
"man," as being the affection of good, and in the opposite sense the
cupidity of evil; in like manner "beast;" but when "man and beast" are
mentioned, then by "man" is signified interior affection or cupidity,
and by "beast" exterior (see n. 7424). The interior good and also the
interior evil which are signified by "man" are those which are of the
intention or end, for the intention or end is the inmost of man; but the
exterior good and also the exterior evil which are signified by "beast"
are those which are of the thought, and of the consequent action when
nothing stands in the way. That what is exterior is signified by "beast"
is because in respect to his external or natural man, a man is nothing
else than a beast, for he takes delight in the like cupidities and
pleasures, as also in the like appetites and senses. And the reason why
that which is interior is signified by "man" is that man is man in
respect to the internal or spiritual man, taking delight there in the
affections of good and truth, such as belong to the angels in heaven,
and also because through this he rules his natural or animal man, which
is a beast. (That a "beast" denotes the affection of good, and in the
opposite sense the yearning of evil, see n. 45-46, 142-143, 246,
714-715, 719, 776, 2179-2180, 3218, 3519, 5198.) \[2\] Such is the
signification of "man and beast" also in the following passages: Mine
anger and My wrath have been poured out upon this place, upon man and
upon beast (Jer. 7:20). I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both
man and beast; they shall die of a great pestilence (Jer. 21:6). It
shall make her land a desolation, that none shall dwell therein; from
man even to beast they have scattered, they have gone away (Jer. 50:3).
When a land sinneth against Me by trespassing a trespass, I will cut off
from it man and beast (Ezek. 14:13, 19, 21). I will stretch out My hand
upon Edom, and will cut off from it man and beast; and I will make it a
waste (Ezek. 25:13). I will consume man and beast, I will consume the
bird of the heavens and the fishes of the sea, and the stumbling blocks
together with the wicked; and I will cut off man from the surfaces of
the land (Zeph. 1:3). \[3\] "Man and beast" denote interior and exterior
good in the following passages: I have made the earth, the man and the
beast, by My great power (Jer. 27:5). Behold the days come, saith
Jehovah, that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with
the seed of man, and with the seed of beast (Jer. 31:27). The earth
shall be a desolation, so that there is no man or beast (Jer. 32:43). In
the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are laid
waste, no man and no inhabitant and no beast (Jer. 33:10; 51:62). Thy
righteousness is like the mountains of God; Thy judgments are a great
deep; O Jehovah, Thou preservest man and beast (Ps. 36:6). Because such
things were signified by "man and beast," therefore the firstborn of the
Egyptians died, both of men and of beasts (Exod. 12:29); and therefore
the firstborn were sanctified, both of man and of beast (Num. 18:15);
and therefore also from a holy rite it was commanded by the king of
Nineveh, that both man and beast were to fast, and were also to be
covered with sackcloth (Jonah 3:7-8).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7524.">7524.</span></span>

A sore breaking forth in pustules. That this signifies filthy things
together with the consequent blasphemies, is evident from the
signification of a "sore," as being the filthy things that come from
evils; and from the signification of "pustules," as being the
blasphemies which are thence derived. The sores in a man's body
correspond to the filthy things that come from evils, and pustules
correspond to blasphemies; and they would also be upon every evil man,
if so long as he is in the world he were not in a state capable of
receiving the good and truth of faith. It is for the sake of this state
that the Lord prevents such things from bursting forth from evils. \[2\]
That "sores" signify filthy things together with blasphemies, is plain
also in these passages: The first angel poured out his vial upon the
earth, and it became an evil and noisome sore upon the men who had the
mark of the beast; the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the throne
of the beast, and they blasphemed the God of heaven, by reason of their
pains, and by reason of their sores (Rev. 16:2, 10-11). Jehovah shall
smite thee with the sore of Egypt, and with the hemorrhoids, and with
the scab, and with the itch, so that thou canst not be healed; whereby
thou wilt become mad from the look of thine eyes wherewith thou wilt
look. Jehovah shall smite thee with an evil sore upon the knees and upon
the thighs, whereof thou canst not be healed. Jehovah shall lead thee
away, and thy king which thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation which
thou hast not known (Deut. 28:27, 34-36); "the sore of Egypt" denotes
filthy things together with blasphemies; and because blasphemies also
are signified, it is said "thou wilt become mad from the look of thine
eyes," for he who blasphemes God is insane. \[3\] The kinds of sores are
"hemorrhoids, scab, and the itch," which signify so many kinds of
falsities from evils; and nearly the same is signified by the "sores
upon the knees and thighs;" and because they signify falsities, it
immediately follows that "the king which they shall set over them should
be led away;" for by "king" is signified truth, and in the opposite
sense falsity (n. 1672, 2015, 2069, 3009, 4581, 4966, 5044, 6148). The
sores of leprosy, as the "swelling," the "abscess," the "pimple," the
"burning," the "scurf," the "scall," which are mentioned in Lev. 13,
also denote such things; for "leprosy," in the spiritual sense, denotes
the profanation of truth (n. 6963). \[4\] That "wounds" also signify
such things, is evident from these passages: From the sole of the foot
even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wound, and bruise,
and recent blow; they have not been squeezed out, nor bound up, nor
softened with oil (Isa. 1:6). Mine iniquities are gone over my head, my
wounds have stunk and have been corrupt because of my foolishness (Ps.
38:4-5).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7525.">7525.</span></span>

In all the land of Egypt. That this signifies the natural mind, see just
above, n. 7522.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7526.">7526.</span></span>

And they took ashes of the furnace. That this signifies the falsities of
cupidities, is evident from the signification of "ashes of the furnace,"
as being the falsities of cupidities (of which above, n. 7519).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7527.">7527.</span></span>

And stood before Pharaoh. That this signifies in the presence of those
who infest, is evident from the signification of "standing before"
anyone as being to be in the presence; and from the representation of
Pharaoh, as being those who infest (see n. 7107, 7110, 7126, 7142, 7220,
7228).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7528.">7528.</span></span>

And Moses sprinkled it toward heaven. That this signifies these
falsities shown to those who are in heaven, is evident from what was
said above (n. 7520), where are like words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7529.">7529.</span></span>

And it became a sore of pustules breaking forth on man and on beast.
That this signifies filthy things together with blasphemies from
interior and exterior evil, is evident from the signification of a "sore
of pustules," as being filthy things together with blasphemies (of which
above, n. 7524); and from the signification of "man and beast," as being
evil interior and exterior (of which also above, n. 7523).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7530.">7530.</span></span>

And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the sore. That
this signifies that those could not be present who abused Divine order
by portraying the like in the outward form, is evident from the
signification of "not being able to stand before" anyone as being not to
be able to be present; from the signification of "the magicians," as
being those who abuse Divine order by portraying the like in the outward
form (see n. 7296, 7337); and from the signification of a "sore," as
being filthy things together with blasphemies (of which above, n. 7524).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7531.">7531.</span></span>

For the sore was on the magicians. That this signifies that the like
filthy things came forth from them, is evident from what was said just
above (n. 7530).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7532.">7532.</span></span>

And on all the Egyptians. That this signifies as were in those who were
infesting, is evident from the signification of "the Egyptians," as
being those who infest (see n. 7097, 7317).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7533.">7533.</span></span>

And Jehovah made firm the heart of Pharaoh. That this signifies that
they were determined, is evident from the signification of "the heart
being made firm," "being hardened," and "being made heavy," as being
obstinacy (see n. 7272, 7300, 7305). Its being said that "Jehovah made
firm the heart of Pharaoh," in the internal sense signifies that they
themselves, and not Jehovah, made firm their heart, that is, that they
were determined; for it is the evil with man which makes him firm or
determined against the Divine; and evil comes from man, and flows in
from hell, but not from heaven. Nothing but good flows in through heaven
from the Lord; evil cannot come forth from good, still less from the
veriest Good; evil comes forth from its own origin, namely, from things
contrary to love to God and to love to the neighbor; such origins exist
in man, and not at all in God. From this it is evident that when it is
said in the Word that "God leads into evil," this is said according to
the appearance (but on this see above, n. 2447, 6991, 6997).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7534.">7534.</span></span>

And he heard them not. That this signifies that they did not obey, is
evident from the signification of "not hearing" anyone as being not to
obey (see also n. 7224, 7275, 7301, 7339, 7413).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7535.">7535.</span></span>

As Jehovah had spoken unto Moses. That this signifies according to the
prediction, see above, n. 7302, 7340, 7414, 7432.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7536.">7536.</span></span>

Verses 13-18. And Jehovah said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning,
and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus said Jehovah the God of
the Hebrews, Let My people go, that they may serve Me. For I this time
will send all My plagues into thy heart, and into thy servants, and into
thy people; that thou mayest know that there is no one as I in the whole
earth. For now I would put forth My hand, and smite thee and thy people
with pestilence, and thou wouldest be cut off from the earth; but yet
for this cause have I made thee to stand, that thou mayest see My power,
and that My name may be told in the whole earth. As yet thou exaltest
thyself against My people, in thy not letting them go. Behold, tomorrow
about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as
hath not been in Egypt since the day it was founded even until now. "And
Jehovah said unto Moses," signifies instruction again as to what was to
be done; "Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh,"
signifies the uplifting by means of presence of the attention of those
who infest; "and say unto him, Thus said Jehovah the God of the
Hebrews," signifies a command from the Lord, who is the God of the
church; "Let My people go that they may serve Me," signifies that they
should leave those who are of the spiritual church that they may worship
the Lord their God; "for this time I will send all My plagues,"
signifies that it might come to pass that all the coming evils would
together rush upon them; "into thy heart," signifies into the inmost;
"and into thy servants, and into thy people," signifies into all things
in general and in particular; "that thou mayest know that there is no
one as I in the whole earth," signifies made known to them from this
that the Lord is the only God; "for now I would put forth My hand,"
signifies that all communication might be taken away; "and smite thee
and thy people with pestilence," signifies thus total devastation; "and
thou wouldest be cut off from the earth," signifies that thus there
would no longer be communication through the things that belong to the
church; "but yet for this cause have I made thee to stand," signifies
that communication would still remain, and they will pass through states
by reason of order; "that thou mayest see My power," signifies that they
may notice how great the Divine power is; "and that My name may be told
in the whole earth," signifies that thus where the church is the Lord
may be acknowledged as the only God; "as yet thou exaltest thyself
against My people," signifies because he does not yet desist from
infesting those who are in truth and good; "in thy not letting them go,"
signifies and does not as yet leave them; "behold, tomorrow about this
time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail," signifies falsities
destroying all things of the church with them; "such as hath not been in
Egypt since the day it was founded even until now" signifies that with
others there is no such destruction in the natural mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7537.">7537.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses. That this signifies instruction again as to
what was to be done, see above, n. 7517.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7538.">7538.</span></span>

Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh. That this
signifies the uplifting by means of presence of the attention of those
who infest, is evident from the signification of "rising up early in the
morning" (see n. 7435); from the signification, of "standing before"
anyone as being presence (n. 7527); and from the representation of
Pharaoh, as being those who infest (n. 7107, 7110, 7126, 7142, 7220,
7228).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7539.">7539.</span></span>

And say unto him, Thus said Jehovah the God of the Hebrews. That this
signifies a command from the Lord, who is the God of the church, is
evident from the signification of "saying," when by Jehovah or the Lord
to those who are in evils and infest, as being a command (see n. 7036,
7310); and from the signification of "the Hebrews," as being those of
the church, thus the church (n. 6675, 6684, 6738). (That where "Jehovah"
is named in the Word, it is the Lord who is meant, see n. 1343, 1736,
2921, 3023, 3035, 5041, 5663, 6280, 6281, 6303, 6905, 6945, 6956). Thus
"Jehovah the God of the Hebrews" denotes the Lord, who is the God of the
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7540.">7540.</span></span>

Let My people go, that they may serve Me. That this signifies that they
should leave those who are of the spiritual church that they may worship
the Lord their God, see above (n. 7500), where are like words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7541.">7541.</span></span>

For this time I will send all My plagues. That this signifies that it
might come to pass that all the coming evils would together rush upon
them, is evident from the signification of "plagues," as being evils,
here evils to come, even until they were utterly cast into hell, for
which reason it is said, "all the plagues"; and from the signification
of "sending," as being to rush in, for plagues or evils are not sent by
Jehovah or the Lord, but rush in from evil itself; for in the other life
evil carries its penalty with it, and has it as it were within itself
(see n. 696, 697, 1857, 6559). Hence it is that by "I will send all My
plagues" is signified that all evils would rush in upon them. \[2\] It
is according to order that one plague should follow another, and the
evil be thus successively cast down into hell, and therefore it is here
said that it might come to pass that they would all rush in together. As
the man of the church has no knowledge about the state of the life after
death, he believes that after his life in the body a man is either at
once uplifted into heaven, or cast into hell; when nevertheless this
takes place successively, although with much variety in respect to times
and in respect to states. With the good who are to be uplifted into
heaven, evils are successively separated, and the good are filled with
goods according to the faculty of reception acquired in the world. And
with the evil who are to be cast into hell, goods are successively
separated, and the evil are successively filled with evils, according to
the faculty of reception acquired in the world. \[3\] Moreover a man in
the other life enters into new states, and undergoes changes. Those who
are being uplifted into heaven, and afterward when they have been
uplifted, are perfected to eternity; but those who are being cast down
to hell, and afterward when they have been cast down, endure evils
continually more grievous, and this until they dare not do evil to
anyone. After this they remain in hell to eternity, whence they cannot
be taken out, because it cannot be given them to will good to anyone,
but only, from fear of the penalty, not to do evil, the desire to do it
always remaining.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7542.">7542.</span></span>

Into thy heart. That this signifies into the inmost, is evident from the
signification of the "heart," as being what is of the will, thus of the
love (see n. 2930, 3313, 3888, 3889), consequently what is of the very
life, for the love, being of the will, makes the very life; hence it is
that by the "heart" is signified the inmost. The inmost with the good is
love to the Lord and love toward the neighbor, but the inmost with the
evil is the love of self and the love of the world; it is this inmost
that is here meant. The things that are around this inmost and make as
it were its circumferences, are evils with the falsities which favor
them; and these are disposed in the order in which they favor. In the
other life these are unrolled according to the order in which they have
been disposed; first come forth those which occupy the outermost
circumferences; afterward those which occupy the more interior ones; and
at last the inmost is made manifest. Hence it is that a man in the other
life passes through many states, and that by degrees, successively, the
evil run into plagues, before they are cast into hell, according to what
has just been said. The inmost, to which they finally come, is hell
itself with them, for it is the evil itself which had been of their
love, thus the end for the sake of which they had done all things, and
which in the world they had most deeply hidden.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7543.">7543.</span></span>

And into thy servants, and into thy people. That this signifies into all
things in general and in particular, is evident from the signification
of "servants" and "people" as being all and each, thus all things and
each (see n. 7396).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7544.">7544.</span></span>

That thou mayest know that there is no one as I in the whole earth. That
this signifies made known to them from this, that the Lord is the only
God, is evident from what was said above (n. 7401).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7545.">7545.</span></span>

For now I would put forth My hand. That this signifies that all
communication might be taken away, is evident from the signification of
"hand," as being power (see n. 4931-4937, 6292, 6947, 7188, 7189, 7518);
and of "the hand of Jehovah," as being omnipotence (n. 878, 3387, 7518).
Hence "to put forth the hand" denotes to show power, and from
omnipotence to do it. This omnipotence is described by his being able
"to send all plagues into his heart, into his servants, and into his
people," whereby is signified that all evils would rush in together, and
thus that communication with the things of heaven would be taken away.
It is this exercise of power that is here signified by these words. How
the case is with this communication has already been told, namely, that
those who infest the upright in the other life are such as in the world
have been in the church and have read the Word, and have known the
doctrinal things of faith of their church and have also professed them,
but have lived a life of evil. So long as such in the other life retain
the things of faith, they have communication with heaven, and so long
they cannot be cast down into hell; and therefore it is these things
that are by degrees taken away from them; and after these have been
taken away, the evil no longer have anything to hold them up; but then
like weights without support, or like birds with their wings cut off,
they fall downward, or into the deep. From all this it is evident what
is meant by the possibility of the communication being taken away from
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7546.">7546.</span></span>

And smite thee and thy people with pestilence. That this signifies thus
total devastation, is evident from the signification of "pestilence," as
being the vastation of good and truth (see n. 7505); here total
devastation, because it is said that Pharaoh and his people would be
smitten with it; but before (verse 3), that the cattle would be smitten,
and therefore in that verse by "pestilence" is not signified total
devastation, but vastation in general as to the things that belong to
the truth and good of the church, and to those which are outside of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7547.">7547.</span></span>

And thou wouldest be cut off from the earth. That this signifies that
thus there would no longer be communication through the things that
belong to the church, is evident from the signification of "being cut
off," when said of the things that belong to the church, as being to be
separated; and when they are separated, or when there is no longer
communication with heaven by means of the things of the church, then the
man falls into hell, which is "to be cut off" (see above, n. 7545); and
from the signification of "the earth," as being the church (n. 662,
1067, 1262, 1733, 1850, 2117, 2118, 2571, 2928, 3355, 4447, 4535, 5577).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7548.">7548.</span></span>

But yet for this cause have I made thee to stand. That this signifies
that the communication would still remain, and they will pass through
states by reason of order, is evident from the signification of "causing
to stand," when it is said of the plagues or evils that these should not
rush in all together (see n. 7541), and of the communication with
heaven, that it should not be taken away from them (n. 7545), as being
that the communication would still remain, consequently that they would
pass through states by reason of order, that is, that they would be
devastated by degrees successively (n. 7541).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7549.">7549.</span></span>

That thou mayest see My power. That this signifies that they may notice
how great the Divine power is, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7550.">7550.</span></span>

And that My name may be told in the whole earth. That this signifies
that thus where the church is the Lord may be acknowledged as the only
God, is evident from the signification of "name," as being everything in
one complex by which the Lord is worshiped (see n. 2724, 3006, 6674);
and as the veriest essential of worship is the acknowledgment that the
Lord is the only God, and that His Human is Divine, and that from this
proceeds all faith and love, therefore by the "name of Jehovah being
told" is signified that the Lord is to be acknowledged as the only God
(that the Divine Human of the Lord is the "name of Jehovah," see n.
2628, 6887), and from the signification of "the earth," as being the
church (see just above, n. 7547). That Jehovah or the Lord in this and
in many other passages wills that His might and power may appear, and
His name be told, and elsewhere that He be humbly worshiped and adored,
seems as if He desires to show forth His glory, and as if He loves
adoration for the sake of Himself. But quite different is the real case.
It is not for the sake of Himself, but for the sake of the human race;
not from self-glory, but from love; for He wills to be conjoined with
the human race, and to give them eternal life and happiness. This cannot
be done unless the man is in humble worship; and there can be no humble
worship unless the man acknowledges and believes that he himself is dust
and ashes, that is, nothing but evil, and that Jehovah or the Lord is
the Greatest and the Holiest, and that he dare not from himself approach
Him. When man is in such humble worship, then the Lord can flow in with
the life of His love, and give heaven and eternal happiness. This is the
reason why Jehovah or the Lord so greatly extols His own power and glory
in the Word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7551-7600](ac152)
