[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac162)  [Next](ac164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="8101.">8101.</span></span>

Verse 19. And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him; for swearing he
had called the sons of Israel to swear, saying, Visiting God will visit
you; and ye shall bring up my bones with you from hence. "And Moses took
the bones of Joseph with him," signifies the representative of a church,
which they had; "for swearing he had caused the sons of Israel to swear,
saying," signifies a binding; "Visiting God will visit you," signifies
when this last state and first state of the church would come; "and ye
shall bring up my bones with you from hence," signifies as above, the
representative of a church with them, and not a church, which moreover
is in what is internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8102.">8102.</span></span>

It is needless to unfold these words further, because they have been
already unfolded at Gen. 50:24, 25, where like words occur (see n. 6590,
6952). 8102a. Verses 20-22. And they journeyed from Succoth, and
encamped in Etham, at the end of the wilderness. And Jehovah went before
them by day in a pillar of cloud, to lead them in the way; and by night
in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and by night. The
pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night, departed not
from before the people. "And they journeyed from Succoth, and encamped
in Etham," signifies the second state after they were liberated; "at the
end of the wilderness," signifies the first state of temptations; "and
Jehovah went before them," signifies the continuous presence of the
Lord; "by day in a pillar of cloud," signifies that when there was a
state of enlightenment, it was tempered by obscurity of truth; "to lead
them in the way," signifies the Divine auspices; "and by night in a
pillar of fire, to give them light," signifies that when there was a
state of obscurity it was tempered by enlightenment from good; "to go by
day and by night," signifies thus life in both states; "the pillar of
cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night, departed not from before
the people," signifies that the presence of the Lord was perpetual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8103.">8103.</span></span>

And they journeyed from Succcoth, and encamped in Etham. That this
signifies the second state after they were liberated, is evident from
the fact that the journeyings and encampments of the sons of Israel
after they went forth from Egypt, signify the spiritual states of those
who were liberated by the Lord (concerning whom see above). The changes
of states are signified by the journeys from one place to another and
the residing there; the second state is here signified by the journeying
from Succoth to Etham, because the first state was signified by the
journeying from Rameses to Succoth (see n. 7972). Moreover by
"journeyings" in the internal sense of the Word are signified states and
purposes of life (n. 1293, 3335, 5605), and by "encampments" the
settings in order of truth and good which are of the life (n. 4236).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8104.">8104.</span></span>

At the end of the wilderness. That this signifies the first state of
temptations, is evident from the signification of a "wilderness," as
being a state for the undergoing of temptations (of which above, n.
8098); and as this state began at the end of the wilderness, therefore
by "the end of the wilderness" is signified the first state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8105.">8105.</span></span>

And Jehovah went before them. That this signifies the continuous
presence of the Lord, is evident without explication. (That "Jehovah"
denotes the Lord, see above, n. 8046.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8106.">8106.</span></span>

By day in a pillar of cloud. That this signifies that when there was a
state of enlightenment it was tempered by obscurity of truth, is evident
from the signification of "by day," or "in the day," as being in a state
of enlightenment; for the times of day, as morning, noon, evening, and
night, correspond to the various degrees of enlightenment which belong
to intelligence and wisdom in the other life (see n. 5672, 5962, 6110);
whence "day" denotes a state of enlightenment or clear perception, and
"night" a state of no enlightenment, or of obscure perception (n. 7680);
and from the signification of "cloud," as being obscurity of truth,
because a cloud takes away the brightness of light from the sun, and
also tempers it. \[2\] In the Word throughout it is said that Jehovah
appeared "in a cloud," and that He was "girded with a cloud," also that
"beneath His feet was a cloud;" in which passages by "cloud" is meant
obscurity of truth, specifically, the literal sense of the Word, for
relatively to the internal sense this sense is obscurity of truth (see
the preface to Gen. 18; also n. 4391, 5922, 6343, 6752). This was
signified by the "cloud" when the Lord was seen by Peter, James, and
John in glory (Luke 9:34); when from Mount Sinai by the people; and when
by Moses upon his entering to Him there (Exod. 19:9; 20:18; 24:15-18;
34:5); and also by the circumstance that the Lord so often said that He
"would come in the clouds of heaven" (Matt. 24:30; 26:63, 64; Mark
13:26; 14:61, 62; Luke 21:27). \[3\] The literal sense of the Word is
called a "cloud," because the internal sense, which is called "glory,"
cannot be comprehended by man, except one who is regenerated, and is
also enlightened. If the internal sense of the Word, or truth Divine in
its glory, were to appear before a man who is not regenerated, it would
be like thick darkness, in which he would see nothing at all, and by
which he would also be blinded, that is, would believe nothing. From all
this it can be seen what is signified by a "cloud by day," namely,
obscurity of truth; and when the Word is treated of, the literal sense.
\[4\] It is said "in a pillar of cloud and of fire," because by "a
pillar" is signified a prop which supports (see Jer. 1:18; Ps. 75:3;
Rev. 3:12; Job 9:6); and it is predicated of the natural, because the
natural is like a prop or base to the spiritual; for the spiritual
closes in the natural, and there rests. Hence it is that the feet of the
angel descending from heaven appeared "as pillars of fire" (Rev. 10:1);
for by "feet" is signified the natural (see n. 2162, 3147, 3761, 3986,
4280, 4938-4952, 5327, 5328).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8107.">8107.</span></span>

To lead them in the way. That this signifies the Divine auspices, is
evident from the signification of "leading in the way," when said of
Jehovah, as being Providence, and the Divine auspices (see n. 8093,
8098).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8108.">8108.</span></span>

And by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light. That this
signifies that when there was a state of obscurity, it was tempered by
enlightenment from good, is evident from the signification of "night,"
as being a state of obscurity (see n. 1712, 6000); from the
signification of "fire," as being the good of love (n. 934, 4906, 5215,
6314, 6832, 6834, 6849, 7324, 7852); and from the signification of
"giving light," as being enlightenment. That Jehovah or the Lord
appeared or went before in a pillar of cloud by day and in a pillar of
fire by night, was because thereby was represented the state of heaven,
for in heaven there are never-ceasing variations and changes of state;
for the angels are continually being perfected, which cannot possibly be
done without unceasing changes of states. In general these variations
and changes are like the changes of times in the world; namely, the
changes of the times of the year; spring, summer, autumn, winter, and
again spring; and the changes of the times of the day-morning, noon,
evening, night, and again morning. When it is morning and noon in
heaven, there is enlightenment of the understanding from the Lord, but
this enlightenment is then tempered by obscurity of truth as by a cloud;
and when it is evening and night there, they have obscurity of
understanding, but this is tempered by the Lord by means of the good of
love, as by a fire which gives light. These are the things which were
represented by the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by
night with the sons of Israel in the wilderness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8109.">8109.</span></span>

To go by day and by night. That this signifies life in both states, is
evident from the signification of "going" and "journeying," as being to
live (see n. 3335, 3690, 4882, 5493, 5605); and from the signification
of "day," as being a state of enlightenment; and of "night," as being a
state of obscurity (of which just above, n. 8106, 8108); thus both
states.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8110.">8110.</span></span>

The pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night, departed
not from before the people. That this signifies that the presence of the
Lord was perpetual, is evident from what has now been unfolded; for so
the angels, in whose midst was the Lord, appeared before the people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8111.">8111.</span></span>

ON THE SPIRITS AND INHABITANTS OF THE PLANET JUPITER, CONTINUED By long
continued interaction with the spirits of the earth Jupiter, it became
evident that they are better disposed than the spirits of some other
earths. Their approach when they came, their stay, and their influx at
the time, were inexpressibly gentle and sweet. In the other life
goodness manifests itself by gentleness and sweetness. These qualities
could be very clearly distinguished from the gentleness and sweetness of
the good spirits of our earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8112.">8112.</span></span>

When any slight disagreement arises among them, there appears to them as
it were a slender ray of white light, such as usually is that of
lightning; or a little band in which are sparkling stars. These are
signs of disagreement; but the disagreement among them is quickly
repaired. When the stars sparkle and at the same time wander, the sign
is not good; but when the sparkling stars are fixed, the sign is good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8113.">8113.</span></span>

I was able to recognize the presence of the spirits of Jupiter, not only
from the gentleness and sweetness of their approach and influx, but also
from the fact that they inflowed most especially into the face, and that
they disposed it to be smiling and cheerful, and continually so while
they were present. It was said that they so dispose the faces of the
inhabitants of their earth, for they wish to inspire them with
tranquillity and delight of heart. This tranquillity and delight with
which they inspired me sensibly filled my chest and heart. The desires
and anxieties about the future, which induce intranquility and
unpleasantness, and excite and agitate the mind into various
disturbances, were then removed. From this I could clearly see what was
the quality of the life of the inhabitants of the planet Jupiter. They
told me that they do not fear death, except a little on account of the
loss of their married partner and children, because they know of a
certainty that the death of the body is a continuation of life, and that
after it they become more happy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8114.">8114.</span></span>

I noticed that they had a still more interior state of happiness, and
that they were susceptible of a state of happiness still more interior
yet. This is discerned from the fact that their interiors are not
closed, but are open to the Lord; for the more open the interiors are,
the more susceptible men are of the Divine good and the Divine
happiness. Very different is the case with those who do not live in the
order of heaven. With such the interiors are closed and the exteriors
are open to hell, whence flow in contempt for others, hatreds, revenges,
and cruelties, which it is a delight for them to exercise against those
who do not reverence them, or do not favor their desires.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8115.">8115.</span></span>

The spirits of the earth Jupiter cannot be together with the spirits of
our earth, because these are of a wholly different genius, and do not
love the delight of tranquillity as they do. It surprised them to hear
that people from our earth who become angels are wholly different in
heart, and retain scarcely anything that is like their state when they
were spirits. To show them that such is the case there came in
succession from heaven a number of choirs of angels from our earth.
(There are choirs when many think, speak, and act all together as a one
in an uninterrupted series: the celebration of the Lord in the heavens
is for the most part effected by means of choirs: as to choirs, see n.
1648, 1649, 2595, 2596, 3350, 5182.) These choirs gave so much delight
to the spirits of Jupiter who were with me that they seemed to
themselves to be as it were transported into heaven. This glorification
by means of choirs lasted about an hour. The delicious feelings excited
thereby in the spirits, being communicated to me, I was enabled to feel
them. They said that they would tell this to their people who were
elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8116.">8116.</span></span>

They reported that in the region of their earth where they had been,
there is a great multitude of men, as great as the planet can feed; and
that the planet is fertile, and abounds in all things; and that its
inhabitants desire no more than will suffice for the necessaries of
life, and that consequently the multitude of men is so great.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8117.">8117.</span></span>

They reported further that they are there distinguished into nations,
families, and houses; that they all dwell separately with their own;
that their interaction is mostly with their family connections; that no
one ever desires the goods of another, and that it never comes into
their minds to claim anything thereof for themselves, still less to
attack and plunder, which they regard as a crime contrary to human
nature, and horrible. When I desired to tell them that in this earth
there are wars, plunderings, and slaughterings, they turned away, and
were averse to hear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8118.">8118.</span></span>

I have been told by the angels that the most ancient people on this
earth dwelt in like manner, that is, distinguished into nations,
families and houses; that they were all content with their own goods;
and that to grow rich from the goods of others, and to exercise
dominion, were then quite unknown. On this account, the ancient times,
and especially the most ancient, were more acceptable to the Lord than
the succeeding ones; and such being the state, innocence also then
reigned, and with innocence, wisdom. Everyone then did what is good from
good, and what is just from justice. They did not know what it is to do
what is good and just with a view to self-honor, or for the sake of
profit. They did not then speak anything but the truth; and this not so
much from truth, as from good; that is, not from the understanding
separate, but from the will conjoined. Such were the ancient times, and
therefore angels could then have interaction with men, and lead their
minds home to heaven in a state almost separated from bodily things, and
could take them round, and show them the magnificent and happy things
there, and likewise communicate to them their own happinesses and
delights. Moreover those times were known to ancient writers, and were
called by them the Golden and also the Saturnian Age. \[2\] Those times
were of this nature, because, as before said, they lived distinguished
into nations, and the nations into families, and the families into
houses, and each house dwelt by itself; and because it never then came
into anyone's mind to attack the inheritance of another, and thereby get
for himself wealth and dominion. Far removed then were the love of self
and the love of the world, and everyone rejoiced at heart by reason of
his own good, and not less by reason of another's. \[3\] But in the
succeeding time this scene was changed and turned into the opposite,
when the lust of dominion and of possessing the goods of others invaded
the mind. Then for the sake of self-defense, the human race gathered
into kingdoms and empires. And as the laws of charity and conscience,
which had been written on hearts, ceased to operate, it became necessary
to enact laws to restrain acts of violence; in which laws, honors, and
riches were the rewards, and the deprivation of these were the
penalties. When the state was thus changed, heaven removed itself from
man, and this more and more, even to the present age, when it is no
longer known whether there is a heaven, and consequently whether there
is a hell, and when it is even denied that these exist. These things
have been stated, in order that by the parallelism there may be
illustrated the quality of the state of those who are on the earth
Jupiter, and whence comes their good disposition, and also their wisdom,
of which more will be said in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8119.">8119.</span></span>

A continuation about the spirits and inhabitants of the earth Jupiter
will be found at the end of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8120.">8120.</span></span>

Exodus 14 THE DOCTRINE OF CHARITY It is believed that charity toward the
neighbor consists in giving to the poor, in helping the needy, and in
doing good to everyone without exception. Nevertheless genuine charity
consists in acting prudently, and to the end that good may come thereby.
He who helps any poor or needy rogue, does evil to his neighbor through
him, for by the help which he affords he confirms him in evil, and
supplies him with the means of doing evil to others. It is otherwise
with him who gives assistance to the good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8121.">8121.</span></span>

But charity toward the neighbor extends much more widely than to the
poor and needy. Charity toward the neighbor consists in doing right in
every work, and one's duty in every office. If a judge does what is just
for the sake of justice, he exercises charity toward the neighbor; if he
punishes the guilty and acquits the guiltless, he exercises charity
toward the neighbor, for he thus consults the welfare of his
fellow-citizen, of his country, and also of the Lord's kingdom. By doing
what is just for the sake of justice he consults the welfare of the
Lord's kingdom; by acquitting the guiltless, he consults that of his
fellow-citizen; and by punishing the guilty, that of his country. The
priest who teaches truth, and leads to good, for the sake of truth and
good, exercises charity; but he who does such things for the sake of
himself and the world does not exercise charity, because he does not
love his neighbor, but himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8122.">8122.</span></span>

The case is the same in all other instances, whether men be in any
employment or not; as with children toward their parents, and with
parents toward their children; with servants toward their masters, and
with masters toward their servants; with subjects toward their king, and
with the king toward his subjects. In these cases he who does his duty
from a sense of duty, and what is just from a sense of justice,
exercises charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8123.">8123.</span></span>

That such things belong to charity toward the neighbor, is because every
man is the neighbor, but in various ways (see n. 6818); a society
smaller or larger is more the neighbor (n. 6819, 6820); our country is
yet more the neighbor (n. 6819, 6821); the church still more (n. 6819,
6822); the Lord's kingdom still more (n. 6819, 6823); and the Lord above
all (n. 6819, 6824). In the universal sense the good which proceeds from
the Lord is the neighbor (n. 6706, 6711), consequently so also are
justice and right. And therefore he who does any good whatsoever for the
sake of good, and anything just for the sake of justice, loves the
neighbor and exercises charity, for he acts from the love of what is
good, and the love of what is just, and thus from the love of those in
whom these are. But he who does what is unjust for the sake of any
self-advantage whatever, hates his neighbor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8124.">8124.</span></span>

He who is in charity toward the neighbor from internal affection is a
charity toward the neighbor in everything which he thinks and speaks,
and which he wills and does. It can be said that as to his interiors a
man or an angel is a charity when good is to him the neighbor. So widely
does charity toward the neighbor extend. EXODUS 14 1. And Jehovah spake
unto Moses, saying, 2. Speak unto the sons of Israel, that they turn
back and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before
Baal-zephon: over against it shall ye encamp by the sea. 3. And Pharaoh
will say of the sons of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the
wilderness hath shut upon them. 4. And I will harden Pharaoh's heart,
and he shall follow after them; and I will be glorified in Pharaoh, and
in all his army; and the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah. And
they did so. 5. And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled;
and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the
people, and they said, What is this we have done, that we have let
Israel go from serving us? 6. And he harnessed his chariot, and took his
people with him: 7. And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the
chariots of Egypt, and tertian captains upon all of them. 8. And Jehovah
hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the
sons of Israel; and the sons of Israel went out with a lofty hand. 9.
And the Egyptians pursued after them, and overtook them encamping by the
sea, all the horses of the chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and
his army, beside Pi-hahiroth before Baal-zephon. 10. And Pharaoh drew
nigh, and the sons of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold the
Egyptian marching after them, and they were sore afraid; and the sons of
Israel cried unto Jehovah. 11. And they said unto Moses, are there no
graves in Egypt, that thou hast taken us to die in the wilderness? Why
hast thou done this to us, to lead us forth out of Egypt? 12. Is not
this the word that we spake unto thee in Egypt, saying, Cease from us,
and let us serve the Egyptians? because it is good for us to serve the
Egyptians, rather than that we should die in the wilderness. 13. And
Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
salvation of Jehovah, which He will do for you today; for the Egyptians
whom ye have seen today, ye shall see them again no more forever. 14.
Jehovah shall wage war for you, and ye shall keep silence. 15. And
Jehovah said unto Moses, Why criest thou unto Me? speak unto the sons of
Israel, that they set forward. 16. And thou, lift up thy rod, and
stretch out thy hand over the sea, and cleave it asunder; and the sons
of Israel shall come into the midst of the sea on the dry. 17. And I,
behold I will harden the heart of the Egyptians, and they shall come
after them; and I will be glorified in Pharaoh, and in all his army, in
his chariots, and in his horsemen. 18. And the Egyptians shall know that
I am Jehovah, when I am glorified in Pharaoh, in his chariots, and in
his horsemen. 19. And the angel of God set out, marching before the camp
of Israel, and he went behind them; and the pillar of cloud set out from
before them and stood behind them: 20. And it came between the camp of
the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness,
and it lighted up the night; and the one came not near the other all the
night. 21. And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and Jehovah
made the sea go away by a strong east wind all the night, and made the
sea dry, and the waters were cleft asunder. 22. And the sons of Israel
came into the midst of the sea in the dry; and the waters were a wall to
them on their right hand, and on their left. 23. And the Egyptians
pursued, and came after them, all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and
his horsemen, into the midst of the sea. 24. And it was in the morning
watch, and Jehovah looked forth to the camp of the Egyptians in the
pillar of fire and of cloud, and troubled the camp of the Egyptians. 25.
And He took off the wheel of his chariots, and he drew it in heaviness;
and the Egyptian said, I will flee before Israel; because Jehovah wageth
war for them against the Egyptians. 26. And Jehovah said unto Moses,
Stretch out thy hand over the sea, and let the waters return upon the
Egyptians, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen. 27. And Moses
stretched out his hand over the sea, and the sea returned at the turn of
the morning to the strength of its flow; and the Egyptians fled to meet
it; and Jehovah shook out the Egyptians into the midst of the sea. 28.
And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen,
even all the army of Pharaoh that came after them into the sea; there
was not left of them even one. 29. And the sons of Israel went on the
dry into the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall to them on
their right hand, and on their left. 30. And Jehovah saved Israel on
this day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians
dead upon the seashore. 31. And Israel saw the great hand which Jehovah
wrought on the Egyptians, and the people feared Jehovah; and they
believed in Jehovah, and in His servant Moses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8125.">8125.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. In this chapter, in the internal sense, the subject
treated of is the first temptation of those who are of the spiritual
church, and the conducting of them through the midst of hell, and their
protection then by the Lord; and also the immersion of those who were in
faith separate from charity in hell, where are falsities from evils.
They who are of the spiritual church are represented by the sons of
Israel; they who are in faith separate from charity by the Egyptians.
The first temptation is described by the murmuring of the sons of Israel
when they saw the army of Pharaoh. Hell is signified by the "sea Suph"
through which the sons of Israel were conducted in safety, and in which
the Egyptians were immersed. Falsities from evils are signified by the
waters which covered the latter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8126.">8126.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE Verses 1-4. And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the sons of Israel, that they turn back and encamp before
Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal-zephon; over
against it shall ye encamp by the sea. And Pharaoh will say of the sons
of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut upon
them. And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and he shall follow after them;
and I will be glorified in Pharaoh, and in all his army; and the
Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah. And they did so. "And Jehovah
spake unto Moses, saying," signifies instruction by the Divine by means
of Divine truth; "Speak unto the sons of Israel," signifies the influx
of truth Divine with those who are of the spiritual church; "that they
turn back," signifies that they were not yet prepared; "and encamp
before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal-zephon,"
signifies the beginning of a state for undergoing temptations; "over
against it shall ye encamp by the sea," signifies that the influx of
temptation is thence; "and Pharaoh will say of the sons of Israel,"
signifies the thought of those who are in damnation concerning the state
of those who are of the spiritual church; "They are entangled in the
land," signifies that they are in confusion in respect to the things of
the church; "the wilderness hath shut upon them," signifies that
obscurity has taken possession of them; "and I will harden Pharaoh's
heart," signifies that they who were in falsities from evil would still
be determined; "and he shall follow after them," signifies that they
would still endeavor to subjugate them; "and I will be glorified,"
signifies that they should see a Divine effect from the Divine Human of
the Lord in the dissipation of falsity; "in Pharaoh, and in all his
army," signifies the immersion in hell of those who were in falsities
from evil, and an environment there by falsities as by waters; "and the
Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah," signifies that from this it
will be known that the Lord is the only God; "and they did so,"
signifies obedience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8127.">8127.</span></span>

And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying. That this signifies instruction by
the Divine by means of Divine truth, is evident from the signification
of "Jehovah spake and said," when concerning those things which shall be
done and come to pass, as being instruction by the Divine (see n. 7186,
7241, 7267, 7304, 7380, 7517); and from the representation of Moses, as
being the Lord as to Divine truth (n. 6723, 6752, 6771, 6827, 7010,
7014, 7089, 7382). It is said by means of Divine truth, because Moses,
by whom Divine truth is represented, was to speak unto the people. The
Divine Itself does not instruct and speak with men, nor indeed with
angels, immediately; but mediately by means of Divine truth (n. 7009).
This is meant by the Lord's words in John: No one hath ever seen God;
the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath set
Him forth (John 1:18; 5:37). By "the only-begotten Son" is meant the
Lord as to Divine truth; from this also the Lord calls Himself "the Son
of man" (n. 2628, 2803, 2813, 3704). The Lord also, when in the world,
was Divine truth; but afterward, when He was glorified, He became also
as to the Human, Divine good; and then from this proceeded Divine truth,
which is the "Spirit of truth" or "Holy Spirit."

<span class="margnote"><span id="8128.">8128.</span></span>

Speak unto the sons of Israel. That this signifies the influx of truth
Divine with those who are of the spiritual church, is evident from the
signification of "speaking," as being influx (see n. 2951, 5481, 5797,
7270), and from the representation of the sons of Israel, as being those
who are of the spiritual church (n. 6426, 6637, 6862, 6868, 7035, 7062,
7198, 7201, 7215, 7223). "To speak" denotes influx, because in the
internal representative sense Moses is Divine truth, and Divine truth
comes into perception and thought by influx. Thought from perception is
internal speech, to which external speech corresponds; and therefore in
the internal sense the former is meant by the latter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8129.">8129.</span></span>

That they turn back. That this signifies that they were not yet
prepared, is evident from the signification of "turning back," namely,
from the way of the land of the Philistines to the way of the wilderness
at the sea Suph, as being that they were not yet prepared, namely for
introduction into heaven, which is signified by their entrance into the
land of Canaan. How the case herein is, and that "turning back" denotes
that they were not prepared, can be seen from what was unfolded and
shown at verse 18 of the preceding chapter (n. 8098, 8099); namely, that
they could not be introduced into heaven until they had undergone
temptations, and the Lord had thereby confirmed truths and goods and had
conjoined them. This is here meant by "being prepared."

<span class="margnote"><span id="8130.">8130.</span></span>

And encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before
Baal-zephon. That this signifies the beginning of a state for undergoing
temptations, is evident from the signification of "encamping," as being
the setting in order of truth and good (see n. 4236, 8103), here for
undergoing temptations. This state is what is signified by the places at
which they were to encamp. That this state is signified is plain from
what follows, in that Pharaoh with his army afterward pitched his camp
there, and that at the sight of them the sons of Israel came into
grievous anxiety, by which the first state of temptations is signified
(see what follows at verses 9 to 12).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8131.">8131.</span></span>

Over against it shall ye encamp by the sea. That this signifies that the
influx of temptation is thence, is evident from the signification of
"over against it," as being near, so as to be in sight, and in the
internal sense so that there was influx thence; and from the
signification of "encamping," as being the setting in order of truth and
good for the undergoing of temptations (as just above, see n. 8130); and
from the signification of "the sea Suph," as being the hell where are
falsities from evils (n. 8099). How it is to be understood that the
influx of temptation was from there shall be briefly told. Temptations
with man are spiritual combats between evil and good spirits, which
combats are from those things and concerning those things which the man
has done and thought, and which are in his memory. The evil spirits
accuse and attack; but the good excuse and defend. These combats appear
as if in the man, for the things which flow in from the spiritual world
with a man are not presented as being from that world, but in himself
(n. 741, 751, 761, 1820, 3927, 4249, 4307, 4572, 5036, 6657, 6666). It
is the same with spirits when they undergo temptations. Therefore when
people are about to undergo temptations, the interior things in them,
that is, the truths and goods, are arranged by the Lord into such a
state that by immediate influx from Himself and mediate influx through
heaven, the falsities and evils which are from the hells may be
resisted, and thereby he who is in temptation may be protected. When a
man is being tempted he is also near hell, especially near that hell
which is signified by "the sea Suph," for in this hell are they who have
been in the memory-knowledge of truth but in a life of evil, and thereby
in falsities derived from evil. From the hells, through spirits, those
things flow in which bring anxiety upon man in temptations. From all
this it can be seen what is meant by the influx of temptation from hell,
which is signified by their "encamping over against it by the sea Suph."

<span class="margnote"><span id="8132.">8132.</span></span>

And Pharaoh will say of the sons of Israel. That this signifies the
thought of those who are in damnation concerning the state of those who
are of the spiritual church, is evident from the signification of
"saying," as being thought (see n. 7094, 7107, 7244, 7937); from the
representation of Pharaoh, as being those who infest by means of
falsities (n. 7107, 7110, 7126, 7142, 7220, 7228, 7317), here those who
are in damnation, that is, in mere falsities from evil, for they who are
merely in these, are in damnation (this state is signified by Pharaoh
and the Egyptians after the firstborn were slain in Egypt, for by the
slaying of the firstborn is signified damnation, n. 7766, 7778); and
from the representation of the sons of Israel, as being those who are of
the spiritual church (as just above, n. 8128).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8133.">8133.</span></span>

They are entangled in the land. That this signifies that they are in
confusion in respect to the things of the church, is evident from the
signification of "being entangled," as being to be perplexed, thus to be
in confusion (n. 2831); and from the signification of "land," as being
those things which are of the church. (That "land" denotes the church,
see n. 8011.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8134.">8134.</span></span>

The wilderness hath shut upon them. That this signifies that obscurity
has taken possession of them, is evident from the signification of
"shutting upon them," when said of the obscurity which is signified by
"the wilderness," as being to take complete possession of them; and from
the signification of "wilderness," as being the obscurity of faith (see
n. 7313).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8135.">8135.</span></span>

And I will harden Pharaoh's heart. That this signifies that they who
were in falsities from evil would still be determined, is evident from
the signification of "hardening the heart," as being to be determined
(see n. 7272, 7300, 7305); and from the representation of Pharaoh, as
being those who are in falsities from evil, or what is the same thing,
who are in damnation (n. 8132). It is said "Pharaoh's heart," because by
"heart" in the genuine sense is signified the good of celestial love (n.
3313, 3635, 3883-3896, 7542), consequently in the opposite sense is
signified evil; here the evil of those who have been in the
memory-knowledge of faith and in a life of evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8136.">8136.</span></span>

And he shall follow after them. That this signifies that they would
still endeavor to subjugate them, is evident from the signification of
"following after them," as being to endeavor to subjugate; for the
intention of their pursuit was to reduce them into a state of servitude,
and by "making to serve," when said of the Egyptians, is signified the
intention to subjugate (n. 6666, 6670, 6671).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8137.">8137.</span></span>

And I will be glorified. That this signifies that they should see a
Divine effect from the Divine Human of the Lord in the dissipation of
falsity, is evident from the signification of "to be glorified," when
said of Jehovah or the Lord, as being a Divine effect, here from His
Divine Human, because by coming into the world and assuming the Human
and making it Divine, the Lord cast into the hells all evils and
falsities, and reduced the heavens into order, and also liberated from
damnation those who were of the spiritual church (see n. 6854, 6914,
7091, 7828, 7932, 8018). These things are in general signified by "being
glorified," but here there is signified that they who had infested the
well-disposed should be cast into hell, and there encompassed about with
falsities as with waters of a sea, and this as a Divine effect from the
mere presence of the Lord. \[2\] To show how the case herein is, it
shall be further unfolded. There are as many hells as there are genera
and species of evils, each hell being separated from others as it were
by rain-storms, clouds, or waters. In the other life evils and falsities
appear before the eyes of spirits as rain-storms and clouds, and also as
waters; the falsities from evils of those who have been of the spiritual
church and have lived evilly, appear as waters; but the falsities from
evils of those who have been of the celestial church, appear as
rain-storms. They who are in the hells appear to be thus encompassed,
with a difference everywhere in respect to amount and kind, density and
rarity, thick darkness and dimness, according to the genus and species
of the falsity from evil. The hell where they are who have lived in
faith separate from charity and in a life of evil, is encompassed as by
the waters of a sea; the falsities of evil do not indeed appear as
waters to those who are there, but to those who look from without. Above
that sea, where these are, are the hells of adulterers; these are above,
because in the internal sense adulteries denote adulterations of good
and the consequent perversions of truth, thus they denote evils from
which come falsities contrary to the truths and goods of faith (n. 2466,
2729, 3399), being such falsities as are with those who are in the hell
beneath, and who have lived contrary to the truth of the church, and
have made its good of no account, and therefore have also adulterated
and perverted everything that is said in the Word about good, that is,
about charity toward the neighbor and about love to God. \[3\] As
regards the "glorification in Pharaoh and in his army," this here
denotes immersion in this hell and being encompassed by waters as of a
sea at the mere presence of the Lord, as was said above. For the evil
flee from the presence of the Lord, that is, the presence of the good
and truth that are from Him, feeling horror and torment at their mere
approach; and also by reason of this presence they become encompassed
about with their own evils and falsities, for these then burst forth
from them; and indeed these evils and falsities encompass and are
interposed in order to prevent the Divine from flowing in and tormenting
them. This is the Divine effect which is here signified by the
"glorification in Pharaoh and in his army." That this effect is from the
Divine Human of the Lord, is because, as before said, by the Lord's
coming into the world and assuming the Human and making it Divine, He
cast all falsities and evils into hell, and reduced truths and goods in
the heavens into order, and liberated from damnation those who were of
the spiritual church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8138.">8138.</span></span>

In Pharaoh and in all his army. That this signifies the immersion in
hell of those who were in falsities from evil, and an environment there
by falsities as by waters, is evident from what has just been mentioned
(n. 8137), namely, that by "Pharaoh" and also by "his army," are
signified those who were cast into hell; by "Pharaoh," those who are in
falsities from evil, and by "his army," the falsities themselves. (That
"armies" denote truths from good see n. 3448, 7236, 7988, and therefore
in the opposite sense they signify falsities from evil n. 3448.) It is
said "an environment by falsities as by waters," because falsities from
evil, such as belong to those of the church who have been in faith
separate and in a life of evil, appear there like waters (n. 8137), and
it is from this that inundations of waters signify vastations of truth,
and the waters of them, falsities (n. 705, 739, 756, 6346, 6853, 7307).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8139.">8139.</span></span>

And the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah. That this signifies that
from this it will be known that the Lord is the only God, is evident
from what has been unfolded above (n. 7401, 7444, 7544, 7598, 7636),
where like words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8140.">8140.</span></span>

And they did so. That this signifies obedience, is evident without
explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8141.">8141.</span></span>

Verses 5-9. And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled; and
the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people,
and they said, What is this we have done, that we have let Israel go
from serving us? And he harnessed his chariot, and took his people with
him; and he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of
Egypt, and tertian captains upon all of them. And Jehovah hardened the
heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the sons of Israel;
and the sons of Israel went out with a lofty hand. And the Egyptians
pursued after them, and overtook them encamping by the sea, all the
horses of the chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army,
beside Pi-hahiroth, before Baal-zephon. "And it was told the king of
Egypt that the people fled," signifies the thought of those who were in
mere falsities from evil, that they were completely separated; "and the
heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people,"
signifies a change of state into evil in the case of those who were in
falsities from evil; "and they said, What is this we have done?"
signifies chiding; "that we have let Israel go from serving us,"
signifies that they have left and have not subjugated them; "and he
harnessed his chariot," signifies the doctrine of falsity, which is that
of faith separate in general; "and took his people with him," signifies
with all falsities both in general and in particular; "and he took six
hundred chosen chariots," signifies all and each of the doctrinal things
of falsity which are of faith separate in their order; "and all the
chariots of Egypt," signifies also the doctrinal things of falsity that
are of service to them; "and tertian captains upon all of them,"
signifies reduced into order under generals; "and Jehovah hardened the
heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt," signifies obstinacy from the falsity
which is from evil; "and he pursued after the sons of Israel," signifies
an attempt to subjugate those who were in faith conjoined with charity;
"and the sons of Israel went out with a lofty hand," signifies when
nevertheless they had been released by the Divine power from the
endeavor to subjugate them; "and the Egyptians pursued after them,"
signifies the effect from the endeavor to subjugate on the part of those
who were in falsities from evil; "and overtook them encamping by the
sea," signifies communication around the region of hell where are
falsities from evil; "all the horses of the chariots of Pharaoh, and his
horsemen, and his army," signifies all things which are of falsity from
a perverted understanding; "beside Pi-hahiroth, before Baal-zephon,"
signifies whence there was communication, and therefore the beginning of
the state of undergoing temptations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8142.">8142.</span></span>

And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled. That this
signifies the thought of those who were in mere falsities from evil,
that they were completely separated, is evident from the signification
of anyone's being told, as being to think and reflect (see n. 2862,
5508); from the representation of Pharaoh, as being those who are in
falsities from evil (n. 8132, 8135), and who when he is called "king of
Egypt" denotes those who are in mere falsities (n. 7220, 7228), for by
"king" are signified truths (n. 1672, 2015, 2069, 4575, 4581, 4966,
5044, 6148), consequently in the opposite sense falsities; and from the
signification of "fleeing," as being to be separated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8143.">8143.</span></span>

And the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the
people. That this signifies a change of state into evil in the case of
those who were in falsities from evil, is evident from the signification
of "the heart being turned," as being a change of state into evil; (that
"to be turned," denotes to be changed, here as to the mind, thus as to
the state, is evident, and that "heart" denotes evil see above, n.
8135); from the representation of Pharaoh, as being those who are in
falsities from evil (n. 8132); from the signification of "servants," as
being those who are of lower condition, and who minister, consequently
all and each who are in falsities from evil (n. 7396), and from the
representation of the sons of Israel, as being those who are of the
spiritual church. Hence it is evident that by "the heart of Pharaoh and
of his servants being turned against the people," is signified a change
of state into evil in the case of all those who are in falsities from
evil, against those who are of the spiritual church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8144.">8144.</span></span>

And they said, What is this we have done? That this signifies a chiding,
namely, of themselves, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8145.">8145.</span></span>

That we have let Israel go from serving us. That this signifies that
they have left and have not subjugated them, is evident from the
signification of "letting go," as being to leave; and from the
signification of "from serving us," when said by the Egyptians
concerning the sons of Israel, as being from assaulting by means of
falsities and infesting (see n. 7120, 7129), and from subjugating
thereby (n. 6666, 6670, 6671).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8146.">8146.</span></span>

And he harnessed his chariot. That this signifies the doctrine of
falsity, which is that of faith separate in general, is evident from the
signification of a "chariot," as being doctrine (see n. 2760, 5321,
5945), here the doctrine of falsity which is of faith separate, because
it is the chariot of Pharaoh, and by Pharaoh are represented the
falsities which are of faith separate; for they who are in faith
separate from charity and at the same time in a life of evil must needs
be in falsities (n. 8094). \[2\] In what now follows, the subject
treated of is the gathering together of all the falsities derived from
evil with those who have been in faith separate from charity and in a
life of evil. In what precedes, the vastation of the truths of faith
with them was described, and their final reduction to the state of being
in mere falsities from evil, thus in damnation. In this chapter their
being cast down into hell is now treated of, for this follows damnation.
With this state of being cast down into hell, the case is this. When
this is to be done, all the falsities that appertain to them are
gathered together into one, which is effected by the opening of all the
hells with which they have had communication, and their being poured in
upon them. Thence come the condensations around them of falsities from
evil which appear as waters to those who look at them from without (n.
8137, 8138), for they are exhalations from their life; and when they are
encompassed about with these, they are in hell. That the falsities from
evil are gathered together into one and are poured in upon them, is done
in order that they may be surrounded by such things as have been of
their life, and may be afterward kept in them. Their kind of evil and
its derivative falsity then distinguish them and their hell from other
hells. \[3\] As the subject treated of is the gathering together of all
the falsities from evil which appertain to them, therefore such frequent
mention is made in this chapter of the chariots of Pharaoh, his horses,
horsemen, army, and people, for by these are signified all things of
falsity which appertain to them, as in this verse, "He harnessed his
chariot, and took his people with him;" in the seventh verse, "He took
six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt;" in the
ninth verse, "And the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and
chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army;" in verse
seventeen, "I will be glorified in Pharaoh, in all his army, in his
chariots, and in his horsemen;" in like manner in verse eighteen; again
in verse twenty-three, "And the Egyptians pursued, and came after them,
all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen;" in verse
twenty-five, "Jehovah removed the wheel of their chariots;" in verse
twenty-six, "That the waters may return upon the Egyptians, upon their
chariots, and upon their horsemen;" in verse twenty-eight, "The waters
returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, even to all the
army of Pharaoh." These things are repeated so many times because the
subject treated of is falsities from evil, in that these were gathered
together and poured in upon them; for by the things mentioned above are
signified all things of falsity from evil; by "Pharaoh and the
Egyptians," the men themselves who are in falsities from evil; by
"chariots," the doctrinal things of falsity; by "horses," false
memory-knowledges from a perverted understanding; by "horsemen," the
derivative reasonings; by "army," and "people," the falsities
themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8147.">8147.</span></span>

And took his people with him. That this signifies with all falsities
both in general and in particular, is evident from the signification of
"people," as being truths, and in the opposite sense falsities (see n.
1259, 1260, 3295, 3581), here falsities derived from evil, which are
represented by Pharaoh and the Egyptians when it is said "Pharaoh and
his servants," or "Pharaoh and his people," there are signified all,
both in general and in particular, who are in these falsities, also all
the falsities both in general and in particular (n. 7396).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8148.">8148.</span></span>

And he took six hundred chosen chariots. That this signifies all and
each of the doctrinal things of falsity which are of faith separate, in
their order, is evident from the signification of the number "six
hundred," as being each and all things of the truth and good of faith in
one complex, thus in the opposite sense each and all things of the
falsity and evil of faith separate from charity (that these are
signified by "six hundred" can be seen from what has been shown
concerning the number "six hundred thousand," n. 7973); and from the
signification of "chariots," as being doctrinal things of faith, here of
faith separate (see just above, n. 8146). By "chosen chariots" are
signified the chief doctrinal things of this faith, on which the rest
depend; those which depend on them, or serve them, being signified by
"the chariots of Egypt" (of which presently). \[2\] Be it known that
these falsities, which are here signified by "Pharaoh, his army, and his
people," also by his "chariots, horses, and horsemen," are especially
the falsities of those who are in persuasive faith, that is, who
persuade themselves that the doctrinal things of the church in which
they are, are true, and yet are in a life of evil. Persuasive faith
exists together with evil of life, but not saving faith; for persuasive
faith is a persuasion that all things that belong to the doctrine of the
church are true, not for the sake of truth, nor for the sake of life,
nor even for the sake of salvation, for in this they scarcely believe;
but for the sake of self-advantage, that is, for the sake of getting
honors and wealth, and for the sake of reputation with a view to these.
They learn doctrinal things in order to acquire such things, thus not to
the end that they may be of service to the church and the salvation of
souls, but to serve themselves and those who belong to them; and
therefore it is all the same to them whether these doctrinal things are
true, or false; this they care nothing about, still less inquire into,
for they are in no affection of truth for the sake of truth. No matter
what kind of doctrinal things they may be, they confirm them; and when
they have confirmed them, they persuade themselves that they are true,
not considering that falsities can be confirmed equally as well as
truths (n. 4741, 5033, 6865, 7012, 7680, 7950). \[3\] This is the source
of persuasive faith, which, because it has not for its end, and does not
regard, the neighbor and his good, thus not the Lord, but self and the
world, that is, honors and self-advantage, is conjoined with evil of
life, but not with good of life; for assuredly the faith that is
conjoined with this is saving faith. This faith is given by the Lord,
but the other is from the man himself. The one remains to eternity; the
other is dissipated in the other life, and is also dissipated in the
world if nothing is gained by it. But so long as men profit by it, they
fight for it as for heaven itself, although it is not for that faith,
but for themselves; for the things of faith, that is, of doctrine, are
to them as means to an end; that is, to eminence and opulence. They who
are in this faith in the world can with difficulty be distinguished from
those who are in saving faith, for they speak and preach from an ardor
as of zeal for the doctrine; but it is an ardor from the fire of the
love of self and of the world. \[4\] These are they who are especially
signified by "Pharaoh and the Egyptians," and in the other life they are
vastated in respect to this faith; and this being vastated, they are in
mere falsities from evil, for falsities then burst forth from the evil.
Every evil is attended with its falsity, for they are joined together;
and the falsities appear when they are left to the evil of their life.
The evil is then like a fire, and the falsities are like the light from
it. This kind of evil and the consequent falsity is quite different from
other kinds of evils and the consequent falsities, being more detestable
than all others, because it is contrary to the goods and truths of
faith, and therefore there is profanation in this evil. (Profanation is
the acknowledgment of truth and good and yet a life contrary thereto, n.
593, 1008, 1010, 1059, 2051, 3398, 3898, 4289, 4601, 6959, 6963, 6971.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8149.">8149.</span></span>

And all the chariots of Egypt. That this signifies also the doctrinal
things of falsity that are of service to them, is evident from the
signification of "the chariots of Pharaoh," as being the chief doctrinal
things of falsity on which the others depend; consequently by "the
chariots of Egypt" are signified the doctrinal things of falsity which
are of service to them (of which just above, n. 8148); for by a king and
his chariots are signified principal things, but by the people, that is,
"the Egyptians," and their "chariots," are signified secondary things.
The doctrinal things of the church with those who are in evil of life
are called doctrinal things of falsity, although it is possible that as
to some part, greater or less, they are true. The reason is that with
those who are in evil of life, truths, insofar as such people are
concerned, are not truths, because by application to the evil which is
of the life they put off the essence of truth, and put on the nature of
falsity, for they look to evil, with which they conjoin themselves.
Truths cannot be conjoined with evil unless they are falsified, which is
done by means of wrong interpretations, and thus perversions. Hence it
is that with such the doctrinal things of the church are called
doctrinal things of falsity, even although they had been truths; for it
is a canon that with those who are in evil of life truths are falsified,
and with those who are in good of life falsities are made true. The
reason why with these falsities are made true, is that they are applied
so as to agree with good, and in this way the crudities of the falsity
are wiped away (n. 8051).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8150.">8150.</span></span>

And tertian captains <span id="fr_169"></span>[8150-1](#fn_169) upon all
of them. That this signifies reduced into order under generals, is
evident from the signification of "tertian captains," as being generals
under which are particulars. "Tertian captains" have this signification
because "three," from which they are called "tertian," signifies what is
complete and perfect (see n. 2788, 4495, 7715), and "captains" signify
chief things; and these together with what is complete and perfect are
generals, for each and all things that must be in a series are set in
order under generals; the setting in order under the generals causes the
several things to act as a one, and to be in a form, and to have a
quality together. (Concerning generals, that under them are particulars,
and under these singulars, see n. 920, 2384, 3739, 4325, 4329, 4345,
4383, 5208, 5339, 6115, 6146.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[8150-1](ac163.htm#fr_169) See 1 Kings 22:32.
\[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8151-8200](ac164)
