[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac171)  [Next](ac173) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="8551.">8551.</span></span>

Man continually inclines and lapses into what he derives hereditarily.
By so doing he confirms this evil in himself, and also adds to it more
evils from himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8552.">8552.</span></span>

These evils are utterly contrary to spiritual life. They destroy it.
Therefore unless in respect to his spiritual life a man is conceived
anew, born anew, and reared anew, that is, created anew by the Lord, he
is damned, for he wills nothing else, and consequently thinks nothing
else, than what is of hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8553.">8553.</span></span>

When a man is of this character, the order of life in him is inverted.
That which ought to rule serves, and that which ought to serve rules.
For his salvation to be possible this order in the man must be wholly
inverted. This is effected by the Lord through regeneration. EXODUS 17
1. And all the assemblage of the sons of Israel journeyed from the
wilderness of Sin, after their journeys according to the mouth of
Jehovah, and they encamped in Rephidim; and there was no water for the
people to drink. 2. And the people quarreled with Moses, and they said,
Give ye us water and we will drink. And Moses said to them, why quarrel
ye with me? why do ye tempt Jehovah? 3. And the people thirsted there
for waters, and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore
is this, that thou hast made us come up out of Egypt, to make me die,
and my sons, and my cattle, with thirst? 4. And Moses cried unto
Jehovah, saying, What shall I do to this people? a little more and they
stone me. 5. And Jehovah said unto Moses, Pass on before the people, and
take with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou
smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go. 6. Behold, I stand before
thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and
there shall come waters out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses
did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel. 7. And he called the
name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the quarreling of the
sons of Israel, and because of their tempting Jehovah, saying, Is
Jehovah in the midst of us, or not? 8. And Amalek came, and fought with
Israel in Rephidim. 9. And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men,
and go out, fight against Amalek: tomorrow I stand upon the top of the
hill, and the rod of God in my hand. 10. And Joshua did as Moses had
said to him, in fighting against Amalek; and Moses, and Aaron, and Hur
went up to the top of the hill. 11. And it was, when Moses lifted up his
hand, that Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, that Amalek
prevailed. 12. And Moses' hands were heavy, and they took a stone, and
put it under him, and he sat upon it; and Aaron and Hur held up his
hands, one on one side, and the other on the other; and it was, his
hands were steady until the setting of the sun. 13. And Joshua weakened
Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword. 14. And Jehovah said
unto Moses, write this for a memorial in the book, and put it in the
ears of Joshua, that blotting I will blot out the memory of Amalek from
under the heavens. 15. And Moses built an altar, and called the name of
it Jehovah-nissi. 16. And he said, Because there is a hand against the
throne of Jah, Jehovah shall have war against Amalek from generation to
generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8554.">8554.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS In the preceding chapter, in the internal sense, the third
temptation was treated of-that there was a lack of good. This having
been given them, in the internal sense in this chapter the fourth
temptation is treated of-that there was a lack of truth. This temptation
is signified by "the murmuring of the sons of Israel because they had no
water;" and therefore the truth of faith was given them by the Lord,
which is signified by "the water out of the rock of Horeb."

<span class="margnote"><span id="8555.">8555.</span></span>

Then follows the combat of the falsity that is from evil against the
truth and good of faith, which combat is represented by the fighting of
Amalek against Israel. That they who are in the truth and good of faith
conquer when they look upward to the Lord, and that they yield when they
look downward, is represented by the sons of Israel conquering so long
as Moses kept his hands raised, and by their yielding when he let them
down.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8556.">8556.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE Verses 1-3. And all the assemblage of the sons of
Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, after their journeys
according to the mouth of Jehovah, and they encamped in Rephidim; and
there was no water for the people to drink. And the people quarreled
with Moses, and they said, Give ye us water and we will drink. And Moses
said to them, Why quarrel ye with me? why do ye tempt Jehovah? And the
people thirsted there for the waters; and the people murmured against
Moses, and said, Wherefore is this, that thou hast made us come up out
of Egypt, to make me die, and my sons, and my cattle, with thirst? "And
all the assemblage of the sons of Israel journeyed," signifies what is
progressive of spiritual life; "from the wilderness of Sin," signifies
from a state of temptation as to good; "after their journeys," signifies
according to the order of life for receiving the life of heaven;
"according to the mouth of Jehovah," signifies by the providence of the
Lord; "and they encamped in Rephidim," signifies the setting in order of
the interiors for undergoing temptation as to truth, the nature of which
is signified by "Rephidim;" "and there was no water for the people to
drink," signifies a lack of truth and of the consequent refreshment;
"and the people quarreled with Moses," signifies a grievous complaining
against truth Divine; "and they said, Give ye us water, and we will
drink," signifies an ardent longing for truth; "and Moses said to them,"
signifies an answer by influx into the thought; "Why quarrel ye with
me?" signifies that they should be more moderate in complaint; "why do
ye tempt Jehovah?" signifies that it was against the Divine, of whose
aid they despair; "and the people thirsted there for the waters,"
signifies an increase of longing for truth; "and the people murmured
against Moses," signifies a greater degree of suffering; "and said,
Wherefore is this, that thou hast made us come up out of Egypt,"
signifies why have we been liberated from infestations; "to make me die,
and my sons, and my cattle, with thirst," signifies that from the lack
of truth everything of spiritual life is expiring.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8557.">8557.</span></span>

And all the assemblage of the sons of Israel journeyed. That this
signifies what is progressive of spiritual life, is evident from the
signification of "journeying," as being what is successive and
continuous of life (see n. 4375, 4554, 4585, 5996, 8181, 8345, 8397),
here what is successive or progressive of spiritual life, that is, its
growth, which takes place continuously by means of temptations. That
spiritual life grows by means of temptations is because by means of them
the truths which are of faith are confirmed, and are conjoined with the
good which is of charity. (That "the assemblage of the sons of Israel"
denotes those who are of the spiritual church, see n. 7830, 7843.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8558.">8558.</span></span>

From the wilderness of Sin. That this signifies from a state of
temptation as to good, is evident from the signification of a
"wilderness," as being a state of undergoing temptations (see n. 6828,
8098); and from the signification of "Sin," as being the quality and
state of temptation as to good (n. 8398).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8559.">8559.</span></span>

After their journeys. That this signifies according to the order of life
for receiving the life of heaven, is evident from the signification of
"journeys," as being what is progressive of spiritual life (of which
just above, n. 8557), thus the order of that life (n. 1293). That it
denotes for receiving the life of heaven, is because that life is a gift
of the Lord to man by means of the temptations that are described by the
journeys of the sons of Israel in the wilderness. The life of heaven is
to be led of the Lord by means of good. In order that a man may come to
that life, good must be implanted by means of truth; that is, charity by
means of faith. So long as this is being done, the man is in the way to
heaven, but is not yet in heaven. And in order that at that time the
truths which are of faith may be confirmed, and may also be conjoined
with good, the man is let into temptations, for these are the means of
the conjunction of good and truth. When therefore the man is in good,
that is, in the affection of doing good for the sake of good, thus for
the sake of the neighbor, he is uplifted into heaven, for he is in the
order of heaven, and is led of the Lord by means of good. From all this
it can be seen what is meant by "the life of heaven."

<span class="margnote"><span id="8560.">8560.</span></span>

According to the mouth of Jehovah. That this signifies by the providence
of the Lord, is evident from the signification of "the mouth of
Jehovah," as being the truth Divine according to which they were led;
for "the mouth of Jehovah" is here taken for a Divine utterance, and for
being led according to it, which is Providence. The Divine Providence
differs from all other leading and guidance in the fact that Providence
continually regards what is eternal, and continually leads unto
salvation, and this through various states, sometimes glad, sometimes
sorrowful, which the man cannot possibly comprehend; but still they are
all profitable to his eternal life. These things are signified by
"journeys according to the mouth of Jehovah." (That "Jehovah" in the
Word denotes the Lord, see n. 1343, 1736, 2004, 2005, 2018, 2025, 2156,
2329, 2447, 2921, 3023, 3035, 5041, 5663, 6281, 6303, 6905.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8561.">8561.</span></span>

And they encamped in Rephidim. That this signifies the setting in order
of the interiors for undergoing temptation as to truth, the nature of
which is signified by "Rephidim," is evident from the signification of
"encamping," as being the setting in order of truth and good for
undergoing temptations (see n. 8130, 8131, 8155), here for undergoing
temptation as to truth, which is represented by their "having no water"'
(of which in what follows). It is said "the setting in order of the
interiors," because truth and good constitute the interiors of the man
of the church. That "Rephidim" signifies the nature of this temptation,
is because the names of places signify the quality of the state of the
thing, here the quality of the state of the temptation as to truth,
because this is what is here treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8562.">8562.</span></span>

And there was no water for the people to drink. That this signifies a
lack of truth and of the consequent refreshment, is evident from the
signification of "water," as being the truth of faith (see n. 2702,
3058, 3424, 4976, 5668); and from the signification of "drinking," as
being to be instructed in the truths of faith and to receive them (n.
3069, 3772, 4017, 4018), here, to be refreshed; for as water and drink
refresh the natural life, so truths and the knowledges of truth refresh
the spiritual life. For he who is in spiritual life longs for the
sustenance thereof from such things as are called heavenly food and
drink, which are the goods and truths of faith; in like manner as he who
is in natural life longs for sustenance from such things as are natural
food and drink. \[2\] That temptation as to truth is now treated of, is
because temptation as to good was treated of just before, after which
temptation they received the manna, by which is signified good. For when
man is endowed with good by the Lord, he comes into a longing for truth,
and this longing is kindled according to the lack of truth, because good
continually strives after truth. All the genuine affection of truth is
from good. The case herein is like food, which without drink cannot
nourish the natural life; and it is also like it in that food longs for
drink, with which it may be conjoined so as to serve for use. This then
is the reason why temptation as to truth follows immediately after
temptation as to good. Temptation attacks that which a man loves and
longs for (n. 4274, 4299).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8563.">8563.</span></span>

And the people quarreled with Moses. That this signifies a grievous
complaining against truth Divine, is evident from the signification of
"to quarrel," as being a grievous complaining, for he who quarrels in
temptation grievously complains; and from the representation of Moses,
as being truth Divine (see n. 6723, 6752, 6771, 6827, 7010, 7014, 7089,
7382).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8564.">8564.</span></span>

And they said, Give ye us water and we will drink. That this signifies
an ardent longing for truth, is evident from what was shown just above
(n. 8562) on the signification of "water" and of "drinking."

<span class="margnote"><span id="8565.">8565.</span></span>

And Moses said to them. That this signifies an answer by influx into the
thought, is evident from the signification of "saying," when by the
truth Divine which is represented by Moses, as being an answer; and as
all answer from the Divine is effected by means of influx, and that
indeed into the thought, therefore this is the signification.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8566.">8566.</span></span>

Why quarrel ye with me? That this signifies that they should be more
moderate in their complaining, is evident from the signification of "to
quarrel," as being a grievous complaining (see n. 8563); and that they
should be more moderate is also involved, for it is said that thereby
they "tempt Jehovah."

<span class="margnote"><span id="8567.">8567.</span></span>

Why do ye tempt Jehovah? That this signifies that it was against the
Divine, of whose aid they despair, is evident from the signification of
"tempting Jehovah," as being to complain against the Divine; that it
denotes even to despairing of His aid, is because complaints in
temptations involve such despair. For temptations are continual
despairings of salvation, in the beginning slight, but in course of time
grievous, until at last there is doubt, almost denial, of the presence
of the Divine and of His aid. In temptations the spiritual life is for
the most part brought to this extremity; for in this way the natural
life is extinguished, because then, in the midst of the despair, the
inmost is kept by the Lord in combat against falsity; and therefore this
despair is soon dissipated by comfortings that are in the next place
insinuated by the Lord; for after every spiritual temptation there is
consolation, and as it were newness of life. (That temptations are
carried even to despair, see n. 1787, 2694, 5279, 5280, 7147, 7155,
7166, 8165, and that after temptations there is consolation, n. 3696,
4572, 5246, 6829, 8367, 8370.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8568.">8568.</span></span>

And the people thirsted there for the waters. That this signifies an
increase of longing for truth, is evident from the signification of
"thirsting," as being to strive after and long for, and as being
predicated of truth, as "hungering" is predicated of good; and from the
signification of "water," as being the truth of faith (see n. 8562).
That "to thirst" denotes to strive after and long for the truth which is
signified by "water," is very plain from many passages in the Word, as
in Amos: Behold the days come wherein I will send a famine into the
land, not a famine for bread, nor a thirst for waters, but for hearing
the words of Jehovah; and they shall wander from sea to sea, and from
the north even to the east; they shall run to and fro to seek the word
of Jehovah, and shall not find it; in that day shall the beautiful
virgins and the young men faint with thirst (Amos 8:11-13). A longing to
know truth is here described by "thirsting;" the longing for truth is
signified by "I will not send a thirst for waters, but for hearing the
words of Jehovah;" the lack of truth and the consequent privation of
spiritual life are described by, "in that day shall the beautiful
virgins and the young men faint with thirst;" "beautiful virgins" denote
those who are in affections of good, and "young men" those who are in
affections of truth. \[2\] In Isaiah: Ho, everyone that thirsteth, come
ye to the waters, and he that hath no silver; come ye, buy, eat, come ye
and buy wine and milk without silver and without price (Isa. 55:1).
"Everyone that thirsteth, come ye to the waters," manifestly denotes one
who longs for the truths of faith; "to buy wine and milk without price"
denotes to procure the truth and good of faith for themselves from the
Lord, thus gratuitously (that "waters" denote the truth of faith, see n.
8562; that "wine" denotes the good of faith, n. 6377, and also "milk,"
n. 2184). Everyone can see that by "coming to the waters and buying wine
and milk," is not here meant wine and milk, but such things as are of
heaven and the church. \[3\] In like manner in John: I will give to him
that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life free (Rev. 21:6);
where "the fountain of the water of life" denotes the truth and good of
faith; "he that is athirst" denotes one who longs from affection,
according to the Lord's words in John: Jesus said to the woman of
Samaria, Everyone that drinketh of this water shall thirst again: but he
that drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but
the water that I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water
springing up into eternal life (John 4:13, 14). Here "water" plainly
denotes the truth of faith from the Word, thus from the Lord; "never
thirsting" here denotes that truth shall no longer fail him. \[4\] In
like manner elsewhere in John: Jesus said, I am the bread of life; he
that cometh to Me shall never hunger, and he that believeth in Me shall
never thirst (John 6:35). Jesus cried, saying, If anyone thirst, let him
come unto Me, and drink; whosoever believeth in Me, as the Scripture
hath said, Out of his belly shall flow streams of living water (John
7:37, 38). In these passages "to thirst" denotes to long for truth; "to
drink" denotes to be instructed; "streams of living water" denote Divine
truth, which is from the Lord alone. \[5\] In Isaiah: Bring ye waters to
meet him that is thirsty; O ye inhabitants of the land of Tema, come
before the wanderer with his bread (Isa. 21:14); where "bringing waters
to meet him that is thirsty" denotes instructing in truths him who longs
for them, and thus refreshing the life of his soul. In the same: The
fool will speak folly, and his heart will do iniquity, to do hypocrisy,
and to utter error against Jehovah, to make empty the soul of the hungry
one, and he will make the drink of the thirsty one to fail (Isa 32:0);
"the hungry one" denotes him who longs for good; and "he that thirsteth
for drink," him who longs for truth. \[6\] Again: The poor and needy
seek water but there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst; I
will open rivers upon the hillsides, and I will put fountains in the
midst of the valleys, the wilderness for a pool of waters, and the dry
land for springs of waters (Isa. 41:17, 18); everyone can plainly see
that "seeking water" denotes seeking truth; that "failing for thirst"
denotes being deprived of spiritual life from a lack of truth; that
"rivers," "fountains," "a pool," and "springs of waters" denote the
truths of faith in which they were to be instructed. \[7\] Again: Say
ye, Jehovah hath redeemed his servant Jacob; then shall they not thirst,
He shall lead them in the wastes; He shall cause the waters to flow out
of the rock for them, and He will cleave the rock that the waters may
flow out (Isa. 48:20, 21); "they shall not thirst" denotes that truths
shall not fail them; "waters" here manifestly denote the truths of
faith. Again: They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat
nor the sun smite them; for He that hath mercy on them shall lead them,
so that even upon the springs of waters He will lead them (Isa. 49:10);
"they shall not hunger" denotes that good shall not fail them; "they
shall not thirst" denotes that truth shall not fail them; "springs of
waters" denote the knowledges of truth from the Word. \[8\] In like
manner in Moses: Jehovah leadeth thee through the great and fearful
wilderness, of the serpent, of the fire-serpent, and of the scorpion,
and of thirst, where are no waters; who bringeth forth for thee waters
out of the stone of the crag (Deut. 8:15). Again in Isaiah: Behold your
God will come; then in the wilderness shall waters break out, and rivers
in the plain of the desert; and the dry place shall become a pool, and
the thirsty one for springs of waters (Isa. 35:4, 6, 7); "the waters in
the wilderness that shall break out," "rivers," "a pool," "springs of
waters," plainly denote the truths of faith and the knowledges of them,
which would be given from the Lord when He should come into the world.
\[9\] In David: O God, my God, in the morning do I seek Thee; my soul
thirsteth for Thee, my flesh longeth for Thee, in a land of drought, and
weary without waters (Ps. 68:1); where "thirsting" is predicated of
truth; "weary without waters" denotes that there are no truths. "Thirst"
denotes a lack of truth and the consequent privation of spiritual life,
in Isaiah: Therefore My people will go into exile, for not
acknowledging, and their glory are men of famine, and their multitude
are parched with thirst (Isa. 5:13). I make the rivers a wilderness:
their fish stinketh because there is no water, and dieth for thirst
(Isa. 50:2). \[10\] From these passages it can now be seen what is
signified in this chapter by there being "no water for the people to
drink" (verse 1); by their saying, "Give us water and we will drink"
(verse 2); by "the people thirsting there for waters" (verse 3); by that
"there shall come waters out of the rock" (verse 6). Consequently by
their murmuring on account of the lack of water is signified temptation
from the lack of truth; for when a man comes into temptation from the
lack of truth, he is kept in a vehement longing for it, and at the same
time in despair of eternal salvation on this account: these things then
cause suffering, and complaint.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8569.">8569.</span></span>

And the people murmured against Moses. That this signifies a greater
degree of suffering, is evident from the signification of "murmuring,"
as being suffering from the bitterness of the temptation (see n. 8351);
that it denotes a greater degree of suffering is evident from the words
of Moses when he cried to Jehovah, "a little more and they stone me"
(verse 4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8570.">8570.</span></span>

And said, Wherefore is this, that thou hast made us come up out of
Egypt? That this signifies, Why have we been liberated from
infestations? is evident from the signification of "making to come up,"
or "bringing out," as being liberating; and from the signification of
"Egypt," as being infestations (n. 7278); for by "the Egyptians are
signified those who infest those who are of the church in the other life
(see n. 6854, 6914, 7474, 7828, 7932, 8018, 8099, 8159, 8321).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8571.">8571.</span></span>

To make me die, and my sons, and my cattle, with thirst. That this
signifies that from the lack of truth everything of spiritual life is
expiring, is evident from the signification of "dying," as being to
expire, here in respect to the spiritual life; from the signification of
"me, my sons, and my cattle," as being all things of spiritual life; for
by "me," or the man of the church, is signified the good of charity and
of faith; by "sons," the interior truths of faith; and by "cattle," the
exterior truths from which is good; thus all things which are of the
spiritual life. For spiritual life consists of the good of charity and
of faith, and of the truth of faith internal and external. (That "man"
denotes good, see n. 4287; that "sons" denote the truths of faith, n.
489, 491, 533, 2623, 2803, 2813, 3372, 3704; and that "cattle" denote
the truths from which is good, n. 6016, 6045, 6049.) And from the
signification of "thirst," as being a lack of truth (of which just
above, n. 8568).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8572.">8572.</span></span>

Verses 4-6. And Moses cried unto Jehovah, saying, What shall I do to
this people? a little more and they stone me. And Jehovah said unto
Moses, Pass on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of
Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine
hand, and go. Behold, I stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb;
and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come waters out of it,
that the people may drink. And Moses did so before the eyes of the
elders of Israel. "And Moses cried unto Jehovah, saying," signifies
interior lamentation and intercession; "What shall I do to this people?"
signifies for those who are in a complaining so grievous on account of
the non-reception of truth; "a little more and they stone me," signifies
that they are not far from doing violence to truth from the Divine; "and
Jehovah said unto Moses," signifies aid; "Pass on before the people,"
signifies that He should lead and teach them; "and take with thee of the
elders of Israel," signifies from primary truths; "and thy rod wherewith
thou smotest the river," signifies the Divine power by which falsities
had been dissipated; "take in thine hand, and go," signifies that
equipped therewith he should perform the mandate; "Behold, I stand
before thee there upon the rock in Horeb," signifies the Lord as to the
truths of faith; "and thou shalt smite the rock," signifies that they
should be urgent in entreating Him; "and there shall come waters out of
it," signifies that the truths of faith are from Him; "that the people
may drink," signifies which shall refresh them and give them spiritual
life; "and Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel,"
signifies the effect by means of primary truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8573.">8573.</span></span>

And Moses cried unto Jehovah. That this signifies interior lamentation
and intercession, is evident from the signification of "crying," when
for Divine aid, which the people demanded by reason of their grievous
suffering, as being interior lamentation (see n. 7782), and also
intercession (n. 8179). As by "Moses crying unto Jehovah" is signified
intercession by the Divine truth which is represented by Moses, it shall
be briefly told what intercession is, and how the case is in respect to
it. They who do not know what intercession is, cannot form any other
idea about it than that the Lord continually prays to the Father, and
intercedes for the sinner who devoutly supplicates and promises
repentance. Nay, the simple think that the Lord sits with the Father,
and pleads with Him for the sinner, and entreats Him to give him to
Himself, that he may be in His kingdom, and may enjoy eternal happiness.
Such an idea have very many about the intercession spoken of in the
Word, where it is said that the Lord will entreat His Father for them.
But who cannot see that these things were said according to the ideas of
human thought? For everyone at that time, as also very many at this day,
could not think otherwise of the heavenly kingdom, than as they think of
an earthly kingdom, because they get the idea about the former from the
latter. This is plainly evident from those very apostles of the Lord,
James and John, who asked to sit the one on His right hand, and the
other on His left, in His kingdom (Mark 10:35-37); and also from the
rest of the apostles, among whom there was a contention as to which of
them should be the greatest in the Lord's kingdom, and who were
therefore told by the Lord that they should eat and drink at His table
in His kingdom, and should sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of
Israel (Luke 22:24, 30), thus that they should reign with Him. It is
evident that these things were said in accordance with their ideas, and
thus in accordance with their apprehension, and that in the interior
sense they have a different signification, which at that time could not
so well be made known. (What "the twelve thrones" signify on which the
apostles were to sit, see n. 2129, 6397.) \[2\] As regards intercession,
the case is this. There is intercession in all love, consequently in all
mercy; for mercy is of love. That he who loves, or who feels compassion,
continually intercedes, can be seen from examples. A husband who loves
his wife, wishes her to be kindly received by others, and to be well
treated; he does not say this in express terms, but continually thinks
it, consequently is in silence continually entreating it, and
interceding for her. Parents act in like manner in favor of their
children whom they love. In like manner do those also who are in charity
for their neighbor; and they who are in friendship for their friends.
From all this it can be seen that there is constant intercession in all
love. It is the same in respect to the Lord's intercession for the human
race, and in especial for those who are in the good and truth of faith;
for toward them there is Divine, that is, infinite love; and there is
Divine, that is, infinite mercy. He does not pray the Father for them,
and in this way intercede, for this would be to act altogether after a
human manner; but He continually excuses, and continually forgives, for
He continually feels compassion; and this is done on the part of the
Lord Himself, for the Lord and the Father are one (John 14:8-12). \[3\]
A secret that lies still more interiorly hidden in the word
"intercession," shall also be told. The Divine truth which proceeds from
the Lord continually intercedes in the manner described, because it
proceeds from the Divine love. When the Lord was in the world He was the
Divine truth; but since He was glorified, which was effected when He
rose again, He is the Divine good (n. 7499). It is the Divine good which
is meant in the Word in the internal sense by "the Father," and the
Divine truth which is meant by "the Son" (n. 2803, 3704, 7499). And as
in the Divine truth, which proceeds from the Divine good, there is
continual intercession, therefore it is said that the Son entreats the
Father, and intercedes for man. This latter idea could be apprehended by
man, but the former with difficulty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8574.">8574.</span></span>

What shall I do to this people? That this signifies for those who are in
a complaining so grievous on account of the non-reception of truth, is
evident from the signification of "What shall I do to this people?" as
involving such things; for by the quarreling of the people against Moses
is signified a grievous complaining (see n. 8563, 8566); and by their
having "no water to drink" is signified a lack of truth (n. 8562, 8568).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8575.">8575.</span></span>

A little more and they stone me. That this signifies that they are not
far from doing violence to truth from the Divine, is evident from the
signification of "a little more," as being that it is not far off; and
from the signification of "stoning," as being the punishment on account
of the violation of the truth which is of worship (see n. 7456); here,
in the opposite sense, of the doing of violence to truth from the
Divine, which truth is represented by Moses. (That "Moses" denotes truth
from the Divine, has been frequently shown.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8576.">8576.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses. That this signifies aid, is evident from
the signification of "saying," as involving the things which follow,
here that truths should be given, of the lack of which they so
grievously complained, which truths are signified by "water from Horeb."
Therefore "saying" here involves aid.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8577.">8577.</span></span>

Pass on before the people. That this signifies that he should lead and
teach them, is evident from the signification of "passing on before," as
being to lead, thus also to teach, for he who teaches, leads in a
spiritual way; and from the representation of the sons of Israel, who
are here "the people," as being those who are of the spiritual church
(of which frequently).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8578.">8578.</span></span>

And take with thee of the elders of Israel. That this signifies from
primary truths, is evident from the signification of "the elders of
Israel," as being the primary things of wisdom and intelligence which
are in agreement with good and with truth (see n. 6524, 6525, 6890,
7912), thus primary truths, for these belong to intelligence and wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8579.">8579.</span></span>

And thy rod wherewith thou smotest the river. That this signifies the
Divine power by which falsities had been dissipated, is evident from the
signification of "a rod," as being power (see n. 4013, 4015, 4876, 4936,
6947, 7011, 7026), here Divine power, because by Moses, whose rod it
was, is represented the Lord as to Divine truth; and from the
signification of "the river," here the river of Egypt, as being falsity
(n. 6693). It is said "wherewith thou smotest the river," in order that
the dissipation of falsity may be signified, for by the Divine power
whereby truth is given, falsities also are dissipated; the truth which
is given is signified by "the water out of the rock in Horeb."

<span class="margnote"><span id="8580.">8580.</span></span>

Take in thine hand, and go. That this signifies that equipped therewith
he should perform the mandate, is evident from the signification of
"taking the rod in the hand," as being to be equipped with this power.
That "go thou" denotes to perform the mandate, is evident without
explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8581.">8581.</span></span>

Behold I stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb. That this
signifies the Lord in respect to the truths of faith, is evident from
the signification of "a rock," as being faith, here faith from the Lord,
or the Lord in respect to faith; for Jehovah, that is, the Lord, says,
"Behold I stand upon the rock;" and from the signification of "Horeb,"
as being the Divine Law; consequently by these words is signified the
Lord in respect to the truths of faith which are from His law, or the
Word. That "a rock" denotes the Lord as to faith, and relatively to man,
the faith which is from the Lord, is evident from many passages in the
Word, as in Moses: Give ye greatness to our God, the Rock whose work is
perfect. He made him ride on the high places of the earth, and he did
eat the produce of the fields, He made him suck honey out of the rock,
and oil out of the stone of the rock. But when Jeshurun became fat, he
kicked, he forsook God who made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of
his salvation. The Rock that begat thee thou hast given to
forgetfulness, and hast forgotten God thy Former. Their rock hath sold
them, and Jehovah hath shut them up, for their rock is not as our Rock.
When it is said, Where are their gods, the rock in which they trusted
(Deut. 32:3, 4, 13, 15, 18, 30, 31, 37). From these words it is plain
that it is Jehovah, that is, the Lord, who is called "the Rock"; that
this is Jehovah or the Lord as to faith, is clear from the details here
in the internal sense. \[2\] In Daniel: Thou wast seeing till that a
stone was cut out, which was not by hands, and it smote the image upon
its feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them in pieces. Then were
the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken in
pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer
threshing-floors; so that the wind carried them away, that no place was
found for them. But the stone that smote the image became a great Rock,
and filled the whole earth. The God of the heavens shall make a kingdom
arise which shall not be destroyed to the ages; and His kingdom shall
not be permitted to another people; it shall break in pieces and consume
all these kingdoms; but itself shall stand to the ages. Forasmuch as
thou hast seen that a stone was cut out from the rock, that was not by
hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the
silver, and the gold (Dan. 2:34, 35, 44, 45). This is said of the Lord
and His kingdom, and by "a stone" is meant faith, and by "a rock" the
Lord as to faith. That these things are signified by "stone" and by
"rock," is plain to everyone who reflects. "Stone" too signifies in the
Word the truth which is of faith (see n. 643, 1298, 3720, 3769, 3771,
3773, 3789, 3798, 6426); and therefore the Lord as to Divine truth is
called "the Stone of Israel" (n. 6426). That "a rock" denotes the Lord
as to the truth of faith, is because by "a rock" is also meant a bulwark
against falsities; the bulwark itself is the truth of faith, for combat
is waged from this truth both against falsities and against evils. \[3\]
From all this it can also be seen that by "rock" is meant the Lord as to
faith, and also the faith which is from the Lord, in the words which the
Lord spake to Peter, in Matthew: I say unto thee, Thou art Peter
\[Petrus\], and upon this rock \[Petra\] I will build My church; and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee
the keys of the kingdom of the heavens; and whatsoever thou shalt bind
on earth shall be bound in the heavens; and whatsoever thou shalt loose
on earth shall be loosed in the heavens (Matt. 16:18, 19). That "a rock"
here denotes the Lord as to faith, and the faith which is from the Lord,
and that Peter represents this faith, see the preface to Genesis 22,
also n. 3750, 4738, 6000, 6073, 6344. It is also plain to everyone who
thinks from sound reason that the power of opening heaven and of
shutting hell for the good, and of opening hell and shutting heaven for
the evil, belongs to the Lord alone; and that this belongs to faith is
because faith is from the Lord, thus also is the Lord's, that is, the
Lord Himself is in it. Moreover all sovereign power in the other life
comes through the truth of faith from good (see n. 4931, 6344, 6423,
8200, 8304). And he who thinks from reason can conclude that the Lord's
church has not been built upon any man, thus not upon Peter, but upon
the Lord Himself, thus upon faith in Him. \[4\] From all this it can be
seen into what and how great errors they fall, who press so closely the
sense of the letter of the Word; and with what eagerness the leaders of
the church catch at the idea that such power was given to Peter, and
consequently to those who call themselves his successors, because it
favors their love; and with what difficulty they suffer themselves to be
persuaded that anything else is meant, for everyone desires to procure
for himself the height of power. From the above it is also plain how
necessary it is to know what is signified in the internal sense by "a
rock," what by "keys," what by "the gates of hell," and many other
things. \[5\] That Jehovah is called "the Rock," and that then is meant
the Lord as to faith, is also evident from many other passages in the
Word, as from the following, which may be cited without further
explication: Send ye the lamb of the Ruler of the land from the Rock
toward the wilderness unto the mount of Zion (Isa. 16:1). Thou hast
forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast not remembered the Rock of
thy refuge (Isa. Asshur shall fall with the sword not of a man, also his
rock shall pass away through dread thereof (Isa. 31:8, 9). Let the
inhabitants of the rock sing, let them cry from the top of the mountains
(Isa. 42:11). Attend to Me, ye that follow after righteousness, that
seek Jehovah, look back unto the Rock from which ye were hewn (Isa.
51:1). Forsake the cities, and dwell in the rock, ye inhabitants of Moab
(Jer. 48:28). I am against thee, O destroying mountain, destroying the
universal earth; and I will stretch out My hand against thee, and roll
thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a mountain of burning;
neither shall they take from thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for
foundations (Jer. 51:25, 26); speaking of Babel. And in David: He made
me come up out of a pit of devastation, out of the mire of clay, and He
set my feet upon a rock (Ps. 40:2). From the extremity of the earth do I
cry unto Thee when my heart faileth, Thou leadest me to the Rock that is
high from Me (Ps. 61:2). He fed them with the fat of wheat; and with
honey out of the rock I sated them (Ps. 81:16). \[6\] As "a rock"
signified the Lord as to faith, and faith from the Lord, therefore also
wonderful things were done upon a rock, of which it is thus written in
the book of Judges: The angel of Jehovah said unto Gideon that he should
take the flesh and the unleavened things, and put them upon the rock,
and pour out the broth, and there went up fire out of the rock, and
devoured the flesh and the unleavened things (Judg. 6:20, 21). Manoah
the father of Samson took a kid of the goats, and offered it upon the
rock. Then the angel did wondrously, and went up in the flame (Judg.
13:19, 20). What these things signified can be seen if from the internal
sense there is unfolded what Gideon represented, and what Manoah the
father of Samson; also what was signified by "the flesh" and "the
unleavened things," and by "the broth," as also by "the kid of the
goats," and by "the for all and each of these things were representative
and significative. \[7\] From the signification of "a rock," as being
faith, it can also be known what is meant by Moses being put in an
opening of the rock when he was to see Jehovah (Exod. 33:20-23); for by
"an opening of a rock" is signified obscurity of faith. That the rock in
Horeb from which came the waters signified the Lord, is known in the
churches; but that it signifies the Lord as to faith, and also that it
signifies faith from the Lord, has now been shown. The like to what is
signified by "the rock in Horeb" is also signified by these words in
Isaiah: Say ye, Jehovah hath redeemed His servant Jacob, then shall he
not thirst, He shall lead them in the wastes, He shall make the waters
flow out of the rock for them, while He shall cleave the rock that the
waters may flow out (Isa. 48:20, 21). That water was not given to the
people from any other rock than that in Horeb, is because by "Horeb" is
signified the Divine Law; that the Divine Law is signified by "Horeb,"
is because the Law was there promulgated; and faith which is from the
Lord is from the Divine Law, that is, from the Word; for through this
the Lord teaches what faith is, and also gives faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8582.">8582.</span></span>

And thou shalt smite the rock. That this signifies that they should be
urgent in entreating the Lord, is evident from the signification of
"smiting," as being to be urgent in entreating, but from a humble heart.
That "to smite the rock" denotes to entreat urgently from a humble
heart, can be seen from the fact that because Moses smote the rock from
a hard heart, and in this way expostulated, therefore it was intimated
to him that he should not bring the people into the land of Canaan, as
he himself relates in the book of Numbers: Moses and Aaron gathered the
congregation together before the rock, and he said to them, Hear I pray
ye rebels; shall we bring you forth waters out of this rock? and Moses
lifted up his hand, and smote the rock with his rod twice. Nevertheless
many waters came out. Then Jehovah said unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye
have not believed in Me, and sanctified Me in the eyes of the sons of
Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land
which I have given them (Num. 20:10-12).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8583.">8583.</span></span>

And there shall come waters out of it. That this signifies that the
truths of faith are from Him, is evident from the signification of "the
rock from which the waters would come out," as being the Lord as to
faith (of which just above, n. 5581); and from the signification of
"waters," as being the truths of faith (n. 2702, 3058, 3424, 4976, 5668,
8568).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8584.">8584.</span></span>

That the people may drink. That this signifies which shall refresh them
and give them spiritual life, is evident from the signification of
"drinking" as being to be instructed in the truths of faith, and thus
giving and refreshing the spiritual life (see above, n. 8562).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8585.">8585.</span></span>

And Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel. That this
signifies the effect by means of primary truths, is evident from the
signification of "Moses did so," as being the effect; and from the
signification of "the elders of Israel," as being primary truths (see n.
8578). It was previously said that Moses should "take with him of the
elders of Israel," and now that he did so "in the sight of the elders of
Israel," because faith is given by means of truth, and indeed by means
of primary truths; for enlightenment is effected by virtue of these, so
that the truths flowing from them, which are called "secondary," may be
clearly perceived.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8586.">8586.</span></span>

Verse 7. And he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because
of the quarreling of the sons of Israel, and because of their tempting
Jehovah, saying, Is Jehovah in the midst of us, or not? "And he called
the name of the place Massah," signifies the quality of the state of the
temptation; "and Meribah," signifies the quality of the complaining;
"because of the quarreling of the sons of Israel," signifies a
complaining from the grievousness of the temptation even so that they
nearly yielded; "and because of their tempting Jehovah," signifies that
it was against the Divine whose aid they despair of; "saying, Is Jehovah
in the midst of us?" signifies that they almost believed that the Lord
does not bring aid to His own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8587.">8587.</span></span>

And he called the name of the place Massah. That this signifies the
quality of the state of the temptation, is evident from the
signification of "name" and of "calling by name," as being the quality
(see n. 144, 145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 2628, 2724, 3006, 3421, 6674, 6887);
and from the signification of "the place," as being the state (n. 2625,
2837, 3356, 3387, 4321, 4882, 5606, 7381). That the quality of the state
of the temptation is meant, is because temptation is the subject treated
of; the quality of the state of it is signified by "Massah." Moreover in
the original tongue "Massah" means "temptation." Its quality will be
described in what now follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8588.">8588.</span></span>

And Meribah. That this signifies the quality of the complaining, is
evident from the fact that in the original tongue "Meribah" means
"contention," or "quarreling," and "quarreling" signifies complaining
(see n. 8563, 8566); and because names signify the quality of the thing
(n. 8587), therefore "Meribah" here signifies the quality of the
complaining. As regards this temptation itself and its quality, be it
known that in this passage are described those who in temptations almost
yield, namely, those who complain against heaven and also against the
Divine Itself, and at last almost disbelieve in the Divine Providence.
These things are signified in the internal sense by what precedes, and
also by what follows in this verse, namely, the quality of the state of
the temptation, which is signified by "Massah," and the quality of the
complaining in the temptation, which is signified by "Meribah." That
this quality is here signified by "Meribah," is plain in David: Thou
calledst upon Me in distress, and I rescued thee; I answered thee in the
secret place, I proved thee at the waters of Meribah (Ps. 81:7). \[2\]
But in the internal historical sense, in which the subject treated of is
the state of religion with the Israelitish nation, that nation is
described in respect to its quality toward Jehovah, namely, that they
were not willing by supplication to entreat Him for aid, but that they
expostulated. The reason was, that at heart they did not acknowledge
Jehovah as the supreme God, but only in the mouth, when they saw the
miracles. That at heart they did not acknowledge Him is very evident
from the Egyptian calf which they made for themselves and worshiped,
saying that these were their gods; also from their frequent apostasy (of
which see n. 8301). This is what is here described in the internal
historical sense; but in the internal spiritual sense is described the
quality of the temptation with those who before they are liberated are
brought to the last of temptation. \[3\] That the quality of the
Israelitish nation and of its religiosity is described by contention
with Moses at Massah and Meribah, is also evident in the following
passages: Harden not your heart, as at Meribah, as in the day of Massah
in the wilderness, where your fathers tempted Me; they tempted Me, and
saw My work; for forty years did I feel loathing at the generation, and
said, It is a people that do err in their heart, and the same have not
known My ways, to whom I sware in Mine anger that they should not come
unto My rest (Ps. 95:8-11). Ye shall not tempt Jehovah your God, as ye
tempted Him in Massah (Deut. 6:16; 9:22, 24). Of Levi he said, Thy
Thummim and thy Urim are with the Holy Man, whom thou didst tempt at
Massah, with whom thou didst contend at the waters of Meribah (Deut.
33:8). "The Holy Man" here denotes the Lord, whom they tempted, and whom
Moses and Aaron did not sanctify. \[4\] In the internal historical
sense, in which the subject treated of is the religiosity of the
Israelitish nation, by Moses and Aaron is not represented truth Divine,
but the religiosity of that nation whose leaders and heads they were (n.
7041). Because this religiosity was such as said above, it was intimated
to them that they should not bring the people into the land of Canaan,
as is written in the book of Numbers: Jehovah said unto Moses and Aaron,
Because ye have not believed in Me, and sanctified Me in the eyes of the
sons of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the
land which I have given them; these are the waters of Meribah, because
the sons of Israel contended with Jehovah (Num. 20:12, 13; 27:14). Aaron
shall be gathered unto his people, and shall not come into the land
which I have given to the sons of Israel, because ye rebelled against My
mouth at the waters of Meribah (Num. 20:24). The same is said of Moses
(Deut. 32:50, 51). \[5\] That still representative Divine worship was
instituted with that nation, was because representative worship could be
instituted with any nation that had holy externals of worship, and
worshiped almost idolatrously; for what is representative does not
regard the person, but the thing (n. 1361), and it was the genius of
that nation, beyond any other nation, to worship merely external things
as holy and Divine, without any internal; as for instance to worship as
deities their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and afterward Moses
and David, and moreover to account holy and as Divine, and to worship,
every stone and every piece of wood that had been inaugurated in their
Divine worship; as the arks, the tables therein, the lamp, the altar,
the garments of Aaron, the Urim and Thummim, and afterward the temple.
Of the Lord's Providence there was then given a communication of the
angels of heaven with man by means of such things. For there must needs
be somewhere a church, or the representative of a church, in order that
there may be communication of heaven with the human race; and as that
nation, beyond any other nation, could make Divine worship consist in
external things, and thus act the representative of a church, therefore
that nation was taken. \[6\] At that time communication with the angels
in heaven was effected by means of representatives in the following way.
Their external worship was communicated to angelic spirits who are
simple, and who do not reflect upon internal things, but still are
interiorly good. Such are they who in the Grand Man correspond to the
outer skin. These pay no attention whatever to the internal of man, but
only to his external. If this appears holy, they think holily of the
internal also. The more interior angels of heaven saw in those spirits
the things that were represented, consequently the heavenly and Divine
things that corresponded; for they could be present with these spirits,
and see those things; but not with the men except by means of the
spirits. For angels dwell with men in things interior; but where there
are no such things, they dwell in the interior things of simple spirits;
for the angels have no interest in other than spiritual and heavenly
things, which are the interior things contained in representatives. From
these few words it can be seen how there could be communication with
heaven by means of such a people. But see what has been previously shown
on this subject, namely: That with the Jews the holy of worship was
miraculously elevated into heaven quite apart from them (n. 4307); that
whatever their quality might be, the descendants of Jacob could
represent what is holy, provided they closely observed the rituals
commanded (n. 3147, 3479, 3480, 3881, 4208, 4281, 4288, 4289, 4293,
4307, 4444, 4500, 4680, 4825, 4844, 4847, 4899, 4912, 6304, 6306, 7048,
7051, 8301).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8589.">8589.</span></span>

Because of the quarreling of the sons of Israel. That this signifies a
complaining from the grievousness of the temptation even so that they
nearly yielded, is evident from the signification of "quarreling," as
being a grievous complaining (see n. 8563); that it denotes that they
nearly yielded, is evident from the character of their quarreling,
namely, that they had almost stoned Moses, and that they tempted
Jehovah, saying, Is Jehovah in the midst of us?

<span class="margnote"><span id="8590.">8590.</span></span>

And because of them tempting Jehovah. That this signifies that it was
against the Divine, whose aid they despair of, is evident from what was
said above (see n. 8567), where are the same words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8591.">8591.</span></span>

Saying, Is Jehovah in the midst of us? That this signifies that they
almost believed that the Lord does not bring aid to His own, is evident
without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8592.">8592.</span></span>

Verses 8, 9. And Amalek came and fought with Israel in Rephidim. And
Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight against
Amalek; tomorrow I stand upon the top of the hill, and the rod of God in
my hand. "And Amalek came," signifies falsity from interior evil; "and
fought with Israel in Rephidim," signifies that they attacked when
grievous temptation was being endured; "and Moses said unto Joshua,"
signifies Divine influx into truth combating; "Choose us out men,"
signifies that it may draw up truths for the fight; "and go out, fight
against Amalek," signifies against falsities from interior evil;
"tomorrow I stand on the top of the hill," signifies the conjunction of
truth Divine with the good of charity, and the consequent influx; "with
the rod of God in my hand," signifies that from this was power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8593.">8593.</span></span>

And Amalek came. That this signifies falsity from interior evil, is
evident from the signification of "Amalek," as being the falsity from
interior evil (of which below). It is first to be told who and what they
are who are in falsity from interior evil. Interior evil is that which
lies inwardly concealed with man, hidden in his will, and thence in his
thought, no trace of which appears in his externals, as in his actions,
speech, and face. They who are in such evil study by every method and
art to hide and hoard it under the semblance of what is honorable and
just, and under the semblance of the love of the neighbor; yet still
they devise nothing else within themselves than how they can inflict
evil, and so far as they can they do inflict evil by means of others,
taking care that it should not appear to be from them; they also color
over the evil itself, that it may not seem like evil. The greatest
delight of their life is to meditate such things, and to attempt them in
concealment. This is called interior evil. They who are in this evil are
called "evil genii," and in the other life are completely separated from
those who are in exterior evil, and who are called "spirits." The evil
genii have their hell behind man, that is, at his back, and are there in
various caverns; but evil spirits have their hell before man, and also
at the sides. In the Grand Man these genii belong to the province of the
cerebellum, and also to that part of the spinal marrow which sends forth
fibers and nerves to the involuntary parts. \[2\] As further concerning
the falsity from this evil-it is not like the falsity from the evil of
evil spirits, for in itself it is evil. They who are in this evil do not
attack the truths of faith, but the goods of faith; for they act by
means of depraved affections, whereby they pervert good thoughts, and
this in a manner almost incomprehensible. Because they are of such a
nature, their hells are completely separated from the hells of evil
spirits, insomuch that they have scarcely any communication, and this
for the reason that they may be separated from the men of the spiritual
church; for if they were to flow in from their hells, it would be all
over with the man of that church, because they would act in the most
hidden manner into his conscience and would pervert it, and this by the
breathing in of depraved affections. These infernal genii never attack a
man openly, nor when he is capable of vigorous resistance; but when it
appears that a man is falling so as to yield, they are then suddenly at
hand, and push him on to a complete fall. This too is represented by the
fact that Amalek now fell upon Israel; and also afterward, when the sons
of Israel had set themselves in opposition to Jehovah, and were afraid
of the nations in the land of Canaan: Then Amalek came down with the
Canaanite from the mountain, and they smote the sons of Israel even unto
Hormah (Num. 14:45). \[3\] From all this it can be seen what is the
quality of those who are represented by Amalek, and why the judgment
came upon Amalek from Jehovah that there should be perpetual war against
them, and that the memory of them should be blotted out from under
heaven, according to these words in the last verse of this chapter:
Because the hand of the evil is against the throne of Jah, there shall
be war to Jehovah against Amalek from generation to generation (Exod.
17:16). And in Deuteronomy: Remember what Amalek did to thee by the way,
when thou camest forth out of Egypt; that he met thee in the way, and
smote the hindmost in thee, all that were feeble, when thou wast faint
and weary, and he feared not God; when Jehovah thy God shall have given
thee rest, thou shalt blot out the memory of Amalek from under heaven;
thou shalt not forget (Deut. 25:17-19). Also in the first book of
Samuel, where it is said by Jehovah through Samuel unto Saul: I have
resolved to visit that which Amalek did to Israel, who laid wait for him
in the way, when he was coming up out of Egypt; wherefore go and smite
Amalek, and give to the curse all things which are his, and spare them
not; but slay from man even to woman, from infant even to suckling, from
ox even to small cattle, from camel even to ass. But Saul spared king
Agag, and the best of the flock, and of the oxen, and the second sort,
and the rams, and all that was excellent; and so it was denounced
against Saul that from him there should no more be a king over Israel (1
Sam. 15:1-3, 9, 23, 26). That "the memory of Amalek was to be blotted
out," and that "all things with him were to be given to the curse,"
signified that evil genii should have no communication whatever with
those who are of the spiritual church; for they communicate with those
who are not in truths, but who favor falsities from evil affection.
\[4\] Who cannot see that without a cause that lies deeply concealed
Jehovah would never have said that "there should be perpetual war
against Amalek," and that "the memory of them should be blotted out from
under heaven," and that "all things with him should be given to the
curse," and that nevertheless this was not done. The deeply hidden
reason why these things were said and done, is involved in the words of
Samuel to Agag the king of the Amalekites, whom Saul spared: Agag the
king of Amalek came unto Samuel delicately; but Samuel said, As thy
sword hath bereaved women, so shall thy mother be bereaved beyond women;
and Samuel hewed him in pieces before Jehovah (1 Sam. 15:32, 33). "To go
delicately" signifies the outward blandishments of such spirits in the
presence of others; "thy sword hath bereaved women" signifies that the
falsity of these spirits inflicts violence on good affections; "thy
mother shall be bereaved beyond women" signifies that with them will
prevail evil affection from the will, and not from the intellectual
part; "and Samuel hewed him in pieces before Jehovah" signifies that
they were separated from those who are in falsity from evil from the
intellectual part; thus genii from spirits (as said above). (That
"women" denote affections, see n. 568, 6014, 8337; and that "a sword"
denotes falsity combating and vastating, n. 2799, 4499, 7102.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8594.">8594.</span></span>

And fought with Israel in Rephidim. That this signifies that they
attacked when grievous temptation was being endured, is evident from the
signification of "fighting," as being to attack by means of falsities
from interior evil; and from the signification of "Rephidim," as being
the quality of the temptation as to truth (see n. 8561). What is meant
by these words is evident from what was said just above (n. 8593),
namely, that in the other life they who are represented by Amalek attack
those who are in temptation when they are falling almost to the point of
yielding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8595.">8595.</span></span>

And Moses said unto Joshua. That this signifies Divine influx into
fighting truth, is evident from the signification of "saying," as here
being influx, because into truth combating, which is represented by
Joshua; that it is Divine influx, is because by Moses is represented
Divine truth, that is, the truth which proceeds immediately from the
Lord, which truth, being purely Divine, flows into the truths of faith
of whatever kind, and causes them to be truths; and from the
representation of Joshua, as being fighting truth. That Joshua denotes
fighting truth is evident from the fact that he was commanded to fight
against Amalek, that is, against the falsities from interior evil. This
war must be waged by truth made fighting through the influx of Divine
truth. The truth Divine itself which proceeds immediately from the Lord,
is not fighting, but pacific; for it is peace itself, because it
proceeds from the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love. But in order
that it may become fighting truth, it flows into such angels as are in
ardent zeal for truth and good, and who being excited by this zeal
fight. Hence comes the fighting truth which is represented by Joshua.
\[2\] As this truth was represented by Joshua, therefore he was also
made the leader over the sons of Israel after Moses, and brought them
into the land of Canaan, and fought with the nations there. For this
reason also, when he came into the land of Canaan, there appeared to him
an angel of Jehovah with a sword drawn in his hand, who called himself
"the Prince of Jehovah's army" (Josh. 5:13-15). By "a sword drawn in the
hand" is signified fighting truth Divine in its power. (That "a sword"
denotes truth fighting, see n. 2799, 4499; also that "a drawn sword"
denotes truth continually fighting against falsities and evils, see n.
8294; and that "hand" denotes power, n. 878, 4931-4937, 7518, 8050,
8153; and also that by "the nations in the land of Canaan" are signified
falsities and evils against which the fight is to be waged, n. 8504.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8596.">8596.</span></span>

Choose us out men. That this signifies that it may draw up truths for
the fight, is evident from the signification of "men," as being truths
(n. 265, 749, 1007, 3134). To draw up these for the fight is signified
by "Joshua choosing them;" for when by Joshua is represented truth
Divine fighting, by "the men whom he chose" and joined to himself, are
signified truths drawn up for the fight.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8597.">8597.</span></span>

And go out, fight against Amalek. That this signifies against the
falsities from interior evil, is evident from the representation of
Amalek, as being falsities from interior evil (see above, n. 8593).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8598.">8598.</span></span>

Tomorrow I stand on the top of the hill. That this signifies the
conjunction of truth Divine with the good of charity, and the consequent
influx, is evident from the representation of Moses, who was to stand on
the top of the hill, as being truth Divine (of which frequently above);
from the signification of "standing," as being to be conjoined and to
flow in; that "standing" here denotes to be conjoined, is because he was
then on the top of the hill, and by "a hill" is signified the good of
charity; that it also denotes to flow in, is because from it he viewed
the battle, and also determined it, which is signified by Israel
prevailing when he lifted up his hand and by Amalek prevailing when he
let down his hand: and from the signification of "a hill," as being the
good of charity (n. 6435). \[2\] How the case is with the conjunction
and influx of the good of charity into the fighting truth, shall be
briefly told. As before said, the Divine becomes fighting truth through
conjunction with those who are in zeal. They who are in zeal fight, yet
not from any enmity and hostility, but rather from charity; for zeal
differs from anger in the fact that zeal has within it the good of
charity; and therefore when zeal fights it merely removes those who are
in falsity and evil, to prevent them from hurting those who are in good
and truth. On the other hand, anger not only removes them, but also
pursues them with hatred and revenge. For from the charity that is in
it, zeal wishes well even to those who are in evil and falsity, and also
does well to them so far as they do not injure the good, whereas anger,
from the hatred and revenge which are within it, wishes harm to all with
whom it fights, whether they be good or evil. From this it can be seen
what is meant by the influx of the good of charity into truth fighting.
(That zeal has good in it, and anger has evil, see n. 4164, 4444.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8599.">8599.</span></span>

With the rod of God in thy hand. That this signifies that from this
there was power, is evident from the signification of "the rod of God,"
as being Divine power (n. 4013, 4015, 4876, 4936, 7026); and from the
signification of "hand," as also being power (n. 8595). It is said "the
rod of God in the hand," because by "rod" is signified exterior power,
and by "hand" interior power; or by "rod" natural power, and by "hand"
spiritual power (n. 6947, 7011). It is said that "from this there was
power," because truth fighting has power in it from good; for all the
power which truth has, is from the good which is therein. The reason is
that the Divine is in good, and through good in truth; but is not in
truth without good. That all the power of truth is from good, see n.
3563, 4931; and that all the power of good is from the Divine, is
manifest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8600.">8600.</span></span>

Verses 10-13. And Joshua did as Moses had said to him in fighting
against Amalek; and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the
hill. And it was, when Moses lifted up his hand, that Israel prevailed;
and when he let down his hand, that Amalek prevailed. And Moses' hands
were heavy, and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat upon
it; and Aaron and Hur held up his hands, one on one side, and the other
on the other; and it was, his hands were steady until the setting of the
sun. And Joshua weakened Amalek and his people with the edge of the
sword. "And Joshua did as Moses had said to him," signifies the effect,
as the fighting truth had been instructed by Divine truth; "in fighting
against Amalek," signifies against the falsity from interior evil; "and
Moses, and Aaron, and Hur," signifies Divine truths in successive order;
"went up to the top of the hill," signifies in the good of charity; "and
it was when Moses lifted up his hand," signifies when faith looked
toward the Lord with those who were of the spiritual church; "that
Israel prevailed," signifies that then the fighting truth conquered;
"and when he let down his hand," signifies when the faith with them
looked downward or away from the Lord to self and the world; "that
Amalek prevailed," signifies that then the falsity conquered; "and
Moses' hands were heavy," signifies that the power of looking upward to
the Lord failed; "and they took a stone," signifies truth Divine in the
ultimate of order; "and put it under him, and he sat upon it," signifies
correspondence with truth in the first of order; "and Aaron and Hur,"
signifies truths in order; "held up his hands," signifies the upholding
of the power of the fighting truth; "one on one side, and the other on
the other," signifies on all sides; "and it was, his hands were steady,"
signifies the strength of power then; "until the setting of the sun,"
signifies when this state ceased; "and Joshua weakened Amalek and his
people," signifies the lessening of power with those who are in falsity
from interior evil; "with the edge of the sword," signifies by means of
fighting truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8601-8650](ac173)
