[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac204)  [Next](ac206) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="10201.">10201.</span></span>

In dressing the lamps he shall burn it. That this signifies when truth
also comes into its light, is evident from the signification of "lamps,"
as being Divine truth and the consequent intelligence and wisdom (see n.
9548, 9783); that "to dress" or kindle them denotes when these come into
their light, is evident; and from the signification of "burning," as
being the hearing and reception of all things of worship (n. 10177,
10198). From this it is evident that by "burning it every morning, when
the lamps were dressed," is signified that the hearing and reception of
all things of worship is chiefly when they are in a clear state of love,
and from this in the intelligence and wisdom of truth. \[2\] It is said
"from this in the intelligence and wisdom of truth," because the light
of truth with man is altogether according to the state of his love; in
proportion as the love is kindled, the truth shines, for the good of
love is the vital fire itself, and the truth of faith is the
intellectual light itself, which is intelligence and wisdom. These two
advance with equal step. \[3\] By intelligence and wisdom is not meant
the capacity to think and reason on every subject, for this exists
equally with the evil as with the good, but there is meant the capacity
to see and perceive the truths and goods which are of faith and charity,
and of love to the Lord. This capacity exists solely with those who are
in enlightenment from the Lord, and they are so far in enlightenment as
they are in love to Him and in charity toward the neighbor. For the Lord
enters through good, thus through the love and charity that are with the
man, and leads into truths corresponding to the good; but when the loves
are alien, as are those which are turned away from the Lord and the
neighbor to self and the world, then these loves lead him, but from
truths into falsities, while the capacity to think and reason still
remains. \[4\] The reason is that they are not in enlightenment from the
Lord, but from self and the world, which enlightenment is mere thick
darkness in spiritual things, that is, in those which are of heaven and
the church. For with such the internal man, which sees from the light of
heaven, is closed; and the external is opened, which sees from the light
of the world; and to see anything from the light of the world without
the influx of light from heaven, is to see the things of heaven in thick
darkness. Nay, insofar as the man has then kindled natural light by
means of the loves of self and of the world, so far he rushes into
falsities, consequently so far he extinguishes the truths of faith. From
this it is that the learned of the world, who are in the love of self,
having greater resources for confirming falsities, are more blind than
the simple. \[5\] These things have been said that it may be known that
the faith of everyone is such as is his love; and that it may be
understood what is meant by truth coming into its light when love comes
into its clearness, which things are signified by "burning the incense
every morning when the lamps were dressed."

<span class="margnote"><span id="10202.">10202.</span></span>

And when Aaron maketh the lamps to go up between the evenings, he shall
burn it. That this signifies an uplifting also in an obscure state of
love when truth also is in its shade, is evident from the signification
of "making the lamps go up," that is, to kindle them, as being to
enlighten with Divine truth, and the consequent intelligence and wisdom
(see just above, n. 10201); from the representation of Aaron, as being
the Lord as to Divine good, and as to the work of salvation (n. 9806,
9965, 10068); from the signification of "between the evenings," as being
an obscure state of love, and consequently a state of truth in shade (n.
10134, 10135); and from the signification of "burning," as being the
uplifting of worship (see n. 10198). From this it is evident that by
"Aaron's making the lamps to go up between the evenings," is signified
the uplifting of all things of worship by the Lord in an obscure state
of love, when truth also is in its shade. How the case herein is can be
seen from what was said just above (n. 10200, 10201), namely, that
states of love in the heavens are varied as are the times of the day and
of the year in the world; and that truth is in its light as good is in
its heat, that is, in its love; and therefore when the love is not so
much in its heat, neither is the truth in its light. This being so,
mention is made of "dressing the lamps in the morning, and making the
lamps to go up in the evening," for "to make to go up" denotes to uplift
and increase the light of truth then as much as it can be done.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10203.">10203.</span></span>

A continual incense before Jehovah. That this signifies in all worship
from love from the Lord, is evident from the signification of "incense,"
as being worship from love (see n. 9475); from the signification of
"continual," as being all in all (n. 10133); and from the signification
of "before Jehovah," as being from the Lord (n. 10146). It is said
"worship from love from the Lord," because both love and faith, which
are the essentials of worship, are from the Lord; and also from the Lord
is the uplifting of all things of worship to Himself. A man who is not
acquainted with the arcana of heaven supposes that worship is from
himself, because he thinks and adores; yet the worship which is from man
himself is not worship, but that which is from the Lord with man. For
love and faith make worship, and as love and faith are from the Lord,
worship also is from Him; neither can a man uplift into heaven anything
from himself, but the Lord uplifts it; there being in man merely the
capacity that this can be done, with which capacity he is endowed during
regeneration (n. 6148); but all the activity and life of this capacity
are from the Lord. (That life itself is from the Lord, and that men and
angels are recipient forms, see n. 1954, 2021, 2536, 2706, 3001, 3318,
3484, 3741-3743, 4151, 4249, 4318-4320, 4417, 4523, 4524, 4882, 5847,
5986, 6325, 6467, 6468, 6470, 6472, 6479, 9338.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10204.">10204.</span></span>

To your generations. That this signifies to eternity with those who are
in faith from love, is evident from the signification of "generations,"
as being those things which are of faith and love (see n. 613, 2020,
2584, 6239, 9042, 9079, 9845); and "to generations" denotes to eternity
(n. 9789).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10205.">10205.</span></span>

Ye shall not make strange incense go up upon it. That this signifies no
worship from any other love than the love of the Lord, is evident from
the signification of "incense," as being worship from love (see n.
9475); and from the signification of "strange" as being one who is
within the church and yet does not acknowledge the Lord (n. 10112). From
this it is evident that by "not making strange incense go up," is
signified that worship from any other love than that of the Lord is not
worship. The case herein is this. Acknowledgment, faith, and love to the
Lord, are the principal of all things of worship within the church, for
acknowledgment, faith, and love conjoin; acknowledgment and faith
conjoin there what is of the understanding, and love what is of the
will; and these two things make the whole man. He therefore who within
the church does not acknowledge the Lord has no conjunction with the
Divine, for all the Divine is in the Lord and from the Lord; and when
there is no conjunction with the Divine, there is no salvation. From
this it is that worship from any other faith and from any other love
than those which are directed to the Lord is not worship. It is
otherwise with those who are outside the church; for as they are in
ignorance about the Lord, their worship is accepted by the Lord when
they live from their religion in any mutual charity, and in any faith
and in any love to God, whom most of them worship under a human form.
Moreover, in the other life, when they are instructed by the angels
about the Lord, that He is the Divine Itself in human form, they
acknowledge Him; and insofar as they had been in the good of life, so
far they worship Him from faith and love (see n. 2589-2604).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10206.">10206.</span></span>

Nor a burnt-offering, nor a meat-offering. That this signifies no
representative there of regeneration through the truths and goods of
celestial love, is evident from the signification of "a burnt-offering,"
as being a representative of purification from evils, of the implanting
of good and truth, and of their conjunction, thus of regeneration (see
n. 10042, 10053, 10057); and from the signification of "a
meat-offering," as being celestial good, into which man is introduced by
regeneration (n. 4581, 9992, 10079, 10137), and also as being a
representative of regeneration (n. 9993, 9994). From this it is evident
that by "not making a burnt-offering nor a meat-offering go up on the
altar of incense," is signified that there was no representative there
of regeneration through the truths and goods of faith and love, but a
representative of the worship of the Lord from these. Regeneration is
one thing, and worship another; for regeneration is first, and the
worship is according to the quality of the man's regeneration; for his
worship is accepted and is pleasing in the proportion that he has been
purified from evils and the consequent falsities, and accordingly in the
proportion that the truths and goods of faith and of love have been
implanted. For by worship is meant everything that proceeds from love
and faith with man, and is uplifted to the Lord by the Lord. As this is
the full completion, the altar of incense, by which worship was
represented, is described last; for all things follow in order according
to the series in which they are described. First is described the
Testimony, by which is meant the Lord; next the ark in which was the
Testimony, by which is signified the inmost heaven where the Lord is;
afterward the table on which were the breads, by which is signified the
good of love therefrom; and also the lampstand with the lamps, by which
is signified the Divine truth that proceeds from the Lord's Divine good;
then the Tent itself, by which is signified heaven and the church which
are from these; at length the altar of burnt-offering, by which is
signified regeneration by means of truths from good; and lastly the
altar of incense, by which is signified worship from all these in heaven
and in the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10207.">10207.</span></span>

And ye shall pour no drink-offering upon it. That this signifies no
representative there of regeneration through the truths and goods of
spiritual love, is evident from the signification of a "drink-offering,"
as being a representative of regeneration through the truths and goods
of faith and charity (see n. 10137), which are the truths and goods of
spiritual love. For love to the Lord is called celestial love, but
charity toward the neighbor is called spiritual love; the former love
reigns in the inmost heaven, but the latter in the middle and ultimate
heavens (see the places cited in n. 9277, 9596, 9684).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10208.">10208.</span></span>

And Aaron shall make expiation upon the horns of it. That this signifies
purification from evils through the truths of faith which are from the
good of love, is evident from the signification of "expiating," as being
purification from evils (see n. 9506); from the representation of Aaron,
as being the Lord as to Divine good and as to the work of salvation (n.
9806, 9946, 10017); and from the signification of "horns," as being
powers (n. 10182), and also the exteriors (n. 10186). That it signifies
purification through the truths of faith which are from the good of
love, is because expiation was made by blood, and by "blood" is
signified the truth of faith which is from the good of love (n. 4735,
7317, 7326, 7846, 7850, 7877, 9127, 9393, 10026, 10033, 10047); and all
purification from evils is effected by means of the truths of faith
which are from the good of love (n. 2799, 5954, 7044, 7918, 9088). That
expiations were made with blood upon the horns of the altar of
burnt-offering and of the altar of incense, is evident in Leviticus 4:3,
7, 18, 25, 30, 34; 16:18. \[2\] The reason why the altars were expiated
in this way, was because the holy things were defiled by the sins of the
people, for the people represented the church; and therefore the things
that belonged to the church, and were called its sanctuaries, as the
altar and the Tent, together with the things that were therein, were
defiled when the people itself sinned; seeing that these sanctuaries
belonged to the church. The same can be seen in Moses: Ye shall separate
the sons of Israel from their uncleanness, that they die not in their
uncleanness, when they defile My Habitation that is in the midst of them
(Lev. 15:31). Aaron shall make expiation for the holy place, from the
uncleannesses of the sons of Israel. Thus shall he make expiation for
the sanctuary of holiness, and for the Tent of meeting, and for the
altar (Lev. 16:16, 33). \[3\] The case herein is this. What are called
the holy things of the church are not holy unless they are solemnly
received; for unless they are solemnly received, the Divine does not
flow into them, and all the holy things with man are holy merely from
the Divine influx. For instance, holy edifices, the altars there, the
bread and wine for the Holy Supper, become holy solely through the
presence of the Lord; and therefore if the Lord cannot be present there
because of the sins of the people, what is holy is absent, because the
Divine is absent. Moreover, the holy things of the church are profaned
by sins, because these remove from them what is Divine. \[4\] This then
is the reason why the sanctuaries are said to be defiled by the
uncleanness of the people, and that on this account they were to be
expiated every year. That expiations were made by blood upon the horns
of the altars, and not upon the altars themselves, was because the horns
were their extremes, and nothing of man has been purified unless the
extremes have been purified; for it is the extremes into which the
interiors flow, and the influx takes place in accordance with their
state; and therefore if the extremes have been perverted, the interiors
are perverted therein; for when these flow in, the recipient forms of
the interiors accommodate themselves to the state of the extremes. When
there is something wrong with the eye, the sight which comes from within
sees no otherwise than according to this state of the eye. Or when there
is something wrong with the arms, the powers which come from within must
needs put themselves forth accordingly. Wherefore, if the natural man
has been perverted, the spiritual man must needs act into him in a
perverted manner. From this it is that the spiritual or internal man is
then closed. \[5\] But see what has been shown above on this subject,
namely, that in order to effect man's purification, he must be purified
as to the natural or external man (see the places cited in n. 9325); for
the reason that all influx is from the internal into the external, and
not the reverse (n. 5119, 6322); for the natural of man is the plane in
which influx from the spiritual world terminates (n. 5651); and the
externals of man have been formed to be of service to the internals (n.
5947, 9216, 9828). Thus the external man must be wholly subject to the
internal (n. 5786, 6275, 6284, 6299); for the reason that the internal
man is in heaven, and the external in the world (n. 3167, 10156); and of
himself, or left to himself alone, the external man is opposite to the
internal (n. 3913, 3928; moreover what the internal man is, and what the
external, may be seen in n. 9701-9709).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10209.">10209.</span></span>

Once in the year. That this signifies perpetually, is evident from the
signification of "once in the year," as being for the whole year, for
expiation upon the horns of the altar of incense once in the year
involved expiation for the whole year; and a year, like all things of
time, signifies a state and its duration, and also perpetuity. In this
case there is meant a state of purification from evils by means of the
truths of faith, for this state is signified by "expiation upon the
horns of the altar of incense once in the year;" and all purification
from evils, or regeneration, goes on perpetually, not only in the world,
but also perpetually in the other life. (That by a "year" is signified
what is perpetual and eternal, see n. 2906, 7828; and also by
"yesterday," "today," "tomorrow," and similar things of time, n. 2838,
3998, 4304, 6165, 6984, 9939; and that purification from evils, or
regeneration, goes on to eternity, see the places cited in n. 9334,
10048.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10210.">10210.</span></span>

From the blood of the sin-offering of expiations. That this signifies
through the truths which are from the good of innocence, is evident from
the signification of "blood," as being Divine truth (see n. 4735, 6978,
7317, 7326, 7846, 7850, 9127, 9393, 10026, 10033, 10047); and from the
signification of "the sin-offering of expiations," or of the sacrifice
of sin by which expiation is effected, as being purification from evils
and the consequent falsities. (That by "sin" is meant sacrifice for sin,
see above, n. 10039; and that "expiation" denotes purification from
evils and the consequent falsities, n. 9506.) That this purification is
effected by means of truths which are from the good of innocence, is
because the blood by which expiation was effected was from a bullock or
a lamb, and by a "bullock" is signified the good of innocence in the
external man (n. 9391, 9990, 10132); and by a "lamb," the good of
innocence in the internal man (n. 10132); and there must be innocence in
order that truth and good may be received (see n. 3111, 3994, 4797,
6013, 6765, 7836, 7840, 9262, 10134, and the places cited in n. 10021).
For the good of innocence consists in acknowledging that all truths and
goods are from the Lord, and nothing from man's own; thus it consists in
being willing to be led by the Lord, and not by self. From this it is
plain that the more a man trusts and believes in himself, thus the more
he is in the love of self, the less he is in the good of innocence. From
this it is that a man cannot be purified from evils unless he is in the
good of innocence; for if he is not in this good, he is not led by the
Lord, but by self; and he who is led by self, is led by hell, for what
is man's own is nothing but evil, and all evil is of hell. (That all
expiation was made by the blood either of a bullock, or of a lamb, or of
turtle-doves, or of young pigeons, is evident in Exodus 29:36; Leviticus
4:1-7, 13-18, 27 to the end; 5:1-7; 15:14, 28-31; Numbers 6:9-11.) By
"turtle-doves" and by "young pigeons" is also signified the good of
innocence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10211.">10211.</span></span>

Once in the year he shall make expiation upon it. That this signifies
the perpetual removal of evils, is evident from the signification of
"once in the year," as being what is perpetual (see above, n. 10209);
and from the signification of "expiating," as being purification from
evils and the consequent falsities (n. 9506); and purification from
evils is nothing but a withholding from them, or their removal (see the
places cited in n. 10057).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10212.">10212.</span></span>

To your generations. That this signifies those of the church who are in
the truths and goods of faith, is evident from the signification of
"generations" as being those things which are of faith and charity (see
the places cited in n. 10204); that those are meant who are of the
church is because genuine truths and goods of faith and love exist
solely with these, for with these is the Word; and by the "sons of
Israel," whose generations are here meant, is signified the church (see
the places cited in n. 9340).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10213.">10213.</span></span>

A holy of holies is this to Jehovah. That this signifies because from
the Divine celestial, is evident from the signification of "a holy of
holies," as being the Divine celestial (see n. 10129). (What the Divine
celestial is, and the Divine spiritual, and what is the difference
between them, see the places cited in n. 9277, 9596.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10214.">10214.</span></span>

Verses 11-16. And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying, When thou shalt take
up the sum of the sons of Israel as to those who are numbered of them,
then they shall give everyone an expiation of his soul to Jehovah in
numbering them, that there be no plague in them in numbering them. This
they shall give, everyone that passeth over upon those who are numbered,
half a shekel, in the shekel of holiness, a shekel of twenty gerahs, the
half of a shekel an uplifting to Jehovah. Everyone that passeth over
upon those who are numbered, from a son of twenty years and upward,
shall give an uplifting to Jehovah. The rich shall not give more, and
the poor shall not give less, from the half of the shekel to give an
uplifting to Jehovah, to make an expiation upon your souls. And thou
shalt take the silver of expiations from among the sons of Israel, and
thou shalt give it for the work of the Tent of meeting; and it shall be
to the sons of Israel for a memorial before Jehovah to make expiation
upon your souls. "And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying," signifies
enlightenment through the Word by the Lord; "when thou shalt take up the
sum of the sons of Israel," signifies all things of the church; "as to
those who are numbered of them," signifies as to a setting in order and
disposing; "then they shall give everyone an expiation of his soul to
Jehovah in numbering them," signifies purification or liberation from
evil through the acknowledgment and faith that all the goods and truths
of faith and love, and their setting in order and disposing, are from
the Lord, and not at all from man; "that there be no plague in them in
numbering them," signifies lest there should be the penalty of evil in
doing goods as from self; "this they shall give, everyone that passeth
over upon those who are numbered," signifies the ascription to the Lord
of all things of faith and love; "half a shekel, in the shekel of
holiness," signifies all things of truth from good; "a shekel of twenty
gerahs," signifies all things of good; "the half of a shekel an
uplifting to Jehovah," signifies that all things of truth from good are
of the Lord alone; "everyone that passeth over upon those who are
numbered," signifies the ascription of all truths and goods to the Lord
alone; "from a son of twenty years and upward," signifies a state of the
intelligence of truth and good; "shall give an uplifting to Jehovah,"
signifies ascription to the Lord alone; "the rich shall not give more,
and the poor shall not give less, from the half of the shekel, to give
an uplifting to Jehovah," signifies that all, of whatever ability they
may be, must ascribe all things of truth and good to the Lord; "to make
expiation upon your souls," signifies that evils may be removed; "and
thou shalt take the silver of expiations from among the sons of Israel,"
signifies truths purifying by virtue of good, which are of the church;
"and thou shalt give it for the work of the Tent of meeting," signifies
conjunction with heaven through the acknowledgment that all truths and
goods are from the Lord; "and it shall be to the sons of Israel for a
memorial before Jehovah," signifies in this way the preservation of the
church and of all things of the church by the Lord; "to make expiation
upon your souls," signifies because in this way evils are removed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10215.">10215.</span></span>

And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying. That this signifies enlightenment
through the Word by the Lord, is evident from the signification of
"speaking," when by Jehovah to Moses, as being enlightenment by the Lord
through the Word; for "Jehovah" in the Word denotes the Lord, and by
Moses is represented the Word; for by "speaking" is signified influx,
perception, and instruction (see n. 2951, 5481, 5743, 5797, 7226, 7241,
7270, 8127, 8128, 8221, 8262, 8660), consequently also enlightenment,
for enlightenment is influx, perception, and instruction by the Lord
when the Word is being read. (That "Jehovah" in the Word denotes the
Lord, see the places cited in n. 9373; and that in the representative
sense "Moses" denotes the Word, n. 9372.) That these things are
signified by "Jehovah speaking to Moses," is because these words are not
perceived in heaven in the same way as on earth; for in heaven words are
perceived according to the internal sense, but on earth according to the
external sense, for in heaven all things are understood spiritually, but
on earth naturally. The spiritual understanding is instantaneous,
without any knowledge of what is understood in the external or literal
sense by man. Such is the consociation of the angels of heaven with man,
for the reason that everything of man's thought flows in from the
spiritual world, and thus that in its first origin his thought is
spiritual, and becomes natural in the external man by means of influx.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10216.">10216.</span></span>

When thou shalt take up the sum of the sons of Israel. That this
signifies all things of the church, is evident from the signification of
"the sum," as being all; and from the representation of "the sons of
Israel," as being the church (see the places cited in n. 9340). That all
things of the church are signified by "the sum of the sons of Israel,"
is because the internal sense of the Word is such as is its sense in the
heavens, for thither names do not pass, as the names of Israel, Moses,
Aaron, and many others; for these names are amid material things, which
are solely for the man of the bodily senses; but in their place are
perceived spiritual things that belong to heaven and the church. The
angels of heaven are spiritual, and apprehend whatever occurs according
to its essence, that is, spiritually. That in heaven instead of the sons
of Israel they understand the church, is because in the inmost heaven,
where the Lord is more present than in the heavens beneath, by the names
in the Word, in a good sense, is understood the Lord Himself; as by
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron, David, Joseph, Judah, and Israel.
And as by these names is there understood the Lord, therefore the Divine
things of heaven and of the church, which are from the Lord, are
perceived by the same names in accordance with the connection of the
things in the Word. Perception flows in from the Lord, who is the Word;
for everything of intelligence and wisdom is from the Lord, and without
Him there is none at all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10217.">10217.</span></span>

As to those who are numbered of them. That this signifies a setting in
order and disposing, is evident from the signification of "numbering,"
when said of all things of the church, which are the truths and goods of
faith and love, as being the setting in order and the disposing of them,
consequently "those who were numbered" signify what has been set in
order and disposed. "Numbering" has this signification because numbering
involves survey, and that which is surveyed by the Lord is also set in
order and disposed. Moreover, the word by which numbering is here
expressed, in the original tongue means to survey, to estimate, to
observe, and also to visit, to command, to preside, thus to set in order
and dispose. That these significations belong to this word is because in
the spiritual sense the one thing involves the other, and the spiritual
sense is the interior sense of the words, which sense is often contained
in the words of languages, especially of the oriental languages. \[2\]
That in the spiritual sense, in which sense the truths and goods of
faith and love are treated of, "to number" denotes to set in order and
dispose, is evident also from the passages in the Word where "numbering"
is spoken of, and also "number," as in the following: The voice of a
tumult of the kingdoms of the nations gathered together; Jehovah Zebaoth
numbers (setteth in order) the army of war (Isa. 13:4). Lift up your
eyes on high, and see who hath created these; He that hath brought forth
by number their army; He calleth them all by name; of the multitude of
the powerful and of the mighty in strength, not a man is lacking (Isa.
40:26). Jehovah who numbers the army of the stars; He calleth all by
names (Ps. 147:4). That by "numbering" in these passages is signified to
set in order and dispose, is plain, for it is said of Jehovah, that is,
the Lord, who does not number any army, or stars, but sets in order and
disposes those things which are signified by an "army" and by "stars,"
which are the truths and goods of faith and love; for the subject
treated of is not wars in the natural world, but wars in the spiritual
world, which are wars or combats of truths from good against falsities
from evil. (That "wars" in the spiritual sense denote such combats, see
n. 1664, 2686, 8273, 8295; that an "army" denotes the truths and goods
of the church and of heaven, n. 7988, 8019; and that "stars" denote the
knowledges of truth and good, n. 2495, 2849, 4697.) \[3\] When it is
known what is signified by "numbering," and by " the sons of Israel," it
can be seen why it was not allowable for David to number the people, and
why after he numbered them, Gad the prophet was sent to him, who
declared the penalty (2 Sam. 24:1-15); and why it is here said that
"everyone should give an expiation of his soul, that there be no plague
in them in numbering them." For by "the sons of Israel" are signified
the truths and goods of the church, and by "numbering" is signified to
set in order and dispose; and because it is of the Lord alone to set in
order and dispose the truths and goods of faith and of love with
everyone in the church and in heaven, therefore when this is done by a
man, as it was done by David through Joab, it then signifies the setting
in order and disposing of such things by man, and not by the Lord, which
is not to set in order and dispose, but to destroy. If the numbering of
the sons of Israel had not involved such things, there would not have
been any sin or guilt in numbering them. \[4\] (That by "the sons of
Israel" are signified spiritual truths and goods, which are the truths
and goods of the church and of heaven, see n. 5414, 5801, 5803, 5812,
5817, 5819, 5826, 5833, 5879, 5951, 7957, 8234, 8805; in like manner by
the tribes into which the sons of Israel were divided, n. 3858, 3926,
4060, 6335, 6397.) As by "the sons of Israel" and by the "tribes" such
things are signified, and these are innumerable, therefore in the Word
it is said of them that: Their number should be as the sand of the sea,
which shall not be measured, nor numbered (Hosea 1:10). Who will number
the dust of Jacob, and the number of Israel? (Num. 23:10). Jehovah said
to Abraham, I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth; so that if
one can number the dust of the earth, it shall be that thy seed will be
numbered (Gen. 13:16; 16:10). Look up toward heaven, and number the
stars, if thou be able to number them. So shall thy seed be (Gen. 15:5).
That by "the sons of Israel," and by "the seed of Abraham," was not
meant their posterity; but spiritual truths and goods, which are
innumerable, and also for the most part unutterable, can be seen from
the fact that there was not a greater multitude of them than of other
nations, which also Moses testifies: Not because of your multitude above
all peoples hath Jehovah desired you, that He should choose you, for
indeed ye are fewer than all peoples (Deut. 7:7). \[5\] Moreover, by
"numbering" is signified to set in order and dispose, in Jeremiah: In
the cities of Jerusalem and of Judah shall the flocks yet pass over
according to the hands of him that numbers them (Jer. 33:13); "flocks"
also denote the goods and truths of the church (n. 6048, 8937, 9135);
"according to the hands of him that numbers" denotes according to the
disposing of the Lord. In David: Who knoweth the vehemence of Thine
anger? For numbering our days, make known what is right, that we may put
on a heart of wisdom (Ps. 90:12); "to number days" denotes to set in
order and dispose the states of life; and days are said to be "numbered"
when they are set in order and disposed, thus when they are finished, as
in these passages: By the letting out of my days I shall go away unto
the gates of hell; I have been numbered as to the residue of my years
(Isa. 38:10); A writing appeared before King Belshazzar: Numbered,
Weighed, and Divided (Dan. 5:25); for when "to number" signifies to set
in order and dispose, then what is "numbered" signifies what is
finished, as when a line is drawn under numbers on completing the
calculation. \[6\] That by "numbering" is signified to set in order and
dispose, is because by "number" is signified the quality of a thing and
of a state, and the quality is determined by the adjoined number; hence
"to number" denotes to qualify, and in spiritual things qualification is
effected by a setting in order and a disposing by the Lord. This is
signified by "number" in John: He causeth that he give to all a mark
upon their right hand or upon their foreheads, and that no one can buy
or sell save he that hath the mark or the name of the beast, or the
number of his name. Here is wisdom. Let him that hath intelligence count
the number of the beast; for it is the number of a man; namely, the
number six hundred and sixty-six (Rev. 13:16-18). \[7\] The subject
treated of in this chapter is the beast out of the sea and the beast out
of the earth; by the "beast out of the sea" is meant the truth of the
church falsified by means of memory-knowledges which are from the world;
and by the "beast out of the earth" is meant the truth of the church
falsified by means of the literal sense of the Word applied to favor the
evils of the loves of self and of the world; for the "earth" denotes the
church as to good and truth (see the places cited in n. 9325; and the
"sea" denotes memory-knowledge in general, n. 28, 2850, 2120). "To have
his mark upon the hand and upon the forehead" denotes to acknowledge all
things no matter what they may be; for the "forehead" signifies love (n.
9936); and a "name" signifies all the quality of that which is being
treated of (n. 3006, 3421, 6674, 8274, 1930). \[8\] "To count the number
of the beast" denotes to explore and know these falsified truths of the
church; "the number of a man" signifies the subject and the state of the
church; "six hundred and sixty-six" signifies its quality as to all
truths falsified from evil, and also the profanation of what is holy,
and likewise the end. To know these things, and to explore them, is the
part of a wise and intelligent man, and therefore it is said, "this is
wisdom, let him that hath intelligence count its number;" for the number
"six" signifies the same as the number "twelve," because it is the half
of it (n. 3960, 7973, 8148); and "twelve" signifies all the truths and
goods of the church in the complex (n. 2129, 2130, 3272, 3858, 3913,
7973), hence also in the opposite sense it signifies all falsities and
evils in the complex. The trebling of the number six also involves the
end, and the end is when truth is completely profaned. \[9\] From all
this it is very evident that numbers in the Word involve things and
states, and signify quality according to the numbers fixed upon, as also
in the following words in John: The angel measured the wall of the holy
Jerusalem a hundred and forty-four cubits, which is the measure of a
man, that is, of an angel (Rev. 21:17); by the number fixed upon in this
passage are also signified all truths and goods in the complex, for "a
hundred and forty-four" signifies the same as "twelve" (n. 7973), for it
arises from twelve multiplied into itself; and therefore it is here said
that its "measure is the measure of a man," as above that this number is
"the number of a man;" but as truths from good are here signified, it is
added that this measure is also "the measure of an angel," for "an
angel" in the Word signifies truths from good, because he is a recipient
of Divine truth from the Lord (see n. 8192).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10218.">10218.</span></span>

Then they shall give everyone an expiation of his soul to Jehovah in
numbering them. That this signifies purification or liberation from evil
through the acknowledgment and faith that all the truths and goods of
faith and love, and their setting in order and disposing, are from the
Lord, and not at all from man, is evident from the signification of
"giving an expiation of his soul," as being to be purified or liberated
from evil by means of the truth of faith, which here is to acknowledge
that all truths and goods are from the Lord; and from the signification
of "numbering Israel," as being the setting in order and the disposing
of them by the Lord alone and not by man. That these things are
signified is evident from all that is here said about the half of a
shekel that was to be given to Jehovah, and about the expiation by it in
numbering the people; for by the "shekel of holiness" is signified the
truth which is of the Lord alone; by "expiation thereby" is signified
purification or liberation from evil (see n. 9506); and by "numbering
the sons of Israel" is signified to set in order and dispose all the
truths and goods of the church (n. 10217). \[2\] The case herein is
this. It was forbidden to number the sons of Israel because by
"numbering" was signified to set in order and dispose, and by the "sons
of Israel" and by the "tribes" into which they were divided, were
signified all the truths and goods of faith and love in the complex; and
as the setting in order and the disposing of these was of the Lord alone
and not of man, therefore to number them was a trespass, such as is made
by those who claim for themselves the truths which are of faith and the
goods which are of love, and the setting in order and disposing of
these, the character of whom is known in the church. For they are such
as justify themselves by claiming for themselves as merit all things of
faith and love, and consequently believe themselves to have of
themselves merited heaven by virtue of their faith and works. This evil
was involved in the numbering of the people by David, concerning which
we read in the second book of Samuel: Again the anger of Jehovah was
kindled against Israel, and therefore He incited David against them,
saying, Go, number Israel and Judah. And the king said to Joab, Go
through all the tribes of Israel, and number ye the people, that I may
know the number of the people. And Joab said unto the king, Jehovah thy
God add unto the people how many soever they be, a hundred-fold, but why
doth my lord the king desire this word? But the king's word prevailed
against Joab, and against the princes of the army; wherefore they went
out to number the people Israel. Afterward David's heart smote him,
wherefore he said unto Jehovah, I have sinned exceedingly in that I have
done; nevertheless, O Jehovah, put away, I beseech thee, the iniquity of
Thy servant, for I have done very foolishly. But Gad the prophet was
sent to David, that he might choose one evil out of three; and he chose
the pestilence, whereof seventy thousand men died (2 Sam. 24). \[3\]
From all this it is evident how great a sin it was to number Israel; not
that regarded in itself the numbering was a sin, but because, as already
said, the numbering of the sons of Israel by David signified the setting
in order and disposing of all things of faith and love by self and not
by the Lord, the "numbering" itself signifying setting in order and
disposing, and "the sons of Israel" signifying all the truths and goods
of faith and love. To the intent therefore that they might be delivered
from sin in numbering the sons of Israel, the half of a shekel was given
for an expiation; for it is said, "they shall give everyone an expiation
of his soul to Jehovah in numbering them, that there be no plague in
them in numbering them." From this it is evident that by these words is
signified purification or liberation from evil by the acknowledgment
that all the truths and goods of faith and love, and their setting in
order and disposing, are from the Lord and not at all from man. \[4\]
That this is so, namely, that all the goods and truths of faith and love
are from the Divine and not at all from man, is also known in the
church, and likewise that it is evil for man to attribute them to
himself; and that those are delivered from this evil who acknowledge and
believe that these are from the Lord, for so they claim for themselves
nothing which is Divine and from the Divine. But see what has been shown
above on this subject, namely, that those who believe that they do good
of themselves and not from the Lord, believe that they merit heaven (n.
9974); that goods from self and not from the Lord are not good, because
those who do goods from themselves do them from evil (n. 9975, 9980);
that such despise the neighbor, and are angry with God Himself if they
do not receive a reward (n. 9976); that such persons cannot receive
heaven into themselves (n. 9977); that they cannot possibly fight
against the hells; but that the Lord fights for those who acknowledge
and believe that all goods and truths are from Him (n. 9978); and that
the Lord alone is merit and righteousness (n. 9486, 9715, 9809,
9979-9984, 10019, 10152).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10219.">10219.</span></span>

That there be no plague in them in numbering them. That this signifies
lest there be the penalty of evil in doing goods as from self, is
evident from the signification of a "plague," as being the penalty of
evil (of which below); and from the signification of "numbering the sons
of Israel," as being to set in order and dispose the truths and goods of
faith and love (of which above, n. 10217), thus to do them. It is said
"as from self," because the goods which a man does he does as from
himself, nor does he perceive otherwise until he is in faith from love.
For goods flow in from the Lord and are received by man, and those which
are received are at first felt no otherwise than as in himself and from
himself; nor is it perceived that they are from the Lord until he comes
into knowledge, and afterward into acknowledgment from faith. For before
this he cannot reflect that anything flows in from the Divine; nor can
he at all perceive this, that is, be sensible of it in himself, until he
begins to will and to love that it be so. \[2\] This is like the life
itself in man, and his two interior faculties of life, which are the
understanding and the will. Who before instruction does not believe that
life is in himself, and thus that what he does from this life is of
himself, and in like manner his understanding and will? although both
his life in general, and his understanding and will, flow in; the truths
of the understanding and the goods of the will out of heaven from the
Lord, but the falsities of understanding and the evils of will from
hell. For unless there are spirits and angels with man through whom this
influx is effected, he cannot live a single moment, consequently neither
can he think or will (as can be seen from manifold experience related at
the close of several chapters, where influx was treated of; see the
places cited in n. 9223, 9276, 9682). \[3\] But so long as a man
believes that he does all things of himself, both goods and evils, so
long goods do not affect him, and evils adhere to him; but the moment
that he acknowledges and believes that goods flow in from the Lord, and
not from himself, and that evils are from hell, then goods affect him
and evils do not adhere to him; and, moreover, insofar as goods affect
him, so far evils are removed, thus he is purified and liberated from
them. But so long as the state of man is such that he cannot perceive
and be sensible of the influx of goods from the Lord, so long he does
goods as from himself, and yet ought to acknowledge and believe that
they are from the Lord. When this is the case, he also is liberated from
evils; but in order that he may be liberated from evils this
acknowledgment must be the confession of the heart itself, and not of
the lips only. \[4\] That a "plague" denotes the penalty of evil, is
evident without explication. There are three plagues which follow those
who attribute to themselves the truths and goods of faith and love, or
who believe that they merit heaven by their works; for they who
attribute these to themselves believe also that of themselves they merit
heaven. These three penalties are: 1. That they cannot receive anything
of the good of love and the truth of faith. 2. That evils and falsities
continually pursue them. 3. And that the truths and goods received from
infancy perish. These three penalties are signified by the three plagues
which were proposed to David by the prophet Gad on account of numbering
the people, which were: 1. Seven years of famine. 2. A fleeing of three
months before their enemies. 3. And a pestilence of three days (2 Sam.
24:13). \[5\] For by "famine" is signified a lack and scarcity of the
goods and truths of faith and love, because these are signified by
bread, food, wheat, barley, oil, and wine, which are lacking while the
famine lasts. By "fleeing before enemies" in the internal sense is meant
to be pursued by evils and falsities, for those who attribute goods and
truths to themselves cannot fight against the evils and falsities which
are from hell (n. 9978), and which in the spiritual sense are the
enemies before whom is the fleeing, and by whom they are pursued. But by
"pestilence" is signified the vastation and consumption of the goods and
truths which have been received from infancy (n. 7505). That David chose
the pestilence, and that seventy thousand died of it, signified that
every truth and good of faith and love would perish with the Israelitish
and Jewish nation, which also came to pass, for they did not acknowledge
the Lord, from whom nevertheless are all goods and truths. "Three days"
signified to the full, and the same was also signified by the "seventy
thousand" men who died.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10220.">10220.</span></span>

This they shall give, everyone that passeth over upon those who are
numbered. That this signifies the ascription to the Lord of all things
of faith and love, is evident from the signification of "giving,"
namely, the expiation of the soul, which was half a shekel, as being
liberation from evils through the acknowledgment that everything of
faith and love is from the Lord and nothing from man (of which above, n.
10218). Hence "everyone that passeth over upon those who are numbered"
signifies whatever of truth and good that is set in order and disposed
by the Lord. For "everyone that passeth over" is everyone of the sons of
Israel, and by the "sons of Israel" are signified all spiritual goods
and truths (n. 5414, 5801, 5803, 5812, 5817, 5819, 5826, 5833, 5879,
5951, 7957, 8234, 8805); and by "those who are numbered" are signified
those who are set in order and disposed by the Lord (n. 10218).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10221.">10221.</span></span>

Half a shekel, in the shekel of holiness. That this signifies all things
of truth from good, is evident from the signification of "half," as
being all things; and from the signification of a "shekel," as being
truth from good. That "half" signifies all things, is because half a
shekel was ten gerahs, or oboli, and by "ten" are signified all things
(see n. 4638), and also remains (n. 576, 1906, 1988, 2284), which are
the truths and goods with man stored up in his interiors by the Lord (n.
5135, 5342, 5897, 5898, 7560, 7564). That a "shekel" denotes truth from
good is because a shekel was a weight of silver and also of gold, and by
"silver" is signified truth, and by "gold" good; but how much of truth
from good and of good through truth, is determined by the number of
gerahs or oboli in the shekel; and in itself, regarded as a weight, a
"shekel" denotes the quantity; and when it is called "the shekel of
holiness," it denotes the quantity of truth and good, for truth and good
are what are called "holy," because they are from the Lord who alone is
holy. (More may be seen concerning the shekel and its signification in
n. 2959.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10222.">10222.</span></span>

A shekel of twenty gerahs. That this signifies all things of good, is
evident from the signification of "twenty," as likewise being all
things, and the remains of good, as also what is holy. (That it denotes
all things and hence what is full, see n. 9641; also the remains of
good, n. 2280; and what is holy, n. 4759, 7842, 7903.) For when said of
the Lord, "twenty" signifies what is His own, which is what is Holy
itself (n. 4176); which shows why a shekel contained twenty gerahs or
oboli, and why it is called a "shekel of holiness" in this and other
passages (as Lev. 27:3; Num. 3:47, 50; 7:13, 19, 25, 31, 37, 49, 55, 61,
67, 73; 18:16). That the shekel was a weight both of silver and of gold,
see Genesis 24:22; Exodus 38:24; Ezekiel 4:10; 45:12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10223.">10223.</span></span>

The half of a shekel an uplifting <span
id="fr_223"></span>[10223-1](#fn_223) to Jehovah. That this signifies
that all things of truth from good are of the Lord alone, is evident
from the signification of "half a shekel," as being all things of truth
from good (of which above, n. 10221); and from the signification of "an
uplifting to Jehovah," as being that which is of the Lord alone (n.
10093).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10224.">10224.</span></span>

Everyone that passeth over upon those who are numbered. That this
signifies that all truths and goods are to be ascribed to the Lord
alone, is evident from what was shown above (n. 10220).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10225.">10225.</span></span>

From a son of twenty years and upward. That this signifies the state of
the intelligence of truth and good, is evident from the signification of
"twenty," when said of a man's age, as being a state of the intelligence
of truth and good. That "twenty" denotes a state of the intelligence of
truth and good, is because when a man attains the age of twenty years he
begins to think from himself; for from earliest infancy to extreme old
age a man passes through a number of states in respect to his interiors
that belong to intelligence and wisdom. The first state is from birth to
his fifth year; this is a state of ignorance and of innocence in
ignorance, and is called infancy. The second state is from the fifth
year to the twentieth; this is a state of instruction and of
memory-knowledge, and is called childhood and youth. The third state is
from the twentieth year to the sixtieth, which is a state of
intelligence, and is called adolescence, young manhood, and manhood. The
fourth or last state is from the sixtieth year upward, which is a state
of wisdom, and of innocence in wisdom. \[2\] These successive states of
the life of man are signified by the numbers of the years of age-"five,"
"twenty," and "sixty," in the following passages in Moses: When anyone
shall make a special vow, the estimation of a male shall be from a son
of twenty years even to a son of sixty years, fifty shekels of silver.
If it be a female, the estimation shall be thirty shekels. And if from a
son of five years even unto to a son of twenty years, the estimation
shall be, if a male, twenty shekels; and if a female, ten shekels. And
if it be from the son of a month even unto five years, the estimation of
a male shall be five shekels; of a female three shekels. And if it be
from a son of sixty years upward, the estimation shall be fifteen
shekels, and of a female ten shekels (Lev. 27:2-7). \[3\] That the first
state is a state of ignorance and also of innocence in ignorance is
plain. During the continuance of this state, the interiors are being
formed for use, consequently are not manifest, but only those most
external, that belong to the sensuous man; and when these alone are
manifest, there is ignorance; for whatever man understands and perceives
is from the interiors; from which it can also be seen that the innocence
which exists at that time and is called the innocence of infancy, is
innocence most external. \[4\] That the second state is a state of
instruction and of memory-knowledge is also plain; this state is not as
yet a state of intelligence, because at that time the child or youth
does not form any conclusions from himself, neither does he from himself
discriminate between truths and truths, nor even between truths and
falsities, but from others; he merely thinks and speaks things of
memory, thus from mere memory-knowledge; nor does he see and perceive
whether a thing is so, except on the authority of his teacher,
consequently because another has said so. \[5\] But the third is called
a state of intelligence, because the man then thinks from himself, and
discriminates and forms conclusions; and that which he then concludes is
his own, and not another's. At this time faith begins, for faith is not
the faith of the man himself until he has confirmed what he believes by
the ideas of his own thought. Previous to this, faith was not his, but
another's in him, for his belief was in the person, not in the thing.
From this it can be seen that the state of intelligence commences with
man when he no longer thinks from a teacher, but from himself; which is
not the case until the interiors are opened toward heaven. Be it known
that the exteriors with man are in the world, and the interiors in
heaven; and that in proportion as light flows in from heaven into what
is from the world, the man is intelligent and wise; and this according
to the degree and quality of the opening of his interiors, which are so
far opened as the man lives for heaven and not for the world. \[6\] But
the last state is a state of wisdom and of innocence in wisdom; which is
when the man is no longer concerned about understanding truths and
goods, but about willing and living them; for this is to be wise. And a
man is able to will truths and goods, and to live them, just insofar as
he is in innocence, that is, insofar as he believes that he has nothing
of wisdom from himself, but that whatever he has of wisdom is from the
Lord; also insofar as he loves to have it so; hence it is that this
state is also a state of innocence in wisdom. \[7\] From the succession
of these states the man who is wise may also see the wonderful things of
the Divine Providence, which are that a prior state is constantly the
plane of the states which follow, and that the opening or unfolding of
the interiors proceeds successively from outermosts even to inmosts; and
at last so that what was first (namely, ignorance and innocence), but in
outermosts, is also last, but in inmosts; for he who knows that of
himself he is ignorant of all things, and that whatever he knows is from
the Lord, is in the ignorance of wisdom, and also in the innocence of
wisdom. From all this it can be seen what is the state of intelligence
which is signified by "twenty," when this number is predicated of man's
age. \[8\] The like is also meant by this number in other passages of
the Word, as in Moses: Take ye the sum of all the congregation, from a
son of twenty years and upward, everyone that goeth forth into the army
in Israel (Num. 1:2, 3, 18, and following verses). The subject treated
of in this passage is the encampment and journeying of the sons of
Israel according to the tribes, and thereby is also signified the
setting in order and disposing by the Lord of the truths and goods of
faith and love; by the "encampment," the setting in order and disposing
(n. 4236, 8103, 8130, 8131, 8155); and by the "tribes," the goods and
truths of faith and love in the whole complex (n. 3858, 3926, 3939,
4060, 6335, 6337, 6397). Hence by "a son of twenty years and upward" are
meant those who are in a state of intelligence, for with these the
truths and goods of faith and love can be set in order and disposed by
the Lord, because the Lord flows into their understanding and will, and
sets them in order and disposes them, and also removes and casts down
falsities and evils. Therefore it is said "from a son of twenty years
and upward everyone that goeth forth into the army," for by "the army"
is signified truths disposed in this order-that they do not fear
falsities and evils; but repel them if they assault. (That such truths
are meant in the internal sense by an "army," see n. 3448, 7236, 7988,
8019.) \[9\] But with those who are in a state of infancy and childhood,
thus who are under twenty years of age, truths and goods have not been
so set in order as to enable them to go forth into the army and into
warfare, because, as before said, they do not as yet from themselves
discriminate, and form any conclusions; consequently they cannot as yet
by means of the rational dispel anything of falsity or evil; and they
who are not able to do this are not let into combats. For this reason a
man is not admitted into temptations, which are spiritual combats
against falsities and evils, until he is in a state of intelligence,
that is, until he comes to his own judgment (n. 3928, 4248, 4249, 8963).
\[10\] The like is signified by the age of "twenty years and upward" in
other passages in Moses: Jehovah said to Moses and Eleazar, Take ye the
sum of all the assembly of the sons of Israel, from a son of twenty
years and upward, everyone that goeth forth to warfare in Israel (Num.
26:2, 3); in the spiritual sense by "going forth to warfare" is
signified to go forth into combats against the falsities and evils which
are from hell. \[11\] One who does not know that a "son of twenty years
and upward" signifies a state of intelligence, or those who are in this
state, cannot know either why, when they murmured against Jehovah, it is
said that they should "die in the wilderness from twenty years and
upward, all who came up out of Egypt" (Num. 14:29; 32:10, 11); for they
who are in such a state of intelligence that they can discriminate,
conclude, and judge from themselves are blamable for their evil; but not
those who are not yet in this state. From this also it is evident that
by "twenty years," when said of a person's age, is signified a state of
understanding, or of judgment. But the number "twenty" has a different
signification when said of a different subject (see above, n. 10222).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10226.">10226.</span></span>

Shall give an uplifting to Jehovah. That this signifies ascription to
the Lord alone, is evident from the signification of "an uplifting to
Jehovah," as being that which is of the Lord alone (see n. 10093). That
this denotes all the truths and goods of faith and love, with their
setting in order and disposing, is plain from what precedes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10227.">10227.</span></span>

The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less, from the
half of the shekel, to give an uplifting to Jehovah. That this signifies
that all, of whatever ability they may be, must ascribe all things of
truth from good to the Lord, is evident from the signification of "one
who is rich," as being one who abounds in truths and goods and their
knowledges (of which in what follows); from the signification of "one
who is poor," as being one who does not abound in these things (of which
also below); and from the signification of "not giving more," and "not
giving less," as being all equally; from the signification of "half a
shekel," as being all things of truth from good (see n. 10221); and from
the signification of "giving to Jehovah," as being to ascribe to the
Lord; for by "Jehovah" in the Word is meant the Lord (see the places
cited in n. 9373). From all this it is evident that by "the rich man not
giving more, and the poor not giving less, than half a shekel, to give
to Jehovah," is signified that all, of whatever ability they may be,
must equally ascribe to the Lord all things of truth from good. \[2\]
The case herein is this. All have the capacity to understand and to be
wise; but the reason one person is wiser than another is that they do
not in like manner ascribe to the Lord all things of intelligence and
wisdom, which are all things of truth and good. They who ascribe all to
the Lord are wiser than the rest, because all things of truth and good,
which constitute wisdom, flow in from heaven, that is, from the Lord
there. The ascription of all things to the Lord opens the interiors of
man toward heaven, for thus it is acknowledged that nothing of truth and
good is from himself; and in proportion as this is acknowledged, the
love of self departs, and with the love of self the thick darkness from
falsities and evils. In the same proportion also the man comes into
innocence, and into love and faith to the Lord, from which comes
conjunction with the Divine, influx thence, and enlightenment. From all
this it is evident whence it is that one is more wise, and another less;
and also why the rich should not give more and the poor less-namely,
that all alike have the capacity of being wise; not indeed an equal
capacity of being wise, but they are alike in having the capacity to be
so, because both the one and the other can be wise. \[3\] By the
capacity to be wise is not meant the capacity to reason about truths and
goods from memory-knowledges, nor the capacity to confirm whatever one
pleases; but the capacity to discern what is true and good, to choose
what is suitable, and to apply it to the uses of life. They who ascribe
all things to the Lord do thus discern, choose, and apply; while those
who do not ascribe to the Lord, but to themselves, know merely how to
reason about truths and goods; nor do they see anything except what is
from others; and this not from reason, but from the activity of the
memory. As they cannot look into truths themselves, they stand outside,
and confirm whatever they receive, whether it be true or false. They who
can do this in a learned way from memory-knowledges are believed by the
world to be wiser than others; but the more they attribute all things to
themselves, thus the more they love what they think from themselves, the
more insane they are; for they confirm falsities rather than truths, and
evils rather than goods, and this because they have light from no other
source than the fallacies and appearances of the world, and consequently
from their own light, which is called natural light, separated from the
light of heaven; and which light when thus separated is mere thick
darkness in respect to the truths and goods of heaven. \[4\] That
"riches" and "wealth" denote the things of intelligence and wisdom,
consequently also the knowledges of truth and good, which moreover are
called spiritual wealth and riches, is evident from the passages in the
Word where they are mentioned, as in Isaiah: I will visit upon the fruit
of the pride of the king of Assyria, for he hath said, In the strength
of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom, for I am intelligent;
whence I will remove the bounds of the peoples and will ravage their
treasures; as a nest shall my hand find the wealth of the peoples (Isa.
10:12-14). The subject here treated of in the internal sense is those
who trust in their own intelligence, and do not believe that true wisdom
comes from heaven, but from themselves. The "king of Assyria" denotes
reasoning, here from self-intelligence (n. 1186); hence "to ravage the
treasures and the wealth of the peoples" denotes to destroy those things
which are truths of intelligence and wisdom. \[5\] Again: A prophecy
concerning the beasts of the south. They carry their wealth upon the
shoulder of asses, and their treasures upon the back of camels, unto
Egypt (Isa. 30:6, 7). "The beasts of the south" denote those who are
within the church, thus are in the light of truth from the Word, but who
nevertheless do not read the Word except merely for the sake of
memory-knowledge, and not for the sake of the use of life; for "the
south" denotes where is the light of truth, thus where the Word is (n.
3195, 3708, 5672, 9642); an "ass" denotes memory-knowledge, and likewise
a "camel," and also "Egypt." (That an "ass" has this signification, see
n. 5492, 5741, 7024; also a "camel," n. 3048, 3071, 3143, 3145, 4516;
and "Egypt," see the places cited in n. 9391.) That these prophetic
words are to be understood in a spiritual sense can be seen from the
fact that without this sense no one knows what is meant by "the beasts
of the south," or by "carrying their wealth on the shoulder of asses,
and their treasures on the back of camels," and this "unto Egypt." \[6\]
In the same: I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden
wealth of secret places, that thou mayest know that I am Jehovah (Isa.
45:3). "The treasures of darkness, and hidden wealth of secret places"
denote such things as belong to heavenly intelligence and wisdom, which
have been hidden from the natural man. \[7\] In Jeremiah: The sin of
Judah is written with a pen of iron. O My mountain in the field, I will
give thy property and all thy treasures for a spoil (Jer. 17:1, 3).
Judah is called a "mountain in the field" because with Judah was the
representative of the celestial church; for a "mountain" denotes the
love of the celestial church (n. 6435); and a "field" denotes the church
(n. 2971, 3766, 7502, 9139, 9295); the "property," and the "treasures,"
which were to be "given for a spoil," denote all the truths and goods of
the church, which were to be dispersed. \[8\] Again: Because of thy
confidence in thy works, and in thy treasures, thou also shalt be taken
(Jer. 48:7). Here also "treasures" denote the doctrinal things and
knowledges of the church. \[9\] Again: O sword against her horses, and
against her chariots, and against the promiscuous crowd that is in the
midst of her! O sword against her treasures, that they may be snatched
away! A drought is upon her waters, that they may be dried up (Jer.
50:37, 38). These words are spoken against the Chaldeans, by whom are
meant those who are in external worship without internal, thus who
profess the truths of the Word with the lips, but at heart deny them. A
"sword" denotes falsity fighting against truths (n. 2799, 4499, 6353,
7102, 8294); "horses" denote the understanding (n. 2760-2762, 3217,
5321); "chariots" denote what is of doctrine (n. 5321, 8215); the
"treasures that were to be snatched away" denote the truths and goods of
the church that would be perverted and would perish by being connected
with the evils of the loves of self and of the world; "a drought upon
her waters" denotes the deprivation and consumption of the truths of
faith (that "water" denotes the truth of faith, see n. 2702, 3058, 3424,
4976, 8568, 9323). \[10\] Who cannot see that the literal sense is not
the genuine sense of these words? For what holiness, or what of the
church or of heaven, or what sense is there in these expressions-that "a
sword should be against the horses," "against the chariots," "against
the promiscuous crowd," "against the treasures," and that "a drought
should be upon the waters that they should be dried up?" Wherefore from
these and all other things of the Word it can be plainly seen that a
spiritual sense, which differs from the natural, is in every detail, and
that without this sense the Word cannot be called holy, and in very many
places it cannot even be apprehended. \[11\] Again: O Babel, who
dwellest upon many waters, great in treasures (Jer. 51:13). "Babel"
denotes those who possess the Word and from this all the goods and
truths of the church, but who connect them with the love of self, and
thus profane them (n. 1326); which was also represented by the king of
Babel taking all the vessels of the temple, which were of gold and
silver, and drinking out of them, and then praising the gods of gold and
silver (Dan. 5:2, and following verses). Hence Babel is said to "dwell
upon many waters, great in treasures;" "waters" denote truths, and in
the opposite sense falsities (n. 2702, 3058, 4976, 8568, 9323). This is
more fully described in Revelation, where the riches of Babylon, which
are there called "merchandise," are enumerated (Rev. 18). \[12\] In
Ezekiel: I will bring Nebuchadnezzar against Tyre. With the hoofs of his
horses shall he trample all thy streets. They shall snatch away thy
wealth, and plunder thy merchandise (Ezek. 26:7, 11, 12). By "Tyre" is
meant the church in respect to the knowledges of good and truth (n.
1201); by "Nebuchadnezzar king of Babel" is meant the profanation that
vastates (n. 1327), which takes place when by means of a wrong
application the truths and goods of the church serve as means to favor
the evils of the loves of self and of the world; for then the evils of
these loves are within the heart, and the holy things of the church are
in the mouth; the "hoofs of the horses" denote the outermost natural
things, which are merely sensuous memory-knowledges (n. 7729), and
"streets" denote the truths of faith (n. 2336); "wealth" and
"merchandise" denote the knowledges of good and truth. \[13\] As by
"Tyre" are signified the knowledges of good and truth (n. 1201),
therefore where Tyre is treated of in the Word, various kinds of
merchandise and riches are also treated of, as in the same prophet:
Tarshish was thy trader, by means of the multitude of all kinds of
wealth, in silver, iron, tin, and lead. Damascus was thy trader for the
multitude of all thy wealth. By the multitude of thy wealth and of thy
merchandise thou didst enrich all the kings of the earth (Ezek. 27:12,
18, 33). In thy wisdom and in thine intelligence thou hast made wealth
for thyself, gold and silver in thy treasuries; by the multitude of thy
wisdom thou hast multiplied wealth for thyself (Ezek. 28:4, 5); speaking
also of Tyre; by which it is very evident that by "wealth" and "riches"
in the Word are meant spiritual wealth and riches, which are the
knowledges of good and truth, thus which are the means of wisdom. \[14\]
So in these passages: Tyre hath gathered silver as dust, and gold as the
mire of the streets. Behold the Lord will impoverish her, and will shake
off her wealth into the sea (Zech. 9:3, 4). The daughter of Tyre shall
offer thee a gift. O daughter of the king; the rich of the people shall
entreat thy faces (Ps. 45:12). In this passage the church is described
in respect to the affection of truth, and is called the "daughter of the
king," for a "daughter" denotes the church as to affection (n. 2362,
3963, 6729, 9055); and a "king" denotes truth (n. 1672, 2015, 2069,
3670, 4575, 4581, 4966, 6148); therefore it is said that "the daughter
of Tyre shall offer a gift," and "the rich of the people shall entreat
thy faces;" "the rich of the people" denote those who abound in truths
and goods. \[15\] In Hosea: Ephraim said, Surely I am become rich, I
have found for me wealth (Hos. 12:8); where by "becoming rich and
finding wealth" is not meant that he was enriched with worldly riches
and wealth, but with heavenly; for by "Ephraim" is meant the
intellectual of the church, which is enlightened when the Word is read
(n. 5354, 6222, 6238, 6267). \[16\] In John: And unto the angel of the
church of the Laodiceans write, Because thou sayest, I am rich, and I
have been enriched, and I need no aid, and knowest not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and needy, and blind, and naked; I counsel thee
to buy of Me gold purified in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and
white garments, that thou mayest be clothed (Rev. 3:14, 17, 18). The
subject here treated of is the church which makes everything of the
church consist in bare knowledges, and from this exalts itself above
others, when yet knowledges are nothing but means for amending and
perfecting the life; wherefore he who possesses them without a life
according to them, is "wretched, miserable, needy, blind, and naked;" to
"buy gold purified in the fire" denotes to procure from the Lord genuine
good, and "white garments," denotes to procure from the Lord genuine
truths from this good. (That "gold" denotes the good of love, see the
places cited in n. 9874; and that "garments" denote the truths of faith,
n. 4545, 5248, 5319, 5954, 9212, 9216, 9814, 9952.) \[17\] In Jeremiah:
I, Jehovah, give to everyone according to his ways, according to the
fruits of his works. As the partridge gathereth, but beareth not, so he
getteth riches, but not with judgment; In the midst of his days he shall
desert them; and in the end of his days he shall become a fool (Jer.
17:10, 11); the subject here treated of is those who acquire knowledges
without any use in view than that they may "get riches," that is, that
they may know them; when yet it is the life which they ought to be
devoted to. This is meant by "gathering as the partridge and yet not
bearing," and by "getting riches, but not with judgment." \[18\] In
Luke: Whosoever he be of you that renounceth not all his property, he
cannot be My disciple (Luke 14:33); he who does not know that in the
internal sense "property" denotes spiritual riches and wealth, which are
knowledges from the Word, cannot possibly know otherwise than that in
order that he may be saved he must deprive himself of all wealth; when
yet this is not the sense of these words: by "property" are here meant
all things which are from man's own intelligence, for no one can be wise
from himself, but only from the Lord; wherefore "to renounce all
property" denotes to attribute nothing of intelligence and wisdom to
self; and he who does not do this cannot be instructed by the Lord, that
is, "be His disciple." \[19\] As by "property," "riches," "wealth,"
"silver," and "gold," are signified those things which belong to
intelligence and wisdom, therefore also the kingdom of heaven is
compared by the Lord to "treasure hid in a field" (Matt. 13:44); and it
is said that they should "make to themselves treasure in the heavens
that faileth not, because where the treasure is there is the heart"
(Matt. 6:19-21; Luke 12:33, 34). \[20\] They who do not know that by the
"rich" are meant those who possess the knowledges of truth and good,
thus who have the Word; and that by the "poor" are meant those who do
not possess these knowledges, but who nevertheless desire them, cannot
know otherwise than that by the "rich man who was clothed in crimson and
fine linen," and by the "poor man who was cast forth at his entrance"
(Luke 16) are meant a rich and a poor man in the common meaning of these
terms, when yet by the "rich man" is there meant the Jewish nation which
had the Word; by the "crimson" with which he was clothed is meant
genuine good (n. 9467); and by the "fine linen," genuine truth (n. 5319,
9469, 9596, 9744); and by the "poor man cast forth at the entrance" are
meant those who are outside the church and have not the Word, and yet
long for the truths and goods of heaven and of the church. \[21\] From
this also it is plain that by the "rich" are meant those who have the
Word, consequently Divine truths; as also in the prophetic utterance of
Mary in Luke: God hath filled the hungry with good things, and the rich
He hath sent empty away (Luke 1:53); here "the hungry" denotes those who
are in other places called the "poor," thus who have no bread and water,
and consequently who are in hunger and thirst, that is, who do not know
good and truth and yet long for them. By "bread and water" in the Word
are signified good and truth (n. 9323); and by "hungering and
thirsting," thus by "hunger and thirst," is signified the longing for
these. \[22\] Such are also meant by the "poor" in other places, as in
the following: Blessed are the poor; for theirs is the kingdom of the
heavens. Blessed are ye that hunger, for ye shall be sated (Luke 6:20,
21). The master of the house said to the servant, Go out into the
streets and highways of the city, and bring in the poor, and the maimed,
and the lame, and the blind (Luke 14:21). To the poor the Gospel shall
be preached (Luke 7:22). The poor hear the Gospel (Matt. 11:5). Then the
firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down
confidently (Isa. 14:30). The needy of men shall exult in the Holy One
of Israel (Isa. 29:19). I will leave in the midst of thee a people
miserable and poor, who shall hope in the name of Jehovah; they shall
feed and shall rest, none making them afraid (Zeph. 3:12, 13). The poor
and the needy seek water, but there is none; their tongue faileth for
thirst. I Jehovah will hear them. I will open rivers upon the hillsides,
and I will set fountains in the midst of the valleys (Isa. 41:17, 18).
\[23\] "The afflicted and the needy seeking water" denote those who long
for the knowledges of good and truth; "water" denotes truth; the longing
is described by "their tongue failing with thirst;" and the abundance
which they will have, by "rivers being opened upon the hillsides, and
fountains in the midst of the valleys." From all this it is further
evident that heavenly things, which are truths of faith and goods of
love, are meant by earthly things, which are "waters," "rivers upon the
hillsides, fountains in the valleys," and that the latter is the literal
sense of the Word, but the former the spiritual sense; and that through
this sense the Word is Divine, and that without it, it is not Divine.
\[24\] The signification of "wealth" and of "riches" as being what
belongs to intelligence and wisdom, is also from correspondence; for
among the angels in heaven all things appear as if they shone with gold,
silver, and precious stones, and this because they are in the
intelligence of truth and in the wisdom of good; for the interiors of
the angels are presented to view in this way from the correspondence.
Moreover, with the spirits who are below the heavens there is an
appearance of riches according to the state of the reception of truth
and good from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10228.">10228.</span></span>

To make expiation upon your souls. That this signifies that evils may be
removed, is evident from the signification of "expiating upon their
souls," as being to be purified or liberated from evils through the
truth of faith (see above, n. 10218); and as purification or liberation
from evils is nothing else than the removal of them, therefore this also
is signified by the same words. (That man is not liberated from evils,
and so purified; but that he is withheld from them when he is kept in
good by the Lord, and thus that evils are removed, see the places cited
in n. 10057.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10229.">10229.</span></span>

And thou shalt take the silver of expiations from among the sons of
Israel. That this signifies truths purifying by virtue of good, which
truths are of the church, is evident from the signification of "silver,"
as being truth from good (see n. 1551, 2954, 5658, 6112, 6914, 6917,
8932); from the signification of "expiations," as being purification
from evils (of which above, n. 10218); thus "the silver of expiations"
denotes purifying truth; and from the representation of the sons of
Israel, as being the church (see the places cited in n. 9340). It is
said "purifying truth" because all purification from evils is effected
by means of truths (n. 2799, 5954, 7044, 7918, 9089). The case herein is
this. From himself man thinks nothing but evil, for from himself he does
not think about God, nor about what is good and just toward his
neighbor, except for the sake of self. He does not even think about
heaven and eternal life, but about the world and life in the world. So
long as a man is in such a state, he thinks from the things which are
beneath him, and not from those which are above him; thus from hell, and
not from heaven. In order therefore that a man may think what is good,
he must think from heaven, consequently his mind must be raised there.
This is effected solely by means of truths such as are in the church
from the Word; for these truths teach what God is, and what the
neighbor, that there is a heaven, that there is eternal life, and in
particular what evil is, and what good is. When these truths enter, then
the interiors are raised above self, and are thus withdrawn from those
things which are beneath self, thus from evils. From this it can be seen
that all purification or removal from evils is effected by means of
truths, which are consequently called "purifying truths."

<span class="margnote"><span id="10230.">10230.</span></span>

And thou shalt give it for the work of the Tent of meeting. That this
signifies conjunction with heaven through the acknowledgment that all
truths and goods are from the Lord, is evident from the signification of
"the work of the Tent of meeting," as being that which works and makes
heaven; for "work" denotes that which works and makes; and "the Tent of
meeting" denotes heaven where the Lord is. That "the Tent of meeting"
denotes heaven where the Lord is, see n. 9457, 9481, 9485, 9784, 9963;
thus it also denotes that which conjoins man with heaven, for that which
works and makes heaven with man also conjoins him with heaven. That
there is signified conjunction with heaven through the acknowledgment
that all goods and truths are from the Lord, is because that which was
given for the work of the Tent of meeting was the half of a shekel,
which was called "the silver of expiations" on account of the numbering
of the people, and by "giving the half of a shekel" is signified the
ascription of all things of faith and love to the Lord (n. 10220,
10221); and by "numbering" is signified the setting in order and
disposing of all things by the Lord (see n. 10218).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10231.">10231.</span></span>

And it shall be to the sons of Israel for a memorial before Jehovah.
That this signifies in this way the preservation of the church and of
all things of the church by the Lord, is evident from the representation
of the sons of Israel, as being the church (see the places cited in n.
9340); from the signification of "a memorial," when said of Jehovah, as
being preservation (n. 9849); and from the signification of "before
Jehovah," as being by the Lord (see n. 10146).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10232.">10232.</span></span>

To make expiation upon your souls. That this signifies because in this
way evils are removed, is evident from the signification of "expiating
upon their souls," as being to remove evils by means of truths (see
above, n. 10228); that here by "making expiation upon your souls" is
signified because in this way evils are removed, and not, to remove
evils, is because these things so follow from those which precede; for
the internal sense does not regard the sense of the words according to
the consistency in the letter, but according to the consistency in its
own sense, which is that the preservation of the church and of all
things of the church is from the Lord, because in this way evils are
removed. That the church is then preserved with man is because evils do
not hinder; for the Lord flows in constantly and continually with His
mercy, and provides that the truths and goods that belong to the church
are not only preserved with a man, but also that they are multiplied and
grow; but so long as evils reign, the truths and goods of the church
flowing in from the Lord are either rejected by the man, or are stifled,
or perverted; whereas when evils are removed, they are accepted and
acknowledged.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10233.">10233.</span></span>

Verses 17-21. And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying, And thou shalt make
a laver of brass, and its base of brass, for washing; and thou shalt put
it between the Tent of meeting and the altar, and thou shalt put waters
therein. And Aaron and his sons shall wash from it their hands and their
feet. When they enter into the Tent of meeting they shall wash with
waters, that they die not; or when they come near unto the altar to
minister, to burn a fire-offering to Jehovah. And they shall wash their
hands and their feet, that they die not; and it shall be to them a
statute of an age, to him and to his seed, to their generations. "And
Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying," signifies perceptivity from
enlightenment through the Word by the Lord; "and thou shalt make a laver
of brass," signifies the good of the natural man, in which is
purification; "and its base of brass," signifies the good of the
ultimate of the natural, which is of the sensuous; "for washing"
signifies purification from evils and falsities; "and thou shalt put it
between the Tent of meeting and the altar," signifies that there may be
the conjunction of truth and good; "and thou shalt put waters therein,"
signifies the truths of faith, through which there is purification in
the natural; "and Aaron and his sons shall wash from it," signifies a
representative of the purification and regeneration of man by the Lord;
"their hands and their feet," signifies the interiors and exteriors of
man; "when they enter into the Tent of meeting," signifies worship from
the good of faith; "they shall wash with waters," signifies purification
by means of the truths of faith; "that they die not," signifies lest the
representative perish; "or when they come near to the altar to minister,
to burn a fire-offering to Jehovah," signifies worship from the good of
love; "and they shall wash their hands and their feet," signifies the
purification of the interiors and the exteriors of man; "that they die
not," signifies lest the representative perish; "and it shall be to them
a statute of an age," signifies an eternal law of order; "to him and to
his seed, to their generations," signifies all who receive the things
that proceed from the Lord, thus who are being regenerated by Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10234.">10234.</span></span>

And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying. That this signifies perceptivity
from enlightenment through the Word by the Lord, is evident from the
signification of "Jehovah speaking unto Moses," as being enlightenment
through the Word by the Lord (see n. 10215); and from the signification
of "saying" as being perception (n. 2862, 3509, 5743, 8660). Be it known
that when anything new, distinct from what goes before, is to be set
forth, it is said that "Jehovah spoke unto Moses," as in this chapter
(verses 11, 17, 22, 34); and also in other passages. The new thing now
set forth is about purification from evils and falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10235.">10235.</span></span>

And thou shalt make a laver of brass. That this signifies the good of
the natural man, in which is purification, is evident from the
signification of "a laver," wherein is water for washing, as being the
natural of man (of which below); and from the signification of "brass,"
as being the good of this (n. 425, 1551). The subject treated of in what
now follows is washing, and it is said that Aaron and his sons should
wash their hands and their feet when they entered into the Tent of
meeting, or came near unto the altar to minister; and in other places it
is said that they who had become unclean should wash themselves and
their garments, and so they would be clean; from which it can be seen
that washing represented purification from evils; thus the washing of
the body and the garments represented the purification of the heart and
mind. Everyone who thinks from any enlightenment can see that the evils
of the heart and mind were not wiped away by the washing, but only the
uncleanness of the body and the garments; and that after this was wiped
away the evils still remained; and that evils cannot possibly be washed
away by water, but by repentance. \[2\] From all this it is again
evident that the things which were instituted among the Israelitish
nation were external things that represented internal ones, and that
these internal things were the real holy things of the church among
them, and not the external things without the internal things. But that
this nation nevertheless made all holiness to consist in the external
things, and nothing of it in the internal things, is evident from the
words of the Lord in the Gospel of Matthew as follows: Woe unto you,
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye cleanse the outside of the cup
and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and
intemperance. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup
and of the platter, and the outside also shall become clean. Ye make
yourselves like unto whitened sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful
outwardly, but within are full of dead men's bones and of all
uncleanness (Matt. 23:25-27; also Mark 7:2-8; and Luke 11:39). \[3\]
That the "laver" signifies the natural, is because by washing therein is
signified purification from evils, and purification from evils is
effected in the natural; and moreover by vessels in general is signified
what is of the natural man (n. 3068, 3079, 9394), because the natural is
the recipient of the spiritual things of the internal man. By the
natural is meant the external of man, that is, what is called the
external man. It may seem strange that by the "laver" is signified the
natural of man; but be it known that the subject here treated of in the
internal sense is purification from evils, and it is man that is
purified; hence it follows that something of man is signified by that in
which the washing, by which is signified purification, was effected.
That this is the natural is because, as already said, purification is
effected in this. Moreover, all things which were built up for the sake
of worship among the Israelitish and Jewish nation signified things of
heaven and the church, consequently such as belong to man; for unless
they had signified something with man, they would not have represented
anything. \[4\] As by the "laver" is signified the natural of man; by
the "waters in the laver," the truths which are of faith; and by
"washing," purification from evils; it can from this be known what was
signified by the brazen sea near the temple, and what by the twelve oxen
which bore it; and likewise by the ten other lavers also placed near the
temple, and by the lions, the oxen, and the cherubs engraved on them,
also by the wheels like those of a chariot under them. The signification
of all these things is evident when it is known what is signified by a
laver, by water, and by washing, and when it is further known how the
case is with purification from the evils in man, for each and all were
representative of celestial and spiritual things. \[5\] The brazen sea
made by Solomon, and set near the temple, is thus described: He made the
molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, the height
five cubits; and a line of thirty cubits compassed it round about. And
under the brim of it round about were wild gourds, for ten cubits,
compassing the sea round about. It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking
toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking
toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea was set
upon them above, and all their hinder parts were inward. Its thickness
was a hand-breadth; and the brim thereof was according to the work of
the brim of a cup, the flower of a lily; it held two thousand baths. And
the sea was set on the right shoulder of the house eastward over against
the south (1 Kings 7:23-26, 39). \[6\] This vessel or laver is called a
"sea," because by the "sea" is signified memory-knowledge in general,
and all memory- knowledge belongs to the natural of man (that the "sea"
denotes memory-knowledge in general, see n. 28, 2850, 8184; and that
this knowledge belongs to man's natural, n. 1486, 3019, 3020, 3309,
3310, 5373, 6004, 6023, 6071, 6077, 9918). The reason why this laver was
"according to the work of the brim of a cup" was because by a "cup," a
"bowl," or a "goblet," is also signified the memory-knowledge that
belongs to the natural or sensuous of man (n. 9557, 9996). By the
"twelve oxen" were signified all the goods of the natural and sensuous
man in the complex, because they were for a base, and by a "base" is
signified that which is ultimate, and supports. (That "twelve" denotes
all things in the complex, see n. 3272, 3858, 3913; and that an "ox"
denotes the good of the natural man, n. 2781, 9135.) \[7\] That they
looked to all the quarters of the world was because the good of the
natural man is the receptacle of all things that flow in from the world,
as well those which relate to goods as those which relate to truths. The
diameter of "ten cubits" signified what is full (n. 3107); and the
circumference "thirty cubits" signified a full and complete complex (n.
9082); "two thousand baths" signified the conjunction of good and truth,
thus purification and regeneration, for regeneration is nothing else
than the conjunction of good and truth; "two thousand" signify the same
as "two," for multiplied numbers signify the like as the simple ones
from which they are compounded (n. 5291, 5335, 5708, 7973); and "two"
denotes conjunction (n. 5194, 8423). The brazen sea being set "on the
right shoulder of the house toward the east over against the south"
signified that it looked to the Lord, for the Lord is the "East" (n.
101, 9668); the "house" or temple denotes heaven and the church where
the Lord is (see n. 3720). From all this it can now be seen what was
signified by the brazen sea, consequently what by the laver, namely, the
natural of man, in which is purification.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10236.">10236.</span></span>

And its base of brass. That this signifies the good of the ultimate of
the natural, which is the good of the sensuous, is evident from the
signification of the "base" of the laver wherein was water for washing,
as being the ultimate of the natural, which is called the sensuous; and
from the signification of "brass," as being good (see above, n. 10235).
That the "base" denotes the ultimate of the natural, which is called the
external sensuous, is because by the laver which is above it is
signified the natural in which is purification, consequently by that
which is beneath is signified what is in the lowest place; that is, in
the ultimate, thus the external sensuous of man. The natural of man is
external, middle, and internal; the external of the natural communicates
with the world, and is called the external sensuous; the internal
natural is what communicates with the internal man, which is in heaven;
the middle natural is that which conjoins the two; for where there are
an external and an internal, there must be a conjoining intermediate.
(That man has an external, a middle, and an internal natural, see n.
4009, 4570, 5118, 5120, 5649, 9216.) \[2\] By the sensuous, which is the
ultimate of the natural, is properly meant that which is called the
"flesh," and which perishes when man dies, thus what has served man for
his functions in the world; as the sensuous of sight, hearing, smell,
taste, and touch. That this sensuous is the ultimate plane, in which the
life of man terminates, and on which it reposes as a base, is evident,
for it stands forth directly in the world, and through it as the
outermost the world enters, and heaven departs. But this sensuous is
common to man with brute animals, whereas the external sensuous which
man has not so much in common with them, and yet is an external
sensuous, is that which man has in his memory from the world, and is
constituted of merely worldly, bodily, and earthly things there. The man
who thinks and reasons from these things alone, and not from interior
things, is called a sensuous man. This sensuous remains with man after
death, but is quiescent; and this external sensuous is what is properly
signified by the "base." \[3\] The nature of this sensuous was
represented by the bases of the ten lavers, which were set near the
temple, and which are thus described: Solomon made the ten bases of
brass; four cubits the length of each base, and four cubits the breadth;
three cubits the height. Upon the closures that were between the flights
of steps were lions, oxen, and cherubs; and upon the flights of steps in
like manner above. Moreover, each base had four wheels and tables of
brass; and its four corners had shoulders: beneath the laver were the
shoulders molten. The work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot
wheel; their hands, and their backs, and their tires, and their spokes,
were all molten. After this manner he made the ten bases; all of them
had one casting, one measure, one proportion. Then he made the ten
lavers of brass; each laver contained forty baths; each laver was four
cubits (1 Kings 7:27-39). \[4\] The nature of the external sensuous in
man is here described by representatives, and especially the protection
of the Lord lest man should enter into the things of heaven or of the
church from his sensuous, thus from the world, because this is contrary
to Divine order. For the world cannot enter into heaven, but heaven can
enter into the world, which comes to pass when the Lord inflows through
heaven with man, and enlightens him, teaches him, and leads him, by
means of the Word. That to enter from the world into the things of
heaven is contrary to Divine order, can be seen from those who enter
from their sensuous, thus from the memory-knowledges which enter from
the world, in that they believe nothing whatever. \[5\] Protection to
prevent this is signified by the lions, the oxen, and the cherubs, for
by "lions" is signified protection lest truths enter, "lions" denoting
truths in their power (n. 6367, 6369); by "oxen" is signified protection
lest goods enter, for "oxen" denote goods in their power (see n. 2781).
That by "cherubs" is signified the protection of the Lord lest this be
done, see n. 308, 9509; also that the "shoulders" of which mention is
made denote power and resistance, n. 1085, 4931-4937, 9836. By the
"wheels as of a chariot" is signified the capacity of being wise when
all things enter from heaven, for thus all things advance according to
order, because the "wheels" of a chariot denote the capacity of
advancing, thus of learning (n. 8215, 9872); and "chariots" denote what
belongs to the doctrine of heaven and the church (n. 5321, 8215). \[6\]
What the sensuous man is, may again be briefly told. He is called a
sensuous man who thinks only from such things as are in the memory from
the world, and who cannot be raised toward interior things; such
especially are they who believe nothing about heaven and the Divine
because they do not see them, for they trust solely in the senses; and
what does not appear before the senses they believe to be nothing. Such
people closely approach the nature of brute animals, which also are led
solely by the external senses; nevertheless they are cunning and skilful
in acting and reasoning; but they do not see truth from the light of
truth. Such were formerly called serpents of the tree of knowledge, and
such for the most part is the infernal crew. (But what the sensuous man
is, and what the sensuous itself, may be seen in the places cited in n.
9331, 9726, 9730, 9731, 9922, 9996; and what it is to be raised above
sensuous things, or to be withdrawn from them, in those cited in n.
9922.) \[7\] The good of the sensuous, which is signified by the "base
of brass," is what is called the pleasure and delight that affect the
imaginative thought, which thought is merely from what is earthly,
bodily, and worldly; and it is distinguished from other delights by the
fact that it looks to no other uses than those of self, or for the sake
of self. For the sensuous man is in the love of self and of the world,
and his delights belong to these loves. And because the loves of the
sensuous man are of this nature, it is evident that he is more skilful
than others in reasoning and in acting for the sake of profits and
honors. For his body burns with the fire of this love, and this fire
kindles a light which is called natural light; and when this has been
kindled to brightness, then the light of heaven, which is of the
interior man, is completely obscured; consequently the things of this
light, being in thick darkness, are said to be nothing. It is otherwise
with those who act from the fire of heaven, and think from the light of
this fire. From all this it can be seen what is meant by the good of the
sensuous, which is signified by the "base" of the laver.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10237.">10237.</span></span>

For washing. That this signifies purification from evils and falsities,
is evident from the signification of "washing," as being purification
from evils and falsities (see n. 3147, 5954). As in what now follows the
subject treated of in the internal sense is purification from evils and
falsities by means of the truths of faith, it shall be briefly told how
this is; for by "washing" is signified purification; by "waters" are
signified the truths of faith; and by the "laver" containing the water
is signified the natural, because all spiritual purification is effected
in the natural. Man has an external and an internal; the external is
called the natural, and also the natural man; and the internal is called
the spiritual, and also the spiritual man, for the reason that the
internal of man is in the spiritual world where spirits and angels are,
and his external is in the natural world where men are. Both the
internal and the external man are purified, the internal in heaven, and
the external while the man lives in the world, thus in the natural which
is in the world. \[2\] The reason why purification goes on in the
natural at that time, is that the truths of faith come to clear
perception in the natural; for there they are among the
memory-knowledges, or things of the memory, which are clearly perceived
when they are thought of. But this is not the case with the things that
are thought of in the internal man; these do not come to clear
perception while the man is in the world, because the ideas in the
internal man are spiritual. Hence it is that purification is effected in
the natural. That it is effected by means of the truths of faith can be
seen from the fact that those who are being purified must not only know
what evil and falsity are, but must also acknowledge them, and then hold
them in aversion and shun them. When this is done, then for the first
time is the man purified from them; and evils and falsities cannot be
known, thus cannot be acknowledged, except in the natural by means of
the truths of faith; for these truths teach what things are evil and
false, and thus make them manifest. He who believes that he is purified
from evils and falsities before he sees and acknowledges them in
himself, is very much mistaken (see n. 8388, 8390, and the following
numbers). \[3\] It was said that it is in the natural that a man knows
his evils and falsities by means of the truths of faith; that is, he
knows them in the external man, but not in the internal; the reason is
that the ideas of thought in the internal man are spiritual, and
spiritual ideas cannot be comprehended in the natural, for they are
intellectual ideas which have no such objects as are in the material
world; nevertheless these spiritual ideas, which are proper to the
internal man, flow into the natural ideas which belong to the external
man, and produce and make them, which is done by means of
correspondences. But concerning the spiritual ideas which belong to the
internal man, of the Lord's Divine mercy more will be said when heaven
is described, with the spirits and angels there, for they think by means
of spiritual ideas, and also converse with each other by means of them.
10237a. And thou shalt put it between the Tent of meeting and the altar.
That this signifies that there may be the conjunction of truth and good,
is evident from the signification of "between the Tent of meeting and
the altar," as being the conjunction of truth and good (see n. 10001,
10025). The reason why the laver was set between the Tent of meeting and
the altar, and Aaron and his sons there washed their hands and their
feet, was that there might be represented the purification of the heart,
and regeneration, which in its essence is the conjunction of truth and
good; for the conjunction of truth and good is heaven itself with man;
wherefore also heaven is compared in the Word to a marriage. This
conjunction is effected by means of the truths of faith, because these
teach how man ought to live; and therefore when he lives according to
the truths of faith, the conjunction of truth and good is effected,
truth being then made good by means of the life. The life of truth is
good. This is also meant by man's being regenerated "by water and the
spirit," "water" denoting the truth of faith; and "the spirit," a life
of this. (That regeneration is the conjunction of truth and good, see n.
2063, 3155, 3158, 3607, 4353, 5365, 5376, 8516, 8517, 8772, 10067.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10238.">10238.</span></span>

And thou shalt put waters therein. That this signifies the truths of
faith, through which there is purification in the natural, is evident
from the signification of "waters," as being the truths of faith (see n.
28, 739, 2702, 3058, 3424, 4976, 5668, 8568, 9323); and from the
signification of the "laver," as being the natural (of which above, n.
10235). He who does not know that "waters" signify the truths of faith,
will fail to comprehend many passages in the Word; as what is signified
by the statement that "unless a man is born of water and of the spirit,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John 3:5). They who by "water"
in this passage understand nothing but water, believe that the water of
baptism is that by which man is regenerated; when yet the water
contributes nothing to regeneration; but the truth of faith and the good
of love; for water merely washes away the uncleanness of the body, and
by no means the evils of the heart. \[2\] He who does not know that
"waters" signify the truths of faith, cannot know what baptism
signifies; for he believes that this external rite saves man, when yet
this external thing effects nothing; but the internal thing that is
signified, which is regeneration by means of the truths of faith. For
they who are of the church are distinguished by baptism from all others
in the whole world, because they can be regenerated by means of the
truths of faith, but not those who are outside the church, seeing that
within the church is the Word, in which are the truths of faith. \[3\]
He who does not know that "waters" signify the truths of faith, cannot
know what is meant by "the waters that were above the expanse, and the
waters that were under the expanse" (Gen. 1:6-10), when yet by "the
waters above the expanse" are signified the truths of faith in the
internal man; and by "the waters under the expanse," the truths of faith
in the external man; for the subject treated of in that chapter is the
new creation of the man of the Most Ancient Church, thus his
regeneration. \[4\] He who does not know that "waters" signify the
truths of faith, cannot know either what is signified by "waters" in
these passages: Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him
shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall become in
him a fountain of water springing up into eternal life (John 4:13). The
poor and the needy seek water, but there is none, and their tongue
faileth for thirst. I will open rivers on the hillsides, and I will set
fountains in the midst of the valleys; I will make the wilderness a pool
of waters, and the dry land springs of waters (Isa. 41:17, 18). They
shall not thirst, He shall cause the waters to flow out of the rock for
them; and He shall cleave the rock that the waters flow out (Isa. 48:20,
21). And very frequently elsewhere. But see what has been previously
said and shown on this subject; as, That purification from evils and
falsities is effected by means of the truths of faith (n. 2799, 5954,
7044, 7918, 9089, 10229): As also regeneration (see the places cited in
n. 9959) That "baptism" signifies regeneration by means of the truths of
faith (n. 4255, 5120, 9089): That purification is effected in the
natural (n. 3147, 9572): And also regeneration (see the places cited in
n. 9325 at the end).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10239.">10239.</span></span>

And Aaron and his sons shall wash from it. That this signifies a
representative of the purification and regeneration of man by the Lord,
is evident from the signification of "washing," as being purification
(see above, n. 10237); from the representation of Aaron, as being the
Lord as to Divine good celestial (n. 9806, 10068); and from the
representation of the sons of Aaron, as being the Lord as to Divine good
spiritual (n. 9807, 10068); from which it is evident that by Aaron and
his sons "washing from the laver" is signified a representative of the
purification of man by the Lord. That it is also a representative of
regeneration, is because regeneration also was represented by washing,
but by the washing of the whole body, which washing was called
"baptizing" (that "baptizing," or "baptism," signifies regeneration, see
n. 4255, 9088). \[2\] But regeneration differs from purification in that
regeneration precedes, and purification follows; for no one can be
purified from evils and falsities except the man who is being
regenerated, and after he has been regenerated; for he who has not been
regenerated is indeed withdrawn from evils insofar as he allows; but he
is not purified from them, for he is always impure. It is otherwise with
the regenerate man, who is being purified from day to day, which is
meant by the Lord's words to Peter: He that hath been washed needeth not
save to be washed as to his feet, and so is wholly clean (John 13:10).
"He who hath been washed" signifies one who is regenerate. \[3\] That
the washing of everything was called "baptizing," is evident in Mark
7:4; and the washing of the whole body, in Matthew 3:13-16; Mark 1:9;
and 2 Kings 5:10, 14. The Jordan, in which the washings took place,
which were baptizings (Matt. 3:6-13; Mark 1:5; 2 Kings 5:10, 14),
signified the natural (n. 1585, 4245). By the washing of baptism is also
signified temptation (Matt. 20:21-23), because all regeneration is
effected by means of temptations (n. 5036, 5773, 8351, 8958, 8959).
\[4\] A few words shall be added to say why the Lord, when He was in the
world, Himself also wished to be baptized, when yet by baptizing is
signified the regeneration of man by the Lord. It was because the
baptizing of the Lord Himself signified the glorification of His Human;
for in the Word that which signifies the regeneration of man signifies
also the glorification of the Human in the Lord, because the
regeneration of man is an image of the glorification of the Lord (n.
3138, 3212, 3296, 3490, 4401, 5688). Therefore when the Lord suffered
John to baptize Him, He said: Thus it becometh us to fulfil all the
righteousness of God (Matt. 3:15). "To fulfill all the righteousness of
God" denotes to subdue the hells by His own power, and reduce them and
the heavens into order, and at the same time glorify His Human; which
things were done by means of temptations admitted into Himself, thus by
means of continual combats with the hells, even to the last on the
cross. (That this is the "righteousness" which the Lord fulfilled, see
n. 9486, 9715, 9809, 10019, 10152.) The like things are also signified
by "all things being fulfilled which were written concerning the Lord in
the Law and the Prophets" (Luke 18:31; 22:37; 24:44); and by the Lord's
coming "to fulfill all things of the law" (Matt. 5:17, 18). \[5\] He who
does not know the arcana of the Word believes that the Lord became
righteousness by fulfilling all things of the Law, and that by this
fulfillment He set free the human race from the yoke of the Law, thus
from damnation. But this is not the meaning of these words; but that He
became righteousness through the subjugation of the hells, the reduction
of the heavens into order, and the glorification of His Human; for by
this He introduced Himself into power, so that He could, from His Divine
Human, eternally subjugate the hells, and keep the heavens in order, and
so regenerate man, that is, deliver him from the hells, and save him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10240.">10240.</span></span>

As by "washing" is also signified regeneration, something further shall
be said about this. He who does not know that the Lord, both in the
Prophets and in the Evangelists, spoke by correspondences, consequently
that in the Word there is an internal sense, cannot possibly know what
is meant by the Lord's words in John: Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except a man be born of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; but that which
is born of the Spirit is spirit. The Spirit bloweth where it willeth,
and thou hearest the voice thereof, but knowest not whence it cometh and
whither it goeth; so is everyone that is born of the Spirit (John 3:5,
6, 8). \[2\] If these words are unfolded by means of correspondences, it
is plain what their meaning is, for they are arcana of heaven. By
correspondence "water" is the truth of faith which comes to clear
perception in the natural man; "the Spirit" is the Divine truth which
flows in from the Lord through the internal of man into his external or
natural, whereby the man who is being regenerated has the life of faith;
"the flesh" is what is man's own, which is nothing but evil; by "the
Spirit blowing where it willeth" is signified that the Lord in mercy
gives new life by means of the Divine truth; by "hearing the voice
thereof" is signified that these things come to perception in the
external or natural man; "the voice" denotes what is announced from the
Word; by "not knowing whence it cometh and whither it goeth" is
signified that man does not know how regeneration is effected, for it is
effected by the Lord by means of countless and unutterable secret
things. \[3\] That by correspondence "waters" are truths of faith, see
n. 28, 739, 2702, 3058, 3424, 4976, 5668, 8568, 9323, 10238; also that
"the Spirit" is Divine truth, from which is the life of faith (n. 9229,
9818); that "flesh" is what is man's own, which is nothing but evil (n.
8409); that "breathing" is the state of the life of faith (see n. 9281);
that the "voice" is what is announced from the Word, thus truth
therefrom (n. 9926); that "hearing" is perception (n. 9311, 9926); that
"to come and to go," or to enter in and go out, is the state of the
thing from beginning to end (n. 9927); that the secret things of
regeneration are countless and unutterable (n. 3179, 3573, 5398, 9334,
9336); and that what goes on in the internal man is not perceived while
the man is in the world, but only what is in the external or natural man
(n. 10236).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10241.">10241.</span></span>

Their hands and their feet. That this signifies the interiors and
exteriors of man, is evident from the signification of "hands," as being
the interiors of man (of which below); and from the signification of
"feet," as being the exteriors of man, thus his natural things, for
these are exterior. (That the "feet" denote what is natural, thus the
exteriors of man, see n. 2162, 3761, 3986, 4280, 4938-4952, 9406.) But
that the "hands" denote the interiors is because the higher things of
the body extend into the hands, and there terminate, consequently by the
"hands" is signified whatever pertains to man, and also his power (see
the places cited in n. 10019). But when both the "hands" and the "feet"
are mentioned, then there is signified whatever is in the internal and
also in the external man, or both spiritual and natural things. For this
reason by "lifting up the hand" is signified power in the spiritual; and
by "lifting up the foot," power in the natural (see n. 5327, 5328);
moreover, by the extremes of man are signified all that pertains to him
(n. 10044), and the extremes are the hands and feet. From all this it
can be seen why Aaron and his sons were to wash the hands and feet when
they entered into the Tent of meeting, or came near to the altar to
minister.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10242.">10242.</span></span>

When they enter into the Tent of meeting. That this signifies worship
from the good of faith, is evident from the signification of "entering
into the Tent of meeting," when said of Aaron and his sons, as being to
represent all things of worship from the good of faith. That these
things were represented by "entering into the Tent of meeting," was
because by "coming near to the altar" were represented all things of
worship from the good of love. There are two essentials of Divine
worship: the good of faith, and the good of love. Worship is Divine,
whether it be from the former good, or from the latter. The good of
faith is the good of charity toward the neighbor; and the good of love
is the good of love to the Lord. These goods differ from each other as
do the spiritual and the celestial, for the nature of which difference
see the places cited in n. 9277. Worship from the good of faith, or from
the good of charity toward the neighbor, was represented by the
ministration of Aaron and his sons in the Tent of meeting (in which
there was daily ministration), because by that Tent was represented the
heaven where spiritual good reigns; but worship from celestial good,
which is the good of love to the Lord, was represented by the
ministration of Aaron and his sons at the altar (n. 9963, 9964, 10001,
10025).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10243.">10243.</span></span>

They shall wash with waters. That this signifies purification by means
of the truths of faith, is evident from the signification of "washing,"
as being purification from evils and falsities (see above, n. 10237);
and from the signification of "waters," as being the truths of faith
(see also above, n. 10238). He who does not know what is signified by
"washing," and what by the "feet" and "hands," cannot know what these
words involve, in John: Jesus poureth water into the basin, and
beginneth to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the linen
towel wherewith He was girded. And He cometh to Simon Peter, who saith
unto Him, Dost Thou wash my feet? Jesus answered, What I do thou knowest
not now, but thou shalt know hereafter. Peter saith unto Him, Thou shalt
never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no
part with Me. Peter saith to Him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my
hands and my head. Jesus saith to him, He that hath been washed, needeth
not save to be washed as to his feet, but is wholly clean. Ye are clean
already (John 13:5-10). Who can know what is involved in what the Lord
said, "What I do, thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter,"
and "if I wash thee not, thou hast no part with Me"? and, "he who hath
been washed needeth not save to be washed as to his feet, but is wholly
clean"? \[2\] That the subject here treated of is purification from
evils and falsities, cannot be known except from the internal sense,
from which it is evident that by "washing" is meant purification from
evils and falsities; by the "water in the basin," the truth of faith in
the natural; by the "linen towel, with which the Lord was girded and
with which He wiped," the Divine truth proceeding from Him; by the
"feet," the natural of man; by "washing the head, hands, and feet,"
regeneration, and in like manner by "him who hath been washed." Thus by
"washing the feet" is meant to purify the natural of man, for unless
this is purified and cleansed with man while he lives in the world, it
can never be purified afterward. For such as the natural of man is when
he dies, such it remains. It is not amended afterward, because it is
this plane into which the interiors, which are spiritual, flow, it being
their receptacle; and therefore when it has been perverted, the
interiors are perverted into its image when they flow in. This is as
when the eye is injured, or any other organ of sense, or member of the
body, in that the interiors then feel and act through the organ or
member no otherwise than according to the reception of them there. \[3\]
That for this reason a man can never be purified unless he is purified
in the world in respect to his natural, is meant by the Lord's words,
"What I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter." That he
who has been regenerated is not to be purified except in respect to the
natural, is meant by these words, "He that hath been washed needeth not
save to be washed as to his feet, and is wholly clean." And that all
purification is effected by the Lord alone, by these words, "If I wash
thee not, thou hast no part with Me." And that this is effected by means
of the Divine truth which proceeds from the Lord, is signified by His
"wiping with the linen towel with which He was girded." That a "linen
cloth" denotes truth from the Divine, see above (n. 7601); thus the
linen cloth with which the Lord was girded denotes the Divine truth from
Him. (That "water" denotes the truth of faith, see n. 10238; that a
"basin" or "laver" in which is water denotes the natural, see n. 10235;
that the "washing" of the head, hands, and feet, or of the whole body,
denotes regeneration, n. 10239; and that the "feet" denote the natural
of man, n. 10241.) From all this it can be seen again that the Lord
spoke by correspondences, thus from the internal sense, because from
heaven in which is this sense; and therefore unless the Word of the Lord
is understood as to this sense, it is understood but little.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10244.">10244.</span></span>

That they die not. That this signifies lest the representative perish,
is evident from the signification of "dying," when said of the
ministration of Aaron and of his sons, as being the cessation of the
representatives, and consequently of conjunction with heaven (see n.
9928). The case herein is this. In the church that existed with that
nation, conjunction with heaven, and through heaven with the Lord, was
solely by means of representatives, that is, by means of external things
that represented internal ones; and therefore as soon as they did not
minister according to the prescribed rituals, the representative
perished, and with it conjunction with heaven. And when conjunction with
heaven perished, they had no protection against hell. Hence the death of
the sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, for they put incense upon strange
fire (Lev. 10:1, 2), by which was represented worship from some other
love than the love of the Lord. Hence their separation from heaven, and
extinction. The like would have happened if Aaron or his sons had come
near to minister unwashed; for thus they would have represented worship
not from heaven, but profane, which is from hell. From all this it is
evident that by "dying," when said of the ministration of Aaron and of
his sons, is signified the extinction of the representatives, and
consequently of conjunction with the heavens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10245.">10245.</span></span>

Or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn a fire-offering
to Jehovah. That this signifies worship from the good of love, is
evident from the signification of "coming near to the altar to
minister," as being to represent the Lord as to the good of love (see n.
9964); and from the signification of "to burn a fire-ring to Jehovah,"
as being worship from the love of the Lord. For by "burning," or
sacrificing, is signified worship (n. 6905, 8936), and by "a
fire-offering to Jehovah" is signified what is from the Divine love of
the Lord (n. 10055). (How the case herein is, see just above, n. 10241.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10246.">10246.</span></span>

And they shall wash their hands and their feet. That this signifies the
purification of the interiors and the exteriors of man, is evident from
what was shown above (see n. 10239, 10240), where are the like words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10247.">10247.</span></span>

That they die not, signifies lest the representation perish (as above,
n. 10243).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10248.">10248.</span></span>

And it shall be to them a statute of an age. That this signifies an
eternal law of order, is evident from the signification of "a statute,"
as being a law of order (see n. 7884, 7995, 8537); and from the
signification of "an age," as being what is eternal. That "an age"
denotes what is eternal, is because by "an age" is meant duration even
to the end; and in the internal sense this duration signifies what is
eternal; moreover, the word by which "an age" is here expressed in the
original tongue signifies eternity. That "an age" denotes what is
eternal, is because "an age," when said in the Word about the church,
signifies its duration even to the end; and consequently when it is said
of heaven, where there is no end, and when it is said of the Lord, it
signifies what is eternal. This is predicated in general of every
church, but specifically of the celestial church. Moreover, "an age"
also signifies the world and life there, and likewise life thereafter to
eternity. \[2\] As regards the FIRST meaning: That "an age" when said of
the church, signifies its duration even to the end, is evident from the
following passages: The disciples said unto Jesus, Tell us what shall be
the sign of Thy coming, and of the consummation of the age? (Matt.
24:3). By "the consummation of the age" is signified the last time of
the church, thus its end, when there is no longer any faith because no
charity. That this is the consummation of the age, consequently that "an
age" denotes the duration of the church even to its end, can be seen
from all that was said by the Lord in that chapter, which may be seen
unfolded in this work before the chapters of Genesis, from chapter 26 to
chapter 40. The like is signified elsewhere by "an age" and its
"consummation" in the same Gospel: The harvest is the consummation of
the age (Matt. 13:39, 40, 49). I am with you all the days even unto the
consummation of the age (Matt. 28:20). Here also the "age" means the
duration of the church from beginning to end. \[3\] In Ezekiel: They
shall dwell upon the land, they and their sons, and their sons' sons,
even to an age; David shall be their prince for an age. My sanctuary
shall be in the midst of them for an age (Ezek. 37:25, 28). These things
are said of Israel, by whom in the internal sense is meant the spiritual
church; by the "land on which they shall dwell" is also signified the
church; by the "sanctuary," everything of the church; and by "David,"
the Lord; from which it is evident that by "to an age" is signified even
to the end. (That "Israel" in the Word denotes the spiritual church, see
the places cited in n. 9340; that the "land" denotes the church, see the
places cited in n. 9325; that the "sanctuary" denotes everything of the
church, and that it is predicated of the good and truth of the spiritual
church, n. 8330, 9479; and that "David" denotes the Lord, n. 1888,
9954.) \[4\] In David: Before the mountains were born, and the earth and
the world were formed, even from age to age, Thou art God (Ps. 90:2). By
"the mountains being born," and by "the earth and the world being
formed," is not meant the creation of the world, but the setting up of
the church; for "mountains" in the Word signify celestial love, thus the
church in which is this love; the "earth" also and the "world" signify
the church; hence "from age to age" signifies from the setting up of
churches to their ends; for churches follow on, one after another,
because when one has been ended or vastated another is set up. (That a
"mountain" denotes celestial love, consequently the church which is in
this love, see n. 795, 796, 4210, 6435, 8758; and that "land" denotes
the church specifically, and the "world" the church generally, see the
places cited in n. 9325.) \[5\] SECONDLY: That "an age," when said of
heaven where there is no end, and of the Lord, signifies what is
eternal, is evident from the following passages: Jehovah is King for an
age, and forever (Ps. 10:16; also Exod. 15:18). Thy kingdom is a kingdom
of all the ages; and Thy dominion is to every generation and generation
(Ps. 145:13). The living God, the King of an age (Jer. 10:10). His
dominion is the dominion of an age which shall not pass away. Afterward
the saints of the highests shall receive the kingdom, and shall confirm
the kingdom even to an age, and even to ages of ages (Dan. 7:14, 18,
27). Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, unto ages
(Matt. 6:13). God shall give unto Him the throne of David, that He may
reign over the house of Jacob for ages (Luke 1:32, 33). \[6\] To Jesus
Christ be glory and strength unto ages of ages (Rev. 1:6). Behold I am
alive unto ages of ages (Rev. 1:18). To the Lamb be blessing, and honor,
and glory, and strength, unto ages of ages. The twenty-four elders
worshiped Him that liveth unto ages of age (Rev. 5:13, 14; 10:6; 11:15).
My salvation shall be for an age, and My righteousness to generation of
generations (Isa. 51:6, 8). The angel of His faces carried them all the
days of an age (Isa. 63:9). Many of them that sleep shall awake to the
life of an age (Dan. 12:2). If anyone shall eat of this bread, he shall
live for an age (John 6:51, 58). I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall not perish for an age (John 10:28). Lead me in the way of an age
(Ps. 139:24). He hath established them forever and for an age, He hath
made a statute which shall not pass away (Ps. 148:6). \[7\] In these
passages "an age" signifies what is eternal, because it is said of the
Lord and of His kingdom, and of heaven and the life there, whereof there
is no end; "ages of ages" do not mean eternities of eternities, but
denote what is eternal; and the expression is used relatively to
churches on earth of which one succeeds another. It is evident from the
Word that on our earth a church has been set up four times, of which the
first was the Most Ancient Church, which was before the flood; the
second was the Ancient Church, which was after the flood; the third was
the Israelitish and Jewish Church; and lastly there was the Christian
Church. The period of each Church, from beginning to end is "an age;"
moreover, after this last mentioned Church, a new one will begin. These
successions of churches are meant by "ages of ages." (That "an age"
denotes the duration of a church even to the end, was shown above.)
\[8\] THIRDLY: That "an age" is predicated in general of every church,
but specifically of the celestial church, is evident from the following
passages: I will set up the tent of David that is fallen, and will build
according to the days of an age (Amos 9:11); where by "the days of an
age" is meant the time of the Most Ancient Church, which was celestial.
And in Micah: Bethlehem Ephrathah, out of thee shall He come forth unto
Me who shall be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth are from of old,
from the days of an age (Micah 5:2); where the sense is the same. And in
Moses: Remember thou the days of an age; understand ye the years of
generation and generation (Deut. 32:7). Here "the days of an age" denote
the time of the Most Ancient Church, which was celestial; and "the years
of generation and generation" denote the time of the Ancient Church,
which was spiritual. \[9\] In Isaiah: Awake, awake, put on strength, O
arm of Jehovah; awake according to the days of antiquity, of the
generation of ages (Isa. 51:8-9). "According to the days of the
generation of ages" denotes according to the states of love and faith in
the Ancient Churches derived from the Most Ancient Church. In David: I
have considered the days of old, the years of ages (Ps. 77:5); where the
sense is the same. \[10\] Again: Remember the former things from an age
(Isa. 46:9). Then shall the meat-offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
sweet to Jehovah, according to the days of an age, and according to the
ancient years (Mal. 3:4). Judah shall be seated for an age, and
Jerusalem to generation and generation (Joel 3:20); where by "Judah" is
signified the celestial church, of which it is therefore said,
"according to the days of an age," and "for an age;" and by "Jerusalem"
is signified the spiritual church, of which it is said, "according to
the ancient days," and "to generation and generation." (That "Judah"
denotes the celestial church, see n. 3654, 3881, 6363, 8780; and
"Jerusalem," the spiritual church, n. 402, 3654.) \[11\] FOURTHLY: That
"an age" signifies the world and life there, is evident from the
following passages: He that was sown among the thorns, this is he that
heareth the Word, but the care of this age and the deceitfulness of
riches choke the Word (Matt. 13:22). The sons of this age are more
prudent than the sons of light (Luke 16:8). The sons of this age marry
and are given in marriage (Luke 20:34). The wicked and the secure of the
age multiply riches (Ps. 73:12). \[12\] FIFTHLY: That "an age" signifies
the life after death to eternity: He shall receive a hundredfold now in
this time, and in the age to come life eternal (Mark 10:30). When I
shall bring thee down with them that go down into the pit, to the people
of an age (Ezek. 26:20). And in other passages, as Luke 18:9, 30; 20:35;
Isa. 34:10, 17; Rev. 14:11; 20:10; 22:5.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10249.">10249.</span></span>

To him and to his seed, to their generations. That this signifies all
who receive the things that proceed from the Lord, thus who are being
regenerated by Him, is evident from the representation of Aaron, as
being the Lord in respect to Divine good (see n. 9806, 9946); from the
signification of "seed," as being those who are born of the Lord, thus
who are being regenerated, for they who are being regenerated are said
to be "born of God," and also to be "His sons." But in the sense
abstracted from persons by "the seed of Aaron" are signified the things
which proceed from the Lord, thus by virtue of which a man is
regenerated, which are the goods of love and the truths of faith. And
from the signification of "generations," as being the goods and truths
which proceed from the former as from their parents, and their
derivations; for by "generations" in the Word in the internal sense are
meant spiritual generations, which are those of love and faith (see the
places cited in n. 10204). \[2\] As the Lord is meant by Aaron in the
representative sense, therefore by the "seed of Aaron" are specifically
meant those who are in the Lord's celestial kingdom; and by
"generations" those who are in His spiritual kingdom; for the goods and
truths of love and faith in the heavens are born and proceed in this way
from the Lord. That by "seed," "those born," and "generations," are
meant those who are in love and faith to the Lord, and in the abstract
sense the goods of love and the truths of faith, is evident from many
passages in the Word, of which only the following may be adduced: I will
bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west (Isa. 43:5);
this is said of Jacob and Israel, by whom in the internal sense is meant
the church external and internal, the "seed" of which is the truth of
faith and the good of charity. \[3\] Again: I will pour out My spirit
upon thy seed, and My blessing upon thine offspring (Isa. 44:3); "upon
seed," and "upon offspring," denote upon those who are of the church,
thus upon the things that are of the church, which are goods and truths,
or charity and faith, for these make the church with man. Again: In
Jehovah shall all the seed of Israel glory (Isa. 45:25); where the
meaning is the same. Again: If He shall make His soul guilty, He shall
see His seed (Isa. 53:10); speaking of the Lord, whose "seed" they are
called who are born of Him, thus who are regenerated. Again: To the
right hand and to the left thou shalt break forth, and thy seed shall
inherit the nations (Isa. 54:3); where the meaning is similar. \[4\] In
Jeremiah: Behold the days come that I will sow the house of Israel and
the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast
(Jer. 31:27). These words are not understood unless it is known what is
signified by "the house of Israel," and "the house of Judah," also what
by "the seed of man," and "the seed of beast." They who do not think
beyond the sense of the letter will believe the meaning to be that man
and beast are to be multiplied in Israel and Judah, but this meaning
involves nothing holy of the church. But by "the house of Israel" is
there meant the spiritual church, and by "the house of Judah" the
celestial church; "the seed of man" denotes the internal good of these
churches; and "the seed of beast" denotes their external good. (That a
"beast" denotes the affection of good, see the places cited in n. 9280;
and that when mention is made of "man and beast," it denotes what is
internal and what is external, n. 7523.) \[5\] Again: As the army of the
heavens shall not be numbered, and the sand of the sea is not measured,
so will I multiply the seed of David (Jer. 33:22). I have made a
covenant with My chosen, I have sworn unto David; thy seed will I
establish for an age, and build up thy throne to generation and
generation (Ps. 89:3, 4). By the "seed of David" is not meant the
posterity of David as a father, for this was not so greatly multiplied,
nor of so much importance that it should be multiplied as the army of
the heavens and as the sand of the sea; but by "David" in this passage,
as also in other places, is meant the Lord as to Divine truth, thus by
his "seed" those who have been regenerated or born of the Lord, and in
the abstract sense the things which they have from the Lord, namely, the
truths of faith and the goods of charity. (That "David" denotes the
Lord, see n. 1888, 9954.) \[6\] And again: A seed that shall serve
Jehovah shall be counted to the Lord for a generation (Ps. 22:30). Their
seed shall become known among the nations, and their offspring in the
midst of the peoples (Isa. 61:9). Here "seed" denotes those who are
regenerate, thus those who are of the church, and in whom the church is;
thus in a sense abstracted from persons, those things which make a
regenerate man, or which make the church with a man, which are faith and
charity from the Lord. \[7\] And in John: The dragon was angry against
the woman, and went away to make war with the remains of her seed, who
keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ
(Rev. 12:17). By "the dragon" are meant those who will attempt to
destroy the church of the Lord hereafter to be set up; by "the woman" is
meant this church; and by "those who are of her seed" are meant those
who are in love and faith to the Lord from the Lord. But in the opposite
sense "seed" signifies those who are against the things of the church,
thus who are in evil and the falsities thence derived; and in the
abstract sense evils and falsities; as in these passages: Woe to the
sinful nation, a seed of evil ones (Isa. 1:4). Sons of the sorceress,
seed of the adulterer, are ye not born of transgression, the seed of a
lie? (Isa. 57:3, 4). The seed of evil-doers shall never be mentioned
(Isa. 14:20).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10250.">10250.</span></span>

Verses 22-33. And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying, And do thou take to
thee chief spices, best myrrh five hundred, and aromatic cinnamon the
half thereof two hundred and fifty, and aromatic calamus two hundred and
fifty, and cassia five hundred, in the shekel of holiness; and oil of
olive a hin. And thou shalt make it an oil of anointing of holiness, an
ointment of ointment, the work of a perfumer; it shall be an oil of
anointing of holiness. And thou shalt anoint with it the Tent of
meeting, and the ark of the Testimony, and the table and all the vessels
thereof, and the lampstand and the vessels thereof, and the altar of
incense, and the altar of burnt-offering, with all the vessels thereof,
and the laver and its base. And thou shalt sanctify them, and they shall
be a holy of holies; whosoever toucheth them shall be made holy. And
thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and shalt sanctify them to
minister to Me in the priest's office. And thou shalt speak unto the
sons of Israel, saying, This shall be to Me an oil of anointing of
holiness to your generations. Upon the flesh of man shall it not be
poured; and in the quality thereof ye shall not make any like it; holy
is this; holy shall it be to you. The man who shall make ointment like
it, and who shall put of it upon a stranger, he shall be cut off from
his peoples. "And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying" signifies another
perceptivity from enlightenment through the Word by the Lord; "and do
thou take to thee chief spices" signifies truths with goods, from the
Word, which are gratefully perceived; "best myrrh" signifies the
perception of sensuous truth; "five hundred" signifies full; "and
aromatic cinnamon" signifies the perception and affection of natural
truth; "the half thereof, two hundred and fifty" signifies the
corresponding quantity; "and aromatic calamus" signifies the perception
and affection of interior truth; "two hundred and fifty" signifies the
corresponding quantity and quality; "and cassia" signifies truth still
more interior from good; "five hundred" signifies full; "in the shekel
of holiness" signifies the estimation of truth and good; "and oil of
olive" signifies the Lord's Divine celestial good; "a hin" signifies the
quantity for conjunction; "and thou shalt make an oil of anointing of
holiness" signifies a representative of the Divine good of the Lord's
Divine love; "an ointment of ointment" signifies in each and all things
of His Human; "the work of a perfumer" signifies from the influx and
operation of the Divine Itself which was in the Lord from conception;
"it shall be an oil of anointing of holiness" signifies a representative
of the Lord as to the Divine Human; "and thou shalt anoint with it the
Tent of meeting" signifies to represent the Divine of the Lord in the
heavens; "and the ark of the Testimony" signifies in the celestial good
that belongs to the inmost heaven; "and the table and all the vessels
thereof" signifies in spiritual good from the celestial, that belongs to
the second heaven, and in the ministering goods and truths; "and the
lampstand and the vessels thereof" signifies in spiritual truth, that
belongs to the second heaven, and in the ministering truths; "and the
altar of incense" signifies in all things of worship from these goods
and truths; "and the altar of burnt-offering" signifies to represent the
Divine Human of the Lord and the worship of Him in general; "with all
the vessels thereof" signifies Divine goods and Divine truths; "and the
laver and its base" signifies all things that belong to purification
from evils and falsities, and to regeneration by the Lord"; and thou
shalt sanctify them, and they shall be a Holy of holies" signifies in
this way the influx and presence of the Lord in the worship of the
representative church; "whosoever toucheth them shall be made holy"
signifies that which is communicative to all who receive in love and
faith; "and thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons" signifies inauguration
to represent the Lord in both kingdoms; "and shalt sanctify them to
minister to Me in the priest's office" signifies to represent the Lord
in respect to all the work of salvation; "and thou shalt speak unto the
sons of Israel, saying" signifies instruction for those who are of the
church; "this shall be to Me an oil of anointing of holiness" signifies
a representative of the Lord as to the Divine Human; "to your
generations" signifies in all things of the church; "upon the flesh of
man shall it not be poured" signifies no capability of communication
with man's own; "and in the quality thereof ye shall not make any like
it" signifies no imitation from the study of man; "holy is this, holy
shall it be to you" signifies because it is the Divine of the Lord; "the
man who shall make ointment like it" signifies the imitation of Divine
things by art; "and who shall put of it upon a stranger" signifies
conjunction with those who do not acknowledge the Lord, thus who are in
evils and the falsities of evil; "he shall be cut off from his peoples"
signifies separation and spiritual death. 10250a. And Jehovah spoke unto
Moses, saying. That this signifies another perceptivity from
enlightenment through the Word by the Lord, is evident from what was
unfolded above (n. 10215), where are the like words. That another
perceptivity is meant, is because it is so said when anything new is
revealed and commanded (see n. 10234).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_223"></span>[10223-1](ac205.htm#fr_223) Or heave-offering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10251-10300](ac206)
