[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac205)  [Next](ac207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="10251.">10251.</span></span>

And do thou take to thee chief spices. That this signifies truths with
goods, from the Word, which are gratefully perceived, is evident from
the signification of "spices," as being truths conjoined with goods,
which are grateful (n. 10199). That it denotes which are gratefully
perceived is because "odor" signifies perceptivity; and hence an
"aromatic odor" signifies grateful perceptivity. (That "odor" signifies
perceptivity, see n. 3577, 4624-4634, 4748, 10054.) That it denotes
truths conjoined with goods from the Word, is because this is said to
Moses, for it is said, "do thou take to thee spices," and by Moses is
represented the Lord as to the Word (n. 9372); moreover, it is the Word
from which are all the truths of the church, for the Word is Divine
truth itself sent down from heaven by the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10252.">10252.</span></span>

Best myrrh. That this signifies the perception of sensuous truth, is
evident from the signification of "fragrant myrrh," as being the
perception of sensuous truth; for its odor denotes perceptivity (as just
above), and "myrrh" denotes sensuous truth. In what now follows, the
subject treated of is the oil of anointing, by which is signified
celestial good, which is the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love in
the inmost heaven; its quality is described by the fragrant things of
which it was compounded, which were best myrrh, aromatic cinnamon,
aromatic calamus, cassia, and oil of olive, by which are signified
celestial truths and goods in their order, namely, from ultimate to
first ones, or from outermost to inmost ones; the ultimate or outermost
ones being signified by "myrrh." The reason why celestial good, or the
good of the inmost heaven, is thus described, is because this good comes
forth by means of the truths which are signified, and it also subsists
by means of them. \[2\] But as this is a subject of deeper
investigation, it may be set forth further. In order that celestial
good, which is inmost good, may be born with man, which is effected by
the Lord through regeneration, truths must be acquired from the Word, or
from the doctrine of the church which is from the Word. These truths
obtain their first seat in the memory of the natural or external man;
from this they are called forth by the Lord into the internal man, which
is done when the man lives according to them; and the more the man is
affected with them, or loves them, the higher, or the more interiorly,
they are raised by the Lord, and there become celestial good. \[3\]
Celestial good is the good of the love of doing truths from the Word for
the sake of good, thus for the Lord's sake; for the Lord is the source
of good, thus is good; and this is the generation of this good. From
this it is evident that this good comes forth by means of truths from
the Word, first in the most external or sensuous man, next by their
elevation into the internal man, and finally into the very inmost man,
where they become celestial good. And as this good comes forth in this
way by means of truths in their order, so it afterward subsists in a
like order by means of the same truths, for subsistence is a perpetual
coming-forth. And when it so subsists, as it had come forth, it is
complete, for then the higher things subsist, rest, and store up
themselves in order, upon the lower ones as upon their planes; and upon
their outermosts or ultimates, which are sensuous memory-truths, as upon
their foundation. \[4\] These truths are described by John in Revelation
as the precious stones forming the foundation of the wall of the holy
Jerusalem that came down out of heaven (Rev. 21:19, 20). By "precious
stones" are signified truths Divine received in good (n. 9476, 9863,
9873, 9905). That "fragrant myrrh" denotes sensuous truth, is evident
also in David: Thou hast loved righteousness, therefore God, Thy God,
hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows; with
myrrh, aloes, and kesia, all Thy garments (Ps. 45:8, 9). This is said of
the Lord, who alone is the "anointed of Jehovah," because there was in
Him the Divine good of the Divine love which is signified by the oil of
anointing (n. 9954). By His "garments" which are said to be "anointed
with myrrh, aloes, and kesia," are signified Divine truths from His
Divine good in the natural (n. 5954, 9212, 9216, 9814); thus by "myrrh"
is signified Divine truth in the sensuous, because it is mentioned in
the first place. \[5\] In Matthew: The Wise men from the east, opening
their treasures, offered unto the Lord then born, gifts: gold,
frankincense, and myrrh (Matt. 2:11). Here "gold" denotes good;
"frankincense," internal truth; and "myrrh," external truth; both of
these from good. That "gold" is here mentioned in the first place is
because it signifies good, which is inmost; in the second place
"frankincense," because it signifies internal truth from good; and
"myrrh" is mentioned in the third or last place because it signifies
external truth from good. (That "gold" denotes good, see the places
cited in n. 9874, 9881; and that "frankincense" denotes internal truth
from good will be seen in what follows at verse 34.) \[6\] The reason
why the wise men from the east offered these things to the Lord then
born, was that they might signify His Divine in the Human; for they knew
what gold signified, what frankincense, and what myrrh, because they
were in the science of correspondences and representations. In those
times this was the chief science among the Arabians, Ethiopians, and
others in the east; and therefore also in the Word by "Arabia,"
"Ethiopia," and "the sons of the east," in the internal sense, are meant
those who are in the knowledges of heavenly things (n. 1171, 3240, 3242,
3762). But in course of time this science perished, because when the
good of life ceased it was turned into magic. It was first obliterated
with the Israelitish nation, and afterward with the rest; and at this
day so completely that it is not even known to exist. So much is this
the case in the Christian world, that if it were said that all things of
the Word in the sense of the letter signify heavenly things by
correspondence, and that from this is its internal sense, no one would
know what was meant. \[7\] As "myrrh" signified truth the most external,
which is sensuous truth, and its perception, therefore the bodies of the
dead were formerly anointed with myrrh and aloes, by which anointing was
signified the preservation of all truths and goods with the man, and
also their resurrection. For this reason such a substance was employed
as signified the ultimate of life with man, which ultimate is called the
sensuous life. (That the body of the Lord was anointed with such things,
and was encompassed with them, together with a linen cloth, and that
this was the custom of the Jews, may be seen in John 19:39, 40; Luke
23:53, 56.) But be it known that what is said of the Lord Himself in the
Word is to be understood in a supereminent sense, and therefore these
things here signify His Divine life in the sensuous, which is the life
proper to the body, and also the resurrection of this. It is known that
the Lord rose again with the whole body which He had in the world,
differently from other men, for He left nothing in the sepulcher; and
therefore He also said to the disciples, who when they saw the Lord
supposed that they saw a spirit, "Why are ye troubled? behold My hands
and My feet, touch Me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as
ye see Me have" (Luke 24:38, 39).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10253.">10253.</span></span>

Five hundred. That this signifies full, is evident from the
signification of the number "five hundred," as being what is full. That
"five hundred" denotes what is full is because this number is compounded
of five twice multiplied by ten, or five times a hundred; and by "five"
is signified much, in like manner by "ten," and by a "hundred;" hence by
"five hundred" is signified what is full. (That by "five" is signified
much, see n. 5708, 5956, 9102; so by "ten," n. 3107, 4638; also by a
"hundred," n. 4400, 6582, 6594; and that all numbers in the Word signify
real things, see the places cited in n. 9488; and that compound numbers
signify the like as the simple ones from which they come forth by
multiplication, n. 5291, 5335, 5708, 7973.) \[2\] That numbers signify
real things is clearly evident in Ezekiel, where the house of God with
all within and without it, and also the new earth, are measured, and are
described by the numbers of the measure (chapters 40 to 48); and by the
"new earth" is there meant the church, and by the "house of God" the
holiness of it; in like manner by John in Revelation, where also the New
Jerusalem, by which also is meant a new church, is described by the
numbers of the measure. If numbers had not signified real things, all
these measurements would have been of no value. \[3\] That "five
hundred" signifies the whole from one end to the other, thus what is
full, is evident from this in Ezekiel: He measured outside the house, or
temple, on the eastern quarter, five hundred reeds round about; on the
northern quarter five hundred reeds round about; on the southern quarter
five hundred reeds; and on the quarter of the sea five hundred reeds.
Its wall round about; the length five hundred reeds, and the breadth
five hundred reeds; to distinguish between that which was holy and that
which was profane (Ezek. 42:15-20); from which words it is plain that
"five hundred" denotes the whole in the complex, or everything holy from
one end to the other, thus what is full, for it is said that the wall,
which was of this length and breadth in a square, distinguished between
what was holy and what was profane. \[4\] That "five hundred" signifies
much; and its tenth part, or "fifty," relatively something is evident
from the Lord's words to Simon in Luke: Jesus said, A certain creditor
had two debtors; the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty.
When they had nothing to pay, he forgave them both; therefore which of
them will love him most? Simon answered, He to whom he forgave most.
Jesus said, Just so the woman's many sins are forgiven, because she
loved much; but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little (Luke
7:41, to the end). The Lord employed these numbers because they
signified much and something; for He spoke from the Divine, thus by
means of significatives according to correspondences; and also in all
other places, as when He spoke of the virgins, whom He called "ten," and
"five" of them wise, and "five" foolish. He said "ten," because by this
number are signified all, that is, of the church; and "five," because by
this number is signified some part (n. 4637, 4638).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10254.">10254.</span></span>

And aromatic cinnamon. That this signifies the perception and affection
of natural truth, is evident from the signification of "aromatic
cinnamon," as being the perception and affection of natural truth, which
truth is the interior truth of the external man; for with man there are
sensuous life and natural life, both of the external man; but the
sensuous life is exterior, deriving its truths from the objects which
are on the earth and in the body; and the natural life is interior,
deriving its truths from the causes of these objects. The life of the
internal man is in like manner exterior and interior. The exterior
derives its truths from those things which are in the ultimates of
heaven; but the interior from those which are in the interiors of
heaven; these latter truths are signified by the fragrant things which
follow. \[2\] That by "aromatic cinnamon" is signified the perception
and affection of truth, is because by what is aromatic is signified
perception that is grateful. Such perception is from the affection which
is of love, for that which is grateful in perception is from no other
source. (That all odors signify perception, see n. 3577, 4626, 4748; and
that grateful odors signify the perception of truth from good, n. 1514,
1517-1519, 4628, 10054, thus from the affection which is of love; and
that the spheres of perception are turned into odors with spirits and
angels, n. 4626.) \[3\] Be it known further that all those sweet spices
from which the oil of anointing was prepared, belong to the celestial
class, that is, to those things which are of the celestial kingdom;
whereas the spices of which the incense was compounded belong to the
spiritual class, that is, to those things which are of the spiritual
kingdom; and therefore in the original tongue the spices of which the
oil of anointing was composed are from a different word and derivation
than the spices of which the incense was composed; for there are in the
Word special words to express those things which are of the celestial
kingdom; and special words to express those of the spiritual kingdom;
and still others which are common to both. But in order that it may be
known what these words are, it must first be known that heaven is
divided into two kingdoms; likewise the church; and that in the
celestial kingdom the essential is the good of love to the Lord, whereas
in the spiritual kingdom it is the good of charity toward the neighbor.
(For the difference between these, see the numbers cited in n. 9277.)
\[4\] That the "spice" which is here mentioned signifies the perception
and affection of celestial truth, is evident in Isaiah: Instead of spice
there shall be rottenness; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead
of braided work baldness (Isa. 3:24); The subject here treated of is the
daughters of Zion, by whom is signified the celestial church, in this
case perverted; and therefore "spice" is expressed by the same word as
in the verse before us; and by "instead of spice rottenness" is
signified that in the place of the perception and affection of truth
from good, and of the consequent life, there shall be the perception and
affection of falsity from evil, in which there is nothing of life. \[5\]
In Ezekiel: The traders of Sheba and Raamah were thy traders in the
chief of every spice, and in precious stone and gold (Ezek. 27:22). This
was said of Tyre, by which are signified the knowledges of good and
truth in the church; and by "Sheba and Raamah" are signified those who
are in the knowledges of celestial things. \[6\] In like manner where
the queen of Sheba is treated of: The queen of Sheba gave to Solomon a
hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and
precious stone; there came no more such a multitude of spice as this (1
Kings 10:10) That "Sheba" chiefly denotes those who are in the
knowledges of celestial things, see n. 1171, 3240. From all this it is
evident that these spices from which the oil of anointing was prepared,
signify the perception and affection of truth such as are possessed by
those who are in the Lord's celestial kingdom. \[7\] The reason why the
spices with which the anointing oil was prepared, which were noble
myrrh, aromatic cinnamon, aromatic calamus, and cassia, belong to the
celestial class, that is, to those things which are of the Lord's
celestial kingdom, is that the "oil of anointing" signified the Divine
good of the Divine love in the Lord, which in heaven is His Divine
celestial (that the "oil of anointing" has this signification, see n.
9954, 10019).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10255.">10255.</span></span>

The half thereof, two hundred and fifty. That this signifies the
corresponding quantity, is evident from the signification of a number
which is the half of a preceding one, as being somewhat, and as much as
is sufficient, or as much as is for use, thus also as much as
corresponds. Hence it is that "two hundred and fifty," being the half of
the previous number "five hundred," signifies the corresponding
quantity. How the case herein is can be seen from examples. Take for
example the number "ten." When this number signifies all, then the half
of it, or "five," signifies some; when "ten" signifies what is full,
then "five" signifies as much as is sufficient; but when "ten" signifies
much, "five" signifies somewhat; and so on. The case is the same with
all other numbers when halved. (That "five" signifies some, also
somewhat, and likewise as much as is sufficient, and as much as is for
use, see n. 4638, 5708, 5956, 9102, 9689), thus with variety relatively
to the number "ten," when this signifies all, what is full, or much. It
is similar with the signification of "fifty" relatively to a "hundred,"
and of "two hundred and fifty" relatively to "five hundred;" it does not
matter whether a number is greater or less, seeing that the greater
numbers have a like signification with the less from which they are
composed (see n. 5335, 5708, 7973; and that numbers in the Word signify
real things, see the places cited in n. 9488, 10127). From all this it
can be seen that the present number, which is half of the previous one,
does not signify half the perception of interior truth relatively to the
perception of exterior truth; but a corresponding quantity. For things
in the heavens are not measured and numbered as are things on earth,
because in the heavens there are no spaces, or times, but instead
thereof states, which are perceived in respect to their quality and
quantity, without regard to any numbering. For numbering and measurement
involve such things as belong to space and time, thus which are proper
to nature in its ultimates.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10256.">10256.</span></span>

And aromatic calamus. That this signifies the perception and affection
of interior truth, is evident from the signification of "aromatic
calamus," as being the perception and affection of interior truth, for
"calamus" denotes this truth, and "aromatic" denotes the perception and
affection thereof. (That "calamus" denotes truth, will be seen below;
and that "aromatic" denotes the perception and affection thereof, see
just above, n. 10254.) \[2\] By interior truth is here meant that truth
of the internal man which is exterior there, according to what was said
above (n. 10254), namely, that in the external man there is an interior
and an exterior, and the same in the internal man. Hence it is that four
aromatics were employed in the preparation of the oil of anointing;
namely, noble myrrh, aromatic cinnamon, aromatic calamus, and cassia;
and by "noble myrrh" is signified the perception of exterior truth in
the external man, which is sensuous truth; by "aromatic cinnamon,"
interior truth there, which is natural truth; by "aromatic calamus,"
exterior truth in the internal man; and by "cassia," interior truth
there; and by "oil of olive," the good itself from which are the
affections and perceptions of these truths. \[3\] That "calamus" denotes
interior truth, can be seen from the passages in the Word where it is
mentioned; yet there it is not called "aromatic calamus," but only
"calamus," and" good calamus," as in these passages: Thou hast not
called upon Me, O Jacob; and thou hast wearied of Me, O Israel; thou
hast bought Me no calamus with silver, and thou hast not filled Me with
the fat of thy sacrifices (Isa. 43:22, 24). Dan and Javan furnished yarn
in thy tradings; bright iron, cassia, and calamus were in thy trading
(Ezek. 27:19). To what purpose cometh to Me frankincense from Sheba, and
good calamus from a far country? (Jer. 6:20). That in these passages by
"calamus" is meant something of the church, and worship there, is plain;
for otherwise what could be meant by its being said that they should
"buy for Jehovah calamus with silver" and that "good calamus should come
to Him from a far country"? And as something of the church and its
worship is signified, it follows that it is truth or good, because all
things of the church and of worship bear relation to these; but what
truth or good is signified, whether celestial or spiritual, whether of
the external or the internal man, is evident from the internal sense of
the above passages when it is examined in its connection. That it is
interior truth is plain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10257.">10257.</span></span>

Two hundred and fifty. That this signifies the corresponding quantity
and quality, is evident from what was shown just above (n. 10255).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10258.">10258.</span></span>

And cassia. That this signifies a more interior truth from good, is
evident from the signification of "cassia," as being the interior truth
of the internal man. That "cassia" has this signification is plain from
what has been said and shown above; for heavenly things follow in this
order, from the outermost to the inmost, and therefore it is inmost
truth which is signified by "cassia," for it is the fourth in order.
That "cassia" denotes truth from good is because inmost truth proceeds
immediately from good, and in lower things acts in conjunction with
good. This takes place when the understanding acts wholly as a one with
the will, so that it is not known whether the act is from the one or
from the other. Moreover the more interior heavenly things are, the more
perfect they are, for all perfection increases toward the interiors, and
all perfection is from good, that is, through good from the Lord. \[2\]
"Cassia" is mentioned among those things which signify things celestial
in Ezekiel: Dan and Javan furnished yarn in thy trading; bright iron,
cassia, and calamus were in thy trading (Ezek. 27:19). The subject here
treated of is Tyre, by which are signified the knowledges of truth and
good in the church (see n. 1201); and by "Dan and Javan" are signified
those who are in the knowledges of celestial things; "bright iron"
denotes ultimate celestial truth; and "cassia," inmost truth. \[3\]
Cassia of this kind is not mentioned in other passages in the Word, but
in David is mentioned "kesia," which also is a species of cassia: God,
thy God, hath anointed thee, all thy garments with the oil of gladness,
with myrrh, aloes, and kesia (Ps. 45:8, 9). The subject treated of in
this whole Psalm is the Lord, and indeed the glorification of His Human,
He who is not acquainted with the internal sense of the Word cannot
possibly know what is signified by "anointing all garments with myrrh,
aloes, and kesia," where the Lord is the subject treated of. \[4\] That
garments are not meant, is plain, nor myrrh, aloes, and kesia with which
they were anointed; but Divine truths from Divine good, which the Lord
put on in respect to His Human. For anointing was nothing else than a
representative of the Divine good in the Lord's Divine Human; hence by
"myrrh, aloes, and kesia" are signified Divine truths in their order
proceeding from the Divine good which was in Him. Hence by "garments" is
signified His Divine Human; for whether you say "the Divine Human of the
Lord," or "the Divine truth," it is the same, because when the Lord was
in the world He was the Divine truth itself; and when He went out of the
world, He made Himself the Divine good, from which is the Divine truth
(see the numbers cited in n. 9199, 9315). Moreover, in the Word, that is
called a "garment" which clothes something else, whatever it may be. The
like is signified by the Lord's "garments" in Isaiah 63:2, 3, and also
in other places. (That "garments" signify the truths which clothe good,
see n. 2576, 4545, 4763, 5248, 5319, 5954, 9093, 9212, 9216, 9952.) From
this it is now evident that by "kesia," which is a species of cassia, is
signified the Divine truth which proceeds immediately from the Divine
good, which truth is inmost truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10259.">10259.</span></span>

Five hundred. That this signifies full, is evident from what was shown
above (n. 10253). The reason why five hundred in the shekel of holiness
were taken of myrrh, and five hundred of cassia, but only two hundred
and fifty of aromatic cinnamon and of aromatic calamus, was that "myrrh"
signified sensuous truth, which is the truth last in order, and "cassia"
the truth that proceeds immediately from good, which is inmost truth;
whereas "aromatic cinnamon" and "aromatic calamus" signified interior
truths, which are intermediate; and of the last and the inmost there
must be what is full; but of the intermediates a corresponding quantity;
for intermediates must hold themselves so as to correspond with what is
first and what is last.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10260.">10260.</span></span>

In the shekel of holiness. That this signifies the estimation of truth
and of good, is evident from the signification of "the shekel of
holiness," as being the price and estimation of truth and good in
respect to its quality and quantity (see n. 2959, 10221).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10261.">10261.</span></span>

And oil of olive. That this signifies the Lord's Divine celestial good,
is evident from the signification of "oil," as being good both celestial
and spiritual (see n. 886, 4582, 9780); and from the signification of
"olive," as being celestial love (of which below); hence by "oil of
olive" is signified the good of celestial love, or what is the same,
celestial good. It is called the Lord's Divine celestial good, because
all good which is essentially good in the heavens, is from the Divine of
the Lord. \[2\] But be it known that in itself the Lord's Divine good is
one and indivisible, for it is infinite, and contains infinite things
within it. That which is infinite is one and indivisible, because the
infinite things which it contains make a one. But that it is
distinguished into celestial and spiritual is owing to its reception by
angels in the heavens and by men on earth. As received by the angels and
men who belong to the Lord's celestial kingdom, it is called Divine
celestial good; but as received by the angels and men who belong to the
Lord's spiritual kingdom, it is called Divine spiritual good; for all
angels and men receive variously or dissimilarly the one only good of
the Lord. Comparatively speaking this is like the heat and light of the
sun of the world, which although considered in themselves they are one
and indivisible, yet vary according to the times of the year and of the
day, and also in a dissimilar manner in every region of the earth; and
this variation of heat and light is not effected by the sun, but by the
varied turning of the earth, according to the varieties of its orbit and
of its rotation, thus also by the reception. Moreover, the same light
varies in every object according to the reception, whence come colors.
From all this it can be seen whence it is that the Lord's Divine good,
which is one and indivisible, because infinite, is called celestial and
spiritual. \[3\] That "oil" denotes good both celestial and spiritual,
is evident from the passages above cited; but that "olive" denotes
celestial love, and "oil" the perception and affection of this love, is
evident from the passages in the Word where "oil" and "olive" are
mentioned; as from the following: The prophet saw a lampstand all of
gold, its seven lamps were upon it, two olive-trees were near it, one
upon the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side
thereof. He said to the angel, What are these two olive-trees, and what
are these two olive berries, which are in the hand of the two pipes of
gold? He said, These are the two sons of olives that stand beside the
Lord of the whole earth (Zech. 4:2, 3, 11, 12, 14). \[4\] What these
prophetic words involve cannot be known to anyone unless he knows from
the internal sense what is signified by a "lampstand," and what by an
"olive-tree;" that a "lampstand" signifies the spiritual heaven, and its
"lamps" the holy truths there, see above (n. 9548, 9551, 9555, 9558,
9561, 9684); from which it is evident that an "olive-tree" signifies the
celestial kingdom by virtue of its perception and affection of good; and
the "olive berries," the holy goods there, the truths of which are
signified by the "sons of olives." "Two" signifies the internal and the
external of this kingdom, and the conjunction. \[5\] Like things are
signified by "oil" and "lampstand" in these passages: I will give to My
two witnesses that they may prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty
days, clothed in sackcloth. These are the two olive-trees, and the two
lampstands, that stand before the God of the earth (Rev. 11:3, 4). I
will plant in the wilderness the cedar of shittim, and the myrtle, and
the wood of oil (Isa. 41:19). The "cedar" and the "wood of oil" are
mentioned because the "cedar" signifies spiritual good, and the "wood of
oil" celestial good. Spiritual good is charity toward the neighbor, and
celestial good is love to the Lord; to "plant these trees in the
wilderness" means in lands outside the church, thus among the Gentiles.
\[6\] In Hosea: His branches shall advance, and his honor shall be as
the olive, and his smell as Lebanon (Hos. 14:6). By "the olive" is here
also signified celestial good, and by "Lebanon" spiritual good, thus by
"Lebanon" the like as by the "cedar," because Lebanon was a forest of
cedars. \[7\] In Isaiah: Thus shall it be in the midst of the earth, in
the midst of the peoples, as the beating of an olive-tree, as the grape
gleanings when the vintage is completed (Isa. 24:13; also 17:6). It is
said "the beating of an olive-tree, and the gleanings of the completed
vintage," because the "olive-tree" signifies the church which is in
celestial good, and the "vine" the church which is in spiritual good;
for in the Word where good is treated of, truth also is treated of, by
reason of their marriage; and in like manner where the celestial is
treated of, the spiritual also is treated of. Moreover, the celestial is
predicated of good, and the spiritual of truth (see the places cited in
n. 9263, 9314); and therefore it is so concerning the vine and the olive
(that a "vine" denotes the spiritual church and its good and truth, see
n. 1069, 5113, 6376, 9277). \[8\] For this reason the "vine" and the
"olive" are mentioned together elsewhere, as in these passages: Thy wife
shall be as a fruitful vine in the sides of thy house, thy sons like
olive-plants round about thy table (Ps. 128:3). The fig-tree shall not
blossom, neither shall produce be in the vines: the work of the olive
shall deceive (Hab. 3:17). The most of your gardens and your vineyards
and your fig-trees and your olive-trees hath the worm devoured (Amos
4:9). The "fig-tree" also is here mentioned because the "fig-tree"
signifies the good of the external church (n. 5113), but the "vine" the
good of the internal spiritual church, and the "olive" the good of the
internal celestial church (as in other places). \[9\] As the "wood of
oil" signified the good of celestial love, therefore the two cherubs
which were in the adytum of the temple were made of wood of oil, as were
the doors, threshold, and posts (1 Kings 6:23, 31, 32); for by the
adytum of the temple was represented the inmost heaven, where celestial
good is, and therefore all things therein signified celestial things.
(That the ark which was there, and for which the adytum was made,
signified the inmost heaven where the Lord is, see n. 9485.) \[10\]
Moreover, the like was signified by the "Mount of Olives"-which was over
against the temple-as by the "olive," just as the like was signified by
"Lebanon" as by the "cedar;" and therefore in order that there might be
represented in the heavens all things which the Lord performed when He
was in the world, and especially Divine celestial things, the Lord was
very often on the Mount of Olives when He was at Jerusalem, as is
evident in Luke: Jesus was for days teaching in the temple, but in the
nights He went out and passed them in the Mount that is called of Olives
(Luke 21:37). Jesus came out, and went, as His custom was, into the
Mount of Olives (Luke 22:39). (That this mountain was over against the
temple, see Mark 13:3; Matthew 24:3.) \[11\] That the "Mount of Olives"
signified Divine celestial good, is evident in Zechariah, where it is
said: The feet of Jehovah shall stand upon the Mount of Olives which is
before the faces of Jerusalem, and He shall there fight against the
nations; and this mountain shall cleave asunder, part toward the east,
and toward the sea, with a great valley; and part of the mountain shall
withdraw toward the north, and part toward the south (Zech. 14:4). There
is here described the state of heaven and the church when the Lord was
in the world, and fought against the hells and overcame them, and at the
same time brought back the heavens into order; the "nations" there
against which He fought denote evils from the hells; the "Mount of
Olives" upon which His feet stood, denotes the Divine good of the Divine
love, for from this He fought and conquered; the "cleaving asunder of
the mountain toward the east and toward the sea, with a great valley,"
signifies the separation of heaven and hell; as also does its
"withdrawal toward the north and the south;" for those are said to be
"in the south" who are in the light of truth; "in the east," those who
are in the love of good; but "toward the sea," those who are in evils;
and "to the north," those who are in falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10262.">10262.</span></span>

A hin. That this signifies the amount sufficient for conjunction, is
evident from the signification of a "hin," which was a measure of
liquids, here of oil, as being the amount sufficient for conjunction;
for by "oil" is signified the Lord's Divine celestial good, which is the
very conjunctive of all in the heavens; hence by its measure is
signified the amount sufficient for conjunction, and everything of
conjunction. The Lord's Divine celestial good is the very conjunctive of
all, because it is the very being of the life of all; for it vivifies
all things by means of the Divine truth that proceeds from this Divine
good, and it vivifies them according to the quality of the reception.
Angels are receptions, and so also are men; the truths and goods with
them afford the quality according to which is effected the reception,
thus the conjunction. \[2\] Two measures are mentioned in the Word,
which were in holy use, one for liquids, which was called the "hin," the
other for dry things, which was called the "ephah;" by the hin were
measured oil and wine, and by the ephah, meal and fine flour; the
measure hin, which was for oil and wine, was divided into four parts,
but the measure ephah was divided into ten. The reason why the measure
hin was divided into four, was that it might signify what is
conjunctive, for "four" denotes conjunction; but that the measure ephah
was divided into ten was that it might signify what is receptive, the
quality whereof was marked by the numbers, for "ten" signifies much,
all, and what is full. (That "four" denotes conjunction, see n. 8877,
9601, 9674, 10136, 10137; and that "ten" denotes much, all, and what is
full, the same as a "hundred," n. 1988, 3107, 4400, 4638, 8468, 8540,
9745, 10253.) \[3\] (That the measure "hin" was for oil and wine in the
sacrifices, and that it was divided into four; but that the measure
"ephah" was for meal and fine meal, which were for the meat-offering in
the sacrifices, and that this was divided into ten, can be seen in Exod.
29:40; Lev. 5:11; 23:13; Num. 15:3-10; 28:5, 7, 14.) From all this it is
evident that by a "hin" is signified the amount sufficient for
conjunction, and by an "ephah" the amount sufficient for reception.
Moreover, the oil conjoined the fine flour, and the flour received it,
for in the meat-offering there were oil and fine flour. \[4\] There were
other measures besides, which were in common use both for dry things and
for liquids; the dry measures were called the "homer" and the "omer,"
and the liquid measures the "cor" and the "bath." The homer contained
ten ephahs, and the ephah ten omers; but the cor contained ten baths,
and the bath ten lesser parts (concerning which see Exod. 16:36; Ezek.
45:11, 13, 24). \[5\] But in Ezekiel, where the new temple is treated
of, there appears a different division of the ephah and the bath; the
ephah and the bath not being there divided into ten, but into six; and
the hin there corresponds to the ephah, as is plain in this prophet
(Ezek. 45:13, 14, 24; 46:5, 7, 11, 14). The reason is that the subject
there treated of is not celestial good and its conjunction, but
spiritual good and its conjunction; and in the spiritual kingdom the
corresponding numbers are twelve, six, and three, because by these
numbers are signified all things, and when they are predicated of truths
and goods, all things of truth and of good in the complex. (That these
things are signified by "twelve," see n. 3272, 3858, 3913, 7973; also by
"six," n. 3960, 7973, 8148, 10217; in like manner by "three," by which
is signified from beginning to end, thus what is full, and in respect to
things, everything, n. 2788, 4495, 5159, 7715, 9825, 10127.) That these
numbers involve similar things is because the greater numbers have a
like signification with the simple ones from which they arise by
multiplication (see n. 5291, 5335, 5708, 7973). \[6\] As by the "hin" is
signified the amount sufficient for conjunction with spiritual truth
also, therefore likewise for the meat-offering in the sacrifices from
the ram, there was taken a third part of a hin of oil, and for the
drink-offering a third part of wine (Num. 15:6, 7); for by the "ram" is
signified spiritual good (n. 2830, 9991). From all this it is now again
clearly evident that by the numbers mentioned in the Word are signified
real things; otherwise to what purpose would have been so frequent a
designation of quantity and measure by means of numbers in Moses, in
Ezekiel, and elsewhere?

<span class="margnote"><span id="10263.">10263.</span></span>

And thou shalt make it an oil of anointing of holiness. That this
signifies a representative of the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love,
is evident from what has been shown above concerning the oil of
anointing (see n. 9954, 10011, 10019).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10264.">10264.</span></span>

An ointment of ointment. That this signifies in each and all things of
His Human, is evident from the signification of "ointment," when said of
the oil of anointing, by which is signified a representative of the
Divine good of the Lord's Divine Human, as being what is Divine in each
and all things of His Human. That this is signified by "an ointment of
ointment" is because all the spices mentioned above, which were best
myrrh, aromatic cinnamon, aromatic calamus, and cassia, are meant by the
"ointment of ointment." Moreover, in the original tongue what is
aromatic in general is meant by this word ("spice," or "aromatic"); but
the translators call it "ointment" from anointing. \[2\] That "aromatic
of aromatic" signifies in each and all things of the Lord's Human, is
because there are signified the truths of the whole human, together with
their perceptions and affections, namely, the ultimate truth of the
sensuous mind, together with the perception of it, which is signified by
"myrrh" (see n. 10252); the interior truth of the natural or external
man, together with the perception and the affection of it, which is
signified by "aromatic cinnamon" (see n. 10254); truth still more
interior which is of the internal man, together with the perception and
the affection of it, which is signified by "aromatic calamus" (n.
10256); and inmost truth, together with the perception and the affection
of it, which is signified by "cassia" (n. 10258). Thus the whole human
is signified by these, for each and all things in man bear relation to
truths and their perceptions and affections, because these make man's
life. \[3\] For it can be known that without the perception and
affection of truth and good, a man is not a man, seeing that each and
all things that he thinks bear relation to truths and their perceptions,
and to goods and their affections. The thoughts and affections of man
are nothing else; for man has an understanding and a will; and the
understanding is made out of the perception of truth; and the will out
of the affection of good. That the whole man from head to heel, both
within and without, is nothing but his own truth or falsity, and his own
good or evil, and that the body is the external form of these, is a
secret which has not as yet been known in the world. \[4\] From all this
it can now be seen that by "aromatic of aromatic," or "ointment of
ointment," by which are understood all truths from the ultimate to the
inmost, thus truths in their whole complex, are signified each and all
things in man, or from which he is man; consequently when this
"aromatic" is predicated of the Lord, that it signifies each and all
things of His Human. \[5\] It is said, "thou shalt make it an oil of
anointing, an aromatic of aromatic, the work of a perfumer," because the
"oil of anointing" signifies the Divine good itself of the Divine love
which was in the Lord from conception (n. 9954, 10011, 10019); "an
aromatic of aromatic" signifies this in each and all things of His
Human; and "the work of a perfumer," or of a "maker of ointment,"
signifies from the influx and operation of the Divine Itself; for the
Lord alone in respect to His Human was the anointed of Jehovah (n.
9954).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10265.">10265.</span></span>

The work of a perfumer. That this signifies from the influx and
operation of the Divine Itself which was in the Lord from conception, is
evident from the signification of "a perfumer," or "a maker of
ointment," as being the one who does this work; and therefore when it is
said of the Lord, the Divine Itself is signified, and by "work," its
operation. Whatever is said in the Word is to be understood relatively
to that of which it is said; and therefore when it is said of the
Divine, it is to be understood of the Divine and of its operation,
influx, and attributes; no matter how it may be expressed in the sense
of the letter. In the inmost heaven all things of the Word are applied
to the Divine Human of the Lord, for the angels there think immediately
from the Lord, and perceive the Word in its inmost sense, which is the
celestial sense; and therefore here by "ointment of ointment, the work
of a maker of ointment," they perceive nothing else than that which is
of the Divine Itself which was in the Lord from conception, and its
influx and operation into each and all things of His Human; for the
Human of the Lord is the Divine Itself with them. They know that the
Divine good of the Divine love, which is called the "Father," is
reciprocally in the Divine Human of the Lord, which is the "Son,"
according to the Lord's words, that "the Father is in Him and He in the
Father" (John 14:10, 11); and that they "are one" (John 10:30). Wonder
not that by a "maker of ointment" or of "perfumes" is signified the
Divine Itself, seeing that in the Word throughout Jehovah calls Himself
the "Former," and the "Maker," nay, even the "Potter," as in Isaiah: O
Jehovah Thou art our Father; we are the clay, and Thou our Potter; and
we all are the work of Thy hands (Isa. 64:8); and also in other passages
in the same prophet, and in Jeremiah 18:2-6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10266.">10266.</span></span>

By the preparation of the oil of anointing in what just precedes, there
has been described the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love in His
Divine Human; and in the relative sense the good of love with man from
the Lord; for what is said in the Word, in the supreme sense, of the
Lord, in the relative sense is said also of man, because the
regeneration of man is an image of the glorification of the Lord's Human
(see n. 3138, 3212, 3296, 3490, 4402, 5688). From this it is evident
that the preparation of the oil of anointing involves also the
generation and formation by the Lord of the good of love with man;
consequently that the good of love is formed by means of the truths of
the church which are from the Word, first by means of the external
truths, and then by means of those which are more and more interior,
according to the description in what just precedes; and that accordingly
the external man is first imbued with these truths, and then the
interior man successively. Be it known that this good is preserved by
the Lord, and subsists, in the same order in which it had been formed by
the Lord by means of truths, that is, in the order in which it had come
forth; for preservation is perpetual formation, as subsistence is a
perpetual coming-forth. From this it follows that the quality of the
good of love with a man is according to the quality of the perception
and the affection, and according to the order in which the man has
become imbued with truths. If his affection of truth has been for the
sake of truth and good, without affection for the sake of self and the
world, and if the order has been from outermost things to more interior
ones, by degrees, then the good of love is genuine; if otherwise, it is
spurious, or not good. It matters not if in the beginning, when the man
begins to be formed, his affection of truth is also for the sake of
himself and the world. But this affection must be put off as good
increases by means of truths; and moreover the man is afterward
continually being purified from such things; as are the digestive
organs, from what is of no use. He who believes that a man can be
endowed with the good of love, without the truths of faith, and without
a life in accordance with these, is very much mistaken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10267.">10267.</span></span>

It shall be an oil of anointing of holiness. That this signifies a
representative of the Lord as to the Divine Human, is evident from the
signification of "an oil of anointing," as being a representative of the
Divine good of the Lord's Divine love (see n. 9954, 10011, 10019). It is
here said "an oil of anointing of holiness," in order that there may be
understood the Lord as to the Divine Human, because this is the holy
itself in the heavens; for the angels in the heavens know and
acknowledge no other Divine than the Divine Human of the Lord, because
of this they can think, and this they can love; while of the Divine
which is called the Father they cannot think, thus cannot love it,
because it is incomprehensible, according to the Lord's words, "Ye have
neither heard His voice at any time, nor seen His shape" (John 5:37).
That which cannot be seen and heard cannot enter into any idea of
thought, nor into any affection of love. That which is to be
comprehended by faith and love must be an accommodated objective. That
the incomprehensible Divine which is called the Father is simultaneously
worshiped when the Lord as to the Divine Human is worshiped, is also
evident from the words of the Lord Himself, where He says that "He is
the way," and that "no one cometh to the Father but by Him" (John 14:6);
and that "no one knoweth the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal Him" (Matt. 11:27); and that "no one hath seen the Father at
any time, except the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the
Father, and He setteth Him forth" (John 1:18); and therefore the Lord
says, "Come unto Me all ye, and I will refresh you" (Matt. 11:28). (That
the Divine Human of the Lord is the all in all of heaven, and that it is
the holy itself there, see n. 9933, 9972, 10067, 10159; also that the
Lord alone is holy, and all that is holy is from Him, n. 9229, 9479,
9680, 9818, 9820, 9956.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10268.">10268.</span></span>

And thou shalt anoint with it the Tent of meeting. That this signifies
to represent the Divine of the Lord in the heavens, is evident from the
signification of "anointing with the oil of holiness," as being to
induce a representation of the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love in
respect to the Divine Human; for "anointing" signifies to induce a
representation, seeing that the things which were anointed were not
called holy from the oil, but from the representation of the Divine
which is signified by the oil, because "oil" signifies the Divine good
of the Divine love, and "holiness" signifies the Divine Human, for this
alone is holy (as can be seen from what has been shown above, n. 9954,
10011, 10019, 10264-10267); and from the signification of "the Tent of
meeting," as being heaven in the whole complex; the inmost or third
heaven being where was the ark of the Testimony; the middle or second
heaven being where was the table on which were the breads of faces, and
where also was the lampstand and the altar of incense; and the ultimate
or first heaven being where was the court (see n. 9457, 9481, 9485,
9784, 9963, 10230, 10242, 10245). From this it is evident that by
"anointing the Tent of meeting" is signified to induce a representation
of the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love in respect to His Divine
Human; and because this is signified by "anointing the Tent of meeting,"
there is also signified to represent the Divine of the Lord in the
heavens. For heaven is not heaven from the angels as regarded in what is
their own; but from the Divine of the Lord with them (see n. 9408,
10125, 10151, 10157, 10159).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10269.">10269.</span></span>

And the ark of the Testimony. That this signifies in the celestial good
that belongs to the inmost heaven, is evident from the signification of
"anointing the ark of the Testimony," as being to induce a
representation of the Divine in the celestial good that belongs to the
inmost heaven; for by "anointing" is signified to induce a
representation of the Divine of the Lord (as just above, n. 10268); and
by "the ark of the Testimony" is signified the good of the inmost
heaven. That "the ark" denotes the inmost heaven, and that "the
Testimony" denotes the Lord there, may be seen above (n. 9485); and as
the good which reigns in this heaven is the good of love to the Lord,
which good is called celestial good, therefore by "anointing the ark of
the Testimony" is signified to induce a representation of the Divine of
the Lord in the celestial good that belongs to the inmost heaven. How
the case herein is can be seen from what has been everywhere shown
above, namely, that anointing represented the Lord as to the Divine
Human; for the Lord as to His Divine Human was alone the anointed of
Jehovah, because in Him, from conception, and consequently in His Human,
there was the Divine of the Father. It is possible to know that the
human body proceeds from the being of the father which is called his
soul; for the likeness of the father in respect to the various
affections which are of love appears in the children even in their
faces. From this each family derives its own peculiarities by which it
is distinguished from others. What then must have been the case with the
Lord, in whom the Divine Itself was His being which is called the soul?
Hence it is that the Lord says, "He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father. Believe Me that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me" (John
14:9, 11).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10270.">10270.</span></span>

And the table, and all the vessels thereof. That this signifies in
spiritual good from the celestial, which belongs to the second heaven,
and in the ministering goods and truths, is evident from the
signification of "the Tent of meeting outside the veil," where was this
table, as being the second heaven (see n. 9457, 9481, 9485); from the
signification of "the table upon which were the breads of faces," as
being spiritual good from the celestial; for the "breads" signify
celestial good (n. 9545); and the "table" upon which these were
signifies spiritual good (n. 9684, 9685); and from the signification of
its "vessels," as being the knowledges of celestial good and truth (see
n. 9544), thus ministering goods and truths, for knowledges minister.
The reason why these words signify spiritual good from the celestial
(which is signified by "the table upon which were the breads of faces"),
is that by the Tent of meeting outside the veil was represented the
second heaven, in which reigns the good of charity toward the neighbor,
which is called spiritual good, and this good is so far good as there is
in it celestial good, which is the good of love to the Lord. For there
are three kinds of good which make the three heavens. There is the good
of love to the Lord, which is called celestial good; this makes the
inmost heaven. There is the good of charity toward the neighbor, which
is called spiritual good, and which makes the second heaven. And there
is the good of faith, which is called spiritual natural good, and makes
the ultimate heaven. The Lord inflows immediately from His Divine Human
into the celestial good which is of the inmost heaven. The Lord inflows
from the Divine Human into the spiritual good which is of the second
heaven, and also mediately through celestial good. And the Lord inflows
from the Divine Human into the spiritual natural good, which is of the
ultimate heaven, and again also mediately. It is said "also mediately,"
because the Lord not only flows into the goods of these heavens
mediately, but also immediately (as can be seen from what was shown
concerning Divine influx immediate and mediate in the numbers cited in
n. 9682).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10271.">10271.</span></span>

And the lampstand, and the vessels thereof. That this signifies in the
spiritual truth that belongs to the second heaven, and in the
ministering truths, is evident from the signification of "the
lampstand," as being a representative of the Lord as to the spiritual
truth that belongs to the second heaven (see n. 9548, 9551, 9555, 9558,
9561, 9684); and from the signification of its "vessels," as being
memory-truths, which are ministering ones (n. 3068, 3079, 9572, 9724).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10272.">10272.</span></span>

And the altar of incense. That this signifies in all things of worship
from these goods and truths, is evident from the signification of "the
altar of incense," as being a representative of all things of worship
which are from love and charity from the Lord (see n. 10177, 10198). It
is called a representative of the Lord in goods and truths, and in
ministering goods and truths, and in all things of worship, because the
goods and truths which are represented are so far goods and truths as
there is in them the Divine of the Lord. For all the goods and truths
that are with man and angel are from the Lord; without life from the
Lord in them they are dead things, and even evil; for if they are not
from the Lord, but from man, they have regard to man and the world, and
those things which have man and the world as their end are in themselves
evil, for the end is the inmost of man, because it is the soul of all
things in him. From this it can be seen what is meant by a
representative of the Lord in goods and truths, and in their ministering
ones. By ministering goods and truths are meant the goods and truths
which are in the natural or external man, which are called knowledges
and memory-knowledges; for it is these into which the internal man
looks, and from which he chooses those which act as confirmations, and
which are in agreement with the life of his affections, or with his
love; and because they are thus subordinate, they are called
"ministering." There are also goods and truths again ministering to
these, which are called sensuous memory-knowledges; for the goods and
truths with a man are circumstanced like families, or like households,
where there are the father of the family, sons, daughters, sons-in-law,
and daughters-in-law, and menservants and maidservants; in the lowest
place therein are those which are meant by sensuous memory-knowledges,
although at the present day with most men these are in the highest
place.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10273.">10273.</span></span>

And the altar of burnt-offering. That this signifies to represent the
Divine Human of the Lord and the worship of Him in general, is evident
from the representation of the altar of burnt-offering, as being the
principal representative of the Divine Human of the Lord and of the
worship of Him (see n. 2777, 2811, 8935, 8940, 9388, 9389, 9714, 9964,
10123, 10151).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10274.">10274.</span></span>

With all the vessels thereof. That this signifies Divine goods and
Divine truths, is evident from the signification of "vessels," as being
knowledges and memory-knowledges (see n. 3068, 3079, 9394, 9544, 9724);
but when said of the Lord's Divine Human they denote the Divine goods
and Divine truths which minister.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10275.">10275.</span></span>

And the laver, and its base. That this signifies all things that belong
to purification from evils and falsities, and to regeneration, by the
Lord, is evident from the signification of "the laver," in which washing
was performed, as being a means of purification from evils and
falsities, and also of regeneration (see n. 10235); and from the
signification of its "base," as being the sensuous that supports and
ministers (n. 10236).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10276.">10276.</span></span>

And thou shalt sanctify them, and they shall be a holy of holies. That
this signifies in this way the influx and presence of the Lord in the
worship of the representative church, is evident from the signification
of "to be sanctified," as being to represent the Lord as to the Divine
Human, and the reception of Divine good and Divine truth from Him; for
the Lord alone is holy, and consequently that only is holy which
proceeds from Him; from which it is plain that by "being sanctified" is
also signified the influx and presence of the Lord in the worship of the
representative church. (That "to be sanctified" denotes to represent the
Lord as to the Divine Human, see n. 9956, 9988, 10069; and also the
reception of Divine good and Divine truth from Him, n. 8806, 9820,
10128; that the Lord alone is holy, and only that is holy which proceeds
from Him, n. 9229, 9479, 9680, 9818; thus that the holy things with the
Israelitish and Jewish nation were representatively holy, n. 10149.) And
from the signification of "a holy of holies," as being Divine celestial
good (n. 10129). \[2\] From this it is evident that all those things
which were anointed were called "holy of holies" from the influx and
presence of the Divine Human of the Lord; and all influx and presence of
the Lord takes place immediately, and in the lower heavens also
mediately through celestial good, which is the good of the inmost
heaven. Therefore insofar as the goods of the lower heavens contain and
store up within them celestial good, which is the good of love to the
Lord, so far they are goods. From this it is that those things which
were anointed were called "holy of holies." (Concerning the immediate
and mediate influx of the Lord, see the places cited in n. 9682, 9683.)
\[3\] But in order that it may be known how the case herein is, it is
necessary to know what representation is, and what a representative
church is. What these are has been abundantly shown in the places cited
in n. 9229, 9280, 10030; but as at the present day few know what these
are, the subject may be somewhat further illustrated. It is the
affections of good and truth from the Lord which make the life and
happiness of the angels in the inmost heavens. In the ultimate heaven
these affections are presented with infinite variety in countless
outward forms. Whatever they see there with their eyes is from this
source. These are representatives of interior things, which are the
affections of good and truth, and are called celestial and spiritual.
\[4\] The good spirits who as subjects perceive the holy things of
heaven in these representatives, are interiorly affected. For example,
they see paradises with trees and fruits of countless species, also beds
of roses, lawns, fields with things sown in them, houses and palaces,
and very many other things, all of which correspond to the affections of
good and of truth that are from the Lord in the higher heavens. In these
heavens also there are representatives, but such as immeasurably surpass
in perfection, delight, and happiness those which are in the ultimate
heaven. It is these representatives of which it is said that "no eye
hath ever seen" such things; and if anything were told of them it would
exceed human belief. \[5\] From this it can be seen what representatives
are. All the representatives instituted with the Israelitish nation were
like those in the ultimate heaven; but were less perfect, because they
were in the nature of this world. Such were the Tent with the ark, the
table upon which were the breads of faces, the lampstand and its lamps,
the altar of incense, the garments of Aaron and his sons, and afterward
the temple with the adytum there containing the ark upon which were the
propitiatory and the cherubs, also the brazen sea, the lavers, and other
similar things. Yet countless more things appear in the ultimate heaven,
and in greater excellence and perfection. It was from this heaven that
the things to be instituted with the Israelitish nation were shown by
the Lord to Moses on Mount Sinai. (See Exod. 25:40; 26:30; 27:8.) But
these things were not seen by Moses with the eyes of his body, but with
the eyes of his spirit. \[6\] The nature of representatives can be seen
further from the things seen by the prophets; as by Daniel, by John in
Revelation, and by the rest; all of which store up within them Divine
spiritual and celestial things that anyone can see are not intelligible
without interpretation from the internal sense. \[7\] From all this it
is now further evident what a representative church is. This church was
established in the land of Canaan chiefly for the sake of the Word, in
order that this might be written by means of representatives and
significatives, thus by means of such things as existed with that
nation, in their church, and in their land. For from the most ancient
times all the places in the land of Canaan, and all the mountains and
rivers there, represented such things as are in the heavens (see n.
3686, 4240, 4447, 4454, 5136, 6516); as did afterward the inheritances,
the tribes, and all other things there. Of such things was the literal
sense of the Word of the Old Testament, in order that there might be
some ultimate in which the interior things might close, and upon which
they might stand, like a building on its foundation (see n. 9360, 9824,
10044). \[8\] From all this an intelligent person is able to know that
the Word is most holy, and that its literal sense is holy from its
internal sense, but that apart from this it is not holy. For apart from
the internal sense the literal sense is like the external of man
separated from his internal, which is a mock appearance devoid of life,
and is like the peel of a tree, flower, fruit, or seed, without anything
inside; and is also like a foundation without a house. Therefore they
who lay stress on the sense of the letter of the Word alone, and neither
have, nor procure for themselves from the Word, doctrine that is in
agreement with its internal sense, can be drawn into any heresies
whatever. It is from this that the Word is called by such the Book of
Heresies. The very doctrine from the Word must by all means give light
and guidance. This very doctrine is taught by the internal sense, and he
who knows this doctrine, has the internal sense of the Word. \[9\] As
the Jewish nation did not acknowledge anything holy in the Word except
in the mere sense of its letter, which they completely separated from
the internal sense, they fell into such darkness that they did not
recognize the Lord when He came into the world. At the present day that
nation is of the same character, and therefore although they live among
Christians they nevertheless still do not acknowledge the Lord from the
Word. (That from the earliest time that nation was in external things
without internal, see what has been shown in the places cited in n.
9320, 9380.) Therefore unless the Lord had come into the world and
opened the interior things of the Word, the communication with the
heavens by means of the Word would have been broken; and then the human
race on this earth would have perished, for man can think no truth and
do no good except from heaven, that is, through heaven from the Lord;
and the Word is that which opens heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10277.">10277.</span></span>

Whosoever toucheth them shall be made holy. That this signifies that
which is communicative to all who receive in love and faith, is evident
from the signification of "touching," as being communication (see n.
10130); and from the signification of "being made holy," as being the
influx and presence of the Lord (of which just above, n. 10276); and as
the influx and presence of the Lord are in love and faith, thus are with
those who receive Him in love and faith, these are they who are here
said to be "made holy;" but it is the Divine with them which alone is
holy, and not at all what is their own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10278.">10278.</span></span>

And thou shall anoint Aaron and his sons. That this signifies
inauguration to represent the Lord in both kingdoms, is evident from the
signification of "anointing," as being to induce a representation (as
above); from the representation of Aaron, as being the Lord in respect
to Divine good celestial, thus in the celestial kingdom; and from the
representation of the sons of Aaron, as being the Lord in respect to
spiritual good, thus in the spiritual kingdom (see n. 9807, 10017,
10068).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10279.">10279.</span></span>

And shalt sanctify them to minister to me in the priest's office. That
this signifies to represent the Lord in respect to all the work of
salvation, is evident from the signification of "sanctifying," as being
to represent the Lord as to the Divine Human (see above, n. 10276); and
from the representation of the priest's office of Aaron and of his sons,
as being the Lord's work of salvation in successive order (n. 9809,
10017).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10280.">10280.</span></span>

And thou shalt speak unto the sons of Israel, saying. That this
signifies instruction for those who are of the church, is evident from
the signification of "the sons of Israel," as being the church (see the
places cited in n. 9340); and from the signification of "speaking" and
"saying," when by Jehovah, as being instruction (n. 6879, 6881, 6883,
6891, 7186, 7226, 7241, 7267, 7304, 7380, 7517, 8127).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10281.">10281.</span></span>

This shall be to Me an oil of anointing of holiness. That this signifies
a representative of the Lord as to the Divine Human, is evident from
what was shown above (n. 10267).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10282.">10282.</span></span>

To your generations. That this signifies in all things of the church, is
evident from the signification of "generations," when said of the sons
of Israel, by whom is signified the church, as being those who are of
the church (see n. 10212); thus abstractedly from persons, the things
which are of the church. It is said "abstractedly from persons," because
the Divine things which proceed from the Lord make the church, and
nothing whatever of man does so; these Divine things do indeed flow in
with man, but still they do not become man's, but are the Lord's with
man. This being the case, when the angels are speaking together, they
speak abstractedly from persons; and for the same reason neither does
the name of any person enter heaven of whom mention is made in the Word,
but the thing which is there signified by the person. (That all names of
persons and of places in the Word signify actual things, see n. 1888,
4442, 5095, 5225; and that names do not enter heaven, n. 1876, 6516,
10216.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10283.">10283.</span></span>

Upon the flesh of man shall it not be poured. That this signifies that
which is not communicative to what is man's own, is evident from the
signification of "the flesh of man," as being that which is his own (of
which below); and from the signification of "pouring," as being to
communicate; for the like is signified by "pouring" as by "touching,"
but "pouring" is said of liquids, as of oil, wine, and water, and
"pouring forth" of things Divine, celestial, and spiritual; while
"touching" is said of things dry and bodily (that "to touch" denotes to
communicate, see n. 10130). Hence it follows that by the oil of
anointing not being poured on the flesh of man is signified that the
Divine good of the Lord's Divine love is not communicative to that which
is man's own, because that which is man's own is nothing but evil, and
the Lord's Divine good cannot be communicated to what is evil. (That
what is man's own is nothing but evil, see n. 210, 215, 731, 874-876,
987, 1023, 1024, 1047, 5660, 5786, 8480.) \[2\] Man has that which is
his own in both the will and the understanding; the former is evil, and
the latter is the falsity thence derived; that is to say, the former is
signified by "the flesh of man," and the latter by the "blood" of this
flesh. That this is so is evident from the following passages: Jesus
said, Blessed art thou, Simon, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it
unto thee, but My Father who is in the heavens (Matt. 16:17). That
"flesh" here, and also "blood," denote that which is man's own, is very
evident. \[3\] In John: As many as received Him, to them gave He power
to be the sons of God, who were born, not of bloods, nor of the will of
the flesh, but of God (John 1:12, 13). By "bloods" are here signified
the falsities which come forth from that which is man's own in his
understanding; and by "the will of the flesh" are signified the evils
which come forth from that which is his own in his will. (That "bloods"
denote falsity from evil, thus what is man's own in the understanding
derived from what is his own in the will, see n. 4735, 9127.) \[4\] In
Isaiah: I will feed thine oppressors with their own flesh; and they
shall be drunken with their own blood as with new wine (Isa. 49:26);
where to "feed them with their own flesh, and make them drunken with
their own blood," denotes to fill them with evil and the falsity of
evil, thus with that which is their own; for both evil and falsity are
from this. \[5\] In Jeremiah: Cursed is the man that trusteth in man,
and maketh flesh his arm (Jer. 17:5). "To trust in man, and make flesh
his arm," denotes to trust in himself and in what is his own. \[6\] In
Isaiah: The people is become like food for the fire; if one shall cut
down on the right hand, he shall be hungry; and if he shall eat on the
left hand, they shall not be satisfied; they shall eat every man the
flesh of his own arm: Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh (Isa.
9:19, 20). By "food for the fire" is signified the appropriation of
evils, or the cupidities of the love of self and the world; by "being
hungry and not being satisfied" is signified not to receive the good and
truth of faith; by "the flesh of the arm" is signified what is man's own
of both kinds; by "Manasseh," the evil of the will; by "Ephraim," the
falsity of the understanding; and by "eating," to make one's own. (That
"fires" denote the evils or cupidities of the love of self and the
world, see n. 5071, 5215, 6314, 6832, 7324, 7575, 9141; and that "to be
hungry and not satisfied" denotes not to receive the good and truth of
faith, is because by "hunger and thirst" is signified the desolation of
good and truth, n. 5360, 5376, 6110, 7102, 8568; that the "right hand"
denotes the good from which is truth, and the "left hand" the truth
through which is good, see n. 10061.) Hence "to be hungry if he cut down
on the right hand, and not to be satisfied if he ate on the left hand,"
signifies that however much they are instructed concerning good and
truth, they will nevertheless not receive them. \[7\] "Manasseh" denotes
the good of the will (see n. 5348, 5351, 5353, 6222, 6234, 6238, 6267);
and "Ephraim" denotes the truth of the understanding (n. 3969, 5354,
6222, 6234, 6238, 6267); hence in the opposite sense "Manasseh" denotes
the evil of the will, and "Ephraim" the falsity of the understanding,
for almost all things in the Word have also an opposite sense. "To eat"
denotes to appropriate (n. 3168, 3513, 3596, 4745); hence it is plain
what is meant by "eating the flesh of his own arm," namely,
appropriating to themselves evil and falsity from what is their own. It
is said "the flesh of the arm" because by the "arm," as by the "hand,"
is signified that which belongs to man, and in which he trusts (see at
the places cited in n. 10019). \[8\] In Zechariah: I said, I will not
feed you; he that dieth let him die; let those who remain eat everyone
the flesh of another (Zech. 11:9). "Not to feed" denotes not to instruct
and reform; "to die" denotes to perish as to spiritual life; "to eat the
flesh of another" denotes to appropriate to themselves the evils which
are from that which is another's. \[9\] In Ezekiel: Jerusalem, thou hast
committed whoredom with the sons of Egypt thy neighbors, great in flesh
(Ezek. 16:26). "Jerusalem" denotes the perverted church; "to commit
whoredom with the sons of Egypt great in flesh" denotes to falsify the
truths of the church by means of memory-knowledges which are from the
natural man alone, thus by means of sensuous memory-knowledges. (That
"Jerusalem" denotes the church, see n. 402, 2117, 3654, here the
perverted church; that "to commit whoredom" denotes to falsify truths,
n. 2466, 2729, 8904; that "sons" denote truths and also falsities, n.
1147, 3373, 4257, 9807; that "Egypt" denotes memory-knowledge in both
senses, see the places cited in n. 9340; and that it denotes the
natural, n. 9391.) Hence those are called "great in flesh" who from the
things of sense reason and draw conclusions about the truths of the
church. They who do this, seize on falsities instead of truths, for to
reason and draw conclusions from the things of sense is to do so from
the fallacies of the bodily senses; wherefore it is sensuous men who are
meant by "great in flesh," because they think from that which is their
own in the body. \[10\] In Isaiah: Egypt is a man, and not God; and his
horses are flesh, and not spirit (Isa. 31:3). Here also "Egypt" denotes
memory-knowledge; his "horses" denote the understanding thence derived;
this is called "flesh not spirit," when they draw conclusions from what
is their own, and not from the Divine (that "horses" denote the
understanding, see n. 2761, 2762, 3217, 5321, 6534; and that the "horses
of Egypt" denote memory-knowledges in conformity with a perverted
understanding, n. 6125, 8146, 8148). \[11\] That by "flesh" is signified
that which is man's own, or what is the same, the evil of his will, is
evident from Moses where the subject treated of is the desire of the
Israelitish people to eat flesh, of which it is thus written: The rabble
that was in the midst of the people lusted a lust, and said, Who shall
feed us with flesh? Jehovah said, Tomorrow ye shall eat flesh; ye shall
not eat it one day, nor two days, nor five days, nor ten days, nor
twenty days, but even for a month of days. And there went forth a wind
from Jehovah, and carried off the quails from the sea, and let them fall
over the camp, as it were two ells upon the faces of the earth. The
people rose up all the day and all the night, and all the next day, and
gathered and spread them round about the camp. While the flesh was yet
between their teeth, before it was swallowed, the anger of Jehovah
burned against the people, and Jehovah smote the people with a very
great plague; whence he called the name of that place, The graves of
lust (Num. 11:4, 18-20, 31-33). \[12\] That "flesh" signified what
belonged to that nation, can be seen from the details in this passage;
for had it not been so, what evil could there have been in desiring
flesh, especially as flesh had previously been promised them (Exod.
16:12)? But as it signified that which was their own, thus the evil of
the will, in which that nation was more than other nations, therefore it
is said when they desired flesh, that they "lusted a lust;" and
therefore they were smitten with a great plague, and the name of the
place where they were buried was called "the graves of lusts
\[concupiscentiarum\]." Whether you say evil of the will, or
concupiscence, it is the same, for the evil of the will is
concupiscence, because man's own desires nothing but its own, and not
anything of the neighbor, or anything of God, except for the sake of
itself. Because that nation was of this character, it is said that "they
should eat flesh, not one day, nor two, nor five, nor ten, nor twenty,
but even for a month of days," by which is signified that that nation
would be such forever; for "a month of days" means forever, and
therefore it is said that "the flesh being yet between the teeth, before
it was swallowed, they were smitten with a great plague;" for by "teeth"
is signified the bodily (or corporeal) own, which is the lowest of man
(n. 4424, 5565-5568, 9062). (That that nation was of such a character,
see the places cited in n. 9380; and also in the song of Moses in
Deuteronomy, 32:20-28, 32-34.) \[13\] In the Word, "spirit" is opposed
to "flesh," because by "spirit" is signified life from the Lord, and by
"flesh" life from man, as in John: It is the spirit that quickeneth, the
flesh profiteth nothing; the words that I speak unto you are spirit and
are life (John 6:63). From this it is evident that "spirit" denotes life
from the Lord, which is the life of love and faith to Him from Him; and
that "flesh" denotes life from man, thus what is his own; hence it is
said, "the flesh profiteth nothing." In like manner elsewhere: That
which is born of the flesh is flesh; but that which is born of the
spirit is spirit (John 3:6). God remembered that they were flesh, a wind
\[spirit\] that goeth away, and cometh not again (Ps. 78:39). \[14\] As
by "flesh," when said of man, is signified that which is his own, which
is the evil of the love of self and the world, it is plain what is
signified by "flesh" when said of the Lord, namely, that which is His
own, which is the Divine good of the Divine love. This is signified by
the "flesh" of the Lord in John: The bread that I will give is My flesh.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink His blood, ye have
no life in you; he that eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood, hath
eternal life; for My flesh is food indeed, and My blood is drink indeed
(John 6:51, 53-55). (That by the Lord's "flesh" is signified the Divine
good of His Divine love, and by His "blood" the Divine truth proceeding
from this Divine good, thus the like as by the bread and the wine in the
Holy Supper, and that these are His own in His Divine Human, see n.
1001, 3813, 4735, 4976, 6978, 7317, 7326, 7850, 9127, 9393, 10026,
10033, 10152; and that the sacrifices represented the goods which are
from the Lord, and that on this account their "flesh" signified goods,
see n. 10040, 10079). Moreover, in the Word throughout mention is made
of "all flesh," and by it is meant every man (as Gen. 6:12-13, 17, 19;
Isa. 40:5-6; 49:26; 66:16, 23-24; Jer. 25:31; 32:27; 45:5; Ezek. 20:48;
21:4-5; and elsewhere).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10284.">10284.</span></span>

And in the quality thereof ye shall not make any like it. That this
signifies no imitation from the study of man, is evident from the
signification of "making any like it in quality," that is, making the
like oil by means of the like spices, as being to prepare in imitation
by the study of man. That these things are signified by these words,
follows from the connection of the things in the internal sense; for it
is said first, that it should "not be poured upon the flesh of man," by
which is signified that which is not communicative to what is man's own;
and next that it shall be "holy unto you;" whereas that which is made
from man, and by his study, is made from what is his own, and is not
holy, because study from what is man's own is nothing but falsity from
evil, for it regards itself and the world as the end, and not the
neighbor and God; and therefore it is called "imitation." \[2\] The case
herein is this. Everything that is from the Lord is good and true. But
the good and truth in imitation of this by man is not good and true, for
the reason that everything good and true has life in it from its end. An
end from man is merely for the sake of himself; whereas that which is
good and true from the Lord is for the sake of good itself and truth
itself as ends, thus for the sake of the Lord, because everything good
and true is from Him. With man the end is himself, for it is his will,
and it is his love; because that which a man loves, and that which he
wills, this he has as his end. All the love with man from man is the
love of self and the love of the world for the sake of self; but the
love with man from the Lord is love toward the neighbor and love to God.
The difference between these loves is as great as that between hell and
heaven; and indeed the love of self, and the love of the world for the
sake of self, reign in hell and are hell; whereas love toward the
neighbor and love to the Lord reign in heaven and are heaven. Moreover,
a man is such, and such remains to eternity, as is his love; for love is
everything of man's will, and from this of his understanding, because
the love which makes the will continually flows into the understanding,
and kindles it, and enlightens it. From this it is that when those who
love what is evil are thinking by themselves, they think what is false
in conformity with the evil of their love; although before men they
speak differently, from hypocrisy, and some from persuasive faith, the
quality of which may be seen above (n. 9364, 9369). \[3\] Be it known
that before men a man is able by study to imitate Divine things
themselves, and to present himself as an angel of light; whereas before
the Lord and before the angels the external form does not appear, but
the internal; and when this is from what is man's own, it is filthy.
Within such persons there is merely what is natural, and nothing
spiritual; they see only from natural light, and not at all from the
light of heaven. Nay, they do not know what the light of heaven is, and
what the spiritual is, for all their interiors are turned outward,
almost like the interiors of animals, nor do they suffer themselves to
be raised upward by the Lord; when yet man possesses this special
privilege above the beasts, that he is capable of being raised by the
Lord to heaven and to the Lord, and thus of being led. All those are so
raised who love good and truth for the sake of good and truth, which is
the same as loving the neighbor and God; for in a general sense the
neighbor is what is good and true, and in a lower sense what is just and
right; and moreover God is what is good and true, and what is just and
right, because these are from God. \[4\] From all this it can be seen
what it is to imitate Divine things by the study of man; the quality of
those who do this is described in the Word throughout by "Egypt" and
"Pharaoh," for by "Egypt" and "Pharaoh" are signified the
memory-knowledges that belong to the natural man; and it is also
described by "Asshur," by whom is signified reasoning from
memory-knowledges (concerning "Egypt" see the places cited in n. 9340,
9391; and concerning "Asshur," n. 1186). \[5\] Among spirits there are
great numbers who imitate Divine things by study and art; for they
counterfeit what is sincere, upright, and pious, insomuch that good
spirits would be led astray unless the Lord enlightened them, and made
them see the interiors of those who would lead them astray, at the sight
of which the good are seized with horror, and flee away. But such
spirits are stripped of their externals, and are let into their
interiors which are diabolical, and thus of themselves they sink down
into hell. (More may be seen concerning these spirits in a following
article, n. 10286.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10285.">10285.</span></span>

Holy shall it be to you. That this signifies because it is the Divine of
the Lord, is evident from the signification of "holy," when said of the
oil of anointing, as being the Divine of the Lord; for the oil of
anointing was representative of the Divine good of the Divine love in
the Lord's Divine Human, thus was representative of His Divine Human
itself; for whether you say the Divine good of the Divine love, or the
Divine Human, it is the same. As this was signified by the "oil of
anointing," and was represented by anointing, and as this alone is holy,
and from this that which proceeds from Him is holy, because it is of
Him, therefore it is so often said, that this is "holy" (see also above,
n. 10266).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10286.">10286.</span></span>

The man who shall make ointment like it. That this signifies the
imitation of Divine things by art, is evident from the signification of
"making like it," as being imitation; and from the signification of the
"ointment," as being Divine truths which are of the Lord alone, and from
the Lord alone (see above, n. 10264). That imitation by art is signified
is because all imitation of Divine things by man is done by art. How the
case herein is can be seen from what was said and shown above (n.
10284). But all this can be further illustrated by what exists among
spirits. Those of them who attribute all things to fortune and their own
sagacity, and nothing to the Divine (as they had done in the world),
know how to imitate Divine things by various methods; for they present
to view palaces almost like those in the heavens, also groves and fields
almost like those which are presented to view by the Lord among good
spirits; they adorn themselves with shining garments, and the sirens
even assume a beauty almost angelic; but all these things are produced
by art by means of phantasies. And however much these things may appear
similar in the outward form, nevertheless in the internal form they are
loathsome, which also is instantly made manifest to good spirits by the
Lord; because if this were not done they would be led astray. The
external is taken away, and then the diabolism within stands forth; what
is external is taken away by means of light let in upon it from heaven,
whereby is dispelled the delusive light of phantasies by means of which
they produce such effects. From this can be seen the nature of the
imitation of Divine things by art. But the things which are from the
Lord are inwardly heavenly, and the more interior they are, so much the
more heavenly they are; for Divine things increase in perfection toward
the interiors, until finally they are of unspeakable perfection and
beauty. \[2\] The like is the case with the imitation of what is good
and true among those who live evilly; those of them who know how to
counterfeit good affections, and somewhat of charity toward the
neighbor, and of love to God, and at the same time from these affections
speak and preach the truths of faith as if from the heart, are in a
similar light of foolishness and phantasy; and therefore when the
external which had counterfeited what is internal is taken away, there
appears the infernalism that lay hidden within, which is nothing but
evil and the falsity of evil; and then it is in like manner presented to
view that this evil is their love, and the falsity of this evil their
faith. From all this it is again evident what is the imitation of things
Divine by the study of man (of which above, n. 10284).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10287.">10287.</span></span>

And who shall put of it upon a stranger. That this signifies conjunction
with those who do not acknowledge the Lord, thus who are in evils and
the falsities of evil, is evident from the signification of "putting
upon" anyone, when said of Divine truths, which are signified by the
"aromatic ointment," as being to conjoin; and from the signification of
"a stranger," as being one who is not of the church, thus who does not
acknowledge the Lord, and consequently is in evils and falsities; for he
who does not acknowledge the Lord is not of the church; and he who
denies the Lord is in evils and falsities, because what is good and true
comes from no other source. That such persons are signified by
"strangers" will be seen from the passages in the Word which will
follow. But something shall first be said about the conjunction of
Divine truth with those who do not acknowledge the Lord. This
conjunction is profanation, for profanation is the conjunction of Divine
truth with falsities from evil; and this conjunction which is
profanation is not possible with any but those who have first
acknowledged the things of the church, and especially the Lord, and have
afterward denied the same. For by the acknowledgment of the truths of
the church, and of the Lord, communication is effected with the heavens,
and from this the opening of the interiors of man toward heaven; and by
denial afterward is effected the conjunction of the same with falsities
from evil; for all things which a man acknowledges remain implanted,
because nothing perishes with man which has entered by means of
acknowledgment. \[2\] The state of the man who commits profanation is
that he has communication with the heavens and at the same time with the
hells; by truths with the heavens, and by falsities of evil with the
hells; from this in the other life there comes a tearing asunder,
whereby everything of interior life perishes. After this tearing asunder
such persons barely appear as men, but as burnt bones in which there is
but little life. (See what has already been said and shown about
profanation, namely: That those profane who have first acknowledged
truths Divine, and afterward deny them, n. 1001, 1010, 1059, 2051, 3398,
4289, 4601, 6348, 6960, 6963, 6971, 8394: That those who have denied
them from infancy, such as the Jews and others, do not profane, n. 593,
1001, 1059, 3398, 3489, 6963: And that the greatest care is taken by the
Lord to prevent profanation with man, see n. 301-303, 1327, 1328, 2426,
3398, 3402, 3489, 6595.) \[3\] But be it known that there are very many
genera of profanation, and of these many species; for there are those
who profane the goods of the church, and there are those who profane its
truths; there are those who profane much, and those who profane little;
there are those who profane interiorly, and those who profane more and
more exteriorly; there are those who profane through belief contrary to
the truths and goods of the church; there are those who profane through
the life; and there are those who profane through the worship. Hence
result many hells of profaners, which are distinct from one another
according to the diversities of the profanation. The hells of the
profanations of good are at the back; but the hells of the profanations
of truth are under the feet and at the sides. Such hells are deeper than
the hells of all other evils, and are seldom opened. \[4\] That
"strangers" denote those who do not acknowledge the Lord, and are
unwilling to acknowledge Him, whether they be out of the church or
within it, thus who are in evils and in the falsities of evil, and in a
sense abstracted from persons, that they are evils and the falsities of
evil, is evident from many passages in the Word. It is said "those who
do not acknowledge the Lord, thus who are in evils and the falsities of
evil," because those who do not acknowledge the Lord must needs be in
evils and the falsities of evil; for all good and the truth of good are
from the Lord, and therefore those who deny the Lord are in evils and
the falsities of evil; according to the words of the Lord in John:
Unless ye believe that I am, ye shall die in your sins (John 8:24).
\[5\] That these are "strangers," is evident from the following
passages. In Isaiah: Your land is a solitude, your cities are burned
with fire; your ground, strangers shall devour it in your presence; and
it shall be a solitude, as the overthrow of strangers (Isa. 1:7). By
"land" in this passage is not meant land, nor by "cities" and "ground,"
cities and ground; but by "land" is meant the church; in like manner by
"ground;" and by "cities," the truths of the church which are called
doctrinal things, and which are said to be "burned with fire" when they
have been consumed by the evils of the loves of self and of the world.
From this it is evident what is signified by "strangers devouring the
ground," namely, that evils and the falsities of evil devour the church;
and by "the land being desolate" (that "land" or "earth" denotes the
church, see the places cited in n. 9325; in like manner "ground," n.
566, 1068; that "cities" denote the doctrinal things of the church, thus
its truths, n. 2268, 2451, 2712, 2943, 3216, 4492, 4493; and "fire" the
evils of the loves of self and of the world, n. 1297, 1861, 2446, 5071,
5215, 6314, 6832, 7575, 9141). \[6\] In Jeremiah: Disgrace hath covered
our faces, seeing that strangers are come against the sanctuaries of the
house of Jehovah (Jer. 51:51). "Strangers against the sanctuaries of the
house of Jehovah" denote evils and the falsities of evil against the
truths and goods of the church; those of the nations were called
"strangers" who were servants in the Jewish Church; and by the "nations"
of that land are also signified evils and falsities (n. 9320). In the
same: Thou sayest, There is no hope, no; but I will love strangers, and
after them will I go (Jer. 2:25). "To love strangers, and to go after
them," denotes to love evils and the falsities of evil, and to worship
them. \[7\] In Ezekiel: I will bring the sword upon you, and I will give
you into the hand of strangers (Ezek. 11:8, 9); where "to bring a sword"
denotes falsities from evil fighting against truths from good; "to give
into the hand of strangers" denotes that they should believe and serve
these falsities. (That a "sword" denotes truth fighting against
falsities, and in the opposite sense falsities fighting against truths,
see n. 2799, 6353, 7102, 8294.) \[8\] Again: Thou shalt die the deaths
of the uncircumcised in the hand of strangers (Ezek. 28:10). "The
uncircumcised" denote those who in respect to the life are in filthy
loves and their cupidities, however much they may be in doctrinal things
(n. 2049, 3412, 3413, 4462, 7045, 7225), whose death is spiritual death;
"in the hand of strangers" denotes in evils themselves and the falsities
of evils. \[9\] Again: Jerusalem is an adulterous wife under her man,
she receiveth strangers (Ezek. 16:32). "Jerusalem an adulterous wife"
denotes the church in which good is adulterated; "to receive strangers"
denotes to acknowledge evils and the falsities of evil in life and
doctrine. And in Joel: Jerusalem shall be holiness, and there shall no
strangers pass through her any more (Joel 3:17). "Jerusalem" denotes the
church, but that in which the Lord is acknowledged, men live in good,
and believe in the truths which are from the Lord; that "strangers shall
not pass through her any more" denotes that the evils and falsities of
evil which are from hell shall not enter. \[10\] In David: Strangers are
risen up against me, and violent men have sought after my soul (Ps.
54:3). Here also "strangers" denote evils and the falsities of evil;
"violent men" denote the same doing violence to goods and truths. Those
who look solely at the sense of the letter of the Word, understand
nothing else by "strangers" than those who are outside the church, and
that they will rise up against David; whereas nothing of person enters
into the heavens, but only the things which are signified (n. 8343,
8985, 9007); thus not strangers, but instead of them strange things,
which are those which are estranged from the church, thus evils and the
falsities of evil which destroy the church; by "David" also, against
whom they would rise up, is perceived the Lord (n. 1888, 9954). \[11\]
In Moses: He forsook God who made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of
his salvation; they provoked Him to jealousy by strangers (Deut. 32:15,
16). "To forsake God, and lightly esteem the Rock of salvation," denotes
to deny the Lord; "to provoke by strange things" denotes by evils and
the falsities of evil. (That a "Rock" denotes the Lord as to the truths
of faith, see n. 8581.) Moreover, in other places also "strangers"
denote evils and falsities (as in Isa. 25:2, 5; Jer. 30:8; Ezek. 31:11,
12). \[12\] As "strangers" signified those who are in evils and the
falsities of evil, and from this in the abstract sense, evils and the
falsities of evil, therefore it was forbidden that a stranger should eat
the holy things (Lev. 22:10); that a stranger should approach the office
of the priesthood, or the service of the sanctuary; and that if he did
so he should be slain (Num. 1:51; 3:10, 38; 18:7). \[13\] It was also
forbidden to burn incense from strange fire, for doing which Nadab and
Abihu, sons of Aaron, were consumed by fire from heaven (Lev. 10:1, 2);
for by the holy fire which was from the altar was signified love Divine;
but by "strange fire," infernal love, and hence also evils and their
cupidities (see n. 1297, 1861, 2446, 5071, 5215, 6314, 6832, 7575,
9141). \[14\] Mention is also made of "foreigners," which is expressed
in the original tongue by another word than "strangers," and by
"foreigners" are signified falsities themselves, as in these passages: O
Jehovah look on our reproach; our inheritance is turned unto strangers,
and our houses unto foreigners (Lam. 5:1, 2). Strangers have led captive
his strength, and foreigners have entered his gates, and shall cast a
lot upon Jerusalem (Obad. 11). "To cast a lot upon Jerusalem" denotes to
destroy the church, and to dissipate its truths. \[15\] In Zephaniah: I
will visit upon the princes, and upon the king's sons, and upon all such
as are clothed in the clothing of a foreigner (Zeph. 1:8). "Those
clothed in the clothing of a foreigner" denote those who are in
falsities; for "princes and the king's sons," upon whom was visitation,
denote the chief truths, and in the opposite sense the chief falsities
(that princes have this signification, see n. 1482, 2089, 5044; and that
"kings" denote truths themselves, and in the opposite sense falsities
themselves, n. 2015, 2069, 3009, 4581, 4966, 5044, 5068, 6148);
consequently "the king's sons" denote that which is derived therefrom.
\[16\] In David: Deliver me and rescue me out of the hand of the sons of
the foreigner, whose mouth speaketh emptiness, and their right hand is a
right hand of a lie (Ps. 144:7, 8, 11). That "the sons of the foreigner"
denote those who are in falsities, thus falsities, is very evident, for
it is said, "whose mouth speaketh emptiness, and their right hand is the
right hand of a lie;" for "emptiness" denotes falsity of doctrine, and
"a lie," falsity of life (n. 9248).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10288.">10288.</span></span>

He shall be cut off from his peoples. That this signifies separation and
spiritual death, is evident from the signification of being "cut off"
and of being "slain," as being to be separated from those who are in
good and the truths thence derived, and to perish as to spiritual life
(see n. 6767, 8902); and from the signification of "peoples," as being
those of the church who are in the truths and goods of faith (n. 3581,
4619, 6451, 6465, 7207); and thus to be "cut off from the peoples"
denotes to be separated from them and perish. In the Word those who are
of the church are sometimes called a "people," sometimes a "nation," as
"the Israelitish people," and "the Jewish nation." By a "people" is
there signified those who are of the spiritual church, and by a
"nation," those who are of the celestial church. It is from this that
"peoples" signify the truths and goods of faith; but "nations," the
goods of love (see at the places cited above).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10289.">10289.</span></span>

Verses 34-38. And Jehovah said unto Moses, Take to thee fragrant spices,
stacte, and onycha, and galbanum, things fragrant, and pure
frankincense, so much in so much shall it be. And thou shalt make it
incense, an ointment the work of a perfumer, salted, pure, holy. And
thou shalt bruise of it small, and shalt put it before the Testimony in
the Tent of meeting, whither I will come to meet thee; a holy of holies
shall it be to you. And the incense which thou makest in its quality, ye
shall not make for yourselves; holy to Jehovah shall it be to thee. The
man who shall make like unto it, to make an odor with it, shall be cut
off from his peoples. "And Jehovah said unto Moses," signifies again
enlightenment and perception by the Lord through the Word; "take to thee
fragrant spices," signifies the affections of truth from good which must
be in Divine worship; "stacte," signifies the affection of sensuous
truth; "and onycha," signifies the affection of interior natural truth;
"and galbanum," signifies the affection of truths still more interior;
"things fragrant," signifies affections from spiritual good; "and pure
frankincense," signifies inmost truth, which is spiritual good; "so much
in so much shall it be," signifies correspondence in every way; "and
thou shalt make it incense," signifies worship from these things; "an
ointment the work of a perfumer," signifies from the influx and
operation of the Divine of the Lord into each and all things; "salted,"
signifies the longing of truth for good; "pure," signifies free from
evil; "holy," signifies free from the falsity of evil; "and thou shalt
bruise of it small," signifies the disposing of truths into their
series; "and shalt put it before the Testimony in the Tent of meeting,"
signifies the worship of the Lord in heaven and in the church; "whither
I will come to meet thee," signifies from the influx of the Lord; "a
holy of holies shall it be to you," signifies because it is from the
Lord; "and the incense which thou makest in its quality, ye shall not
make for yourselves," signifies that worship from the holy truths of the
church must not be applied in favor of the loves of man; "holy to
Jehovah shall it be to thee," signifies that worship must be applied in
favor of love Divine; "the man who shall make like unto it, to make an
odor with it," signifies the imitation of Divine worship by means of the
affections of truth and good from what is man's own; "shall be cut off
from his peoples," signifies separation from heaven and the church, and
spiritual death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10290.">10290.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses. That this signifies again enlightenment and
perception by the Lord through the Word, is evident from the
signification of "saying," when by Jehovah, as being enlightenment and
perception (that it denotes enlightenment, see n. 7019, 10215, 10234;
and that it denotes perception, n. 1791, 1815, 1819, 1822, 1898, 1919,
2080, 2862, 3509, 5877); and from the representation of Moses, as being
the Word (n. 6752, 7014, 7089). That "Jehovah" in the Word denotes the
Lord, see at the places cited in n. 9373. Hence it is plain that by
"Jehovah said unto Moses" is signified enlightenment and perception by
the Lord through the Word. \[2\] That this is signified is because the
Lord speaks with the man of the church in no other way than through the
Word, for He then enlightens man so that he may see truth, and also
gives him perception to perceive that it is so; but this is effected
according to the quality of the desire for truth with the man, and the
desire for truth with a man is according to his love of it. They who
love truth for the sake of truth are in enlightenment, and they who love
truth for the sake of good are in perception (what perception is, see at
n. 483, 495, 521, 536, 597, 607, 784, 1121, 1387, 1919, 2144, 2145,
2171, 2515, 2831, 5228, 5920, 7680, 7977, 8780). \[3\] But the Lord
spoke with Moses and the prophets by a living voice, in order that the
Word might be promulgated, and be such that each and all things might
have an internal sense. Consequently also in these words, "Jehovah said
unto Moses," the angels, who are in the internal sense, do not know what
"Moses" is, because the names of persons do not enter heaven (n. 10282),
but instead of "Moses" they perceive the Word; and the expression "said"
is turned with them into what is in agreement with the sense, thus here
into being enlightened and perceiving. Moreover, in the angelic idea,
"saying" and "speaking," when said of the Lord speaking through the
Word, are nothing else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10291.">10291.</span></span>

Take to thee fragrant spices. That this signifies the affections of
truth from good which must be in Divine worship, is evident from the
signification of "spices," as being the perceptions and affections of
truth and of good (n. 10254). That it signifies which must be in Divine
worship, is because by the incense which was prepared from them is
signified Divine worship (of which in what follows). The spices which
are now mentioned are of a totally different kind from those of which
the oil of anointing was prepared (verses 23, 24). These also are called
"spices," but are expressed in the original tongue by another word. The
spices from which the oil of anointing was prepared, in like manner
signify perceptions and affections of truth and good as do these spices,
but with the difference that the former truths belong to the celestial
class, and the latter to the spiritual class. (That the former truths
belong to the celestial class, see n. 10254; and that the latter belong
to the spiritual class, will be seen in what follows.) \[2\] What is
meant by belonging to the celestial class, and to the spiritual class,
shall be briefly told. It has been frequently stated that heaven is
distinguished into the celestial kingdom and the spiritual kingdom. In
the two kingdoms the truths differ as do the goods; the good of the
celestial kingdom is the good of love to the Lord, and the good of the
spiritual kingdom is the good of charity toward the neighbor. Every good
has its own truths; celestial good its own, and spiritual good its own;
which are quite different from each other. (What this difference is can
be seen from what has been shown concerning the two kingdoms at the
places cited in n. 9277.) \[3\] That every good has its truths, is
because good is formed by means of truths (n. 10252, 10266), and also
manifests itself by means of truths. It is with these as it is with the
will and the understanding in man; his will is formed by means of the
understanding, and it also manifests itself by means of it; that which
is of the will is called good, and that which is of the understanding is
called truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10292.">10292.</span></span>

Stacte. That this signifies the affection of sensuous truth, is evident
from the signification of "stacte," as being sensuous truth; that it
denotes the affection of this truth, is from its fragrance, for "odor"
signifies perceptivity; a fragrant odor, the perceptivity of what is
grateful; and an offensive odor, the perceptivity of what is ungrateful;
and all gratefulness and ungratefulness of perception are from the
affection which is of love, and according to it (see n. 925, 1514,
1517-1519, 3577, 4624-4634, 4748, 5621, 10054). In general be it known
that all things in the vegetable kingdom, whatever they may be, whether
the produce of the forest, or that of gardens, fields, and plains, such
as trees, crops, flowers, grasses, and vegetables, both in general and
in particular, signify spiritual and celestial things, for the reason
that universal nature is a theater representative of the Lord's kingdom
(see at the places cited in n. 9280). \[2\] That "stacte" denotes the
affection of sensuous truth is because it is mentioned first; for there
are four spices of which the incense was prepared, as there were also
four of which the oil of anointing was prepared; and that which is
mentioned in the first place is the most external, as is also that which
is mentioned in the first place for the preparation of the oil of
anointing, which was best myrrh (that this denotes the perception of
sensuous truth, see n. 10252). \[3\] That four spices were taken for the
preparation of both the oil and the incense, was for the reason that
they signified truths in their order from external to inmost; and they
are in the same succession with man; for man has an external which is
called the external man, and an internal which is called the internal
man, in each of which there is an exterior and an interior; the most
external is called the sensuous, and this is therefore signified by
"stacte" (what the sensuous is, and its quality, see n. 9996, 10236).
\[4\] That "stacte" denotes the affection of sensuous truth, cannot be
confirmed from other passages in the Word, because it is nowhere else
mentioned; but stacte of another kind, expressed in the original tongue
by another word, is mentioned among those spices which were brought down
into Egypt (Gen. 37:25; 43:11), and which involve such things as are in
the external or natural man, because by "Egypt" is signified the
memory-knowledge that is of the natural man (see at the places cited in
n. 9391).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10293.">10293.</span></span>

And onycha. That this signifies the affection of interior natural truth,
is evident from the signification of "fragrant onycha," as being the
affection of natural truth. By "onycha" is signified this truth, and by
"fragrant," the perceptivity of what is grateful, which is from the
affection of truth, thus there is signified the affection itself. It is
said "fragrant onycha" because this expression is used both before and
after the enumeration of these spices in these words: "take to thee
fragrant spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum, things fragrant."
That it is the affection of truth in the natural which is signified by
"onycha," is because it is mentioned in the second place; for the spices
are mentioned in order, according to the truths with man, from most
external to inmost; hence by "stacte" is signified the affection of
sensuous truth, which is truth most external; by "onycha," the affection
of natural truth, which is interior truth in the natural man; by
"galbanum," an affection of truth still more interior, which is interior
truth in the spiritual or internal man; and by "frankincense," inmost
truth in the internal man, which is spiritual good-in like manner as was
signified by the spices from which the oil of anointing was prepared,
which were best myrrh, aromatic cinnamon, aromatic calamus, and cassia
(that these spices signified truths in such an order, see n. 10252,
10254, 10256, 10258). But the difference is that those truths which are
signified by the spices of the oil of anointing, belong to the celestial
class, while these truths which are signified by the spices of the
incense, belong to the spiritual class (of which distinction see above,
n. 10254, 10291).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10294.">10294.</span></span>

And galbanum. That this signifies the affection of a truth still more
interior, is evident from what was said just above (n. 10293). That
"onycha" and "galbanum" denote truths successively more interior, can be
confirmed in no other way than from their order, because they do not
occur in the Word elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10295.">10295.</span></span>

Things fragrant. That this signifies affections from spiritual good, is
evident from the signification of "fragrant spices," as being the
affections of truth from good (shown above, n. 10291); (that they are
from spiritual good, see n. 10254, 10290, 10293). The reason why the
incense was prepared from spices, which signify truths from spiritual
good; or what is the same, why the truths which are signified by these
spices belong to the spiritual class, is that by "incense" is signified
Divine worship which is performed by means of truths from this good, for
it is confessions, adorations, prayers, and other similar things, which
are specifically signified by "incense" (n. 9475); and such things come
forth from the heart by means of the thoughts and the speech. That this
worship is performed by means of spiritual truths, can be seen from the
ideas in which a man is when in this worship, for the ideas in which a
man then is are from his memory, and consequently from the
understanding; and the things which proceed from this source are called
spiritual. But as regards Divine worship from celestial good, such as is
with those who are in the Lord's celestial kingdom, this is not
performed by means of confessions, adorations, and prayers of the same
quality as exist with those who are in the spiritual kingdom; thus not
by means of truths from the memory, but by means of truths from the
heart, which make one with the love itself in which they are; for the
truths with these are inscribed on their love. When therefore they do
from love what is commanded, they do it at the same time from truths,
without any thought about these from doctrine, thus without calling them
forth from the memory. (That such is the state of those who are in the
Lord's celestial kingdom can be seen from what was shown concerning this
kingdom and the spiritual kingdom in the passages cited in n. 9277.)
(That "incense" signifies confessions, adorations, and prayers which
proceed through the mouth from the thought, see n. 9475, 10177, 10198.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10296.">10296.</span></span>

And pure frankincense. That this signifies inmost truth, which is
spiritual good, is evident from the signification of "frankincense," as
being that which has been clarified from the falsity of evil. That the
inmost truth which is signified by "frankincense" is spiritual good, is
because the good with those who are in the Lord's spiritual kingdom is
nothing else than truth, which is called good when the man wills and
does it from conscience and affection. For with the spiritual all the
will has been destroyed, but the understanding is preserved entire by
the Lord, and in it there is implanted by the Lord a new will by means
of regeneration. This will is the conscience with them, which is a
conscience of truth. For whatever is implanted in the understanding and
proceeds from the understanding, is truth, because man's understanding
has been allotted to the reception of the truths of faith; but the will
to the reception of the goods of love. From this it is evident that in
its essence spiritual good is truth. (That with the spiritual a new will
is implanted in their intellectual part, and that consequently the good
with them is in its essence truth, see the places cited in n. 9277,
9596, 9684.) It is said of inmost truth that it is good, for the reason
that the more interior things are, the more perfect they are; and
because the inmost of man is his will, and that which belongs to the
will is called good. (That "frankincense" denotes inmost truth, thus
spiritual good, can be seen from the passages above adduced from the
Word, n. 10177.) \[2\] As "frankincense" denotes spiritual good, and
good is that which reigns in all truths, disposes them, conjoins them,
and gives affection to them, therefore frankincense is mentioned in the
last place, and on this account the vessels of incense were called
"censers <span id="fr_224"></span>[10296-1](#fn_224);" for the name is
from the essential, which is good; in like manner as the oil of
anointing is named from the oil of olive, and not from the spices from
which it was prepared; for a similar reason, namely, because "oil"
signified good, and "spices" truths. \[3\] It is called "pure
frankincense" because "pure" signifies that which has been clarified
from the falsities of evil; and in the original tongue by this word is
signified what is interiorly pure, but by another word that which is
exteriorly pure or clean. That what is interiorly pure is signified by
this word is evident in these passages: Wash you, make you pure, put
away the wickedness of your works from before Mine eyes (Isa. 1:16). In
vain have I rendered mine heart pure, and washed my hands in innocency
(Ps. 73:13). To "render the heart pure" denotes to be purified
interiorly; and to "wash the hands in innocency" denotes the same
exteriorly. And again: Be thou pure when thou judgest (Ps. 51:4). (That
by the other word is signified what is exteriorly pure or clean, may be
seen in Lev. 11:32; 12:7, 8; 13:6, 13, 17, 23, 28, 34, 37, 58; 14:7, 8,
9, 20, 48, 53; 15:13, 28; 16:30; 22:7; Jer. 13:27; Ezek. 24:13; 39:12;
and elsewhere.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10297.">10297.</span></span>

So much in so much shall it be, signifies correspondence in every way.
By "so much in so much" is meant equally as much of one and of the
other, or as much of the frankincense as of the spices, and by quantity
both of measure and weight is signified correspondence, here
correspondence in every way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10298.">10298.</span></span>

And thou shalt make it incense. That this signifies worship from these
things, is evident from the signification of "incense," as being
confessions, adorations, prayers, and such things of worship as come
forth from the heart into the thought and speech (see n. 9475); for by
the "smoke" of incense is signified elevation (n. 10177, 10198); and by
"fragrant odor," grateful perception and reception (see the places cited
in n. 10292). \[2\] As Divine worship, signified by the "incense of
spices," is here described, and by the spices of which this incense was
prepared are signified truths in their order, it shall here be told in a
few words how the case is with this worship. But this is a secret which
cannot be revealed unless the nature of man is known. Man is not man
from his face, nor even from his speech, but from understanding and
will; such as are his understanding and his will, such is the man. It is
known that when he is born he has nothing of understanding and nothing
of will; and also that his understanding and his will are formed by
degrees from infancy; from this a man becomes a man, and such a man as
are the understanding and the will that have been formed in him. The
understanding is formed by means of truths, and the will by means of
goods, insomuch that his understanding is nothing else than a
composition of such things as bear relation to truths, and his will is
nothing else than the affection of such things as are called goods. From
this it follows that a man is nothing but the truth and good from which
his two faculties have been formed. \[3\] Each and all things of his
body correspond to these, as can be seen from the fact that the body
instantly does that which the understanding thinks and the will wills;
for the mouth speaks in accordance with the thoughts, the face changes
in accordance with the affections, and the body makes movements in
accordance with the commands of both. From this it is evident that a man
is wholly such as are his understanding and his will, thus such as he is
in respect to truths and in respect to goods; for as before said, truths
constitute his understanding, and goods his will; or what is the same, a
man is his own truth and his own good. \[4\] That this is so appears
openly with spirits; these are nothing else than their own truths and
their own goods which they had put on when they lived in the world as
men; and yet they are human forms. Consequently from their face shines
forth the quality of the truths and goods which they have; and this is
also perceived from the sound and disposition of their speech, and from
their gestures, especially from their spoken words; for their spoken
words are not such as are with men in the world, but are in perfect
harmony with their truths and goods, so as to proceed from these quite
naturally. In this speech are spirits and angels when they are
conversing together; and in respect to his spirit, man is in a like
speech during his life in this world, although he is then unaware of it;
for he thinks from similar ideas, as has also been observed by some
learned men who have called these ideas immaterial and intellectual.
After death, when the man becomes a spirit, these ideas become words.
From all this it is again evident that a man is not anything else than
his own truth and his own good. Hence it is that after death a man
remains such truth and good as he has become. \[5\] It is said "such
truth and good as he has become," and thereby is also meant such falsity
and evil as he has become; for evil men call falsity truth and evil
good. This is a secret which must by all means be known, in order that
it may be known how the case is with Divine worship; but besides this
there is one secret more, namely, that in every idea of thought
proceeding from a man's will there is the whole man. This moreover
follows from the former, for a man thinks from his truth and wills from
his good, which are himself. That this is so can be seen from the
following experience. When the angels perceive a single idea of a man,
or a single idea of a spirit, they at once know the quality of the man
or of the spirit. \[6\] These things have been said in order that it may
be known how the case is with Divine worship, which is signified by the
"incense of spices," namely, that the whole man is in each and all
things of his worship, because his truth and good are there, which are
himself. This is the reason why four spices are mentioned, by which are
signified all truths in the complex. From all this it also follows that
it is the same whether you say that Divine worship consists of these
truths and goods, or that man consists of them, because as before said
the whole man is in every one of the ideas of his thought, which are of
his worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10299.">10299.</span></span>

An ointment the work of a perfumer. That this signifies from the influx
and operation of the Divine of the Lord into each and all things, is
evident from the signification of "ointment," or "aromatic," as being
truths in each and all things of worship (see n. 10264); and from the
signification of "the work of an ointment maker" or "perfumer," as being
the influx and operation of the Divine Itself (n. 10265). \[2\] How it
is to be understood that there must be influx and operation into each
and all things of worship shall also be briefly told. It is believed by
those who are not acquainted with the arcana of heaven that worship is
from man, because it proceeds from the thought and affection which are
in him; but the worship which is from man is not worship, consequently
the confessions, adorations, and prayers which are from man, are not
confessions, adorations, and prayers which are heard and received by the
Lord; but they must be from the Lord Himself with man. That this is so
is known to the church, for it teaches that nothing that is good
proceeds from man, but that all good is from heaven, that is, from the
Divine there. From this also is all the good in worship; and worship
without good is not worship; consequently in holy worship the church
prays that God may be present and lead the thoughts of the discourse.
The case herein is this. When a man is in genuine worship, then the Lord
flows into the goods and truths which are with him, and raises them to
Himself, and with them the man, insofar and in such a manner as he is in
them. This elevation does not appear to the man unless he is in the
genuine affection of truth and good, and in the knowledge,
acknowledgment, and faith that everything good comes from above, from
the Lord. \[3\] That it is so may be comprehended even by those who are
wise from the world, for they know from their learning that natural
influx, which is called by them physical influx, is not possible, but
only spiritual influx; that is, that nothing can flow in from the
natural world into heaven, but only from heaven into the world. From all
this it can be seen how it is to be understood that the influx and
operation of the Divine of the Lord are into each and all things of
worship. That it is so has frequently been given me to experience; for
it has been given me to perceive the very influx, the calling forth of
the truths which were with me, their application to the objects of
prayer, the affection of good that was adjoined, and the elevation
itself. \[4\] Nevertheless a man must not let down his hands and await
influx, for this would be to act like an effigy devoid of life; in spite
of all he must think, will, and act as of himself, and yet must ascribe
to the Lord everything of thought of truth and of endeavor of good; by
so doing there is implanted in him by the Lord the capability of
receiving Him and the influx from Him. \[5\] For man was created no
otherwise than to be a receptacle of the Divine; and the capability of
receiving the Divine is formed in no other way. When this capability has
been formed, he afterward has no other will than that it should be so;
for he loves the influx from the Lord, and is averse to any working from
himself; because the influx from the Lord is the influx of good, whereas
any working from himself is the working of evil. In such a state are all
the angels in heaven; therefore by "angels" in the Word are signified
truths and goods which are from the Lord, because the angels are
receptions of these (n. 1925, 3039, 4085, 4295, 8192).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10300.">10300.</span></span>

Salted. That this signifies the longing of truth for good, is evident
from the signification of "salt," as being that longing for good which
is of the love of truth (of which below); hence "salted" denotes that in
which is this longing. The reason why there must be a longing of truth
for good is that this longing is conjunctive of the two; for insofar as
truth longs for good, so far it is conjoined with it. The conjunction of
truth and good is what is called the heavenly marriage, which is heaven
itself with man; and therefore when in Divine worship, and in each and
all things of it, there is a longing for this conjunction, heaven is in
each and all things there. Thus the Lord is in them. This is signified
by the requirement that the incense should be salted. Salt has this
signification from its conjunctive nature; for it conjoins all things,
and from this gives them relish; salt <span
id="fr_225"></span>[10300-1](#fn_225) even conjoins water and oil, which
otherwise will not combine. \[2\] When it is known that by "salt" is
signified a longing for the conjunction of truth and good, it can be
known what is signified by the Lord's words in Mark: Everyone shall be
salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt; salt is
good, but if the salt have lost its saltiness, wherewith will ye season
it? Have salt in yourselves (Mark 9:49, 50). "Everyone shall be salted
with fire" denotes that everyone will long from genuine love; "every
sacrifice shall be salted with salt" denotes that there shall be in all
worship a longing from genuine love; "salt without saltiness" signifies
a longing from some other love than genuine love; "to have salt in
themselves" denotes the longing of truth for good. (That "fire" denotes
love, see n. 4906, 5071, 5215, 6314, 6832, 10055; and that "sacrifice"
denotes worship in general, n. 922, 6905, 8680, 8936.) Who can know what
it is to be salted with fire, and why the sacrifice should be salted,
and what it is to have salt in themselves, unless it is known what is
meant by fire, salt, and by being salted? \[3\] In like manner in Luke:
Whosoever he be of you that renounceth not all his possessions, he
cannot be My disciple. Salt is good; but if the salt have lost its
savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is fit neither for the land,
nor for the dunghill: they shall cast it out (Luke 14:33, 35). "To
renounce all his possessions" denotes to love the Lord above all things;
"his possessions" denote the things which are man's own; "salt that has
lost its savor" denotes a longing from what is one's own, thus from the
love of self and the world: such a longing is "salt without savor," not
fit for anything. So also in Matthew: Ye are the salt of the earth; but
if the salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is no
longer fit for anything but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot
by men (Matt. 5:13, 14). \[4\] That in all worship there must be a
longing of truth for good is also signified by the law that every
offering of the meat offering should be salted; and that upon every
offering there should be the salt of the covenant of Jehovah (Lev.
2:13). By the "meat offering," and the "offering," which is sacrifice,
is signified worship, as above; and salt is there called "the salt of
the covenant of Jehovah," because by a "covenant" is signified
conjunction (n. 665, 666, 1023, 1038, 1864, 1996, 2003, 2021, 6804,
8767, 8778, 9396, 9416). Moreover, longing is the very ardor of love,
thus its continuity; and love is spiritual conjunction. \[5\] As the
longing of truth for good conjoins, so the longing of falsity for evil
disjoins, and that which disjoins also destroys; consequently by "salt"
in the opposite sense is signified the destruction and devastation of
truth and good, as in Jeremiah: Cursed is the man that maketh flesh his
arm; he shall not see when good cometh, but shall dwell in parched
places, in a salt land which is not inhabited (Jer. 17:5, 6). "To make
flesh his arm" denotes to trust in one's self, thus in what is one's
own, and not in the Divine (n. 10283); and as one's own consists in
loving self more than God and the neighbor, it is the love of self which
is thus described: hence it said that "he shall not see when good
cometh," and that "he shall dwell in parched places, and in a salt
land," that is, in filthy loves and their longings, which have destroyed
the good and truth of the church. \[6\] In Zephaniah: It shall be as
Gomorrah; a place left to the nettle, and a pit of salt, and a waste
forever (Zeph. 2:9). "A place left to the nettle" denotes the ardor and
burning of the life of man from the love of self; "a pit of salt"
denotes a longing for what is false, which, as it destroys truth and
good, is called "a waste forever." It is said that it shall be "as
Gomorrah," because by "Gomorrah and Sodom" is signified the love of self
(n. 2220). \[7\] That Lot's wife was turned into a statue of salt,
because she turned her face to these cities (Gen. 19:26), signified the
vastation of truth and good; for in the internal sense to "turn the face
to anything" denotes to love (n. 10189); hence it is that the Lord says:
Let him not turn back to what is behind him; remember Lot's wife (Luke
17:31, 32). The whole land thereof shall be sulphur, and salt, and a
burning, according to the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah (Deut. 29:22).
By "land" here, as elsewhere in the Word, is meant the church (see at
the places cited in n. 9325). \[8\] From this then it was that the
cities which were no longer to be inhabited were after their destruction
sown with salt (Judges 9:45). From all this it is evident that by "salt"
in the genuine sense is signified the longing of truth for good, thus
what is conjunctive; and in the opposite sense, the longing of falsity
for evil, thus what is destructive. \[9\] He therefore who knows that
"salt" denotes the longing of truth for good and their capability of
conjunction, is able to know also what is signified by the waters of
Jericho being healed by Elisha by casting in salt into their outlet (2
Kings 2:10-22); for by Elisha, as by Elijah, was represented the Lord in
respect to the Word (n. 2762, 8029); and by "waters" are signified the
truths of the Word; by the "waters of Jericho" the truths of the Word in
the sense of the letter, and likewise by the "outlet of the waters;" and
by "salt" is signified the longing of truth for good, and the
conjunction of both; whence comes healing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_224"></span>[10296-1](ac206.htm#fr_224) "Censer" in the
Latin is thuribulum, from thur, frankincense. \[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_225"></span>[10300-1](ac206.htm#fr_225) Probably here used
in an old sense to include alkalies. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10301-10350](ac207)
