[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc23001)  [Next](cc23003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 23: Ezekiel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then came certain of the elders of
Israel unto me, and sat before me.

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et venerunt ad me viri ex senioribus
Israel, et sederunt coram facie mea.  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** And the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying,

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>**2.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me, dicendo,

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Son of man, these men have set up
their idols in their heart, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity
before their face: should I be inquired of at all by them?

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>**3.** Fili hominis, viri isti ascendere
fecerunt idola sua super cor suum, et offendiculum iniquitatis suae
posuerunt coram facie sua. An quaerendo quaerar ipsis?  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span><span id="iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>Here Ezekiel relates an event worthy of
notice. For this was not a mere vision, but a real transaction, since
some of the elders of Israel came to him for the sake of consultation.
He says *that he sat,* as men who are perplexed and astonished by evils
are accustomed to do, when they see no remedy. The gesture then which
the Prophet describes was a sign of anxiety and despair. A person
wishing for an answer is said to sit before another; but since it is
probable that they disputed among themselves about beginning, and did
not immediately discover how they should commence, hence they became
anxious to consult the Prophet. Ezekiel, indeed, might be touched and
softened by pity when he saw them seeking God in this way. For this was
a sign of repentance when they turned to the true and faithful servant
of God. But since they had no sincerity, the Prophet is warned in time
against supposing them to come with cordiality. Hence God instructs his
servant not to give way with too much facility when he sees old men
coming to be disciples. But he shows their hypocrisy, because
superstition still reigned in their hearts; nay, they desired openly to
violate God’s law, and they did not disguise this feeling whenever
occasion offered. First, he says they *have set up idols in their
hearts;* by which words he means that they were addicted to
superstition, so that idols obtained a high rank in their hearts; as
Paul exhorts the faithful, that the peace of God which passes all
understanding may obtain the rule in their hearts (<span
id="iii.i-p12.1"></span>[Php 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)<span
id="iii.i-p12.1"></span>; <span id="iii.i-p12.2"></span>[Col
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#015)<span id="iii.i-p12.2"></span>);
so on the other hand the Prophet says that these men had given supreme
sway to idols. And again an implied comparison must be remarked between
God and idols. For God has erected the seat of his empire in our hearts:
but when we set up idols, we necessarily endeavor to overthrow God’s
throne, and to reduce his power to nothing. Hence the most heinous crime
of sacrilege is here shown in those old men *who caused idols to rise
above their hearts.* For hence it follows that all their senses were
drowned in their superstitions.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>He adds, *they placed the stumblingblock of
their iniquity before his face*. By this second clause he signifies
their hardness and perverseness; as if he had said, although the
doctrine of the law was put before their eyes, yet they had no regard
for piety, and despised even God’s threats, as if he were not going to
be their judge. When, therefore, the sinner is not moved by any
admonitions, and is more than convicted of his impiety, and is
compelled, whether he will or not, to suffer God’s anger, and yet
afterwards despises it, he is said *to put the stumbling block of his
iniquity before his face.* For many slide away by error and
thoughtlessness, because they do not think they can attempt anything
against God. But here Ezekiel expresses that there was a gross contempt
of God in these old men, and even a professed rebellion against him. Now
he asks*, Shall I by inquiring be inquired of by them?* Some translate,
Shall I, when consulted or asked, answer them? But this comment seems to
me too remote from the mind of the Prophet; and it is probable that they
thought this to be the sense, because they could not understand what
else the Prophet meant. But God shows that this was like a wonder, since
these old men dared to break forth, and to pretend to have some desire
to inquire the truth. Hence their impudence is shown here, because they
did not hesitate to place themselves before God’s servant, and to
pretend a regard for piety when they had none. God says, therefore, can
it be done? For this question expresses the absurdity of the thing, and
that for the above mentioned purpose, that their wickedness may be the
more apparent in their daring to insult the face of God. For what else
is it than openly to reproach God when impure men approach him, and wish
to become partakers of his counsel? Meanwhile they show by their whole
life that they are most inveterate enemies of the whole heavenly
doctrine. Afterwards it follows —

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#004)<span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Therefore speak unto them, and say
unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Every man of the house of Israel
that setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock
of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet, I the LORD
will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of his idols;

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Propterea loquere ad ipsos, et dic
illis: sic Dominator Iehovah, vir vir, domo Israel,  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) ascendere fecerit idola sua super cor
suum, et offendiculum iniquitatis suae posuerit coram facie sua: et
venerit ad prophetam: ego Iehovah respondebo huic  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) secundum multitudinem idolorum ejus.
 <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36)

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span><span id="iii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span>Here God seems to treat those hypocrites
too indulgently who pretend to ask his advice and yet despise his
counsel. But God here rather threatens what would be destructive to the
wicked than promises anything which they ought to expect. It is indeed a
singular testimony of God’s grace when he answers us: for prophecy is an
image of God’s paternal anxiety towards us and our salvation. But
sometimes prophecy only ends in destruction; and this is but an
accident. Although, therefore, God’s word by itself is naturally to be
greatly desired, yet when God answers as a judge, and takes away all
hope of pardon and pity, no taste of his favor can then be perceived.
Thus this passage must be understood. God pronounces that he would
answer, but whom? The reprobate, and those who tauntingly inquired of
the Prophet what they should do. When he answers them, he only shows
himself the avenger of their perfidy; and thus his answer contains
nothing else but the fearful judgment which hangs over all the
reprobate. For God does not here impose a perpetual law on himself; for
he does not always act in the same way towards all the reprobate, but
says that those impious ones should feel that they shall not profit by
their cunning and artifices, since they shall find the difference
between God and Satan: for they were accustomed to lies, and had itching
ears; hence they wished to have some pleasing and flattering answer from
the servant of God, since the false prophets gratified their
inclinations. What then does God say? *I will answer them*, but far
otherwise than they either wish or desire: for *I will answer them
according to the multitude of their idols*: for they bring with them the
material for their own condemnation: hence they shall take back nothing
from me but the seal of that condemnation which is already placed upon
their hearts, and appears on their hands. In fine, God here laughs at
the foolish confidence of those who inquire about future events of his
prophets; but meanwhile they have their heart bound up with
superstitions, so as openly to show their gross impiety: hence he says,
*that he would answer them*, not as they thought, but as they deserved.

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#005)<span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>**5.** That I may take the house of Israel
in their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their
idols.

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span>**5.** Ut deprehendam domum Israel in corde
ipsorum, quia alienarunt se  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) a me
in suis idolis omnes.

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span><span id="iii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>He shows God’s object in being unwilling to
dismiss without an answer the hypocrites who still impiously trifled
with him. He says, *that I may seize the house of Israel in their
heart.* It is yet asked how the impious are seized, when God answers
them neither according to the opinion of their mind nor their
expectation, but pronounces what they dislike and fear most grievously.
I reply, that the impious are answered when they are driven to madness,
and God thus extracts from them what was formerly hidden in their own
hearts. He says, therefore*, that their impiety may be manifest to all,
I will answer them*. For as long as God spares the impious, they
endeavor to soothe him by a kind of flattery; but when they see that
they take nothing by their false blandishments, then they roar, nay,
bellow furiously against God: thus *they are caught in their own
hearts*: that is, all their former dissembling is made bare, so that all
may easily perceive that there never was a spark of piety in their
hearts. God, therefore, bears witness that his answers would be of this
kind, *that he may take the house of Israel in their hearts*; that is,
that his severity may draw out into the light what was formerly hidden;
for the word of God is a two-edged sword, and examines all the
sentiments of men. (<span id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>[Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>.)
Some are so slain by this sword that they grow wise again; but others
are stung with fury when they see that they must engage with the power
of God; therefore they are seized in their own hearts when God twists
from them what they would willingly have kept always hidden. *Since they
have estranged themselves from me, literally, in their idols*. This
passage is explained in two ways, as we have said. Some say, because
they separated themselves; but I approve of the other version, *because
they have alienated themselves,* and we shall understand the point more
clearly afterwards when the subject leads us to it. *They alienated
themselves*, then, *from God*; that is, when they had utterly declined
from God’s law; yet, as long as this was concealed, they still wore
their masks. The separation of which the Prophet here speaks seems to be
referred to this pretense. Since, then, *they so alienated themselves
from me by their idols;* that is, he says they are deceived in thinking
that they cannot be discovered, and that their abominations, however
foul they are, will remain secret. And this agrees with the last clause,
namely, that he would seize the hypocrites in their own heart.

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we are so
inclined to all kinds of vices, that we may be restrained by the power
of thy Spirit: then that we may be attentive to the teaching which
sounds continually in our ears, so that we may persevere in the pure
worship of thy name; and thus being strengthened against the cunning of
the wicked, may we be upheld in our weakness, and preserved from all
error, until we finish our course, and arrive at the goal which is
proposed to us in Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Eighth.

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#006)<span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>**6.** Therefore say unto the house of
Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD; Repent, and turn *yourselves* from your
idols; and turn away your faces from all your abominations.

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Propterea die ad domum Israel, Sic
dicit Dominator Iehovah, revertimini et redire facite ab idolis vestris,
et a cunctis abominationibus vestris redire facite  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) facies vestras.

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span><span id="iii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>Now God shows why he had threatened the
false prophets and the whole people so severely, namely, that they
should repent; for the object of God’s rigor is, that, when terrified by
his judgments, we should return into the way. Now, therefore, he exhorts
them to repentance. Hence we gather the useful lesson, that whenever God
inspires us with fear, he has no other intention than to humble us, and
thus to provide for our salvation, when he reproves and threatens us so
strongly by his prophets, and in truth is verbally angry with us, that
he may really spare us. But the exhortation is short, *that they may be
converted and turned away from their idols, and may turn their faces
from all their abominations*. When he uses the word <span
id="iii.vi-p7.1"></span>השיבו, *heshibev*, in the second clause, some
understand “wives;” but this is frigid: others think the verb
transitive, but yet impersonal, thus make yourselves return: this also
is harsh.  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) I have no doubt that the
Prophet here exhorts the Israelites that each should desire to reconcile
himself to God, and at the same time bring others with him. As many were
mutually the authors of evils to each other, he now orders them to do
their utmost to bring back others with them: and surely this is a true
proof of our repentance, when we are not only converted to God one by
one, but, when we stretch forth our hand to our brethren, and recall
them from error; especially if they have wandered away through our
fault, we must take care to make up for the injury by at least equal
diligence. The sense therefore of the Prophet is, first, that, the
Israelites should repent; next, that one should assist another to
repentance, or that they should mutually unite in the pursuit of piety,
just as each was previously corrupted by his companion and brother. This
seems to be the full meaning. Besides, this series must be remarked:
because many show zeal in seizing others, and stretching out the hand to
free them from error; but they themselves never think of repenting. But
the Holy Spirit here shows us the true method of proceeding, when he
commands us to repent, and then extends our desires to our brethren who
have need of our exhortations. At length he adds, *withdraw your faces*,
or turn away *from all your abominations*. A part is here put by the
Prophet for the whole, since turning away the face means the same as
withdrawing all the senses. Since, therefore, they had been almost
affixed to their own abominations to which they had cast their eyes, and
were completely intent upon them, he orders them to turn away their
faces, so as to bid them farewell. It follows —

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#007)<span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>**7.** For every one of the house of
Israel, or of the stranger that sojourneth in Israel, which separateth
himself from me, and setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the
stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to a prophet
to inquire of him concerning me; I the LORD will answer him by myself:

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Nam quisquis, domo Israel, et e
peregrino qui peregrinatur apud Israelem, et separatus fuerit  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) de post me (ad verbum), et ascendere
fecerit idola sua super cor suum, et offendiculum iniquitatis suae
posuerit coram facie sua, et venerit ad Prophetam ad inquirendum ipsum
ex me,  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) ego Iehovah respondebo ei
in me (*vel* per me).

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span><span id="iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span>Ezekiel again returns to threats, because
exhortations was not sufficiently effectual with such hardened ones; for
we have seen that they were obdurate in their vices and almost like
untamed beasts. For unless God’s judgment had been often set before
them, there had been but small fruit of teaching and exhortation. This
then is the reason why God here sets before them his vengeance*: a man,
a man, says he, or a stranger who sojourns among Israel.* When he adds
strangers, he doubtless speaks of the circumcised who professed to be
worshipers of the true God, and so submitted to the law as to refrain
from all impieties. For there were two kinds of strangers, those who
transacted business there, but were profane men, continuing
uncircumcised. But there were others who were not sprung from the sacred
race, and were not indigenous to the soil, but yet they had been
circumcised, and as far as religion was concerned, had become members of
the Church; and God wishes them to be esteemed in the same class and
rank as the sons of Abraham. The law shall be the same for the stranger
and the home-born, wherever the promise is concerned, (<span
id="iii.vii-p8.1"></span>[Num. 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#016)<span id="iii.vii-p8.1"></span>,)
and the same sentiment is repeated in many places. Thus the word
foreigners is now to be explained. But this circumstance exaggerates the
crime of the chosen people. For if any one settled in the land of Canaan
and embraced God’s law, this was an accidental event: but the Israelites
were by nature heirs of eternal life, for the adoption was continued
through successive ages. Since then they were born sons of God, it was
the more disgraceful to depart from his worship. And so when Ezekiel
here gravely rebukes the strangers, he shows how much more atrocious the
crime was in the case of those who were bound by a more sacred bond to
the worship of God. He says*, and he was separated from after me.* The
Prophet yesterday said <span id="iii.vii-p8.2"></span>מעלי, *megneli*,
from near or from towards me: here he more clearly expresses declension,
when men reject the teaching of the law, and openly show that they pay
no obedience to God. For he is said to follow God or to walk after him,
who proposes to himself God as a guide, and is devoted to his precepts,
and holds on in the way pointed out by him. Thus by the obedience of
faith we follow God or walk after him: so we recede from him when we
reject his law, and are openly unwilling to bear his yoke any longer.
Hence he shows of what kind the separation of the people or of
individuals from God is, namely, when they refuse to follow his law. The
Israelites indeed wished God always to remain united to them, but they
made the divorce, although they denied it: hence the Prophet cuts away
from them beforehand this prop of backsliding, when he says that *they
separated from God* by not following him.

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span>At length he repeats what we saw yesterday,
*he who caused his idols to ascend unto his heart, he who placed the
stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face*, that is, was drowned in
his own superstitions, so that his idols bore sway in his heart: lastly,
he who is so forward in audacity that he did not conceal his wish to
oppose the Almighty: *if any one, says he, came to a prophet to inquire
of him in me*, or my name, *I will answer him*. He confirms what we saw
yesterday, that he could no longer bear the hypocrites who deluded
themselves so proudly. And certainly when they openly worshipped idols,
and were fined with many superstitions, what audacity and pride it was
to consult true prophets? It is much the same as if a person should want
only insult and rail at a physician, and not only load him with
reproaches, but even spit in his face: and should afterwards go and ask
his advice, saying, “What do you advise me to do? How must I be cured of
this disease?” Such pride could not be borne between man and man. How
then will God permit such reproaches to go unpunished? For this reason
he says *that he would answer*, but after his own manner, as if he had
said — they seek flatteries, but *I will answer in myself*: that is, in
my natural character. I will not change it according to their pleasure,
for they change my character by their fictions, but they are deceived:
they profit nothing when they expect me to answer according to their
views: *I will answer,* says he, *in myself*; that is, they shall feel
that the answer proceeds from me, and they shall have no reason for
thinking that my servants will be submissive to them, as they are
accustomed to abuse the false prophets whom they buy for reward, because
they are venal. For when any one is venal he is compelled to flatter
like a slave. For there is no freedom but in a good and upright
conscience. Hence God here separates his servants from impostors who
make a trade of their flatteries. Now it follows —

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span><span id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#008)<span id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p2"></span>**8.** And I will set my face against that
man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will cut him off from
the midst of my people; and ye shall know that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="iii.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Et penam ficiem meam in viro illo,
 <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) et ponam illum  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) in signum et proverbia et excidem eum e
medio populi mei: et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="iii.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.viii-p7"></span><span id="iii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p8"></span>Here God adds, that the execution of his
wrath would be ready when the prophet had denounced it. For profane men
always fabricate for themselves empty treaties, and when God threatens
they say that it is only thunder without lightning. Since the prophetic
threats moved the reprobate either nothing or but little, so God now
shows that he would not only answer what they did not wish to hear, but
they should perceive by its effect how truly he had spoken. And this
ought to be understood from the last sentence; for when God answers by
himself, he neither is nor strikes the air with threatening words, but
denounces what he determined to fulfill and accomplish in his own time.
For God never answers in himself without joining the effect with the
prophecy. But hypocrites are too stupid to acknowledge this, unless a
clearer explanation was afforded. This then is the reason why the
Prophet brings a message respecting the effect.

<span id="iii.viii-p9"></span>He says, *I will put my face upon that
man:* when God speaks openly against us, this is sufficient for our
destruction; but he wished to express more in this case, namely, that
prophets were the heralds of his wrath, and that hypocrites should be
admonished about the penalties which await them, and even now hang over
them, since his hand is stretched out against them. He is said to place
his face against another who rises against him, or descends to a contest
and engages hand to hand. So also God pronounces that he would be an
adversary to all the reprobate who thus endeavored to elude him. He
says, *I will place him for a sign and a proverb.* He marks the
heaviness of the punishment by these words: for God sometimes chastises
the faults of men, but after a common and accustomed manner. But when
punishment excites the wonder of all and is like a portent, then God
puts forth the sign of his wrath in no common fashion, as they say. The
Prophet then means this, and hence at the same time admonishes us how
detestable a crime it is to decline from the pure worship of God. For
God chastises thefts and lewdness, drunkenness, deceits, and rapines:
but not always so rigorously that the punishment is remarkable, and
turns the minds of all towards itself. Hence from the greatness of the
punishment the atrocity of the crime is made known. He now adds, *for
proverbs*. This phrase is taken from the law, as the prophets who are
the interpreters of Moses make use of words from it. (<span
id="iii.viii-p9.1"></span>[De
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037)<span
id="iii.viii-p9.1"></span>.) When any remarkable slaughter occurs it is
said to be *for a proverb*, as all persons usually boast when speaking
of any slaughter, that none is equal to it or more horrible. But, <span
id="iii.viii-p9.2"></span>משל, *meshel*, is also used for a disgrace: as
if he had said, it should not only be material for remark among the
whole people, but their name should be subject to reproach and contempt.
At length he adds, *I will cut him off from my people.* This is most
severe of all, for even the hope of pity is taken away. A person may be
a wonder for a time: then his calamity may be the subject of vulgar
taunts and proverbs: and yet God is still exorable, and may not cut him
off from his people. But when any one is cut off from God’s people, his
safety is already beyond hope. It is not in vain that this sentence is
so often repeated, *you shall know that I am Jehovah,* says he, since we
even formerly saw hypocrites always put a veil before them, since they
think they have only to do with the prophets, and thus they despise
mortals with security. Hence God here inscribes his name on his word,
that they may know that he has spoken, and may experience the effect of
his words by his hand. It follows —

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p2"></span>**9.** And if the prophet be deceived when
he hath spoken a thing, I the LORD have deceived that prophet, and I
will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst
of my people Israel.

<span id="iii.ix-p3"></span>**9.** Et Propheta cum deceptus fuerit, et
locutus fuerit sermonem: ego Iehovah decepi prophetam eum: et extendam
manum meam super ipsum, et delebo illum e medio populi mei Israel.

<span id="iii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p6"></span>Here God meets that foolish thought in which
many minds are rapt up. When they had their own impostors at hand, they
thought that all God’s threats could be repelled as it were by a shield.
Jeremiah and Ezekiel threaten us, say they, but we have others to cheer
us with good hope: they promise that all things shall be joyful and
prosperous to us: since, therefore, only two or three deprive us of the
hope of safety, and others, and those, too, far more numerous, promise
us security, we have no need to despair. Since they thus oppose their
impostors to the true prophets, and imagine a kind of conflict, in which
imposture prevails and God’s truth is vanquished, he says there is no
reason why the flatteries of the false prophets should deceive you. For
if you say that they bear also the prophetic name and office, I reply,
that they err through your fault; for I deceive them because your
impiety deserves it. This may as yet be obscure, but I will endeavor to
explain it by a familiar example. At this time we see that many through
sloth withdraw themselves from all fear, and promise themselves freedom
from punishment, while they reject all care for God. O, say they, what
have I to do with religion? for this only occasions me trouble; whoever
wishes to give himself up seriously to God amidst, these dissension’s
and divisions will enter a labyrinth. Since, therefore, many think
themselves free from fault, even if they reject God, this doctrine may
be turned against them. There are, indeed, at this day dissension’s in
religion which disturb many; but do you think that this happens rashly:
Oh! we know not which party to follow: inquire; for God has not so given
the rein to Satan and his ministers, that the Church is disturbed, and
men are mutually opposed by chance. But when this happens by the just
judgment of God, it is certain that no one can be deceived unless of his
own accord. For the Prophet takes that principle from Moses, whenever
false prophets come forth, that this is a proof of faithfulness and of
sincere piety. Thy God tries thee, says Moses, whether you love him.
(<span id="iii.ix-p6.1"></span>[De
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix-p6.1"></span>.)
Since, therefore, no false prophet arises without the just judgment of
God, and since God wishes to distinguish between sincere worshipers and
hypocrites, it follows that no one can be excused on this pretext, of
differing opinions which arise by wise ordination. For since God wishes
to make an experiment, as I have said, concerning his servants and sons,
and since false prophets so mingle all things, and involve the clear
daylight in darkness, no one who truly and heartily seeks God shall be
entangled among their snares.

<span id="iii.ix-p7"></span>But Ezekiel will proceed still further, as I
have previously hinted, namely, that all impostures and errors do not
spring up rashly, but proceed from the ingratitude of the people itself.
For if they had not so willingly given themselves up to the false
prophets, God would doubtless have spared them. But, since false
prophets abounded on every side, and were so plentiful everywhere, hence
it may be understood that, the people were worthy of such impostures.
Now then we perceive the meaning of the Holy Spirit when God pronounces
that he is the author of all the error which the false prophets were
thus scattering abroad. For it is not sufficient to observe merely the
sound of the words, and then to illicit the substance of the prophetic
teaching; but we must attend to the Spirit’s purpose. I have already
explained why the Prophet says this, namely, that the Israelites should
cease to turn their backs according to their custom, saying, that if
they remained in doubt amidst various opinions, this ought not to be
imputed to them as a crime. For he answers, that the false prophets only
took this license, because the people deserved to be blinded: and in
fine, he says that Satan’s lies multiplied not at random or at the will
of men, but because God repays a graceless and perfidious people with a
just recompense. So Paul says that error has a divine efficacy, when men
prefer embracing a lie to the truth (<span id="iii.ix-p7.1"></span>[2
Thess. 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix-p7.1"></span>),
and do not submit themselves to God, but rather shake off his yoke. Now,
therefore, whoever wishes to excuse himself under the pretext of
simplicity for not acquiescing in God’s word, this answer is at hand —
that all things are thus mingled by God’s just decree. Since, therefore,
Satan eclipses the light whenever clouds are scattered to disturb the
weak, we here find God to be the author of it, since man’s impiety
deserves it. For the Prophet does not here discourse profanely about
God’s absolute power, as they say; but when he brings forward God’s
name, he takes it for granted that God is not delighted with such
disturbance, when false prophets seize upon his name. It is certain,
then, that God does not delight in such deception; but the cause must be
thought, as we shall soon see: the cause is not always manifest; but
without controversy this is fixed, that God punishes men justly, when
true religion is so rent asunder by divisions, and truth is obscured by
falsehood.

<span id="iii.ix-p8"></span>We must hold, then, that God does not rage
like a tyrant, but exercises just judgment. Besides, this passage
teaches us that neither impostures nor deceptions arise without God’s
permission. This seems at first sight absurd, for God seems to contend
with himself when he gives license to Satan to pervert sound doctrine:
and if this happens by God’s authority, it seems perfectly contradictory
to itself. But let us always remember this, that God’s judgments are not
without reason called a profound abyss (<span
id="iii.ix-p8.1"></span>[Ps 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span
id="iii.ix-p8.1"></span>), that when we see rebellious men acting as
they do in these times, we should not wish to comprehend what far
surpasses even the sense of angels. Soberly, therefore, and reverently
must we judge of God’s works, and especially of his secret counsels. But
with the aid of reverence and modesty, it will be easy to reconcile
these two things — that God begets, and cherishes, and defends his
Church, and confirms the teaching of his prophets, all the while that he
permits it to be torn and distracted by intestine broils. Why so? He
acts thus that he may punish the wickedness of men as often as he
pleases when he sees them abuse his goodness and indulgence. When God
lights up the flame of his doctrine, this is the sign of his inestimable
pity; when he suffers the Church to be disturbed, and men to be in some
degree dissipated, this is to be imputed to the wickedness of men.
Whatever be the explanation, he pronounces *that he deceived the false
prophets*, because Satan could not utter a single word unless he were
permitted, and not only so, but even ordered; while God exercises his
wrath against the wicked.

<span id="iii.ix-p9"></span>In another sense Jeremiah says that he was
deceived (<span id="iii.ix-p9.1"></span>[Jer
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix-p9.1"></span>). I
am deceived, but you Jehovah have deceived me: for there he speaks
ironically. For when ungodly men boasted that so many of his prophecies
were delusive, and derided him as a foolish and misguided man, he says,
If I am deceived, you, O Lord, have deceived me. We see, then, that by
false irony he reproves the petulance of those who despised his
prophecies; and finally, he shows that God was the author of his
teaching. But in this place God pronounces without a figure that he
deceived the false prophets. If any one now objects, that nothing is
more remote from God’s nature than to deceive, the answer is at hand.
Although the metaphor is rather rough, yet we know that God transfers to
himself by a figure of speech what properly does not belong to him. He
is said to laugh at the impious; but we know that it is not agreeable to
his nature to ridicule, to laugh, to see, and to sleep. (<span
id="iii.ix-p9.2"></span>[Ps 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)<span
id="iii.ix-p9.2"></span>; <span id="iii.ix-p9.3"></span>[Ps
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013)<span id="iii.ix-p9.3"></span>.)
And so in this place, I confess, there is an improper form of speaking;
but the sense is not doubtful — that all impostures are scattered abroad
by God — since Satan, as I have said, can never utter the slightest word
unless commanded by God. But the kind of deceit which will solve this
difficulty for us is described in the sacred history. For when Ahab had
a great crowd of false prophets, Micah alone stood firm, and faithfully
discharged his duty to God: when brought before king Ahab, he
immediately blows away their boastings — Behold! all my prophets predict
victory: he answers — I saw God sitting on his throne; and when all the
armies of heaven were collected before him, God inquired, Who shall
deceive Ahab? And a spirit offered himself, namely, a devil, and said, I
will deceive him, because I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
his prophets. God answers, Depart, and thus it shall be. (<span
id="iii.ix-p9.4"></span>[1 Kings
22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#000)<span id="iii.ix-p9.4"></span>;
<span id="iii.ix-p9.5"></span>[2 Chronicles
18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#000)<span id="iii.ix-p9.5"></span>.)
Afterwards it follows, Therefore the Lord put a lie in the mouth of all
those prophets. Here he distinctly shows us the manner in which God
maddens the false prophets, and deceives them, namely, since he sends
forth Satan to fill them with his lies. Since, then, they are impelled
by Satan, the father of lies, what can they do but lie and deceive? The
whole of this, then, depends on the just judgments of God, as this place
teaches. God, therefore, does not deceive, so to speak, without an
agency, but uses Satan and impostors as organs of his vengeance. If any
one flies to that subtle distinction between ordering and permitting, he
is easily refuted by the context. For that cannot be called mere
permission when God willingly seeks for some one to deceive Ahab, and
then he himself orders Satan to go forth and do so. But the last clause
which I have quoted takes away all doubt, since God put a lie in the
mouth of the prophets, that is, suggested a lie to all the false
prophets. If God suggests, we shall see that Satan flies forth not only
by his permission to scatter his impostures; but since God wished to use
his aid, so he afforded it on this condition and to this end. But we
shall leave the rest for the next lecture.

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we are so prone to
error, that thy truth may always shine upon us amidst the darkness of
this world: Grant, also, that we may gaze upon it with open eyes, and
subject ourselves to thee with true docility, so that being governed by
both thy Word and thy Spirit, we may fulfill our course, and at length
arrive at that happy rest, which your only begotten Son has prepared for
us. Amen.

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty Ninth.

<span id="iii.xi-p2"></span>WE saw in the last lecture with what
intention God permits so much license to the false prophets to deceive
the people. For men would desire to throw the fault of their errors on
God, if he did not meet their rashness. But God has pronounced in this
place, that his judgment is just, since the exiles as well as the Jews
remaining in the city were equally blind. Hence we must understand that
there was no cause for excuse when God’s hand was against an impious and
wicked people. He now adds, that he would be an avenger in destroying
the false prophets from the midst of the people. This seems at first
sight not to be in accordance with justice, that God should impel and
precipitate men into error, and then exact punishment of them: and as I
have said, men think themselves free from blame, if God blinds them,
casts them into a reprobate state of mind, and even hurries them into
impious desires. But I have already remarked that those act erroneously
who estimate God’s judgment by their own notions. For how small is the
measure of our intelligence: for God’s judgments are a profound abyss.
(<span id="iii.xi-p2.1"></span>[Ps
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="iii.xi-p2.1"></span>.)
Nothing therefore remains, except waiting for that day in which we shall
see face to face the things which we now behold darkly and obscurely, as
Paul says. (<span id="iii.xi-p2.2"></span>[1Co
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="iii.xi-p2.2"></span>.)
Whatever may be the sense, God does rightly in deceiving the false
prophets by way of punishing an impious people; and when he summons the
false prophets to judgment, that also is free from blame. But if men are
restive through their own rashness and audacity, God will free himself
from all their calumnies. Wherefore let us diligently mark this passage
where God pronounces that he is the deceiver; because however Satan may
plot by his lies to abolish the truth, yet he can accomplish nothing
unless God permit him, as we have already explained at full length. But
when false prophets are dragged to punishment, they have no cause of
expostulation with God and they profit nothing by their complaints,
since their own consciences condemn them. They cannot object that they
were compelled or drawn violently aside by God, since of their own
accord and by their own efforts they endeavored to deliver wretched men
to destruction by their lies. Since this is the case, God justly extends
his hands to punish them, as he now says. But let us proceed to the next
verse.

<span id="iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#010)<span id="iii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p2"></span>**10.** And they shall bear the punishment
of their iniquity: the punishment of the prophet shall be even as the
punishment of him that seeketh *unto him*

<span id="iii.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Et ferent iniquitatem suam, sicut
iniquitas sciscitantis sic iniquitas Prophetae erit.

<span id="iii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p6"></span>Here what Ezekiel had partially touched
upon is more clearly taught. For he had said, that at length false
prophets should meet with punishment, but he now joins the whole people
with them, and at the same time repels the empty pretenses by which men
are always willing to conceal their fault. For when he mentions their
iniquity by name, it is the same as forbidding them to turn their back
any more. In this way, then, God removes all the cavils to which men
usually resort, since they never pursue these tortuous paths without
being conscious of their iniquity. For when God says that he is a
searcher of hearts, he brings openly before us the secret feelings of
mankind. As long as hypocrites have to deal with men, they easily delude
them: and then they put on various disguises, by which they throw off
the blame from themselves. But when God addresses them, his language
necessarily penetrates to their hidden thoughts. Now therefore we
understand the force of the words which God uses, *they shall bear their
iniquity*

<span id="iii.xii-p7"></span>He now adds, *the iniquity of the inquirer
shall be like that of the prophet*. We have said that the sacred name of
prophet is improperly transferred to impostors: but God often speaks
thus by concession, and in this way a stumbling block occurs by which
the weak are disturbed. For when they hear that deceivers, who not only
obscure God’s word but pervert it, proudly boast in their title, they
are moved, and not without reason. For divine things ought seriously to
move us to reverence, since prophets are organs of the Holy Spirit.
Hence that man is worthy of such honor that no man ought to despise one
who is reckoned a prophet. But because God tries his own people and
blinds the reprobate, as we have said, when he sends them false
prophets, in order that the faith of the pious should not faint when
they hear that sacred name profaned, he says by concession — well, they
shall be called prophets — but he does not mean that those shall be
truly and really esteemed such who falsely claim to themselves that
glory. Now let us come to the next clause, *the iniquity of the inquirer
shall be like that of the prophet*. We have already spoken of the
iniquity of those who, being led captive by the lies of Satan, endeavor
to pervert both the worship and the pure doctrine of God. Since
therefore they propose to contend with God, their iniquity is by no
means excusable. But another question may arise concerning the people,
which, although we have solved it before, yet it may be expedient to
repeat it. He says, then, that those who had been deceived by the false
prophets would be subject to punishment, that they may sustain the same
penalty. This seems hard, as I have said: but the Prophet had previously
taught that the people would be justly involved in the same punishment
with the impostors, because they erred knowingly and willingly. For if
they had cordially devoted themselves to God, and had suffered
themselves to be ruled by his Spirit, and by the teaching of the law,
they had doubtless been freed from all error. For God takes care of his
own people, though he does not defend them from the insults of the
ungodly, yet he fortifies them by the foresight and fortitude of his
Spirit. Those who are deceived, receive the just reward of either their
sloth or pride or ingratitude. For many scarcely deigned to inquire what
the will of God was: others looked down as from an eminence on whatever
was uttered in God’s name: for through self-confidence they receive with
difficulty any instruction but their own. Since then they were so
unteachable, they are worthy of the reward which I have mentioned.
Others again are ungrateful to God: for they stifle his instructions and
the knowledge of heavenly things, and contaminate and pollute what is
sacred; so that God justly joins the disciples with their masters when
he revenges sacrilege as we see, since all sacred teaching is
overthrown.

<span id="iii.xii-p8"></span>But Ezekiel expresses more when he says,
*that the people had inquired*. For they had counselors, who thereby
gave a direct approbation to their employment. If they had been
teachable they would not have betaken themselves so eagerly to the false
prophets: hence the greater their diligence in this direction, the more
their crime was apparent, since they purposely rejected God and his
servants, by transferring themselves to the false prophets. We now
understand the meaning of this sentence. It only remains that each of us
should apply what is here said to his own profit. The Papists think
themselves to be twice or thrice absolved if they have been deceived in
any quarter. But, on the other hand, Christ exclaims — If the blind lead
the blind, it is not surprising if both fall into the ditch. (<span
id="iii.xii-p8.1"></span>[Mt
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span id="iii.xii-p8.1"></span>.)
The reason is here expressed, because however those who are deceived
show their simplicity, it is by no means doubtful that they flee from
the light and desire the darkness by a crooked and perverse craving.
Hence it happens *that the iniquity of the inquirer is like that of the
prophet.*

<span id="iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#011)<span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** That the house of Israel may go no
more astray from me, neither be polluted any more with all their
transgressions; but that they may be my people, and I may be their God,
says the Lord GOD.

<span id="iii.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Ut non errent amplius domus Israel
a me,  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) et non polluantur amplius in
cunctis sceleribus suis: ut sint mihi in populum, et ego sim illis in
Deum, dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="iii.xiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiii-p6"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p7"></span>Here God shows that there was no other
remedy, if he would recall to safety those who had almost perished, and
at the same time he teaches that it is useful to the Church to chastise
those who had so impiously declined from himself. Meanwhile it happens
that God thunders, and exercises his judgments even to the extreme of
rigor: meanwhile men do not repent but remain obstinate: nay, the
punishment which God inflicts upon the reprobate sinks them into deeper
destruction. How so? Those who harden themselves against the hand of God
heap upon themselves severer punishments, since the reprobate do not
submit to the yoke when God wishes to correct their hardness and
obstinacy. But here God announces that he will not be so severe as not
to consult for their safety. But this contradiction might disturb many,
since God destined the people as well as the false prophets to
destruction, for this seems to render his covenant vain. But he prevents
this question, and says, since he should exact such severe penalties
from the despisers of his word and from apostates, that rigor would be
useful to the Church. Now we understand the meaning of the saying, *the
house of Israel shall not err any more*: since otherwise their obstinacy
was incurable: and unless God had seriously roused them up, they had
never been brought back into the way of their own accord. Here therefore
God obliquely rebukes the hardness of his people, because they could not
be instructed except by punishment. For incorrigible indeed are those
sons who, while their father cherishes and indulges them, despise him,
and become worse by the indulgence. Of this then God now complains, that
the children of Israel were so untractable that they could not bear
destruction, unless he descended to the utmost rigor. For it was a very
sad spectacle, that God’s truth should be corrupted and adulterated by
lies, and that the people, with those who imposed upon them, should
utterly perish. But we now hear that there was but one remedy since the
children of Israel were untameable, unless they were completely broken
down. He now adds, from me: a phrase worthy of notice, for we here
gather, that as soon as we bend ever so little from following God, we
wander after errors: for we shall never hold on in the right way unless
we follow God, that is, unless we are intent upon the end which he sets
before us: and then unless our eyes are turned in the direction that he
points out, lest we bend to either the right hand or the left. Thus we
shall be beyond any danger of wandering if we, follow God: on the other
hand, if our minds turn to either this side or that, and we are not
retained in obedience to God alone, the Prophet teaches that we wander
in error, and that this will at length turn out unhappily for us. When
he speaks of the house of Israel, he does not embrace without exception
those who spring from Jacob; for both the false prophets and those who
consulted them were of Jacob’s line, and had a name in that family. But
we have already seen what was decreed concerning them, namely, that God
would destroy them and blot them out from the midst of his people. We
see then that they are not; comprehended under the offspring of Abraham
or the house of Israel; but this is restricted to the remnant of the
people whom God wished to spare. For we know that there was always some
seed left, that the covenant which had been made with Abraham might be
firm and sacred. This sentence then properly refers to the elect, who
are called by Paul the remnant of grace. (<span
id="iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span id="iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>.)
But God says that the example would be useful to the survivors, since
the punishment of others would instruct them: and when they should see
the false prophets perish, and should acknowledge God’s remarkable
judgment in their destruction, then they would profit by it. Now we
understand what the Prophet means by the destruction of the false
prophets and of those hypocrites who despised the true prophets, and
prostituted themselves to be deceived by impostors: when God makes them
an example of his wrath, the Prophet says that the house of Israel
should receive advantage from their perishing, and profit by their utter
ruin.

<span id="iii.xiii-p8"></span>Now he adds, *And that they should not be
polluted any more in all their wickedness*. Here he purposely enlarges
on their crime, that he may the more magnify the mercy of God; for if
they had been only moderately guilty, his pardoning them had not been so
remarkable. But the Prophet here pronounces them abandoned in sin, and
does not condemn them for one sin but for many: he says *they were
polluted and contaminated in their crimes*: and when God’s mercy is
extended to such as these, we discover with certainty how inestimable it
is. Finally, let us learn from this passage, that God not only pardons
men who transgress but lightly through want of thought and error, but
that he is also merciful to the abandoned who are convicted of many
iniquities. He says*, that they may be my people and I may be their
God.* God had already adopted the whole seed of Abraham, and all were
circumcised to a man: and thus they bore personally the testimony and
covenant of God’s paternal favor. Since, therefore, they were already
God’s people, and were considered as members of the Church, what can it
mean *that they shall be my people?* For God seems here to promise them
something new. But by this form of speech the Prophet marks their
declension and manifests their deserts. For although God had thought
them worthy of such honor as to reckon them among his elect people, yet
they had cast themselves out by their own depravity. For since all
religion among them was corrupt, God’s worship was profaned, his whole
law almost buried, and they were separated as far as possible from God,
as we shall afterwards see. On the part of God the adoption remained
firm: but here Ezekiel regards their condition if they would really look
at it themselves, namely, as one of estrangement, since their own
wickedness had cut them off: hence he speaks as of a new benefit when he
says, *they should be for a people* when they repented.

<span id="iii.xiii-p9"></span>The second chapter of Hosea will help us
to understand this more clearly, when it is said,

<span id="iii.xiii-p10"></span>“I will call them my people who are not
my people,  
and her beloved who is not beloved.” (<span
id="iii.xiii-p10.2"></span>[Ho
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span
id="iii.xiii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xiii-p11"></span>For the Prophet was commanded to go into
an improper house and to take an impure female and to beget sons: he
says that a son was born to whom God gave the name <span
id="iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>לאעמי, *lagnemi*, it shall not be my people:
and then when a daughter was born, she was unworthy of love. There Hosea
signifies that the Jews were cut off from the sacred root, and he speaks
not of one or two, but of the whole race; for they were neither God’s
people nor a beloved daughter. Afterwards when reconciled, they begin
again to be God’s people and a beloved daughter. Paul does not
accommodate that sentence to the calling of the Gentiles rashly: (<span
id="iii.xiii-p11.2"></span>[Ro
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)<span
id="iii.xiii-p11.2"></span>,) namely, that there was no difference
between Jews and Gentiles, since the former were rejected. Whatever it
is, we see that those who had a place and a name among God’s people, and
whom he had chosen for himself, were cast off and had become strangers
through their own fault. Thus they begin to be God’s people afresh when
they repent and God receives them to favor. The conclusion is, I will
restore them afresh, that my covenant may be renewed in some way, *that
they may be my people* as they formerly were; *and I may be to them a
God,* since by their own backsliding they deserved to be treated as
entire strangers. Besides, it is well to remember what we said
elsewhere, that under these words is contained whatever belongs to solid
happiness. For if God acknowledges us as his people, we are certain of
our salvation, as when he pronounces that he will be our God while we
call upon him as a father. But whoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved. (<span id="iii.xiii-p11.3"></span>[Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span id="iii.xiii-p11.3"></span>;
<span id="iii.xiii-p11.4"></span>[Ac
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#021)<span id="iii.xiii-p11.4"></span>;
<span id="iii.xiii-p11.5"></span>[Ro
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xiii-p11.5"></span>.) Then we must remember that celebrated
sentence of the Prophet Habakkuk, You art our God: we shall not die.
(<span id="iii.xiii-p11.6"></span>[Hab
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)<span
id="iii.xiii-p11.6"></span>.) Lastly, we have nothing else to wish for
towards the fullness of all good things and confidence in eternal life,
than that God should reckon us among his people, so that there may be
open to us a free access to him in prayer. It follows —

<span id="iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#012)<span
id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** The word of the LORD came again to
me, saying,

<span id="iii.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me,
dicendo.

<span id="iii.xiv-p4"></span>**13.** Son of man, when the land sinneth
against me by trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out mine hand
upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send
famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast from it:

<span id="iii.xiv-p5"></span>**13.** Fili hominis terra cum scelerate
egerit erga me,  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) et extendero manum
meam super eam, et confregero in ipsa baculum panis, et immisero in
ipsam famem, et excidero ex ipsa hominem et jumentum.

<span id="iii.xiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiv-p8"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p9"></span>The next verse thought to be joined: for
some interpreters altogether pervert the Prophet’s sense by finishing
the sentence there, as if he had said, I will extend my hand over it,
&e. But the sentence is dependent, as we shall see —

<span id="iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)<span id="iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p2"></span>**14.** Though these three men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver *but* their own souls
by their righteousness, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="iii.xv-p3"></span>**14.** Et fuerint tres viri isti in medio
ejus, Noe, Daniel, et Job, ipsi in justitia sua eripient  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) animas suas, dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="iii.xv-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv-p6"></span><span id="iii.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p7"></span>Here again God threatens the people of
Israel with final destruction: but the words seem opposed, that God
would be merciful and propitious to his people, and yet that no hope of
pardon would be left. But we must remember the principle, that the
prophets sometimes directed their discourse to the body of the people
which was utterly devoted to destruction, since its wickedness was
desperate; yet afterwards they moderated that rigor, when they turned to
the remainder, which is the seed of the Church in the world, that God’s
covenant should not be extinguished, as we have already said. Hence,
when we meet with this kind of contradiction, we know that God affords
no hope to the reprobate, since he has decreed their destruction: so
that language ought to be transferred to the body of the people which
was already alienated, and like a putrid carcass. But when God mingles
and intersperses any testimony of his favor, we may know that the Church
is intended, and that he wishes a seed to remain, lest the whole Church
should perish, and his covenant be abolished at the same time. The
Prophet, therefore, as before, so also now, sets before himself the
people desperate in wickedness, and says that they had no right to hope
that God would act mercifully as usual, since necessity compelled him to
put his hand for the last time to the destruction of the impious. This
is the full meaning. We had a similar passage in Jeremiah (<span
id="iii.xv-p7.1"></span>[Jer 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xv-p7.1"></span>), where he said, If Moses and Samuel had stood
before me, my mind is not towards this people; that is, it never could
be that I should return to favor them, even if Moses and Samuel should
intercede for them, and endeavor to obtain pardon by their own
intercession. The papists foolishly distort this passage to prove that
the dead intercede for us, for Moses and Samuel had been dead some time;
but God says, Even if they should pray for the people, their prayers
would be in vain. But this passage refutes that gross ignorance: for God
is not here making a difference between the living and the dead; but it
is a kind of personification, and of bringing back Moses and Samuel from
the grave; as if he had said, Were they living at this time, and
entreating for these wicked ones, I would never listen to them: for
Ezekiel here mentions three, Noah, Job, and Daniel. But Daniel was then
alive: he had been dragged into exile, and lived to a mature old age, as
is well known. Then he expresses his meaning more clearly, by saying,
*if they had been in the midst of the city they had escaped in safety
themselves*, but they would not have prevailed for others. The whole
meaning is, that God cuts off all hope of mercy from the abandoned
people.

<span id="iii.xv-p8"></span>We must remark the form of speech which is
used: he relates four kinds of punishments by which men’s crimes are
usually avenged, and enumerates them distinctly. *If I shall break the
staff of bread*, says he, *because the land has revolted from me, and I
shall send famine upon it, Daniel, Job, and Noah, shall preserve their
own souls, but shall not profit others* by their holiness: then he adds,
*if I shall send a sword*, that is, if I shall follow up the impious by
wars, *even Daniel, and Job, and Noah, shall save their own souls, but
they shall not intercede for others*. He pronounces the same of
pestilence and wild beasts. At length He reasons from less to greater.
When I shall have punished any nation, says He, with famine, pestilence,
and the sword, and wild beasts, how much less shall Daniel, Job, and
Noah, prevail with me by their intercession? But God had condemned the
house of Israel to all punishments, just as if he had poured all his
curses like a deluge to destroy them. Hence He concludes that there is
no reason for cherishing any hope of escape from these imminent dangers.
Now then we comprehend the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="iii.xv-p9"></span>Now let us come to the first kind of
punishment. *If the land*, says he, *acts wickedly against me,* or
conducts itself wickedly, <span id="iii.xv-p9.1"></span>חטא, *cheta*, to
act wickedly, *but by prevaricating with prevarication*. By these words
the crime of perfidy is distinguished from error, because men often fall
away and depart far from God through ignorance of the way which they
thought to pursue. But here the Prophet condemns the people’s defection
through perfidy, as if he had said that they purposely, and by
deliberate malice, were estranged from God, since they had been
correctly taught how God ought to be worshipped. Although the Prophet
speaks generally, yet he wished to show God’s wrath to be of no ordinary
kind: for God will often chastise men’s sins by either pestilence, or
sword, or famine, and yet will not be implacable. But he here speaks of
a desperate people, and one already addicted to eternal destruction. He
says, therefore, *by prevaricating with prevarication;* that is, by
deceiving my confidence by open and gross perfidy.

<span id="iii.xv-p10"></span>Again, *and I will stretch forth, my hand
upon it, and will break the staff of bread, and will send famine upon
it, and will cut off from it man and beast.* Here, as I have mentioned,
he touches upon only one kind of punishment; for God is accustomed to
take vengeance on men in four ways; and the prophets, as you have often
heard, usually adopt the form of speech used by Moses. These four curses
of God are everywhere related in the law, — war, famine, pestilence, and
the assault and savageness of wild beasts. Now the Prophet begins with
hunger; but he points out the kind of hunger — *if God has broken the
staff of bread.* For sometimes, when he does not reduce men to poverty,
yet he puffs up the bread, so that those who think to use it as
nourishment do not gather any rigor from it. But the Prophet properly
means it in this second sense, as we see in <span
id="iii.xv-p10.1"></span>[Ezekiel
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#000)<span id="iii.xv-p10.1"></span> and
<span id="iii.xv-p10.2"></span>[Ezekiel
5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#000)<span id="iii.xv-p10.2"></span>. The
metaphor is in accordance with the word staff: for as the lame cannot
walk unless they lean on a staff — and tremulous old men need a similar
support — so by degrees men’s strength vanish, unless new rigor is
replaced by meat and drink. Bread is, therefore, like a staff which
restores our strength when want has weakened it. We now come to the word
*breaking*. How does God break the staff of bread? By withdrawing the
nourishment which he had infused into it; for the virtue which we
perceive in bread is not intrinsic: I mean this — that bread is not
naturally endued with the virtue of continuing and inspiring life within
men; and why? Bread has no life in it: how then can any one derive life
from it? But the teaching of the law has been marked: that man lives not
by bread only, but by every word proceeding from God’s mouth. (<span
id="iii.xv-p10.3"></span>[De 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xv-p10.3"></span>.) Here Moses intends, that even if God has
inserted the virtue of nourishment in bread, yet this is not to be so
attributed to it as if it were inherent in it. What follows then? That
as God breathes a secret virtue into the bread, it sustains and
refreshes us, and becomes our aliment. On the other hand, God says that
he breaks the virtue of the bread when he withdraws from it that virtue:
because, as I have already said, when we taste bread, our minds ought to
rise immediately to God, since men, if they cram themselves a thousand
times, yet will not feel their life to be deposited in the bread.
Therefore, unless God breathes into bread the virtue of nourishment, the
bread is useless; it may fill us up, but without any profit. Now, then,
we understand the meaning of this sentence, about which we shall have
something more to say.

<span id="iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you shine so
clearly upon us with the teaching of thy Gospel, in which thy Son
reveals himself familiarly to us, — Grant that we may not shut our eyes
to this light, or turn them hither and thither by depraved curiosity,
but may remain in simple obedience, until at length having passed
through the course of this life, we may arrive at the fullness of light,
when you will transform us into thy glory by the same — your
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture Fortieth.

<span id="iii.xvii-p2"></span>I have already partially explained the
Prophet’s design, when he says, *if God has sent famine upon a land, and
Job, Noah, and Daniel were in it,* that they indeed should be safe, but
that the land should perish, since he had determined to destroy it.
Moreover, he described the kind of famine, when he said, *when I shall
have broken the staff of bread*; because, though wheat should be
plentiful, and men be prevented from starving, yet they would not be
refreshed, since the bread would only burden them. On the whole, God
means that famine, even if it arise from natural causes, proceeds from
his judgments: for by continual rains the seed rots in the ground, and
drought consumes all its juice and substance. Then, if hail devastates
the sown fields, the causes of the ensuing famine are manifest. But it
is necessary to look higher, because, as we are nourished by God’s
bounty, so we never suffer poverty unless when he withdraws his hand.

<span id="iii.xvii-p3"></span>Let us now come to the next verse. *If
these three men, the most just of all, had been in the land, they should
only free their own souls*. The exclusive particle is not expressed, but
it is easy to gather the Prophet’s sense from the context; as if he had
said that God’s decree was fixed when he had determined to afflict the
land grievously. It is sometimes asked why Noah, Daniel, and Job are
named, rather than Abraham, Jacob, or David, or any others. Those who
wish to be precise guess various comments; namely, because Noah could
not preserve the old world from the deluge, but only his sons an their
wives. But this example does not suit: and as to the others, they say
that Job did not preserve his own sons, since they were all consumed by
the lightning. But the same thing happened to others. Thus Abraham was
the common father of the people, and even he could not snatch his
posterity from the wrath of God: nay, Jeremiah describes Rachel, though
dead, weeping for her children, and refusing consolation because none of
them survived. (<span id="iii.xvii-p3.1"></span>[Jer
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xvii-p3.1"></span>.) We see, then, that this is cold. Others say
that these three men had experienced three different kinds of life; that
Noah, living before the deluge, had seen the horrible devastation of the
whole earth, and yet the renovation of the world had followed: they say,
also, that Job had flourished in prosperity, and then was deprived of
all his goods and his children, and was so defiled by disease and filth
as to be rather a carcass than a living man, and yet was restored like a
captive from the enemy’s hand. Daniel, again, had lived at Jerusalem,
had been taken captive, and had lived there in exile; that he at length
saw the beginning of the restoration of the people when that sudden
change happened, and the Babylonian monarchy passed to the Persians.
These things, at the first glance, seem to be clever; but whatever is
affected is always cold and tame. Ezekiel here mentions these three men,
simply because they first occurred to him. For we must remember that
passage of Jeremiah which I quoted yesterday, (<span
id="iii.xvii-p3.2"></span>[Jer
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xvii-p3.2"></span>,)where it is said, If Moses and Samuel had
stood before me, I should not have listened to them for the safety of
the people. A question may arise, why Jeremiah names Moses and Samuel
rather than any others? What will these clever speculators say? We see,
therefore, that each of these things must not be so scrupulously beaten
out, since it is enough to understand the general intention of the Holy
Spirit. Three men, then, are placed here, whose holiness was celebrated.
Daniel was then living: the others had been dead many ages ago; but the
integrity of them all was universally manifest. It is then as if he had
said, even if those should come who either are or have been most perfect
among men, yet they would avail nothing in interceding for a land
already devoted to destruction.

<span id="iii.xvii-p4"></span>But the Prophet’s saying, *they should be
saved on account of their own righteousness*, seems absurd: for no one
can be found whose righteousness can stand before God’s tribunal: for if
God was to reason with men, every one must be found guilty, as the
Scripture also often teaches, and experience most fully convinces us.
Here the Prophet seems to extol too much the merit of works, when he
attributes the person’s freedom to his righteousness. But the solution
is easy; namely, this righteousness of which mention is made ought not
to be separated from gratuitous pardon, which reconciles men to God, so
that their sins are not imputed to them: for as to some saying that they
were justified by faith, this does not forward the inquiry; and besides
that, it is forced. By their own righteousness shall they free their own
souls, that is, say they, by their faith. But when God addresses Noah
himself, (<span id="iii.xvii-p4.1"></span>[Ge
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)<span id="iii.xvii-p4.1"></span>,)
and says that he was found just through his piety, he does not mean that
he was endued with faith; this would be nugatory. There is no doubt,
then, that he commends sanctity and integrity in his servant; so also in
this passage, under the word righteousness or justice, he implies the
fear of God, in which all virtues are founded, and chastity and
temperance, and whatever belongs to the rule of living holy and justly.
But meanwhile this derogates nothing from the righteousness of faith;
for the faithful are reckoned just before God, and their works are also
reckoned just — not by any inherent merit — not because they bring any
perfection of that kind before God which may conciliate his favor, and
in which they can stand; but because God pardons them indulgently
through his own paternal clemency, and so approves their righteousness,
which otherwise might be deservedly rejected. For example, Pinnehas was
thought just when he avenged the reproach of the sanctuary. (<span
id="iii.xvii-p4.2"></span>[Num. 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008)<span id="iii.xvii-p4.2"></span>.)
When inflamed with zeal, Pinnehas brought out of the midst the courtezan
with her paramour; for this cause, as is said in the Psalm, (<span
id="iii.xvii-p4.3"></span>[Ps
106:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#031)<span
id="iii.xvii-p4.3"></span>,) he was reckoned just. But that could not
suffice for a man’s righteousness, since one special act could not
render a man just. Pinnehas, then, could not be reckoned just on that
ground; but while his work was pleasing to God, for that reason it was
just. But, on a serious inquiry, that work was also condemned as being
infected with some fault, and so was not just in itself. But because God
pardons his sons, as we have said, hence he accepts their works: so he
acknowledges them also as just, and they do not obtain this by either
their own worthiness or peculiar merits. For the beginning of the
righteousness about which we are now speaking is a gratuitous
reconciliation by which all the faults of the faithful are buried:
whence it happens also that their integrity, although not perfect, is
still pleasing to God. We see, therefore, that these things are easily
reconciled; that men are freed by their righteousness, and yet that
their temporal safety depends only on the mere pity of God: for when
God’s gratuitous favor has gone before, hence he seems to acknowledge as
true righteousness which was in itself mutilated and but half complete.
Now it follows —

<span id="iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p2"></span>**15.** If I cause noisome beasts to pass
through the land, and they spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man
may pass through because of the beasts:

<span id="iii.xviii-p3"></span>**15.** Si bestiam malam transire fecero
per terram, et orbaverit eam, et fuerit vastitas ut nemo transeat
propter bestiam.  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)

<span id="iii.xviii-p5"></span>**16.** *Though* these three men *were*
in it, *as* I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither sons
nor daughters; they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be
desolate.

<span id="iii.xviii-p6"></span>**16.** Tres viri isti in medio ejus,
vivo ego, dicit Dominator Iehovah, si filios et filias liberabunt: ipsi
soli liberabuntur, et terra erit in vastitatem.

<span id="iii.xviii-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.xviii-p8"></span><span id="iii.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p9"></span>Now he mentions the second kind of
punishment. For we said that God’s four scourges were here brought
before us, which are more familiarly known to men through frequent use.
They are hunger and wild beasts, war and pestilence. The Prophet has
spoken of famine; he now comes down to wild beasts. This kind of scourge
is rarely used in Scripture; for God more frequently mentions the sword,
pestilence, and famine; but when he distinctly treats, of his scourges,
he adds also savage beasts. Now therefore he says, *if he had sent wild
beasts to lay waste the land, and Noah, Job, and Daniel, had been in
that land, they would be free from the common slaughter, but that their
righteousness would not profit others*. He expresses a little more
clearly what he had spoken briefly and obscurely when he treated of the
famine. If, says he, *I shall cause an evil beast to pass through and
injure the land, so as to lay it waste, that no one may pass through on
account of the wild beasts, as I live, says he, if these three men shall
free their sons and their daughters*. This passage teaches what I lately
touched upon about the famine, namely, that the beasts did not break in
by chance to attack and rage against men, but that they are sent by God.
Thus God follows out his judgments no less by means of lions, and bears,
and tigers, than by rain and drought, the sword and the pestilence: and
surely this may be understood, if we reflect upon the great savageness
of these beasts; first, when hunger arouses them they are carried along
by a ravenous impulse; and then, without the compulsion of necessity,
they are hostile to the human race, and without doubt they would urge
themselves on to tear to pieces all whom they met with, unless
restrained by God’s secret instinct. If, therefore, God restrains the
wild beasts, thus also he sends them forth as often as it pleases him,
to exercise their ferocity against mankind, and in this way to become
his scourges. But here an oath is interposed that God may inspire
confidence in his sentence, so God swears by his own life. This is the
meaning of the phrase *as I live*; that is, I swear by my life. This is
indeed spoken improperly, but elsewhere we have seen that God swears by
his life; that is, just as if he swore by himself, because he has no
greater by whom he can swear, as the Apostle says (<span
id="iii.xviii-p9.1"></span>[Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xviii-p9.1"></span>); and as often as we swear by the name of
God we attribute the supreme power to him, and thus we profess our life
to be in his hand, and he to be our only Judge. When, therefore, he
swears by himself, he admonishes us at the same time that his name is
profaned if we swear by any others: then he shows how much religion is
to be exhibited in oaths. Let us follow, therefore, God’s example, when
our speech needs confirmation, by calling in a witness and judge: next,
that we should not use his name rashly and falsely, but that our oath
should be truly a testimony to our piety. But here in truth a question
arises, — How God can say that the land should perish which has been
once subjected to wild beasts? For sometimes wild beasts have infected
many regions, and God has immediately restrained them, and so their
cruelty has passed away like a storm.

<span id="iii.xviii-p10"></span>Again, we knew that the prayer of the
saints are not superfluous when they pray for others; but God seems here
to deny what is clearly manifest. But the solution is easy. For since he
does not inflict his judgments equably but variably, and at one time
hastens punishments and at another suspends them: at one time punishes
men’s sins and at another delays doing so, he fixes for himself no sure
law by which he is always bound, but he speaks of the land which he has
destined to destruction. God therefore will strike one region with
famine, another with war, a third with pestilence, a fourth with wild
beasts, and yet he can mitigate his own rigor, and when men begin to be
terrified, he can withdraw his hand. But if it has been once decreed
that any land must perish, all the saints would run together in vain,
because no one would be a fit intercessor to abolish that inviolable
decree. We now understand the Prophet’s intention, for he does not speak
generally of any lands whatever, but he points out the very land which
was devoted to final destruction. It follows —

<span id="iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p1"></span><span id="iii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#017)<span
id="iii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p2"></span>**17.** Or *if* I bring a sword upon that
land, and say, Sword, go through the land; so that I cut off man and
beast from it:

<span id="iii.xix-p3"></span>**17.** Vel gladium transire fecero super
terram illam, et dixero gladio, Transi per terram, ut excidatur ex ea
homo et jumentum.

<span id="iii.xix-p4"></span>**18.** Though these three men *were* in
it, *as* I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither sons nor
daughters, but they only shall be delivered themselves.

<span id="iii.xix-p5"></span>**18.** Et tres viri isti in medio ejus,
vivo ego, dicit Dominator Iehovah, non liberabunt filios et filias, quia
ipsi soli liberabuntur.

<span id="iii.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xix-p7"></span><span id="iii.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p8"></span>The Prophet now descends to the third kind
of punishment. Hence God says, *if he send a sword upon a land, he
cannot be entreated so as not to consume it utterly*, neither will he
admit any man’s intercession, although the most holy dwell there,
namely, Job, Noah, and Daniel. But the phrase used must be marked: *if I
shall say to the sword, pass through to exterminate and blot out the
whole land*, or cut off from it, *both man and beast*, because we here
gather the great power of God’s secret government. For we think that
wars are stirred up at random: and as men are in agitation, so also we
imagine war to be nothing but confusion and turbulence. But God governs
even wars by his inestimable wisdom, and also men and their swords: men
are enraged, their swords fly about in their hands, and they seem to go
hither and thither at random by blind impulse. But God here announces
that he permits swords to pass through a land, and to destroy both men
and cattle. If he had said, after the language used in many places, that
he would arm men, it would not have been very wonderful: for everywhere
throughout the Prophets he calls the Chaldaeans and Assyrians executors
of his judgment. Hence that sentence of Jeremiah, Cursed is he who has
done God’s work negligently. (<span id="iii.xix-p8.1"></span>[Jer
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#010)<span id="iii.xix-p8.1"></span>.)
But that work of God was the slaughter at Jerusalem. So also
Nebuchadnezzar is called God’s servant and minister when he laid waste
Egypt, and God promises him the reward of his labor. (<span
id="iii.xix-p8.2"></span>[Eze
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#020)<span id="iii.xix-p8.2"></span>.)
So here Ezekiel proceeds further, not only that the hands of men are
directed as God wishes, but also that their swords listen to his secret
command, so that they neither pass by nor strike any man or animal
except as far as God pleases. But if God so commands the swords, let us
know that whenever men rise up against us, that our patience is
exercised and our sins chastised in this way: and that the impious are
God’s agents: and let us determine that we shall never profit by noise
and resistance, since there is but one remedy, to humble ourselves under
God’s strong hand. Now the fourth kind of punishment follows —

<span id="iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p1"></span><span id="iii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#019)<span id="iii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p2"></span>**19.** Or *if* I send a pestilence into
that land, and pour out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man
and beast:

<span id="iii.xx-p3"></span>**19.** Vel pestem immisero in terram illam,
et effudero iracundiam meam super ipsam in sanguine ad perdendum  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) ex ea hominem et jumentum.

<span id="iii.xx-p5"></span>**20.** Though Noah, Daniel, and Job, *were*
in it, *as* I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither son
nor daughter; they shall *but* deliver their own souls by their
righteousness.

<span id="iii.xx-p6"></span>**20.** Et Noe, Daniel, et Job in medio
ejus, vivo ego, dicit Dominator Iehovah, si filium et filium
liberaverint: ipsi in justitia sua liberabunt animam suam.

<span id="iii.xx-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.xx-p8"></span><span id="iii.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p9"></span>He now affirms of the fourth kind of
punishment, what he has hitherto pronounced of the rest. He says, then,
If I shall have sent a pestilence, and have devoted a land to
devastation, that Job, Daniel, and Noah, should be safe if they dwelt
there: but that their righteousness should not profit even their sons
and their daughters. Nay, he seems to speak with greater restriction,
since he has substituted the singular number for the plural: for he had
just said, they shall not free either sons or daughters. He now says,
*not even a son or a daughter*, that is, they shall not prevail with me
by their intercession so much as to save from death even a single son or
daughter. We must also remember what I have said, that God does not
always act in the way related here: for he has manifold and various
methods of carrying out his judgments. Hence it would not be just to
impose a law not to liberate any one, and according to his own will
either to hear or reject their prayers. But here he only means, that
when he has determined to destroy a land, there is no hope of pardon,
since even the most holy will not persuade him to desist from his wrath
and vengeance. But now the conclusion follows —

<span id="iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021)<span
id="iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p2"></span>**21.** For thus saith the Lord GOD; How
much more when I send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword,
and the famine, and the noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off
from it man and beast?

<span id="iii.xxi-p3"></span>**21.** Quoniam sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah, Quanto magis cum quatuor judicia mea mala, gladium, et famem,
et bestiam malam, et pestem immisero contra Hierusalem ad excidendum ex
ea hominem et animal?

<span id="iii.xxi-p4"></span>**22.** Yet, behold, therein shall be left
a remnant that shall be brought forth, *both* sons and daughters:
behold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their way and
their doings: and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have
brought upon Jerusalem, *even* concerning all that I have brought upon
it.

<span id="iii.xxi-p5"></span>**22.** Et ecce evasio in ea residua,
 <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) evasio egredientium, inquit nempe
filii et filiae: ipsi egredientur ad vos: et videbitis vias ipsorum, et
opera ipsorum: et consolationem sumetis super malo quod venire fecero
super Hierusalem, super omni quod venire fecero super eam.

<span id="iii.xxi-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxi-p8"></span><span id="iii.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p9"></span>He now reasons, as we said in the
beginning, from the less to the greater. Hitherto he has said, If I
shall have sent forth only one weapon to take vengeance upon men, no one
will oppose my following out my decree: then he enumerated four weapons,
one after another. Now he adds, What then, when I shall have heaped
together all punishments, and not only shall have sent pestilence or
sword or famine, but as it were when I have four armies prepared and
drawn up, and shall command them to attack and destroy mankind, how
shall even one person escape? If Job, Daniel, and Noah, cannot snatch
away even their sons and daughters from a single scourge, how shall they
snatch them from four at once! We see, then, that God here cuts away the
false and specious hopes by which the false prophets deluded the
miserable exiles when they promised them a return to their country, and
daily proclaimed how impossible it was that the sacred city, the earthly
dwelling-place of God, could be taken by the enemy, and the religion
which God had promised should be eternal could perish. Since, therefore,
the false prophets so deceived these miserable exiles, here God shows
how greatly they erred while they cherished any hope in their minds;
because he had not only held one kind of scourge over Jerusalem, but
approached it with a whole heap of them to destroy and cut off both man
and beast. This then is the full meaning.

<span id="iii.xxi-p10"></span>Now he says, *If I shall have sent my four
evil judgments*. Here God calls *his judgments* evils, in the sense in
which he says in Isaiah, that he creates good and evil, (<span
id="iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>[Isa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>,)
since immediately afterwards he expresses his meaning by saying life and
death. Hence what is against us is here called evil, and so this epithet
ought to be referred to our perceptions. For our natural common sense
dictates that whatever is desirable and useful to us is good: food and
life and peace are good, and whatever is conducive to life, and what we
naturally wish for, we call good. So also, on the other hand, death and
famine are evils: so are nakedness, want, and shame: why so? since we
dread whatever is not useful to us; and because we fly from evils as
soon as reason dawns. In fine, evil here is not opposed to justice and
right, but, as I have said, to men’s opinion and our natural senses. He
now confirms what we before said, namely, that these are God’s judgments
when enemies rage against us, pestilence attacks us: poverty assails us,
and wild beasts break in upon us. When therefore we suffer under these
afflictions, let us learn immediately to descend into ourselves and to
discover the cause why God is so angry with us. For if we turn our
attention towards the sword, and pestilence, and famine, we are like
dogs which gnaw and bite what is thrown at them, and do not regard the
hand which threw it, but only vent their rage upon the stone. For such
is our stupidity when we complain of famine being injurious to us, wild
beasts troublesome, and war horrible. Hence this passage should always
be borne in mind that, these are *God’s evil judgments*, that is,
scourges by which he chastises our sins, and thus shows himself hostile
and opposed to us.

<span id="iii.xxi-p11"></span><span id="iii.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p12"></span>He now adds, *there shall be a remnant in
that escape.* They explain this verse parenthetically, as if God by way
of correction engaged to act more mercifully towards that city, than if
he struck any land with only one scourge. They explain it thus: although
these four scourges should meet together, yet I will mitigate the rigor
of my vengeance, since some shall go out safely, and reach even to you.
Almost all agree in this sense; but when I weigh the Prophet’s intention
more accurately, I cannot subscribe to it: because God seems to me to
confirm what he had said before, that he would be a just avenger of
wickedness while he treats the Jews so harshly. To discover the most
suitable sense, we must consider the condition of the exiles: it was
surely worse than if they had been destroyed by a single death for they
were dying daily; and at length, when cast out of the sacred land, they
were like the dead. Hence that exile was more sorrowful than death,
since it was better to be buried in the holy land than among the
profane. Since, then, they had been mixed with dog’s, it was no life to
them to protract a wretched existence amidst constant languor; and if
the hope of restoration had been taken away, concerning which we are not
now treating, and to which not a single syllable applies, exile was by
itself like death. Since, then, the Prophet here says, *that some should
be left, to escape,* he does not mean that they should be safe: hence
this is not a mitigation of their punishment. For as we saw before, and
especially in Jeremiah, those who died quickly were less to be deplored.
(<span id="iii.xxi-p12.1"></span>[Jer
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xxi-p12.1"></span>.) Finally, when the Prophet here says that
some should come to Babylon, he does not promise them pardon, as if God
was propitious to them, or noticed them favorably; no such thing: for he
speaks of the reprobate, and of those who bore on their forehead the
manifest sign of their impiety, and show by their whole life that they
are abandoned, and most worthy of final destruction.

<span id="iii.xxi-p13"></span>For he says, *a departure of those who go
forth shall come: sons as well as daughters shall come to you,* says
he*, and you shall see their ways and their work*: that is, you shall
see that the men are so wicked, that their ungodliness shall compel you
to confess the city to be worthy of perishing, and the people deserving
destruction. For the word consoling, which the Prophet uses immediately
afterwards, refers here to the acknowledgment of their wickedness
appeasing the minds of those who formerly roared and murmured against
God. Neither does he mean that consolation which, according to the
common proverb, has many friends; but only the calm acknowledgment of
God’s just vengeance, in which the ten tribes acquiesced. For before
they saw the state in which the inhabitants of Jerusalem were, they
thought that God was too severe, and hence their outcry and complaint
against God. The Prophet, therefore, now says, that the sight of your
wickedness will bring you consolation; for you shall see that it could
not be otherwise, and that you deserved such punishment: hence, when you
have acknowledged your abandoned wickedness, you will regard my justice
with peaceful and tranquil minds; and you will so finish and cease your
complaints which now agitate your minds in different directions. The
rest, to-morrow.

<span id="iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you daily
exercise thy judgments in all parts of the world, and since many regions
are harassed by pestilence and war, that so long as you spare us we may
profit by the evils and slaughters of others: Grant, also, if thy
scourges reach also unto us, that we may not be obstinate, but may
submit ourselves to thy judgment, and being truly humble, may we seek
pardon by the serious pursuit of piety, so that we may truly acknowledge
thee; and may feel thee to be a propitious Father to us, until at length
we enjoy thy love in thy heavenly kingdom, through Christ our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-First.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p2"></span>WE said in yesterday’s lecture, when the
Lord pronounces that he would have some remnants when destroying
Jerusalem, that this is no act of clemency, as if he had relaxed the
rigor of his justice. For exile was not preferable to death, as we may
collect from the context, since God does not use these words of his
elect. For there is no mention of repentance, so that the cause of his
vengeance would be conspicuous in their crimes. *You shall see,*
therefore*, and shall take comfort*: because the exiles who were then in
Chaldaea could not subscribe to the judgment of God. But when they saw
their brethren of such abandoned morals, the review of their sins
availed to their comfort, that is, to appease their minds. He repeats
the same in the last verse of the chapter.

<span id="iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#023)<span id="iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p2"></span>**23.** And they shall comfort you, when
ye see their ways and their doings: and ye shall know that I have not
done without cause all that I have done in it, says the Lord GOD.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p3"></span>**23.** Et consolabuntur vos, quia
videbitis vias ipsorum et opera ipsorum: et scietis quod non frustra
fecerim quaecunque feci in ea, dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p6"></span>He now puts the verb for comforting in the
third person, but in the same sense, because after the Jews shall have
been led captive, they will bear sure and special marks of God’s justice
against their sins. This, then, is the consolation, as I explained it
yesterday, while the exiles acknowledge that cruelty cannot be ascribed
to God, as if he had exceeded moderation in exacting punishment; for the
desperate wickedness of the people demanded it. But this passage
contains a useful doctrine, since we collect from it that we are never
tranquil in our minds unless when the greatest equity and justice
appears in God’s judgments, and become present to our minds. As long,
therefore, as we do not acknowledge God to be severe in just cases, our
minds must necessarily be disturbed and disarranged: hence the word
“consolation” is opposed to those turbulent thoughts. But since nothing
is more miserable than to be distracted and drawn hither and thither,
and to be anxiously disturbed, let us learn that those profit most who
acquiesce in God’s judgments, although they do not perceive the reason
of them, yet modestly adore them. But when God shows why he treats
either us or others so severely, this is a special favor, since he
offers us material for joy and tranquillity. Let us proceed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc23002.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span> “At my face.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc23002.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span> Or, “by them.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc23002.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span> That is, “any one of the house of Israel.”
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc23002.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span> “It is another word: <span
id="iii.ii-p5.1"></span>ענה, *gneneh*, is properly to answer — I will
answer him in his inquiry.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc23002.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span> “Some think the letter <span
id="iii.ii-p6.2"></span>ה to have been substituted for <span
id="iii.ii-p6.3"></span>א, and translate it — I will answer him,
*because* he comes in the multitude of his idols. But I follow the
simpler sense, because I fear their explanation to be too forced,
namely, that God would reply to the impious when they consulted him, but
according to the multitude of their idols, that is, as they deserved.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span>The Hebrew word to which Calvin here refers
is, <span id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>בה, *beh*, which is so entirely
Syriac, that Eichhorn says the Masoretes wished to corrupt it to <span
id="iii.ii-p7.2"></span>בא, *ba*. It is wanting in two MSS. Newcombe
quotes the authority of Kennicott for reading, <span
id="iii.ii-p7.3"></span>בא, *ba*, though Houbigant treats it as a
barbarism. The Chaldee interpretation is perhaps preferable. Rosenmfiner
discusses the point fully. See also Cappell. Crit. Sac., volume 1. Edit.
Hal.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc23002.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span> Or, as others translate, “separate
themselves.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc23002.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span> Or, “turn away?.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc23002.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span> Calvin has not explained the difficulty
which he raises. The verb “return” is in Hiphil, and thought to have a
case following it. Houbigant reads it in Hophal, and Newcombe prefers to
understand “yourselves.” Rosemuller, as usual, is very explanatory.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc23002.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span> “It cannot be otherwise translated here:
the word is <span id="iii.vii-p4.2"></span>נזר, *nezer*, which we
yesterday saw might be derived from <span id="iii.vii-p4.3"></span>זור,
*zor*, to be estranged. There is no doubt about the sense, ‘he who has
been separated.’” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc23002.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.vii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span> That is, “through me, or to inquire of him
in or by me, or through my name.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc23002.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p4"></span> Or, “upon that man.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc23002.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p5"></span> Some translate, “I will destroy him,”
changing the point from left to right; but the reading, “I will place
him,” is better. — *Calvin*. Calvin’s meaning is, that by altering the
point over the Hebrew letter the meaning of the word is changed: in this
and in the previous verses, Calvin prefers the reading of our authorized
version.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc23002.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p4"></span> Verbally, “from after me.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc23002.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p6"></span> “By prevaricating prevarication,”
according to some, <span id="iii.xiv-p6.2"></span>מעל *megnel*, properly
signifies perfidy, hence the version just given — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc23002.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p4"></span> Or, “shall free.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc23002.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iii.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p4"></span> That is “beasts,” for there is a change
of number. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc23002.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iii.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p4"></span> Or, “to cut off.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc23002.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p6"></span> That is, “some remnant which shall escape
shall remain in it.” — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](cc23003)
