[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc23002)  [Next](cc23004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 23: Ezekiel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 15

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying,

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me dicendo,

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>**2.** Son of man, What is the vine-tree more
than any tree, *or than* a branch which is among the trees of the
forest?

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Fili hominis, quid erit  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) lignum vitis prae omni arbore rami  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) quae est inter arbores sylvae?

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>**3.** Shall wood be taken thereof to do any
work? or will *men* take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>**3.** An sumetur ex eo  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) lignum ad formandum, ut sit opus, vel an
sument,  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) ex eo paxillum, ut
suspendatur in eo omne vas?  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md)

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span>**4.** Behold, it is cast into the fire for
fuel; the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is
burned. Is it meet for *any* work?

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>**4.** Ecce in ignem traditur  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) ad consumptionem, duas extremitates ejus
consumpsit ignis, et medium ejus exustum est,  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) an utile erit ad opus?

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>**5.** Behold, when it was whole, it was meet
for no work: how much less shall it be meet yet for *any* work, when the
fire hath devoured it, and it is burned?

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span>**5.** Ecce, cum esset integrum non factum
fuit  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) ut esset opus: quanto magis
postquam ignis consumpsit ipsum et exaruit  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) formabitur adhuc ut sit opus?

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span>The Prophet’s intention is to humble the
foolish confidence of the people, who boasted of the gratuitous kindness
of God, as if they were naturally excellent: hence, also, their
obstinacy against his threats was so great. For when the prophets
reprove them sharply, they boasted against them the remarkable gifts by
which they were divinely adorned: as if they had been so armed by God’s
benefits to resist his power, for we know that they were so blinded.
Since, then, that disease had attacked the people, it is not surprising
that the prophets in many places refute such folly. But the Prophet here
uses a simile to show the Jews that they were not intrinsically but only
accidentally excellent, since God had treated them as worthy of
remarkable benefits. Since it is so, their arrogance is easily refuted,
when they oppose their superiority to God, as if it were peculiar to
them, and not God’s special gift. But we must understand the simile
which Ezekiel uses: *what is the vine more than other trees of the
woods?* It is certain that the vine produces very good fruit, and
therefore is preferred to other trees: the very flower of the vine has a
most, delicious scent; but the fruit which it produces proves its
excellence. For the wood of the vine is without elegance and shapeless:
it does not attain to any thickness; it is slender, pliable, and
twisted. In looking at a vine, it. seems scarcely worth numbering among
shrubs: if compared with trees, it clearly has no value; but in the
excellency of trees something is easily acknowledged which surpasses all
vines. For when we cast our eyes upon a branching tree, we are struck
with admiration, while the vine lies at, our feet. If, therefore, a tree
is compared with the wood of the vine, it will be praised for its
beauty, while the vine will be despised as a low and insignificant wood.
Hence God collects that the Jews were in no respect more excellent than
others, unless because they are planted by himself, as he says in many
places in Isaiah, O my vine, I have planted thee. (<span
id="iv.i-p23.1"></span>[Isa 5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.i-p23.1"></span>.) Then in the 80th Psalm: he brought his vine
out of Egypt, and planted and propagated it even to the sea, (<span
id="iv.i-p23.2"></span>[Ps
80:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.i-p23.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.i-p23.3"></span>[Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)<span id="iv.i-p23.3"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span>Now we understand the Prophet’s meaning,
namely, that the Jews excelled, indeed, in privileges, but not in
nature, nor yet by themselves, but by the gratuitous kindness of God:
and if other nations were compared with them, they had greater dignity
than the Jews. And we know that other nations flourished in arts and
wealth, in population, in warlike valor, and in other respects: the
profane nations were like lofty trees which grow up and attract all eyes
to themselves. But the Jews were like a vine which, being planted by
God’s hand, deserved more praise than the trees of the wood which were
fruitless. Ezekiel now carries on the comparison at, greater length: *if
the vine is torn up, can its wood*, says he, *be fitted to any use?* it
will not make beams or tables, or any vessels; it will not make a peg or
a hook on which to hang a hat or cloak, or anything of the kind. Since,
then, the wood of the vine is useless when torn from the soil, and is of
no use but for burning, hence the Jews are made acquainted with their
condition since their excellence and worthiness depend on the mere good
pleasure of God: since, as he planted them, he can pluck them up in a
moment; and when they have been torn up, they will be altogether
useless, and will be cast into the fire, while trees are of some use.
But, the Prophet proceeds another step: if a bundle of twigs were cast
into the fire, and the two extreme parts were burnt up, and the middle
made dry, that scorched part would be much less useful. For since fire
penetrates to the very marrow, wood, which is half consumed, is reduced
to powder by the touch alone: He afterwards accommodates what he had
said about the vine to the city of Jerusalem; therefore let us go on to
the rest of the context.

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Therefore thus says the Lord GOD; As
the vine-tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the
fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Propterea sic dicit Dominator Iehovah,
Quemadmodum lignum vitis in ligno sylvae, quod posuli  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) in ignem ad consumptionem, sic dedi
habitatores Hierusalem.

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span><span id="iv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span>Here the Prophet shows that the citizens of
Jerusalem were cast into a fire, by which they suffered various kinds of
death: for although they were not immediately and entirely consumed, yet
the extremities were burnt off. For the whole region was laid waste all
around, and the kingdom of Israel was entirely cut off: Jerusalem
remained like the middle portion of the bundle. But the inhabitants of
Jerusalem were so worn down by adversity, that they were like a stick
burnt at both ends. Since this was so, we here perceive their great
stupidity in persisting in contumacy, although God had humbled them so
in various ways. Now, therefore, we understand the meaning of this
point. But the words of the Prophet must be explained, what shall be, or
what is *the wood of the vine compared with other wood?* Some translate,
with the palm branch; others, with the wild vine; but both of these are
foreign to the mind of the Prophet: especially the wild vine cannot have
any place here. As far as the palm is concerned, what reference is there
to the palm branch in the midst of a wood? for palms are not planted in
woods amidst lofty trees. But since the wood, <span
id="iv.ii-p7.1"></span>זמורה, *zemoreh*, signifies boughs as well as
palms, it agrees best with the sense to speak of every tree as
branching. *What*, therefore, *is the vine in comparison with every
branching tree which is among the trees of the forest?* Here the Prophet
brings before us fruitless trees, but yet those which attract our notice
by their beauty: and so he implies, if the Jews wish to compare
themselves with the profane nations, they are not superior in any
worthiness or elegance which they have naturally and of themselves. This
must be diligently noticed; although God sometimes adopts those who
excel in ability and learning, in warlike prowess, in riches, and in
power, yet he gathers his Church as much as possible from lowly-born
men, in whom no great splendor is refulgent, that they may be objects of
wonder to the world. For what end, then, does God do this? for he could
fashion his own elect, that they may be completely perfect in every way.
But since we are too inclined to pride, it is necessary that our
infirmity should always be set before our eyes to teach us modesty. For
if nothing in us reminded us of our weakness, our worthiness would blind
us, or turn away our eyes from ourselves, or intoxicate us with false
glory. Hence God wishes us to be inferior to the profane, that we may
learn always to acknowledge as received from him whatever he has
gratuitously conferred upon us, and not to arrogate anything to
ourselves when our humility is so plainly set before our eyes. But as
far as concerns the Jews, they were, as we have said, like a vine,
because their excellence was not natural, but external. God had
fashioned them, as it were, from nothing; and although they were adorned
with many remarkable gifts, yet they could claim nothing from
themselves.

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span>*Shall there be taken, says he, any wood from
it to fashion it for any work?* God here shows that the Jews were
deservedly preferred to others, because he had planted them with his
hand; for if they had been pulled out of the earth, he shows that the
wood would be useless, since it could not be used for any purpose. And
Christ uses the same simile (<span id="iv.ii-p8.1"></span>[Joh
15:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii-p8.1"></span>.md),
when he shows that we have no root in us by nature, nor yet sap or
moisture or rigor, since we are a vine planted by our heavenly Father.
But if he roots us up, nothing remains for us but to be cast into the
fire and utterly burnt. Lastly, God shows that the Jews should be viler
than the nations, if he took away from them whatever he gave them; and
he admonishes them that their state has no firmness unless through his
goodwill towards them. For if the Prophet had only said, that whatever
the Jews had they owed to God, and for this reason were bound to his
liberality, yet they might still exalt themselves. But it is added in
the second place, that they remained safe day by day, as far as God
spares them, cherishes, defends, and sustains them. Therefore the
Prophet means this when he says, *Shall it be taken to form any work
from it, or will they take it for a peg to hang any vessels upon it.
Behold*, says he, *it was given for consumption, and its two ends were
burnt up.* Here, as I said, he points out various calamities by which
the Jews were almost struck down, though not subdued. For they were
hardened in their obstinacy; and although they were like burnt and
rotten wood, yet they boasted themselves to be perfect through their
adoption, and through the covenant which God had made with Abraham: they
boasted themselves to be a holy race, and a royal priesthood. Yet God
reproves their sloth when he says theirs was like burnt wood, when a
bundle of twigs has been cast into the fire, and there is some remnant
so injured by the smoke as to be deprived of its strength.

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span>*Behold*, says he, *when it was whole could
it be formed into any work! How much less after the fire has consumed
it*. Here we pursues the same sentiment. If any one should take any part
of the bundle after the fire had dried it, could he fit it for any work?
If he should take the twig when whole, it would not be fit to receive
any shaping: how much less could the burnt wood be used for a peg or
anything else. If, then, not even a peg can be found in the entire
bundle, when the stem is like an ember through being parched by fire,
how can it be turned to any use? Now follows the application: *as I have
given the wood of the vine among woods*, says he: verbally, in the wood
of the forest. Hence gather we what I formerly said about the branch,
that it agrees with trees and is not put for the wild vine or the palm
branch: for he now says, simply, *amidst all the wood of the forest.*
But he says that *the wood of the vine was among the wood of the forest*
— not because vines are merely planted there, but this comparison is
used: that is, among woods, or even among all the woods of the forest,
because these trees are felled, and destined for buildings, or vessels
are made from them, and all kinds of wooden furniture, as well as the
materials of houses, are taken from trees. He says, therefore, *that the
wood of the vine is given among the wood, of the forest*, that is, among
the woods of the forest, since the twigs are burnt, as they cannot be
rendered useful to men: *so have I given*, says he, *the citizens of
Jerusalem*

<span id="iv.ii-p10"></span>Now after we understand the Prophet’s
meaning, let us learn that the Holy Spirit so addressed the Jews
formerly, that this discourse might profit us in these days. We must
perceive, in the first place, that we are superior to the whole world,
through God’s gratuitous pity: but naturally we have nothing of our own
in which to boast. But if we carry ourselves haughtily, through reliance
on God’s gifts, this arrogance would be sacrilege: for we snatch away
from God his own praise, and clothe ourselves, as it were, in his
spoils. But Paul, when he speaks of the Jews, shortly, but clearly,
defines both sides: Do we excel? says he — (for he there makes himself
one with the people) — Do we excel the Gentiles? says he, (<span
id="iv.ii-p10.1"></span>[Ro 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii-p10.1"></span>); by no means: for Scripture denounces us all
to be sinners — all to be, accursed. Since, therefore, we are children
of wrath, he says, there is nothing which we can claim to ourselves over
the profane Gentiles. After he has so prostrated all the pride of his
own nation, he repeats again — What? Are we not superior to others? Yea,
we excel in every way. For the adoption, and the worship, and the law of
God, and the covenant, confer upon us remarkable superiority, and such
as we find nothing like it in the whole world. How do those things
agree? That the Jews excel, and are to be preferred to others, and yet
that they excel in nothing! namely, since they have nothing in
themselves to cause them to despise the Gentiles, or boast themselves
superior; hence their excellence is not in themselves but in God. And
so, Paul here does not commend their virtues, but says that they excel
by gratuitous adoption, because God made his covenant with Abraham, and
they were to arise from the holy nations, because he instituted a fixed
line of piety among them, in promising himself to be a Father to them;
nay, he determined that Christ should spring from them, who is the life
and light of the world. We see, then, the former privileges of the Jews:
ours is the same in these days. As often as we are favored with God’s
gifts, by which we approach near him and overcome the world, we ought
also to remember what we were before God took us up. Then our origin
will prostrate all arrogance, and prevent us from being ungrateful to
God. But that is not yet sufficient; but we must come to the second
clause, that not only has God’s free grace raised us to such a height,
but also sustains us; so that our standing is not founded in ourselves,
but depends only on his will. Hence not only the remembrance of our
origin ought to humble us, but the sense of our infirmity. Whence we
gather that we have no perseverance in ourselves unless God daily, nay,
momentarily strengthen us, and follow us up with his favor. This is the
second point: the third is, if God afflicts or chastises us with his
rods, we should know that the foolish confidence by which we deceive
ourselves is by this means beaten out of us. Here we ought diligently to
weigh the meaning of the phrase — *the wood of the vine is useless when
it is torn up,* and especially when dry. For although the profane
nations perish, yet it is not surprising if God’s judgments are more
severe towards the reprobate, who had obtained a place in his Church,
and who had been enriched with his spiritual gifts. This ingratitude
requires us to become an example to others, so that the whole world may
be astonished at beholding in us such dreadful signs of God’s anger.
Hence the Jews were for a hissing and an abhorrence, an astonishment and
a curse to the profane nations. Why so? They had more grievously
exasperated God who had acted so liberally towards them, and were not
only ungrateful and perfidious, but had purposely provoked him. Thus
also it happens to other reprobates. So this clause is to be diligently
noticed, when the Prophet says *that the wood of the vine is cast into
the fire*, although trees, when cut down, are still useful either for
building or for furniture. Now it follows —

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
15:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>**7.** And I will set my face against them;
they shall go out from *one* fire, and *another* fire shall devour them;
and ye shall know that I *am* the LORD, when I set my face against them.

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span>**7.** Et ponam faciem meam in ipsos: ex
igni egredientur, et ignis vorabit  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md)
eos: et scietis quod ego Iehovah, cum posuero faciem meam in ipsis.
 <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md)

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span>**8.** And I will make the land desolate,
because they have committed a trespass, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span>**8.** Et ponam terram in vastitatem, quia
transgressi sunt transgressione  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md)
dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span><span id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span>He confirms what had been said in the last
verse, and at the same time explains it: as if the citizens of Jerusalem
retained some form, because they were not reduced to dust; but the fire
had burnt all round them, as if the flame was licking a bundle of twigs.
While the royal seat remained to them, the name of a people remained,
and hence an opportunity for their obstinacy. For they were not to be
subdued, since they were not entirely consumed: and now another madness
is added; for as soon as they had escaped from any misfortune, they
thought themselves quite safe, — “O now we shall rest,” said they; if
the enemy had departed from the city, or if new forces had not arrived
against them, or if provisions failed the enemy’s troops, they
immediately regained their courage, and not only breathed again, but
proudly laughed at God and his prophets, as if they were beyond all
danger. For this reason he now says, *I have set my face against them.*
To set, or, if any one prefers it, to establish one’s face, is to
persist constantly, so as not only to do anything on passing, but to
remain there until we have accomplished our intention; so that those are
not bad expounders of the Prophet who say, “I have set my face firmly:”
they do not translate verbally, but according to God’s meaning. For he
often chastises a whole nation or city, and yet he does not set his
face, that is, he does not stay there, but chastises them lightly, and
but for a short time, as if passing in another direction. But he means
something else here — *that he would set his face;* that is, never
desist until the people’s name, as well as their city, was utterly
abolished. For we have said that the prophets speak of the present state
of the people when they threaten such destruction. *I will set my face,*
therefore*, against them: they shall escape from one fire, and another
shall devour them*. Here the Prophet strikes down that foolish opinion
by which the Jews deceived themselves. For if they escaped from one
danger, they thought it the last, and hence their security, and even
obstinacy. But the Prophet says here, after they had escaped from one
fire, that a new fire to consume them was lighted up: he means, that
there were different means in God’s hand by which he destroys and
extinguishes a people: as he had previously said, that he was armed with
pestilence and the sword, and famine and wild beasts; so now under the
name of fire he comprehends various scourges. If, therefore, men have
escaped the sword, a new attack shall inter them, since God will press
them with famine, or urge them with pestilence, or in other ways: *and
then, they shall know,* says he*, that I am Jehovah, when I shall set my
face against it.* By these words he signifies that his glory could not
otherwise remain safe, since impunity blinded the Jews — nay, hardened
them till they became like the brutes. If, therefore, God had spared
them, his glory would have been as it were buried, and through so long a
connivance he had been no longer acknowledged as God. There was a real
necessity for so much rigor: since he would never show himself to be God
otherwise than by destroying the impious who were so stupefied by their
sins as long as he bore with them. At length he adds, *I will lay the
land waste since they have prevaricated by prevarication*. Here, also,
God expresses how terrible, yet just, was that judgment, because the
Jews were no trifling offenders, but perfidiously departed from his
worship, and from the whole teaching of the law, and were obstinate in
their ingratitude. Since they were so abandoned, we gather that God was
not too severe when he put forth his hand to destroy them utterly.

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span>Grant. Almighty God, since you have not only
deigned to separate us from the common herd of men, but also to renew
your image in us: and while thy favors towards us are conspicuous you
exhort us at the same time to glorify thy name: Grant that being mindful
of our calling we may study to devote ourselves wholly to thee and so to
extol thee by peculiar and true and rightful praises, that we may be at
length partakers of the glory to which you invite us, and which has been
acquired for us by the blood of your only begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Second

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc23003.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span> Or, “what is these.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc23003.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span> Or, “branching.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc23003.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span> “Namely, wood.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc23003.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span> Verbally, in taking, that is, if they take.
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc23003.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span> Whatever vessel. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc23003.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span> Or, “is cast.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc23003.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span> That is, “after the fire had consumed it.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc23003.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span> That is, “was not formed or fitted.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc23003.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span> Or, “was burnt as before.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc23003.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span> “I have lost.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc23003.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span> Or, “shall consume.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc23003.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span> Or, “against them. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc23003.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span> Or, “they have prevaricated with
prevarication,” as some translate; that is, have acted perfidiously, or
have been shamefully perfidious. — *Calvin*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](cc23004.md)
