[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc23000)  [Next](cc23002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 23: Ezekiel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Fourth.

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** And the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying,

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span>1. Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me, dicendo,

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span>**2.** Son of man, prophesy against the
prophets of Israel that prophesy, and say you unto them that prophesy
out of their own hearts, Hear you the word of the LORD;

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Fili hominis, prophetiza contra
prophetas Israel prophetizantes, et dic prophetizantibus ex corde suo,
Audite sermonem Iehovah.

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span>**3.** Thus says the Lord GOD, Woe unto the
foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span>**3.** Sic dicit Dominator Iehovah, Vae super
prophetas stultos  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) qui ambulant post
spiritum suum: et non viderunt.

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span><span id="ii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span>He speaks of the exiled prophets, as will be
evident from the context: for among the captives there were those who
assumed the name of God, boasting themselves endowed with the prophetic
spirit: but meanwhile they intruded into the office, and then vainly
boasted in their deceptions. But the end which they proposed to
themselves was to promise the people a speedy return, and so to will the
favor of the multitude. For the captives were already almost
broken-hearted by weariness: and seventy years was a long period. When
therefore they heard of returning after three years, they easily
suffered themselves to be deceived by such blandishments. But although
God is so vehemently enraged against those impostors, it does not
therefore follow that when he charges them with their crime, he absolves
the people, or even extenuates their fault. Nor could the people object
that they were deceived by those falsehoods, since they willingly and
knowingly threw themselves into the snare. They were not destitute of
true prophets; and God had distinguished his servants from false
prophets by well-known marks, so that no one could mistake except
willfully. (<span id="ii.ii-p11.1"></span>[De
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span id="ii.ii-p11.1"></span>.)
But in the midst of light they blinded themselves, and so God suffered
them to be deceived. But that was the just reward of their pride, since
they could not be subject to God and his servants. Then when they
thought enticements, as is evident from many passages, God also gave the
reins to Satan, that there should be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
the prophets. Micah reproves them because they desired prophets to be
given them who should promise large grape-gatherings and a plentiful
harvest, (<span id="ii.ii-p11.2"></span>[Mic
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011)<span id="ii.ii-p11.2"></span>;)
meanwhile, when God chastised them severely, they roared and were
tumultuous. We see, therefore, that while God inveighs so sharply
against false prophets, the people’s fault was not diminished; but
rather each thought thus to reason with himself — if God spares not our
prophets, what better have we to hope for?

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span>When therefore the Prophet turns his
discourse to the false prophets, there is no doubt of his intention to
reprove the whole people for attending to such fallacies while they
despised the true doctrine, and not only so, but even rejected it with
fury. *Say therefore to the prophets of Israel while prophesying, say to
those prophesying out of their own hearts.* Here he concedes the name of
prophets of Israel to those who thrust themselves forward, and rashly
boasted that they were commanded to utter their own imaginations, or
what the devil had suggested. For then indeed no others thought to have
been lawfully reckoned prophets, unless divinely chosen. But because the
wicked seized upon this title, they are often called prophets, though
God’s Spirit is a complete stranger to them: but the gift of prophecy
can only flow from that one fountain. This great struggle then happened
when the prophets, or those who assumed the title, engaged with
hostility among themselves: for we are commanded to acquiesce in God’s
truth alone: but when he is offered to us instead of truth, what can we
do but fluctuate and at length engage in conflict? There is no doubt,
then, that weak minds were thus vehemently shaken when they saw contests
and dissension’s of this kind between prophets. At this day God wishes
to prove the fidelity of his people by such an experiment, and to detect
the hypocrisy of the multitude. For, as Paul says, there must be
heresies, that those who are approved may be made manifest. (<span
id="ii.ii-p12.2"></span>[1Co
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)<span id="ii.ii-p12.2"></span>.)
God therefore does not rashly permit so much license to Satan’s
ministers, that they should petulantly rise up against sound doctrine:
nor yet without a cause does he permit the Church to be torn asunder by
diverse opinions, and fictions to grow so strong sometimes, that truth
itself is buried under them: he wishes indeed in this way to prove the
constancy of the pious, and at the same time to detect the lightness of
hypocrites who are tossed about by every wind. Meanwhile, if the
contention which we now perceive between those who boast themselves
pastors of the Church disturbs us, let this example come to mind, and
thus novelty will not endanger our faithfulness. What we suffer the
ancients have experienced, namely, the disturbance of the Church by
intestine disputes, and a similar tearing asunder of the bond of unity.

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span>Next, God briefly defines who the false
prophets are; namely, *those who prophesy out of their own hearts:* he
will afterwards add, *they have seen nothing, they only boast in the
name of God,* and yet they are not sent by him. The same thing is
expressed in various ways, but I shall treat other forms of speech in
their own places. Here, as I have said, we may readily decide at once
who are the true and who the false prophets: the Spirit of God
pronounces every one who prophesies from his own heart to be an
impostor. Hence nothing else remains but for the prophets faithfully to
utter whatever the Spirit has dictated to them. Whoever, therefore, has
no sure testimony to his vision, and cannot truly testify that he speaks
from God’s mouth and by the revelation of his Spirit, although he may
boast in the title of prophet, yet he is only an impostor. For God here
rejects all who speak from their own heart. And hence we also gather the
extreme vanity of the human mind: for God puts a perpetual distinction
between the human mind and the revelation of his Spirit. If this be so,
it follows that what men utter of themselves is a perverse fiction,
because the Spirit of God claims to himself alone, as we have said, the
office of showing what is true and right. It follows —

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span><span id="ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span>*Woe to, the foolish* or disgraceful
*prophets* <span id="ii.ii-p15.1"></span>נבל, *nebel*, signifies “a vile
person,” “a castaway,” just as <span id="ii.ii-p15.2"></span>נבלה,
*nebeleh*, means “foulness,” “crime,” “wickedness,” although <span
id="ii.ii-p15.3"></span>נבל, *nebel*, is oftener taken for folly, and I
willingly embrace this sense as it is generally received. He calls false
prophets foolish, because they doubtless fiercely insulted the true
servants of God — just like upstarts puffed up with wonderful
self-conceit; for the devil, who reigns in them, is the father of pride:
hence they carry themselves haughtily, arrogate all things to
themselves, and wish to be thought angels come down from heaven. And
when Paul speaks of human fictions, he grants them the form of wisdom.
(<span id="ii.ii-p15.4"></span>[Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)<span id="ii.ii-p15.4"></span>.)
Hence there is no doubt that these pretenders of whom Ezekiel speaks
were held in great esteem, and so, when swollen with bombast, they
puffed forth surprising wisdom; but meanwhile the Holy Spirit shortly
pronounces them fools: for whatever pleases the world under the mask of
wisdom, we know to be mere folly before God.

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span>Now he adds, *who walk after their own
spirit, without seeing any thing:* that is, when no vision has been
given them. Ezekiel explains himself more clearly, or rather the Spirit
who spoke through him. As, therefore, he has lately condemned all who
prophesy out of their own mind or heart, — for the noun “heart” is here
used for “intellect,” as in other places, — as, therefore, the Spirit
has lately condemned all such, so he says that those *who walk after
their own spirit* wickedly abuse the prophetic office. He here alludes
to the prophetic gift when he speaks of “spirit.” For, because they
might object that false prophets did not speak from their own heart, but
had secret revelations, he concedes to them the use of the word “spirit”
by a rhetorical figure,  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) and thus
refutes their boasting, as if Ezekiel had said that those fictitious
revelations are mere fancies: they have indeed something in them more
than common, but still they are fanatics. This then is the sense of the
word “spirit.” Meanwhile there is no doubt that he repeats what he
lately saw, and the contrast removes all doubt. *Without seeing any
thing*, says he: thus vision is opposed to the human heart and spirit;
but what is vision but a supernatural gift? When, therefore, God raises
his servants above the capacity of human ability, and makes them discern
what no mortal power can bestow, that is a vision; and if a vision is
removed, nothing will remain but the spirit or heart of man. Hence those
who cannot really show that their utterance is evidently inspired, shall
be compelled to confess that they speak of their own minds. It follows —

<span id="ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#004)<span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p2"></span>**4.** O Israel, thy prophets are like the
foxes in the deserts.

<span id="ii.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Tanquam vulpes in locis solitaries
prophetae tui, Israel, fuerunt.

<span id="ii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p6"></span>Hence Ezekiel exposes the snares of the
false prophets. The ten tribes had been dispersed, just as if a field or
a vineyard had been removed from a habitable neighborhood into desert
regions, and foxes held their sway there instead. For they have many
hiding-places; they insinuate themselves through hedges and all
openings, and so break into the vineyard or field, and lay waste its
fruits. Such, as I have said, was the condition of the people from the
time of its dispersion. While the Israelites dwelt at home, they were in
some way retained within their duty, as if fortified by certain
ramparts. At Jerusalem, too, the high Priest presided over spiritual
trials, that no impious doctrine should creep in: but now, since the
people were so dispersed, greater license was given to the false
prophets to corrupt the people, since the miserable exiles were exposed
to these foxes; for they were liable to injuries just as if desert
regions surrounded them. Being thus destitute of protection, it was easy
for foxes to enter by clandestine arts, and to destroy whatever good
fruits existed. Meanwhile Ezekiel obliquely reproves the people’s
carelessness. Although they were dispersed, and were so open to the
snares of the false prophets, yet they thought to have been attentive
and cautious, and God would doubtless have afforded them aid, as he
promises to his people the spirit of discretion and judgment whenever
they need it. (<span id="ii.iii-p6.1"></span>[1Co
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010)<span id="ii.iii-p6.1"></span>.)
But when the Israelites were wandering exiles, and attention to the law
no longer flourished among them, it came to pass that foxes, meaning
their false prophets, easily entered. Whence it follows that the people
were not free from faults, since they exposed themselves to the snares
of these false prophets. It follows —

<span id="ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p2"></span>**5.** You have not gone up into the gaps,
neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the battle
in the day of the LORD.

<span id="ii.iv-p3"></span>**5.** Non ascendistis ad rupturas  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) neque sepiverunt sepem super domum Israel ad
standum in praelio in die Iehovae.

<span id="ii.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv-p6"></span><span id="ii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p7"></span>Hence he pursues the same sentiment, but
presses the false prophets harder. He has said generally that they were
sacrilegious, making a false use of God’s name when speaking entirely in
their own. He now separates them by another mark from the approved and
faithful servants of God, *namely, they had not gone up into the breach,
nor built up a hedge to protect the house of Israel, that they might
stand in the battle in the day of Jehovah*. This verse is variously
explained: some refer what is here said to prayer; others twist it
according to different imaginations, but I restrict it to their
teaching.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) Ezekiel not only blames
their inner and hidden perfidy, he not only strikes their minds, so as
to convince them that they had no desire for piety, and no zeal for
God’s glory, but he shows that their teaching must be altogether
rejected, because they did not propose to themselves the right object.
But what is the mark at which all God’s servants thought to aim? Surely
to consult the public safety; and when they see signs of God’s wrath, to
meet them, and prevent the urgent calamity. These impostors saw the
people not only impious, but rebellious, so that there was no hope of
their repentance. On the other hand, they saw God threatening; and
although they were blind, yet they could behold the signs of God’s
reproaching vengeance. Hence it was their duty to go up to the breaches.
Hence, also, we understand what the Prophet means by “breaches,” namely,
as an approach is open to an enemy to storm a city when a breach is made
in the wall, so also, when the iniquity of the people overflows like a
deluge, a rupture is already made, by means of which God’s wrath is able
to penetrate immediately, and to lay everything waste till it is reduced
to nothing.

<span id="ii.iv-p9"></span>As often, then, as we see God offended by the
people’s wickedness, let us learn that a breach has been made, as if we
had been destined to destruction. Hence those who desire to discharge
the office of teaching faithfully ought to hasten to the breach, to
recall the people from their impiety, and to exhort them to repentance.
Thus the wall becomes restored, because God is appeased, and we are able
to rest in quietness and security. What follows has the same object —
*they have not restored the hedge*. For when a people breaks through all
rights, and violates God’s law, it is just as if they laid themselves
bare in every part from the protection of God, as Moses reproves them
when speaking of the molten calf: Behold, says he, this day you are
naked; that is, because they had hurled themselves into destruction.
(<span id="ii.iv-p9.1"></span>[Ex
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#025)<span id="ii.iv-p9.1"></span>.)
So the Prophet says that these traitors did not run up to restore the
hedge when the house of Israel was exposed to robbers, thieves, and wild
beasts, because it was no longer protected by the hand of God. What
follows has the same object, *that they should stand in the battle in
the day of the Lord;* that is, to oppose themselves to God’s vengeance.
This relates to prayers, when mention is made of Phinehas, in <span
id="ii.iv-p9.2"></span>[Ps 106:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#030)<span
id="ii.iv-p9.2"></span>, and also in the same psalm, <span
id="ii.iv-p9.3"></span>[Ps 106:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv-p9.3"></span>, where it is said of Moses, Unless Moses had
stood in the breach to turn away God’s wrath. Here also, as I have said,
the Prophet looks rather to doctrine. For here he sharply rebukes the
folly of false prophets who had promised wonderful things. Now, when God
approached in earnest, all their prophecies vanished: he says,
therefore, *they stood not in the battle in the day of Jehovah*; for, if
they had diligently exhorted the people to repentance, those sinners had
reconciled God to themselves: for we turn aside his judgment beforehand
when we turn to him in time, as Paul teaches. (<span
id="ii.iv-p9.4"></span>[1Co 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031)<span
id="ii.iv-p9.4"></span>.) If, therefore, the people had been thus
diligently advised, they had stood in the battle; that is, their
teaching would have been a bulwark against the breaking out of God’s
wrath to destroy them utterly. Now, therefore, we see the meaning of
Ezekiel, namely, to show how the fallacies of the false prophets could
be perceived, since by their blandishments and flatteries they destroyed
the people,. Now it follows —

<span id="ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span><span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#006)<span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span>**6.** They have seen vanity and lying
divination, saying, The LORD saith: and the LORD hath not sent them: and
they have made *others* to hope that they would confirm the word.

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span>**6.** Viderunt vanitatem, divinarunt
mendacium, dicentes, dicit Iehovah, et non misit eos Iehovah: et sperare
fecerunt  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) ad stabihendum sermonem.

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span><span id="ii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span>Here again he pronounces generally that those
false prophets were vain, and this assertion depends upon the principle
that they had spoken from their own heart or spirit, for nothing false
or vain can proceed from God. It follows, therefore, that they are here
condemned of vanity and lying, because they dared falsely to use the
name of God when they uttered nothing but their own dreams. He now
confirms what we saw in the last verse, when he says, *they hoped to
establish their word*. Hence they puffed up the people with vain hope,
when they said that God would not be so severe as to exact continual
punishment of the holy and elect nation. True prophets also often recall
sinners to the mercy of God, and magnify it so, that those who wrestle
with despair may not doubt God’s long-suffering, since he is said to be
slow to anger, and inclined to reconciliation; and his pity endures for
a life, while his anger passes away in a moment. (<span
id="ii.v-p7.1"></span>[Nu 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018)<span
id="ii.v-p7.1"></span>; <span id="ii.v-p7.2"></span>[Ps
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008)<span id="ii.v-p7.2"></span>, and
<span id="ii.v-p7.3"></span>[Ps
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span id="ii.v-p7.3"></span>.)
True prophets indeed act thus; but they join two members which must not
be separated, otherwise God himself would be, as it were, dissipated.
 <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) Hence, when true prophets exhort
sinners to hope and predict God’s freeness to pardon, they likewise
discourse about penitence; they do not indulge sinners, but rouse them,
nay, wound them sharply with a sense of God’s anger, so as in some way
to stir them up, since God’s mercy is set before us for that end, that
by it we may seek life. Hence we must be dead in ourselves; but false
prophets sever between the two, and divide God, as it were, in half,
since they speak only of his freeness to forgive, and declare his
clemency to be set before all, while they are profoundly silent about
repentance. Now, therefore, we see why the Prophet here reproves these
traitors  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) who abused the name of God,
*since they made the people to hope.* Without hope, indeed, the sinner
could not be animated to seek God: but they promised peace, as he will
say directly, when there was no peace. Therefore let us proceed with the
exposition.

<span id="ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#007)<span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span>**7.** Have ye not seen a vain vision, and
have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas you say, The LORD saith
*it*; albeit I have not spoken?

<span id="ii.vi-p3"></span>**7.** An non visionem vanitatis vidistis? et
divinationem mendacii locuti estis? Et loquentes  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) dicit Iehovah: ego non fueram locutus?

<span id="ii.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi-p6"></span><span id="ii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p7"></span>Here God shows why he had formerly pronounced
that they brought forward nothing but vanity and falsehood, namely,
because they used his name falsely, and out of light created darkness;
for by the feint of speaking in God’s name, they darkened men’s minds.
That sacred name is, as it were, a fount of splendor, so as far to
surpass the light of the sun; nay, whatever light exists, is made
apparent and refulgent by it. But, as I have said, the servants of Satan
turn light, into darkness, because they audaciously boast that God has
said so. This passage and similar ones show us how diligently we ought
to guard against Satan’s fallacies. This is their astounding boldness to
bring forward God’s name while they so wantonly trifle with his
judgments. For to boast that God has spoken is as if we wished, by
impious profanation, purposely to draw him into a dispute. For how can
God bear us to turn his truth into lie? But there have been impostors in
all ages who have thus thoughtlessly flown in the face of God. We are
not surprised at the heathen doing so; but in the chosen people, it was
certainly an incredible prodigy and an intolerable disgrace, when they
had access to all heavenly doctrine for the guidance of their conduct,
and when God was daily calling forth prophets, as he had promised by
Moses, to see these impious dogs who barked so, and you pretended so
proudly to speak in God’s name. (<span id="ii.vi-p7.1"></span>[De
18:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span
id="ii.vi-p7.1"></span>.) Admonished, then, by this caution, let us be
on our guard when we see Satan’s servants endued with such arrogance. It
follows —

<span id="ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#008)<span id="ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p2"></span>**8.** Therefore thus says the Lord GOD;
Because ye have spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I *am*
against you, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="ii.vii-p3"></span>**8.** Propterea sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah, eo quod locuti estis vanitatem, et vidistis mendacium,  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) propterea ecce ego contra eos, dicit
Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="ii.vii-p5"></span>**9.** And mine hand shall be upon the
prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the
assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of
the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel;
and you shall know that I *am* the Lord GOD.

<span id="ii.vii-p6"></span>**9.** Et erit manus mea contra prophetas
qui vident vanitatem, et qui divinant mendacium: in consilio populi mei
non erunt, et in scriptura  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) domus
Israel non scribentur: et ad terram Israel non redibunt: et cognoscitis
quod ego Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="ii.vii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.vii-p9"></span><span id="ii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p10"></span>Here at length he begins to pronounce
judgment against the false prophets. Hitherto, under the form of a
complaint, he shows how wickedly they had corrupted and profaned his
sacred name: then how impiously they had rendered prophecies
contemptible by their lies, and how cruel they were to the people whose
safety ought to be their first care, and how they drew on the miserable
to destruction. For after God has so narrated their sins, he now
denounces punishment; and, first, generally he says that he was their
adversary. This clause is by no means superfluous, since such
carelessness would not have besotted the impious, unless they thought
themselves free from all dealings with God; hence they utterly reject
all fear and sin with freedom. But this could not happen, unless they
determined that God either sleeps, or does not behold human affairs or
trifles as they do. Since, therefore, false prophets very licentiously
corrupt God’s word, when they pretend it to be a pleasant sport; God, on
the other hand, pronounces Himself their adversary; as if he said, your
contest shall not be with men, but I will be the avenger of so wicked a
profanation of my name.

<span id="ii.vii-p11"></span><span id="ii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p12"></span>Besides, he afterwards points out the
punishment; *my hand*, says he, *shall be against the prophets*. For
although God threatens to become an adversary to the reprobate, yet this
is not sufficient to terrify them, they are so stupid. But it is
necessary to use another stimulus, namely, that God should display his
power. This is the reason why he now adds, *his hand should be against
the false prophets*. The hand is sometimes taken for a blow: but because
God sees the impious torpid amidst their sins, he says that he would not
only be their enemy and an avenger of his glory, but he brings forward
his own hand into the midst. It follows, *they shall not be in the
counsel of my people*. Some explain the noun <span
id="ii.vii-p12.1"></span>סוד, *sod*, more subtlety than they need for
that experience of God which is offered to the elect for their
salvation. But this explanation is forced, for they are deceived in
thinking that the Prophet’s meaning is different in the second clause,
where he adds, they shall not be written in the list of the house of
Israel: he repeats the same thing in different words: in the first place
he had said, they should not be in the secret of the people: for <span
id="ii.vii-p12.2"></span>סוד, *sod*, signifies a secret, but it is taken
for counsel: *they shall not be therefore in the assembly of the
people*: afterwards he adds, *they shall not be in the catalogue of the
house of Israel*. He mentions a catalogue, because judges and others
elected to any office were written in a list. We see, therefore, what
the Prophet intends — for I am compelled to break off here — namely,
that those impostors who wished to enjoy the prophetic title, were
altogether without the Church, since God had cast them off.

<span id="ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ii.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we are so torpid
in our vices that excitements are daily necessary to rouse us up, first,
that our destined pastors may faithfully call us to repentance; then,
that we in our turn may be so attentive to their exhortations, and so
suffer ourselves to be condemned, that we may be our own judges: Grant
also, that when you chastise us severely, the taste of thy paternal
goodness may never be so lost to us, so that a way may always be open to
us to seek reconciliation in Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Fifth.

<span id="ii.ix-p2"></span>We explained yesterday what the Prophet meant
when he pronounces that the impostors who deceived the people *should
not be in the counsel of the pious nor in their catalogue,* and we said
that this was twice repeated. Now the question arises, did the Prophet
speak of the secret election of God, or only of an external state? For
although these traitors were at the greatest distance from the Church,
yet we know that they boasted in a common title like Ishmael, who, until
he was cast out of his father’s house, proudly boasted in his right of
birth. (<span id="ii.ix-p2.1"></span>[Ge
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#009)<span id="ii.ix-p2.1"></span>.)
And at this day, we see how the Papists claim to themselves the name of
“the Church,” since they pretend to the perpetual succession: and truly
we are compelled to confess that the ordinary ministry is with them. But
because they have tyrannically abused their power, and have altogether
overthrown that method of governing the Church which the Lord had
appointed, we may safely laugh at their boastings.  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) There was the same haughtiness in the
false prophets of old, who asserted that they held no mean rank among
the people, because they were created prophets by God. Hence, therefore,
we gather that these words are not used of any external state, because a
place among the elect people was always conceded to them. Without doubt,
then, we must understand the contrast between the true members of the
Church and hypocrites, who pretend to the name of God. And for this
reason it is said in <span id="ii.ix-p3.3"></span>[Ps
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002)<span id="ii.ix-p3.3"></span>, as
well as <span id="ii.ix-p3.4"></span>[Ps
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004)<span id="ii.ix-p3.4"></span>,
that not all who go up to the mount of God have a perpetual seat there,
unless they are pure in heart and hand. The sum of the whole then is,
although false prophets thunder forth their boasts with inflated cheeks,
and claim the prophetic name, yet they thought not to be reckoned in
that rank, as they are altogether without the elect people.

<span id="ii.ix-p4"></span>But a second question arises out of this. If
the Prophet denies their right to be included in the council of the
pious, he ought not to speak in the future tense: because as God’s
election is eternal, so his sons were written in the book of life before
the creation of the world. But he says they shall not be written, and
this seems absurd. But Ezekiel here accommodates his language to the
usual custom of mankind. The language of the psalm is harsher: let them
be blotted from the book of life, since they are not written among the
just. (<span id="ii.ix-p4.2"></span>[Ps
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028)<span id="ii.ix-p4.2"></span>.)
For it cannot happen that he who is once written in the book of life can
ever be blotted out. But in the second clause the Prophet explains
himself — that they be not written with the just; that is, that they be
not written in the catalogue of the just. So also Ezekiel now says:
*they shall not be in the secret of my people,* and they shall not be
*written in the writing of the house of Israel*: because for a time they
seemed to be in the number of the pious: hence a change of expression is
here used, but only in accommodation to the rudeness of our mind.

<span id="ii.ix-p5"></span>This passage is useful in this sense. The
Holy Spirit admonishes us that it is not sufficient to suppose men
members of the Church because the greater number seem to excel others,
just as the chaff is above the wheat and suffocates it: thus hypocrites
bury the sons of God whose number is small, while they shine forth in
their own splendor, and their multitude makes them seem exclusively
worthy of the title of the Church. Hence let us learn to examine
ourselves, and to search whether those interior marks by which God
distinguishes his children from strangers belong to us, viz., the living
root of piety and faith. This passage also teaches that nothing is more
formidable than to be rejected from God’s flock. For no safety is to be
hoped for, except as God collects us into one body under one head.
First, all safety resides in Christ alone; and then we cannot be
separated from Christ without falling away from all hope of safety: but
Christ will not and cannot be torn from his Church with which he is
joined in all indissoluble knot, as the head to the body. Hence, unless
we cultivate unity with the faithful, we see that we are cut off from
Christ: hence I said that nothing was more to be feared than that
separation of which mention is here made. On the other hand, it is said
in <span id="ii.ix-p5.1"></span>[Ps
106:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#004)<span id="ii.ix-p5.1"></span>,
Remember me, O God, in thy good will towards thy people: visit me with
thy salvation. When the author of the Psalm prays in this way, he at the
same time acknowledges that our true and solid happiness is placed in
the Lord’s embracing us with the rest of the faithful. For God’s good
will towards his people is that fatherly kindness by which he embraces
his own elect. If, therefore, God thinks us worthy of that fatherly
favor, then we have a sure confidence of safety.

<span id="ii.ix-p6"></span>Afterwards he adds, *And they shall not
return to the land of Israel: and ye shall know that I am Jehovah*.
Ezekiel here places an outward mark as the sign of reprobation, since,
while a free return was permitted to others, these were excluded. Hence
Ezekiel signifies that God’s anger would be manifest in the case of
false prophets by their exclusion from the benefits common to the
people. For when God shall open the door, and promulgate an edict
concerning a free return: they shall remain exiles, and shall never
enjoy that native country to which they boasted that they should in a
short time return. He confirms then by an outward symbol what he has
already said about reprobation. For although many died in exile who were
real members of the Church, as Daniel and his allies, and many others,
yet., as far as these deceivers were concerned, it was a sure sign of
their rejection that they boasted of their speedy return to their
country. Since, therefore, they were deprived of that advantage, God
openly shows that they were unworthy of being reckoned among the elect
people. It follows —

<span id="ii.x"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p1"></span><span id="ii.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#010)<span id="ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p2"></span>**10.** Because, even because they have
seduced my people, saying, Peace; and *there was* no peace; and one
built up a wall, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered, *morter*:

<span id="ii.x-p3"></span>**10.** Propterea et propterea  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) quod deceperunt populum meum dicendo, pax
et non erat pax: et ipse aedificavit parietem, et ecce ipsi leverunt
ipsum insipido.

<span id="ii.x-p5"></span>**11.** Say unto them which daub *it* with
untempered *morter*, that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing
shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall
rend *it.*

<span id="ii.x-p6"></span>**11.** Dic ad linentes insipido, cadet:
 <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) erit pluvia *vel imber* inundans:
et dabo lapides grandinis,  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) et
spiritus turbinum *vel tempestatum* scindet *vel disrumpet*

<span id="ii.x-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.x-p10"></span><span id="ii.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p11"></span>Here Ezekiel pursues the same metaphor which
he had used with a very slight difference, for there is such an
agreement that the connection is apparent between the former and the
present sentence. He had said that the false prophets did not go up to
the breaches, and did not restore the hedges of the house of Israel: we
have explained these words thus — teachers who discharge their duties
honestly and sincerely are like builders, who, if they see a breach in a
wall, instantly and carefully repair it: they are like gardeners who do
not allow either a field or a vineyard to be exposed to wild beasts. As,
then, he had formerly said that these false prophets did not go up to
the breach through their not being affected by the dispersion of the
people, but knowingly and willingly betrayed the people’s safety through
open and gross perfidy; so also he now says, that they built a wall
indeed, but without mortar. The word <span id="ii.x-p11.1"></span>תפל,
*thephel*, “untempered,” is variously explained, but I doubt not the
Prophet meant sand without lime. Jerome thinks it to be mortar without
chaff; but my view is better, namely, that they built only in
appearance; and in this the image which the Prophet now uses differs
from the preceding one. He had said before, they did not go up to the
breach; he now grants them more — that they really built; but it is easy
to reconcile the two assertions: since they did not go up to the breach
to provide safety for the people; and yet they feigned themselves
anxious, and seemed as if they wished to restore the ruins. But while
the Prophet merely grants their intention, he adds that they were bad
builders, just as if any one should heap together a quantity of sand,
and moisten it with water, yet it would profit him nothing; for the sand
disperses by itself, and grows solid by lime alone, and thus becomes
cement. Therefore the Prophet means that those impostors accomplish
nothing seriously; and when they show great anxiety and care, that is in
vain, because they only heap up sand and dust when they ought to temper
the mortar with sand and lime. We understand then how these two places
mutually agree: *because, even because they have deceived my people*:
this is without a figure. Now he adds figuratively, *they have built up
a wall, but they have daubed it only with untempered mortar*, that is,
sand.

<span id="ii.x-p12"></span>The kind of fallacies are now mentioned*:
because they said, Peace, when there was no peace.* We yesterday
reminded you that impostors have something in common with God’s true
servants, just as Satan transforms himself into an angel of light.
(<span id="ii.x-p12.1"></span>[2Co
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="ii.x-p12.1"></span>.)
We know that all the prophets were always messengers of peace: now this
agrees chiefly with the good news, How beautiful are the feet of those
who preach the gospel of peace. (<span id="ii.x-p12.2"></span>[Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span id="ii.x-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.x-p12.3"></span>[Ro
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span id="ii.x-p12.3"></span>.)
Whenever God commends his own word, he adds its character of peace. For
when he is justly at enmity with us, there is one way of reconciliation
and remission of sin. This springs from the preaching of the gospel. The
prophets formerly discharged this duty; and when these impostors strove
to deceive the people, they stripped off their masks and deceived the
simple through the difficulty of discerning between themselves and the
true servants of God. And yet, as we said yesterday, no one could be
deceived except through their own fault. For God, indeed, offers us
peace, and invites us to reconciliation by his own prophets; but on this
condition, that we make war with our own lusts. This, then, is one way
of being at peace with God by becoming enemies to ourselves, and
fighting earnestly against the depraved and vicious desires of the
flesh. But how do false prophets preach peace? Why! so that miserable
and abandoned men may sleep in the midst of their sins. We must
diligently attend, then, to this difference, that we may safely embrace
the peace which is offered us by true prophets, and be on our guard
against the snares of those who fallaciously flatter us with peace,
because under promise of reconciliation they foment hostilities between
God and ourselves.

<span id="ii.x-p13"></span><span id="ii.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p14"></span>How, then, can it happen that we can be at
rest while God is opposed to us? *Thou shalt say*, therefore, to those
*who daub with untempered mortar, it shall fall*. Here the Spirit
signifies that the false prophets should be subject to the greatest
ridicule, when they shall be convicted by the event, and their is shall
be proved by clear proof. Hence, also, we may gather the utility of the
doctrine which Paul teaches, that we must stand bravely when God gives
the reins to impostors to disturb or disperse the Church. They shall not
proceed any further, says he. (<span id="ii.x-p14.1"></span>[2Ti
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009)<span id="ii.x-p14.1"></span>.) He
says elsewhere in the same epistle, (<span id="ii.x-p14.2"></span>[2Ti
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013)<span id="ii.x-p14.2"></span>,)
They shall wax worse and worse; that is, as far as God pleases to be
patient with them. But meanwhile the end is at hand, when the Lord shall
shame all the impious false prophets, and detect their ignorance,
rashness, and audacity, because they dared to use his name in offering
peace to the reprobate. *Thou shalt say,* therefore*, the wall shall
fall*. He speaks here of doctrine. *There shall be an overflowing
shower*, says he — a desolating rain. Here the Spirit signifies that
there shall be a violent concussion which shall disperse all the
artifices of the false prophets, and detect their frauds, when the Lord
should bring on the Chaldaeans, and deliver the city to them. Hence the
same meaning is intended *by the shower, by stones, by the rush of a
whirlwind*, but it was necessary to express the same thing in many ways,
because the Israelites had grown torpid through their fallacies, and
willingly seized upon what the false prophets said — that God would be
propitious to them. After he had mentioned the shower, he goes on to
hailstones. The more probable reading is, Ye, O great hailstones, shall
fall; unless perhaps it is better to take the verb <span
id="ii.x-p14.3"></span>תפלנה, *thephelneh*, transitively, as I am
inclined to do, *ye shall make fall.* This apostrophe is emphatic,
because God addresses the stones themselves, and thereby obliquely
reproves the sloth of those who thought to escape in safety through
their blandishments. When God, therefore, addresses the stones, he
doubtless reproaches the Israelites for hardening themselves so
completely. He adds the violence of whirlwinds, or of tempests, in the
same sense. *The violence of the whirlwinds*, then, shall *break down*
or overthrow *the wall*. In conclusion, Ezekiel teaches that the
doctrine of the false prophets had no need of any other refutation, that
the arrival of the Chaldaeans, and their boasting, is like a storm and
whirlwind to devastate the whole land: and thus he derides those praters
who used their tongues so audaciously: he says that those strangers
should come to refute these lies, not by words only, but by a violent
attack. It follows —

<span id="ii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#012)<span id="ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p2"></span>**12.** Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it
not be said unto you, Where *is* the daubing wherewith ye have daubed
*it*?

<span id="ii.xi-p3"></span>**12.** Et ecce cadet paries,  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) annon dicetur ad vos, ubi litura  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) quam levistis.

<span id="ii.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xi-p7"></span><span id="ii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p8"></span>He confirms the last sentence, namely, that
the false prophets would be a laughing-stock to all when their
prophecies and divinations came to nothing, for the event would show
them to be liars. For when the city was taken it sufficiently appeared
that they were the devil’s ministers of deceit, for they were trained in
wickedness and boldness when they put forth the name of God. Now the
Prophet teaches that a common proverb would arise when the wall fell;
for by saying, *shall it not be said to them*, he signifies that their
folly and vanity would be completely exposed, so that this proverb
should be everywhere current — *where is the daubing with which you
daubed it?* It follows —

<span id="ii.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#013)<span id="ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p2"></span>**13.** Therefore thus says the Lord GOD; I
will even rend *it* with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be an
overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailstones in *my* fury, to
consume *it*

<span id="ii.xii-p3"></span>**13.** Propterea sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah. Cadere faciam  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) spiritum
tempestatum in ira mea: et imbre inundans in ira mea: et erit imber
inundans in ira mea,  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) et lapides
grandinis in excandescentia ad consumptionem.

<span id="ii.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xii-p7"></span><span id="ii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p8"></span>He still pursues the same sentiment; but he
says he will send forth storms and hail, and a whirlwind. He formerly
spoke of hail, and showers, and violent storms; but he now says, that
those winds, storms, and showers should be at hand to obey him. We see,
therefore, that this verse does not differ from the former, unless in
God’s showing more clearly that he would send forth storms, whirlwind,
and hail to overthrow the empty building which the false prophets had
raised. It follows —

<span id="ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#014)<span id="ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p2"></span>**14.** So will I break down the wall that
you have daubed with untempered *morter*, and bring it down to the
ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall
fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof: and you shall know
that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="ii.xiii-p3"></span>**14.** Et evertam parietem quem levistis
insipido, et projiciam in terram, et discooperietur fundamentum ejus, et
cadet: et consumemini in medio ejus: et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="ii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p6"></span>This verse ought to be united with the
other: God says, *I will throw down the wall*. For the false prophets
had acquired so much favor, that their boasting was as much esteemed as
an oracle. Hence the people were persuaded that what even these
impostors dreamt was uttered by God. Since, therefore, they had so bound
men’s minds to themselves, the Prophet was obliged to inveigh vehemently
against those impostures, since he would not have succeeded by simple
language. This language, indeed, may seem superfluous; but if any one
considers how greatly these miserable exiles were deluded by the false
prophets, he will easily acknowledge that God does not repeat the same
thing so often in vain: as in this place he brings forward nothing new;
but he so inculcates what we have already seen as to confirm it. *I will
pull down*, therefore, *the wall which you have daubed with untempered
mortar, and I will lay it low on the ground, and its foundation shall be
uncovered*, or discovered. Here the Prophet signifies that God would so
lay bare the fallacies of those who had deceived the people with vain
hopes, that no disguise should remain for them, but their disgrace
should be plain to every one. Now, such was the shamelessness of these
impostors, that if they were convicted on one point, yet they did not
desist on that account, but took credit to themselves if anything turned
out more fortunately than they could expect,  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) as if they had not prophesied in vain,
while a single thing came true. Since, therefore, the impious so turned
their backs when God detected their folly, the Prophet adds, that the
false prophets would have nothing left, because God will not only
overthrow whatever they seemed to build, but he will uncover even the
foundations, so that the people may understand that there was not a
scruple or the least particle of truth in them.

<span id="ii.xiii-p8"></span>*And it shall fall, and you shall be
consumed in the midst of it.* He had just said that it should be
ruinously consumed: hailstones, he said, should fall to consume it; by
which word he understood that the final slaughter should be so severe
that no hope should be left. For as long as Jerusalem stood, the
Israelites always look forward to a return. But when they saw the
kingdom not only weakened, but utterly destroyed, the temple overthrown,
and the city ruined, whenever they heard of their dreadful dispersion,
not the slightest remnant of hope survived. Now this consumption is
transferred to the false prophets. As that consumption was final, and
without a gleam of hope, *ye shall be consumed*, says he, *in the midst
of it, and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.* He does not inculcate this
particular so often in vain; but he inveighs with indignation against
the wicked audacity of the false prophets, who dared so petulantly to
oppose themselves to the true servants of God, and to assume his name,
and to trifle with him like children. Such is the prodigious madness of
mortals who dare to set themselves against God: for this reason, he
says, they shall at length perceive with whom they have to do. It
follows —

<span id="ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#015)<span id="ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p2"></span>**15.** Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon
the wall, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered *morter*;
and will say unto you, The wall *is* no *more*, neither they that daubed
it;

<span id="ii.xiv-p3"></span>**15.** Et complebo excandescentiam meam in
pariete et linentem ipsum insipido: et dicam illis non est paries, et
non sunt qui leverunt ipsum.

<span id="ii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p6"></span>If the inveterate obstinacy of the people
had not been known to us, Ezekiel would seem too verbose, since he might
have said in a few words what he explains at such length. But if we bear
in mind the perverse and refractory disposition of the people, we shall
find that there was need of such continual repetition, *I will fulfill*,
says he, *my burning wrath upon the wall;* that is, I will show how
detestable and destructive to my people was this doctrine. Hence God
fined up his anger on the wall, when he reduced to nothing all the lies
of the false prophets: afterwards also he attacked them, since the mark
of disgrace was attached to their characters, and this rendered their
doctrine detestable: afterwards, says he, *I will say, There is no wall;
those who daubed it are not.* When God speaks thus, he means that he
will suffer the false prophets to triumph among the people for only a
short time. For even to the destruction of the city and temple they
always withstood God’s servants with a bold forehead, as if they would
thrust their horns against God and his announcements. Let us observe,
then, that while Jerusalem was standing, the appearance of a wall
existed; for there was the prop of false doctrine, and the people fed
willingly on such deceits. Their daubing, therefore, stood till it
vanished with the ruin of the city, and then their vanity was proved,
for God took vengeance on these insolent triflers. It follows —

<span id="ii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#016)<span id="ii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p2"></span>**16.** *To wit*, the prophets of Israel
which prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and which see visions of peace for
her, and *there is* no peace, says the Lord GOD.

<span id="ii.xv-p3"></span>**16.** Prophetae Israel prophetarunt de
Hierusalem, et viderunt ei visionem pacis, et non est pax, dicit
Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="ii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xv-p5"></span><span id="ii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p6"></span>He now concludes this discourse, and shows
what he had hitherto intended by a building badly cemented, by using
sand without lime. *The prophets of Israel prophesied concerning
Jerusalem*. Here he does not mean false prophets, with whom Jeremiah was
continually contending, but those who in exile still hardened the
wretched. While they thought to make use of the occasion, and so to
humble the people who had been so grievously wounded by the hand of God,
they stirred them up to pride, as we have formerly seen. Our Prophet was
obliged to strive with them for the comfort of his exiles, for he was
peculiarly sent to the captives, as we have said, although the advantage
of his prophecies also reached Jerusalem. *The prophets*, those *of
Israel*, that is, the ten tribes dispersed in different directions,
*prophesied concerning Jerusalem*. Why then did they not rather predict
a happy result? For they were reduced to extremes, and meanwhile
promised victory to the Jews. *And they saw a vision, for it,* says he.
This clause seems opposed to another, in which the Prophet says that
they saw nothing. How, then, do these two things agree — to see a
vision, and yet to see nothing’? What he now says as to *seeing a
vision* refers to their false boasting. For they were altogether without
the Spirit of God, nor did they possess any revelation. Yet when they
boasted themselves to be endowed with the Spirit, and many had faith in
their words, the Prophet concedes to them the name of a vision, although
there was none, by accommodation. He says, therefore, *that they saw a
vision,* that is, that they boasted in one since they professed to be
spiritual. As at this time the Papists deny that they utter anything out
of their own minds, and say that they have all those fictions, by which
they adulterate all piety, from the Holy Spirit; so these prophets said
they were spiritual: and as far as the title is concerned, the Prophet
grants what in reality he disallows when he adds, *there was no peace
when they said there was peace.* Hence it appears that a vision was in
their mouth united with sacrilegious boldness: yet there was no vision;
because, if God had manifested anything by his Spirit, he would really
have proved it as he says by Moses. (<span id="ii.xv-p6.1"></span>[De
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022)<span id="ii.xv-p6.1"></span>.)
Since, then, there was no peace, but the final overthrow of the city was
at hand, it is easily collected that they saw nothing, but made false
use of that sacred name of vision to acquire confidence for themselves.
As to his saying there is no peace, it extends to the future. They
promised peace by saying that the siege of the city was to be raised,
and prosperity to await the Jews. But God, on the other hand, pronounces
there should be no peace, because it will shortly be evident that
Jerusalem is devoted to utter destruction.

<span id="ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ii.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we do not cease
to provoke thee by our sins, that we may at length consider our wretched
condition, unless you govern us by thy Spirit, and subject us to thyself
in true obedience: and may we so desire to be reconciled to thee, that
we may not flatter ourselves, but being altogether humbled and emptied
of self, may we fly to thy mercy with a true feeling of piety: and so
find what is prepared for us in Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Sixth.

<span id="ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#017)<span
id="ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p2"></span>**17.** Likewise, thou son of man, set thy
face against the daughters of thy people, which prophesy out of their
own heart; and prophesy thou against them,

<span id="ii.xviii-p3"></span>**17.** Et tu fliesi hominis, pone faciem
tuam contra filias populi tui, quae prophetant ex corde suo: et propheta
contra eas.

<span id="ii.xviii-p4"></span>**18.** And say, Thus saith, the Lord GOD;
Woe to the *women* that sew pillows to all armholes, and make kerchiefs
upon the head of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of
my people, and will ye save the souls alive *that come* unto you?

<span id="ii.xviii-p5"></span>**18.** Et dices, sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah, Vae consuentibus pulvillos super omnes cubitos manus, et
facientibus pepla  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) super caput
omnis staturae ad venandum animas: in animas venabimini a populo meo,
 <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) et animas quae vobis sunt  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) vivificabitis.

<span id="ii.xviii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xviii-p10"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p11"></span>WE may gather from this passage that
Satan’s lies were not spread among the people so much by men as by
women. We know that the gift of prophecy is sometimes though rarely
allowed to women, and there is no doubt that female prophets existed
whenever God wished to brand men with a mark of ignominy as strongly as
possible. I say as much as possible, because the sister of Moses enjoyed
the prophetic gift, and this never ceased to the reproach of her
brother. (<span id="ii.xviii-p11.1"></span>[Ex
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)<span
id="ii.xviii-p11.1"></span>.) But when Deborah and Huldah discharged the
prophetic office, (<span id="ii.xviii-p11.2"></span>[Jud
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004)<span id="ii.xviii-p11.2"></span>,
and <span id="ii.xviii-p11.3"></span>[2Ki
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xviii-p11.3"></span>,) God doubtless wished to raise them on high
to shame the men, and obliquely to show them their slothfulness.
Whatever may be the reason, women have sometimes enjoyed the prophetic
gift. And this is the meaning of Joel’s second chapter, (<span
id="ii.xviii-p11.4"></span>[Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span
id="ii.xviii-p11.4"></span>,)Your sons shall see visions and your
daughters shall prophesy. There is no doubt that the Spirit transfers to
the kingdom of Christ what had been customary among the ancient people.
For we know that Christ’s kingdom is described, or rather depicted,
under the image of that government which God formerly held under the
law. Since, then, certain women were gifted with the prophetic spirit,
Satan, according to his custom, abused this under a false pretense. We
know that he always emulates God and transforms himself into an angel of
light, because if he were to show himself openly, all would instantly
flee from him: hence he uses God’s name deceptively, to ingratiate
himself among the simple and incautious. And he not only sends forth
false prophets to scatter abroad their lies and impostures, but he turns
even females to the same injurious use.

<span id="ii.xviii-p12"></span>Here we see how anxiously we ought to
guard against any corruption which may creep in to contaminate the pure
gifts of God. But this contest seems not to have been sufficiently
honorable to the servant of God; for it was almost a matter of shame
when they engaged with women. We know that those who desire praise for
their bravery do not willingly engage with unequal antagonists who have
no strength to resist; since there is no praise in a victory when it is
too easy: so also Ezekiel could put away from him this undertaking,
since it was unworthy of the prophetic office. Hence it appears, that
God’s servants cannot faithfully discharge the duties assigned to them,
unless they strive to remove all impediments. This then is the condition
of all those to whom God assigns the office of teaching, that they may
oppose all false doctrines and errors, and never consider or wish for
great praise from their victory: it should suffice them to assert God’s
truth against all Satan’s devices. Thus we see Paul strove with a
workman (Demetrius), (<span id="ii.xviii-p12.1"></span>[Ac
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xviii-p12.1"></span>,) and that was all but ridiculous: and truly
he might seem not sufficiently to regard his dignity; for from the time
when he saw secret things which it was not lawful for him to utter, and
was carried up to the third heaven, (<span
id="ii.xviii-p12.2"></span>[2Co
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xviii-p12.2"></span>,) when he engages in a contest with a
craftsman, he seems to forget that dignity to which God had raised him.
But we must remember the reason which I have mentioned, that as the duty
of teaching is assigned to God’s servants, so they are appointed as his
avengers and defenders of the doctrine of which they are heralds. Hence
if, so to speak, fleas were to come out of the earth and rail at sound
doctrine, none who are influenced by a desire of edification will
hesitate to contend even with those fleas. Thus the Prophet’s modesty is
conspicuous, because by God’s command he turns to these weak women to
refute even them.

<span id="ii.xviii-p13"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p14"></span>It is said, then, *woe to those who sew
pillows* or *cushions*; it is the same thing — *to all armholes, and to
those who make covers for the head of every stature*. There is no doubt
that by these tricks they deluded the minds and eyes of the simple. It
is evident from the law that some ceremonies are useful, since God
commands nothing superfluous; but Satan by his cunning turns everything
useful to man’s destruction. Meanwhile we must remark that false
prophets were always immoderately fond of outward signs; for since they
have nothing substantial to offer, they have need of ostentation to
dazzle all eyes. This then is the reason why men and women who intend to
deceive, always heap together a number of ceremonies. Hence Ezekiel
says, *that those women had sown together pillows, and he adds, for all
armholes*. Whence it appears that they laid them under the armpits of
those by whom they were consulted, although he afterwards seems to hint
that they themselves reclined upon these pillows. But now he is treating
of the people. The ancients were accustomed when they reclined at table
to have cushions under their arms, though this is not our habit. But
there is no doubt that they wished to represent a kind of sleep, like
the foolish who consult oracles, and think themselves in ecstasies, and
snatched away beyond all thoughts of this world. Then they had veils or
coverings which they put over their heads. In this way imposture
flourished with the Roman augurs; for they veiled their head when they
wished to begin their incantations. Livy says, that the augur stood at
the threshold with his head covered, and uttered these words, “O
Jupiter, hear;”  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) so that it is
probable that veils covered the heads of those who wished to consult
God, that they might be as it were separated from the world, and no
longer look upon human things, but have only spiritual eyesight. With
this view these women used such ceremonies that wretched men thought
themselves caught up above the world, and all earthly thoughts being
laid aside, they dozed so as to receive the oracles, and at the same
time had the head covered to avoid everything which might call them off
and distract them, and to be wholly intent on spiritual meditations.

<span id="ii.xviii-p16"></span>As to his saying, *upon all arms, and
upon the head of every stature*. I doubt not that the Prophet teaches by
these words that these women exercised a promiscuous trade, making no
distinctions, but, gratifying all without choice, so long as they
brought their money in their hands, as we shall by and by see. Hence
this mark of universality ought to be noticed emphatically, because
these women did not attend to the disposition with which persons came,
but only grasped at their reward, and thus the gate was as open to all
as that of the market-place. For shops are open to all, since all are
expected to promote profit and make bargains, and merchants by their
allurements entice as many as they can to purchase their goods. So also
veils were provided for all heads and cushions for all arms, for there
was no difference except in reference to profit from these profane and
base transactions. With regard to the word “stature,” the opinion of
those who think it used, because the women ordered those who consulted
the oracles to stand, appears to me forced, and not in accordance with
the Prophet’s intention. I have no doubt that, the Prophet uses the word
for “age,” or person, as others correctly interpret it; as if he had
said, that they made no difference between old and young, tall and
short, but prostituted their answers to all from whom they looked for
gain.

<span id="ii.xviii-p17"></span>It afterwards follows, *Is it not to hunt
souls?* Here God reproves one crime, but he will shortly add another,
namely, the profanation of his sacred name. But he here speaks only of
the death of souls, as if he said that the women laid those snares to
deceive wretched souls. And because Ezekiel was commanded to, prophesy
against them, he here addresses them more vehemently — *Will ye hunt the
souls of my people?* It is literally the souls which belong to my
people; but it will be more simple to receive it thus — *will ye hunt
the souls of my people, and will ye give life to your own souls,* unless
any one wishes to interpret it so as to make the Prophet repeat the same
thing twice. For the souls of the people were also their own. For as we
shall afterwards see, no one is deceived by the devil unless he offers
himself of his own accord, and entangles himself in his snares on
purpose. Since then it is always true that wretched men who catch at
vain oracles devote themselves to the devil and his ministers, hence the
passage may be explained in this way. But the sense which I have
proposed is more simple, namely, that these women must not be yielded to
*because they have hunted the souls of the people;* as if the Prophet
had said, the people are precious to God, who has undertaken the care of
them. Thus then he reasons; such is your audacity, nay, even fury, that
you doubt not to seize upon God’s people: since therefore your impiety
is so licentious and bold, will God suffer you to rage with impunity
against the souls of which he is the guardian? Lastly, he signifies that
punishment is prepared for the women who ensnare God’s people, because
although those who are deceived are worthy of death, yet God will still
exact punishment of Satan’s ministers who have endeavored to despoil him
of his rights. It, follows —

<span id="ii.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p1"></span><span id="ii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#019)<span id="ii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p2"></span>**19.** And will ye pollute me among my
people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls
that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live,
by your lying to my people that hear *your* lies?

<span id="ii.xix-p3"></span>**19.** Et profanastis me erga populum meum
in pugillis hordeorum  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) propter
frusta  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) panis: ut occidaris animas
quae non moriebantur, et ad vivificandum animas quae non vivebant,
decipiendo populum meum audientes mendacium.  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)

<span id="ii.xix-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.xix-p8"></span><span id="ii.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p9"></span>Here God accuses these women of a double
crime; one crime was that which I have mentioned, cruelly to destroy the
souls which were sacred to God, and hence were destined to be saved; but
he added a more atrocious crime — that of sacrilege, because they had
abused the name of God to deceive. Nothing is less tolerable than when
God’s truth is turned into a lie, because this is like reducing him to
nothing. God is truth; if, therefore, that is abolished, what else will
remain behind? God will be, as it were, a dead specter. Hence the
Prophet, in God’s name, complains of both*: ye have profaned me,* says
he*, before my people.* For as the gift of prophecy was a rare and
remarkable pledge of God’s love and paternal anxiety towards the
Israelites, so when that gift was corrupted, the name of God was at the
same time polluted. For God was never willing to be disjoined from his
word, because he is himself invisible, and never appears otherwise than
in a mirror. Hence God’s glory, and sanctity, and justice, and goodness,
and power, ought to shine in the gift of prophecy; but when that gift is
contaminated, we see how such a disgrace becomes a reproach against God.
In this way his holiness is defiled, his justice, virtue, and fidelity,
are corrupted, and his very existence called in question. So it is not
without cause that God pronounces *his own name to be polluted.* Then he
adds, *among the people.* And this circumstance increases the crime,
since God’s name was profaned where he wished it to be peculiarly
worshipped; for it was also profaned among the Gentiles: but since God
had never made himself known there, their profanation was the less
detestable. But, because God erected his throne among the people of
Israel, and wished his glory to shine there, we see how sacrilege
increases, while his name is profaned in that sanctuary which he had
chosen. This is one crime.

<span id="ii.xix-p10"></span>But he also adds, *on account of handfuls
of barley and pieces of bread*. Here God shows how much and how basely
he was despised by those females, who sold their prophecies for a piece
of bread or a few grains of barley which any one could hold in his hand.
If they had demanded a great reward, their insatiable avarice would not
have extenuated their crime; but their impiety is the rather discovered,
when on account of a small reward they so prostituted themselves and the
name of God. They boasted themselves to be the organs of the Holy
Spirit: but when by this mask they deceived the people, injustice was
done to the Holy Spirit, since for so paltry a reward they vainly
boasted in their prophecies. They prostituted even God himself: and in
fine, this was just as if; being corrupted by a small bribe of no value,
they did not treat God’s name with sufficient respect to be withheld
from the crime by the slightest of the recompense. A comparison will
make the matter clearer. If a person is tempted by a moderate reward to
the perpetration of any crime and refuses, and then when he is offered a
far more valuable reward, and thus yields to the temptation, this shows
that his will was upright, though not sufficiently firm. But if any one,
for a single farthing, undertakes to do what he is ordered, and refuses
no crime, this shows his readiness to all sorts of wickedness. If a girl
rejects bribes when she knows her modesty to be assailed, but yet yields
for a large reward, here, as I have said, virtue struggles with vice;
but if she prostitutes herself for a morsel of bread, here she manifests
that depravity which all abominate. This, then, is God’s intention, when
he says that these women traded in their lies for handfuls of barley and
pieces of bread. If any one objects that prophecies were anciently
saleable, since it was customary with the people to offer the prophets
rewards, I answer, that the women are not condemned merely for receiving
either the handful of barley or the piece of bread, but because they did
not hesitate to corrupt God’s truth for a trifling gain, and then to
turn it into a lie. The Prophet afterwards points out the nature of
their deceit, for it would not have been sufficient to blame these women
generally, unless Ezekiel had pointed with his finger at their
pestiferous impostures.

<span id="ii.xix-p11"></span>Now, therefore, he says, *that they slew
the souls which were not dying, and kept alive the souls which were not
living.* We have said before, that by this mark the true and righteous
servants of God were distinguished from impostors. For the servants of
God, who faithfully discharge the duty enjoined upon them, kill and make
alive: for God’s word is life, and brings health to lost mankind; but is
a savor of death unto death in those who perish, as Paul says. (<span
id="ii.xix-p11.1"></span>[2 Cor. 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="ii.xix-p11.1"></span>.)
Hence it is true that prophets who faithfully and properly discharge
their duty both kill and make alive: but they give life to the souls
which are to be freed from death, and slay the souls which are devoted
to destruction; for they denounce eternal death to all unbelievers
unless they repent; and whatever they bind on earth is also bound in
heaven. (<span id="ii.xix-p11.2"></span>[Mt
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span id="ii.xix-p11.2"></span>.)
Their teaching, therefore, is effective for destruction, as also Paul
elsewhere teaches. We have at hand, says he, vengeance against every
high thing which exalts itself against Christ, (<span
id="ii.xix-p11.3"></span>[2 Cor. 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="ii.xix-p11.3"></span>.)
Hence honest teachers are armed by God’s vengeance against all
unbelievers who remain obstinate: but they convey life to those who
repent, since they are messengers of reconciliation; nay, they reconcile
men to God when they offer Christ to them as our peace, and by whom the
Father is propitious to us. (<span id="ii.xix-p11.4"></span>[Eph
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#016)<span id="ii.xix-p11.4"></span>.)
When false prophets desire to rival God’s servants, they omit the
principal part, namely, faith and repentance; hence it happens that they
proclaim life to souls already adjudged to destruction; for they give
life to the reprobate who are hardened in contempt of God by their
flatteries; for they do not require of men either faith or penitence,
but only a reward. Hence also it happens that they slay the souls which
ought not to die, namely, because nothing is prouder or more cruel than
these false prophets. For they fulminate according to their pleasure,
and sink even to the lowest hell the whole world when no hope of profit
appears.

<span id="ii.xix-p12"></span>Here then we see the vices of these women
of whom Ezekiel treats so pointedly out, that no one need be any longer
deceived by them except through his own fault. Hence also we gather a
perpetual rule in examining doctrine, lest the deceits of Satan should
surprise us for the word of God. Let us learn, then, that the prophetic
word is life-giving to us, if we are dissatisfied with our sins, and fly
to God’s pity with true and serious penitence; for all souls are slain
who do not receive this kind of life; and whoever compares the papacy
with that corruption which Ezekiel describes to us, will see that,
although Satan has many methods of deceiving men, yet they will always
be discovered like himself. Ezekiel spoke of veils and cushions. We see
many rites exhibited in the papacy, so that the incredulous, being
snatched as it were out of the world, are not only delirious, but suffer
themselves to be drawn in any direction like cattle by the grossest
impostures. But in their teaching we perceive what Ezekiel condemns,
namely, that they give life to souls devoted to death, and slay souls
which thought to be kept alive. For what is the meaning of their immense
heap of laws, except to bury wretched consciences? For any one who
wishes to satisfy the laws of the papacy from his heart, must cut
himself to pieces, so to speak, through his whole life. We now perceive
with what intent our Prophet will elsewhere say that legislators of this
kind are implacable, since they remit nothing, and exact all their
conditions with the utmost rigor. Hence it happens that these miserable
souls perish, because despair oppresses them and overwhelms them in the
deep. Meanwhile we see how they give life to souls subject to death,
since; pardon is prepared for adulterers, robbers, manslayers, and all
criminals, if they only buy themselves off, as popish priests and monks
pretend that God is appeased by satisfactions and prayers. Hence they
thrust expiation’s of no value upon God; and, to speak more correctly,
trifles and follies, which do not deceive even children, they call
expiation’s, as if God could change his nature. Hence we must diligently
remark this passage, that we may know how to distinguish between true
and false prophets, and may not despise the test which the Prophet puts
before us.

<span id="ii.xix-p13"></span>He says, *in deceiving my people by
listening to a lie.* He accuses some of lying, and others of willingly
embracing is. For the noun <span id="ii.xix-p13.1"></span>כזב, *kezeb*,
which is repeated, is derived from the same root. Here, again, God
undertakes the cause of his people; for though they were all worthy of
being drawn into exile by Satan, yet when God took care of them, it was
like snatching them out of Satan’s hand, and claiming them as his own
peculiar people. This is one point. But meantime these wretches are
deprived of all excuse for seeking false oracles. For the Prophet
pronounces them deceived *because they listened to vanity,* that is,
because they wished to be deceived, since it was entirely their own
fault, and they could not in any way throw it off. It is true they were
deceived under false pretenses through the abuse of the prophetic name,
and hence their vision was obscured by a darkened cloud; but still they
thought to have gone to the fountain, for no opening would have been
found for Satan if they had been properly fortified: for God had
surrounded them with ramparts by giving them a law to protect them from
all fallacies. Since, then, they thus exposed themselves of their own
accord, it is not surprising if God allowed them to be deceived.

<span id="ii.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p1"></span><span id="ii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#020)<span id="ii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p2"></span>**20.** Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I *am* against your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls
to make *them* fly, and I will tear them from your arms, and will let
the souls go, *even* the souls that ye hunt to make *them* fly.

<span id="ii.xx-p3"></span>**20.** Propterea sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah, Ecce, ego ad vestros pulvillos quibus vos venamini illic animas
ad volandum; et lacerabo eos desuper brachiis vestris, et eruam animas
quas vos venamini, animas ad volandum.

<span id="ii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xx-p5"></span><span id="ii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p6"></span>Here Ezekiel begins to threaten those women
with what would shortly happen, namely, that God would not only render
them contemptible, but also ridiculous, before the whole people, that
their delusions and impostures might sufficiently appear. This is the
Prophet’s intention, as we shall afterwards see; but the Prophet is
verbose in this denunciation. God therefore says, *that he is an enemy
to those cushions*, that is, to those false ceremonies which were like
cloaks to deceive miserable men: hence he says, that those souls were a
prey. He uses the comparison from hunting: *ye have hunted*, says he,
*the souls of my people*. And this is the meaning of the word used
immediately afterwards *for flying*. This word <span
id="ii.xx-p6.1"></span>פרח, *pherech*, signifies also “to flourish;” but
I here willingly subscribe to the opinion of all who interpret it to
fly: unless the paraphrast is right in translating it “to perish;” for
he thought the Prophet was speaking metaphorically, as if he meant that
those souls were ensnared, and so vanished away. But I do not think this
quite suitable, since it is more probable that the Prophet is speaking
of their lofty speculations. For we know that false prophets boasted in
this artifice, when they either raise, or pretend they raise, men’s
minds aloft, and curious men desire this only; and hence it happens that
the doctrines of the Law and the Gospel are insipid to them, because
subtleties alone delight them. And we see at this day how many embrace
the follies of Dionysius  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) about the
celestial hierarchy, who treat all the prophets, and even Christ
himself, as of no value. Hence the Prophet says, *that these women
hunted the souls of the people,* because they had snares prepared in
which they entangled all who were subject to their impostures and
fallacies. Yet, in my opinion, he also alludes to birds. When,
therefore, he has said that all impostures were Satan’s method of
hunting souls, he now adds obliquely another simile, that all false
prophecies are so many allurements to catch birds. The sense of the
passage now appears clear. *Behold*, therefore, says he, *God will arise
against your cushions, by which you have hunted birds to make them fly;*
that is, when you promised wonderful revelations those wretched dupes
whom their own curiosity urged on were deceived by such enticements.
Afterwards he adds, *I will free them from your arms,* and *I will let
go the souls which you have hunted to make them fly,* says he. He
repeats again what we have already said about deep speculations, by the
sweetness of which false prophets are accustomed to entice all fools who
cannot be content with true doctrine, nor be wise with sobriety.
Meanwhile it is by no means doubtful that God here speaks peculiarly of
his elect, who were left among the people. For although they were but
few, God was unwilling for them to perish: and for this reason he
announces that he would be their avenger, and undeceive them, whether
they had been already entrapped, or were just surrounded by these
allurements. Since, then, he uses the same word, we gather from this
that the phrase cannot be used indiscriminately. For God suffers many to
perish, as he says by the Prophet Zechariah, “Let what perishes perish,”
(<span id="ii.xx-p7.1"></span>[Zec
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="ii.xx-p7.1"></span>); but
meanwhile he rescued a small number as the remnant of his choice, as
Paul says. (<span id="ii.xx-p7.2"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span id="ii.xx-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you show us that
our salvation is so precious in thy sight, that through our ingratitude
we may not cast away this testimony of thy favor, but be anxious to
listen to thy instructions: Grant also, that being gifted by thee with
the spirit of discretion, we may not be exposed to capture as a prey;
but may we be so ruled by the light of thy word that we may hold on in
the right way, till after our allotted time is finished we may arrive at
that happy repose which is laid up for us in heaven through Christ our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Seventh.

<span id="ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#021)<span id="ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p2"></span>**21.** Your kerchiefs also will I tear,
and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in
your hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p3"></span>**21.** Et conscindam pepla vestra,  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) et eruam populum meum e manibus vestris:
et non erunt amplius in manibus vestris in praedam: et cognoscetis quod
ego Iehovah.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiii-p6"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p7"></span>What the Prophet had said concerning the
pillows he now pronounces of the veils, by which they were accustomed to
cover either their own heads, or those of the persons who consulted
them. The conclusion is, that God would put an end to such follies. For
the people were so fascinated by these silly things, that it became
necessary to strip away these masks, since these women were always ready
to deceive. He adds also, that he would do that for the benefit of his
own people. We have said that this ought not to be extended generally to
all the sons of Abraham according to the flesh. For God suffered almost
all to perish, as he had said by Isaiah:

<span id="ii.xxiii-p8"></span>“Even if thy people had been as the sand
of the sea-shore, a remnant only shall be saved,” (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p9"></span>When, therefore, God speaks here
concerning his own people, this sentence ought to be restricted to the
elect: as when it is said in the psalm, How soft and kind is God to his
people Israel; and then he adds by way of correction, to those who are
upright in heart, (<span id="ii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>,)
Since many boasted themselves to be Israelites who are very unlike their
father, and through being degenerate deprived themselves of that honor:
hence the Prophet restricts God’s goodness peculiarly to the elect who
are upright in heart, after he had spoken of the whole people. Although
Ezekiel did not distinctly express what we have cited from the psalm,
yet the sense is the same; and this is easily gathered from the eleventh
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p9.2"></span>[Rom. 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxiii-p9.2"></span>),
where God sets before us the remnant preserved according to God’s
gratuitous election. For the same sense it is added*, that they should
no longer be for a prey*. We have said how these women hunted these
wretched souls, not only for purposes of gain, but also because Satan
abused their fallacies. So, therefore, it happened that these souls were
enticed to their destruction. For this reason God pronounces that they
should no longer be their prey. And he repeats what he had already said,
*ye shall know that I am Jehovah*. Here God brings before us his power,
because we know how safely hypocrites allude his sacred name; and this
easily appears in the boldness and licentiousness of these women. Hence
God here threatens them: he says that they should feel at length who had
spoken, since they ridiculed Ezekiel and his other servants. There is,
then, a silent antithesis between God and the prophets; not that God
separates himself from his servants; for the truth, of which they are
ministers and heralds, is an indissoluble bond of union between them;
but the language is adapted to the senses of those with whom the Prophet
treats. Now, since these women were so wanton, he says that he was not
despised by them, but God himself. It follows —

<span id="ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
13:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#022)<span
id="ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p2"></span>**22.** Because with lies ye have made the
heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened
the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way,
by promising him life:

<span id="ii.xxiv-p3"></span>**22.** Quia contristastis cor justi
mendacio,  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) et ego non
contristaveram ipsum;  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) et
roborastis manus impii, ut non converteretur a via sua mala, vivificando
ipsum.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p6"></span>**23.** Therefore ye shall see no more
vanity, nor divine divinations: for I will deliver my people out of your
hand: and ye shall know that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p7"></span>**23.** Propterea mendacium non videbitis,
et divinationem non divinabitis amplius: et eruam populum meum e manu
vestra: et scietis quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiv-p9"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p10"></span>He explains in other words what we saw
yesterday: but the repetition adds to the weight of the matter. The
Prophet therefore shows that he had a just cause of complaint, because
the women so deceived the people. He says now *that they made the heart
of the righteous sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked*: the
sentiment is the same, though the words are changed. He had previously
said that they gave life to those devoted to death, and slew those
destined to life; but now he shows more clearly the meaning of killing
the soul that should not, or ought not to die, when the heart of the
righteous is made sorrowful. By the righteous he means those whom the
false prophets inspired with causeless terror. But why, it is asked,
does he say that the righteous are grieved, since we have formerly
taught that no others were deceived unless those who spontaneously throw
themselves into the snares and traps of Satan? I answer, that the false
prophets thundered so, and their lies were so spread about here and
there as to involve the simple: for they scatter their threats so as to
reach all men. Hence they wound weak consciences; as at this day when
the lies of Satan fly about; by which true religion is corrupted, many
simple ones are frightened, for they are destitute of judgment, and do
not distinguish whether God threatens, or man vaunts himself rashly.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p11"></span>We see, then, how false prophets cause the
righteous sorrow, when they suggest scruples, and, under the penalty of
mortal sin, denounce first one thing and then another: then they deprive
them of confidence in God’s favor, and strike them with various terrors,
as we discern clearly in the papacy of this very day. Let us take that
one point which is with them without controversy, that our confidence
springs from our works, and hence that we cannot determine whether God
is propitious to us or not., and thus they overthrow all assurance of
faith. They retain, indeed, the name of faith, but meantime they wish
wretched consciences to vacillate and be turned about with disquiet,
since no one can know whether he can invoke God as a father.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) That confidence which Paul says is common
to all Christians, they call presumption and rashness. (<span
id="ii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>[Eph
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span id="ii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>.)
We see, then, how that point not only grieves the righteous, but
disturbs innocent consciences: for a series of traditions is afterwards
added, and the penalty of eternal death is always annexed. hence it
happens that those who wish to worship God in any other way, when they
are thus rendered spiritless, know not which way to turn: hence also
they lose all fear of God, since no one can seriously reverence God
unless he who feels him to be easily entreated, as we learn from <span
id="ii.xxiv-p12.2"></span>[Ps
130:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxiv-p12.2"></span>.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p13"></span>We now understand what the Holy Spirit
means when he reproves the women *because they made the heart of the
righteous sad*. It is added, *but I was unwilling to grieve them.* For
God’s faithful servants often inspire terror, but only when necessary.
For they cannot otherwise subdue those who exult in their lusts, and
they cannot bring them to obedience unless they overcome them with fear.
Hence even true prophets and evangelists cause pain, as Paul says: If I
have caused you sorrow, I do not repent of it: for so I thought to do:
for there is salutary grief. (<span id="ii.xxiv-p13.1"></span>[2Co
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxiv-p13.1"></span>.)
Besides, true prophets do not afflict men for nothing; they only cause
anxiety in the minds of those whom God wishes to grieve: hence they do
not fabricate the material for sorrow and pain in their own brain, but
receive it from God’s mouth and the spirit of revelation. Hence the word
*righteous* is used, and *falsely* is added, by which particle the
severity which true prophets are often compelled to use is distinguished
from the roughness, or rather savage rudeness, of false prophets. For as
I have said, they frighten wretched consciences. But by what right? by
transferring God’s power to themselves; just as at the present day the
Pope with swelling cheeks thunders forth that himself and his throne are
apostolic, and therefore infallible. Since, therefore, false prophets
thus contend by fallacies, the simple are overcome by fear.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p14"></span>It is now added, *that they strengthened
the hands of the impious* (literally, of the impious man in the
singular). When the Prophet spoke of the righteous, he used the word
heart: he now uses the word hand, and not without reason. For the false
terrors in which the false prophets indulged, penetrate even to the
intimate affections, and as each is affected by the fear of God, so he
becomes afraid of those threats which he hears uttered in God’s name. We
see, then, that it was said with very good reason that the mind of the
righteous was sadly grieved; and now when he says *that he had
strengthened the hands of the impious*, he means that audacity was
added, so that not only the wicked always remain obstinate against God,
but they break out in unbridled license, and hesitate not openly to
violate God’s law: for strengthening the hands is more than grieving the
mind. For it may and it does happen, that a man may swell with pride and
contempt of God, and yet modesty may hinder him from basely
contaminating himself with many crimes. But when the hands themselves
are engaged in licentiousness, all evils are heaped together. Now,
therefore, we understand the reason of this difference. In fine, Ezekiel
means that the impious had been hardened by the blandishments of these
women, so as not only to despise God in their minds, but to bear witness
through their whole life, that they were openly and confessedly erecting
the standard of war against God. In this sense, then, he says, that
*they had strengthened the hands of the impious.*

<span id="ii.xxiv-p15"></span>He adds, *that he should not be
converted*. Here he more clearly defines how those souls which were
devoted to death  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) were kept alive,
since such confidence was set before them as to lull and stupefy their
consciences. He does not say, then, *that the hands of the impious were
strengthened,* as in a conspiracy of the wicked one often assists
another, as if they mutually bound their hands together. But the Prophet
now speaks in another sense, namely, that these women so hardened the
wicked that they went on securely in their wickedness, and made a
laughing-stock of God and his law. *You have strengthened the hands that
they should not be converted:* but how? *by affording them life*. Hence
we gather that men cannot be humbled otherwise than by placing death
before them, because all willingly indulge themselves, and hypocrisy is
so ingrained in us by natural corruption, that every one readily
persuades himself that all things will turn out well. Unless, therefore,
death is presented before our eyes, and God himself appears as a judge
to destroy us, we remain like ourselves, and proceed to still greater
audacity. The Prophet signifies this when he says, *that by giving life
to the impious the false prophets strengthened their hands*, and opposed
their repentance altogether. How so? When the sinner thinks God
propitious to him, he is not anxious about reconciliation, but abuses
God’s forbearance, and is daily rendered bolder, until at last he puts
off all sense of fear. Hence this is the true preparation for
conversion, when the sinner is slain; that is, acknowledges himself
liable to the judgment of God, and takes a formidable view of his wrath.
When, therefore, he sees himself lost, then he begins to think of
conversion; but when men sleep over their sins, as I have said, they
persist till they arrive at constant apathy, as Paul says when he
remarks that they have no longer any sense of sorrow. (<span
id="ii.xxiv-p16.3"></span>[Eph
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxiv-p16.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxiv-p17"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p18"></span>It follows, *you shall not see a lie any
more*. He has hitherto explained the reason why God grew so warm against
these women, because they destroyed miserable souls either by their
cruelty or their flatteries, and thus were like false prophets: now he
adds, *you shall not see a lie any more.* This ought not to be
understood as if God promised these women a sound mind, so that they
should cease to hurt the people by their lies: but he confirms the
sentiment previously expressed, namely, that they should be subject to
the taunts of all men, as boys themselves acknowledge that what they
boasted to be oracles were mere imposture. It is just as if he had said
— I will make you ashamed, so that hereafter you may be deprived of the
use of the prophetic name, as you have hitherto used it. Although these
women persisted in their madness, yet they saw vanity no more, since it
became openly apparent that those wretched ones who trusted in them were
deceived. Lastly, this thought to be adapted not to any change of
feeling in these women, but rather to a failure in the effect. It is
just as if any one were to say to a foolish fellow boasting himself to
be a Lawyer or a physician, — I will take care that you profit no more
as either a Lawyer or a physician; and yet that foolish person should
not be able to put away the opinion which he had ever formed of his own
skin. But this is said, because the mere vanity of his boasting should
be evident to all. So also God now speaks. This addition has the same
meaning: *you shall not divine divination any more*. And yet there is no
doubt that they desired by all means to invent new prophecies, and to
boast in new revelations: but they were despised, because God had
detected their lies when Jerusalem was taken, and the people dragged
into exile: then because they promised the people a speedy return, when
the same God refuted them by prolonging their exile. When, therefore,
any one suffers the just penalty of his impiety, then the vanity of
those women was detected: in this way they ceased to divine. He repeats
— *I will free my people from your hand: and you shall know that I am
Jehovah*. Since I have lately explained this phrase I now pass it by. It
follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc23001.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span> Or, “disgraceful.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc23001.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p17"></span> Calvin uses the Greek word <span
id="ii.ii-p17.2"></span>καταχρηστικῶς, meaning in rhetoric the use of a
word in a sense different from its natural one. *Catachresis* is the
grammatical term, implying the use of terms in their “non-natural”
sense. The French has “<span id="ii.ii-p17.3"></span>neantmoins que ce
soit improprentent.”

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc23001.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p4"></span> Or, “breaks.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc23001.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p8"></span> CEeolampadius takes a different view: he
says, “<span id="ii.iv-p8.1"></span>principibus et prophetis juxta
quadrat: eorum est animam ponere pro ovibus contra pseudoprophets.” he
then quotes <span id="ii.iv-p8.2"></span>[John
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv-p8.2"></span>,
“<span id="ii.iv-p8.3"></span>Vident lupum venientem et fugiunt.” The
remainder of his comment on this verse is worthy of perusal.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc23001.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span> Others translate, “to be hoped for;” but the
word is here taken transitively. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc23001.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.v-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span> *Dissipetur*: The French has “<span
id="ii.v-p8.1"></span>fust luy-mesme deschire par picces.”

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc23001.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span> Calvin’s Latin is <span
id="ii.v-p9.1"></span>*nebulones*; the French translation “<span
id="ii.v-p9.2"></span>*belistres*;” the familiar English “rascals.”

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc23001.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p4"></span> Verbally, that is, “by saying.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc23001.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p4"></span> There is a change of expression here, since
he had formerly said, “you have spoken a divination of falsehood and
have seen a vision of vanity.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc23001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p7"></span> That is, “in the catalogue.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc23001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p3"></span> The subject of “the perpetual succession”
being so fully discussed in the present day, this admission of Calvin’s
is worthy of notice. The Latin has <span
id="ii.ix-p3.1"></span>*ordinarium ministerium*: the French, “<span
id="ii.ix-p3.2"></span>le ministere ordinaire.” The reasons which he
gives for rejecting such pretensions would be deemed by many
unsatisfactory.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc23001.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p4"></span> The repetition is emphatic. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc23001.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p7"></span> The copula is superfluous. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc23001.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p8"></span> Others translate “and you hailstones shall
fall;” others take it transitively, “you shall cause to fall;” ‘but we
must explain it either “they shall fall,” or “cause to fall.” —
*Calvin*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc23001.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p4"></span> That is, “when the wall shall have fallen:”
we must understand the adverb “when.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc23001.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p5"></span> Some translate <span
id="ii.xi-p5.1"></span>*lenimentum* or <span
id="ii.xi-p5.2"></span>*linimentum*: grammatically it thought to be
<span id="ii.xi-p5.3"></span>*litio*; but although good Latin authors do
not use the word <span id="ii.xi-p5.4"></span>*litura* here for
“daubing,” yet we express it <span id="ii.xi-p5.5"></span>*ubi litura*.
— *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc23001.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p4"></span> This is the same word which he had formerly
used, but it is here taken in another sense: he had formerly said, “And
the spirit of tempests shall break or cut;” but he now says, “I will
make it cut or break forth;” so that the sense is clearer — “therefore I
will make it break forth.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc23001.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p5"></span> The original words for *ira* are different.
We may translate <span id="ii.xii-p5.1"></span>חמה, *chemneh*, “burning
wrath” — “therefore in my burning wrath I will make the whirlwind break
forth.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc23001.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p7"></span> Calvin’s Latin is very cramped here. The
French translation paraphrases it thus: “<span
id="ii.xiii-p7.1"></span>Mais ils repliqueront qu’il se pourra bien
faire qu’il leur sera eschappe quelque chose mal a propos.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc23001.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p6"></span> Or, “veils.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc23001.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p7"></span> That is, “you hunt the souls of my
people.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc23001.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p8"></span> That is, “yours.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc23001.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.xviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p15"></span> “Lib. 1. ch. 32. See also chap. 36.,
‘<span id="ii.xviii-p15.1"></span>statua Atti capite velato, referring
to ‘<span id="ii.xviii-p15.2"></span>Attus Navius, inclitus ea
temptestate augur.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc23001.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p4"></span> Literally, “in handfuls of barley, or on
account of them.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc23001.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p5"></span> Or, “fragments.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc23001.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p6"></span> That is, “those who hearken to a lie.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc23001.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.xx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p7"></span> Dionysius was a Carthusian, a philosopher
imbued with the mystic doctrines of Plato, on whose ‘writings he wrote
an elaborate comment. Calvin refers to his attempt to combine the
scholastic theology of his day with the mystical fancies of Platonism.
He was commonly called a Ryckel, and wrote A.D. 1471. See Gieseler’s
Eccl. Hist., edited in English by Francis Cuningham, volume 3

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc23001.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p4"></span> Or, “I will tear.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc23001.htm#fr_28) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p4"></span> Or, “fallaciously.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc23001.htm#fr_29) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p5"></span> The word is different, but only in one
letter, and signifies to be sad and to be grieved. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc23001.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p12"></span> The modern state of this controversy is
fully explained in Ward’s “Ideal of the Christian Church.” He utterly
rejects Calvin’s theory, and then very consistently joins the Church of
Rome.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc23001.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p16"></span> The Latin edition of 1565 has “motu:” the
true reading is “<span id="ii.xxiv-p16.1"></span>morte.” The French
version is correct in rendering it by “<span
id="ii.xxiv-p16.2"></span>perdition.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](cc23002)
