[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc23005)  [Next](cc23007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 23: Ezekiel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 18

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** The word of the LORD came unto me
again, saying,

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit sermo Iehova, ad me, dicendo,

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**2.** What mean ye, that ye use this proverb
concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge?

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quid vobis? vos proverbiantes
proverbium  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) super terram Israel,
dicendo, Patres comederunt omphacem,  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) et dentes filiorum obstupescunt.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**3.** *As* I live, saith the Lord GOD, ye
shall not have *occasion* any more to use this proverb in Israel.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>**3.** Vivo ego, dicit Dominator Iehovah, Si
erit vobis amplius  <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) qui utatur
hoc dicterio  <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) in Israele.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>**4.** Behold, all souls are mine; as the
soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that
shineth, it shall die.

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span>**4.** Ecce omnes animae mihi,  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) sicut anima patris sic anima filii
mihi.  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) Anima quae peccaverit
ipsa morietur.

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span><span id="vii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span>We may collect from this rebuke that the
Jews were perverse interpreters of the best teaching; yea, they
purposely reviled the Prophet’s expression, and drew it to a contrary
meaning. For it, is far commoner than it ought to be among unbelievers,
always to take occasion of turning backwards, twisting, distorting, and
tearing the teaching of heaven. And at this time we see this impudence
increasing greatly in the world. For the world is full of buffoons and
other deceivers, who wickedly sport with God, and seek material for
joking from the law and the gospel: and so also it appears to have been
in the Prophet’s time; for although they listened to the wrath of God
hanging over them, they did not cease to provoke him, and that too for
many years. And not only were their own iniquities set forth against
them, but also those of their fathers: hence the occasion for cavil when
they heard — For so many ages you do not cease your warfare against God:
he has borne with you patiently unto this day. Do you think that you can
carry on your audacity with impunity? God wished hitherto to tame you by
his forbearance; but your obstinacy is not to be subdued. Since,
therefore, not only for one or two generations, but for four and five,
your obstinacy has wrestled with God’s goodness, he cannot any longer
pardon you. Since the prophets thus gathered up the iniquities of their
fathers, impious men scattered abroad their witticisms — then we are to
pay the penalty of our fathers’ sins: they provoked God, but we suffer
the punishment which they deserved. The Prophet now convinces them of
this unfairness, and shows that they had no reason for transferring
their faults to others, or to thrust them away from themselves, since
God was just in taking vengeance on them. We know that men willingly
shuffle so as to free themselves from blame, and then afterwards accuse
God of cruel injustice. It is true, indeed, that they are held in such
constraint by their own consciences that they are compelled, whether
they will or not, to feel that they are suffering punishment justly; but
afterwards they become refractory, and suffocate their conscience, and
strive pettishly with God. Hence these words —

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span>Though guiltless of your fathers’ crimes,  
Roman, ‘tis thine to latest times  
The vengeance of the gods to bear,  
Till you their awful domes repair.  
Horace, lib. 3, Od. 6, as translated by Francis.

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span>Since so many crimes were rife at Rome, why
does that trifler say that the men of his own age were undeservedly
paying the penalty due by their ancestors? But, as I have said, this is
the testimony of a corrupt nature, because we desire to throw off the
blame as far from ourselves as we possibly can. Hence we begin to strive
with God, and to rebel against his judgments. And hence this destruction
is the more useful to us, since it is proposed as a remedy for a disease
by far too common. Whatever the meaning is, this sentiment came into
common use like a proverb — *that the children’s teeth were set on edge,
because their fathers had eaten sour grapes*. By these allegorical words
they wished to free themselves from blame, as if God was unjustly
charging the wickedness of their fathers against them. For to eat the
sour grape or wild grape has the same meaning as to set the teeth on
edge; for we know this to be the effect of acidity. If any one eats a
sour grape, his teeth will suffer from its unripeness. To eat then is to
cause this effect on the teeth — referring to sin: for they said that
their own teeth suffered, not through their own eating the sour grapes,
but through its flowing down from their fathers. On the whole, they
wished to contend with God, as if he were afflicting the innocent, and
that, too, under the fallacious pretext which I have mentioned, as God
announced that he would avenge the wickedness which had been perpetrated
in former ages.

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span><span id="vii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span>*Ye*, says he, *use this proverb; but as I
live, says the Lord Jehovah, you shall not use this proverb anymore.* He
does not mean, by these words, that the Jews should repent and become
more modest, and not dare to vomit forth such blasphemy against him; for
he is not treating of repentance here; but it is just as if he said, I
will strike from under you this boasting, since your iniquity shall be
made manifest, and the whole world shall acknowledge the justice of your
punishment, and that you have deserved it yourselves, and cannot throw
it upon your fathers, as you have hitherto endeavored to do. The Jews
indeed did not cease their rebellion against God, and there is no doubt
that they were more and more exasperated, so as to expostulate with
audacity against him; but because their wickedness was really apparent,
and God was not hostile to them in vain, or for trifling reasons; and
although he was severe, yet they had arrived at the highest pitch of
impiety, so that no punishment could be sufficient or too oppressive. We
now understand the meaning of the Prophet, or rather of the Holy Spirit,
since God took away all pretense for shuffling from the Jews when he
detected their impiety, and made it conspicuous that they were only
suffering the due reward of their crimes. But God swears by himself,
whence we gather how abominable was their blasphemy; and truly men
cannot absolve themselves without condemning God; for God’s glory then
shines forth, when every mouth is stopped, as we saw before. (<span
id="vii.i-p22.1"></span>[Eze
16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063)<span id="vii.i-p22.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.i-p22.2"></span>[Ro
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)<span id="vii.i-p22.2"></span>.)
As soon as men descend into that arena, through wishing to show their
innocence, it is just as if they wished to reduce God’s justice to
nothing. Hence it is not surprising that God is very angry when he is
despoiled of his justice; for he cannot exist without this attribute.

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span><span id="vii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span>We now see why an oath is interposed, while
he pronounces that he will take care that the Jews should not ridicule
any longer *Behold,* says he*, all souls are mine; as the sole of the
son so the soul of the father, all souls are mine; the soul, therefore,
which has sinned it shall die*. Some interpreters explain the beginning
of the verse thus: that men vainly and rashly complain when God seems to
treat them too severely, since the clay does not rise against the
potter. Since God is the maker of the whole world, we are his
workmanship: what madness, then, to rise up against him when he does not
satisfy us: and we saw this simile used by Jeremiah. (<span
id="vii.i-p24.1"></span>[Jer 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#006)<span
id="vii.i-p24.1"></span>.) The sentiment, then, is true in itself, that
all souls are under God’s sovereignty by the right of creation, and
therefore he can arbitrarily determine for each whatever he wishes; and
all who clamor against him reap no profit: and this teaching it is
advantageous to notice. But this passage ought to be understood
otherwise; namely, that nothing is more unworthy than that God should be
accused of tyrannizing over men, when he rather defends them, as being
his own workmanship. When, therefore, God pronounces *that all souls are
his own,* he does not merely claim sovereignty and power, but he rather
shows that he is affected with fatherly love towards the whole human
race since he created and formed it; for, if a workman loves his work
because he recognizes in it the fruits of his industry, so, when God has
manifested his power and goodness in the formation of men, he must
certainly embrace them with affection. True, indeed, we are abominable
in God’s sight, through being corrupted by original sin, as it is
elsewhere said, (<span id="vii.i-p24.2"></span>[Ps.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002)<span id="vii.i-p24.2"></span>;) but
inasmuch as we are men, we must be dear to God, and our salvation must
be precious in his sight. We now see what kind of refutation this is:
*all souls are mine,* says he: I have formed all, and am the creator of
all, and so I am affected with fatherly love towards all, and they shall
rather feel my clemency, from the least to the greatest, than experience
too much rigor and severity. At length he adds, *the soul which sinned
it shall die*. Now, Ezekiel expresses how God restrains the Jews from
daring to boast any longer that they are afflicted undeservedly, since
no innocent person shall die; for this is the meaning of the sentence;
for he does not mean that every guilty person should die, for this would
shut against us the door of God’s mercy, for we have all sinned against
him: so it would follow that there is no hope of safety, since every man
must perish, unless God freed sinners from death. But the Prophet’s
sense is not doubtful, as we have said, since those who perish are not
without fault; neither can they bring up their innocence to God, nor
complain of his cruelty in punishing them for the sins of others.
Although here a question may arise, since no one at this day perishes
who does not partly bear the fault of another, namely, of Adam, by whose
fall and revolt the whole human race actually perished. Since therefore
Adam, by his fall, brought destruction upon us, it follows that we
perish through the fault of another. Since this question will be treated
again in its own place, it will now be sufficient to say, in three
words, that although we perish through the fault of another, yet the
fault of each individual is joined with it. We are not condemned in Adam
as if we were innocent in ourselves, but we have contracted pollution
from his sin; and so it has come to pass that each must bear the
punishment of his own crime, since the punishment which he deserved
first is not simply inflicted on the whole human race, but we have been
tainted with his sin, as will afterwards be said. Whatever the meaning,
we shall not die innocent, since each is held convicted by the testimony
of his own conscience. As far as relates to young children, they seem to
perish not by their own, but for another’s fault; but the solution is
twofold; for although sin does not appear in them, yet it is latent,
since they carry about with them corruption shut up in their soul, so
that they are worthy of condemnation before God. This does not come
under the notice of our senses; but we should consider how much more
acutely God sees a thing than we do: hence, if we do not penetrate into
that hidden judgment, yet we must hold that, before we are born, we are
infected by the contagion of original sin, and therefore justly destined
to ultimate destruction: — -this is one solution. But as far as concerns
the Prophet’s expression, the dispute concerning infants is vain and out
of place, since the Prophet only wished to refute that impious
perverseness, as I have said, so that the people should no longer charge
God with cruelty. *The soul,* says he, *which has sinned*; that is, none
of you can boast of innocence when I punish you: as when it is said, He
who does not labor, neither let him eat. (<span
id="vii.i-p24.3"></span>[2Th 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010)<span
id="vii.i-p24.3"></span>.) Surely this cannot be extended to infants.
Nature teaches us that they must be nourished, and yet sure enough they
do not acquire their food by labor: but this is said of adults, who are
old enough to acknowledge the reason why they were created, and their
fitness for undergoing labor. So also, in this place, we are not
treating of the tender young when newly born, but of adults, who wish to
charge God instead of themselves, as if they are innocent; and so, when
they cannot escape punishment, they are anxious to transfer the fault
elsewhere — first upon others, and then upon God himself.

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have not only
created us out of nothing, but have deigned to create us again in your
only-begotten Son, and have taken us from the lowest depths, and deigned
to raise us to the hope of thy heavenly kingdom:-Grant, I say, that we
may not be proud or puffed up with vainglory; but may we embrace this
favor with becoming humility, and modestly submit ourselves to thee,
until we become at length partakers of that glory which your
only-begotten Son has acquired for us. — Amen.

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Fourth.

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#005)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>**5.** But if a man be just, and do that
which is lawful and right,

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span>**5.** Et vir si fuerit justus, et fecerit
judicium et justitiam,

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span>**6.** *And* hath not eaten upon the
mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of
Israel, neither hath defiled his neighbour’s wife, neither hath come
near to a menstruous woman,

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span>**6.** Super montes non comederit, et oculos
suos non extulerit ad idola  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204)
domus Israel, et uxorem socii sui  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) non polluerit, et ad mulierem
menstruatam non accesserit,

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span>**7.** And hath not oppressed any, *but*
hath restored to the debtor his pledge, hath spoiled none by violence,
hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a
garment;

<span id="vii.iv-p9"></span>**7.** Et neminem afflixerit,  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) pignus suum reddiderit debitori,
praedam non rapuerit,  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) panem
suum famelico dederit, et nudum texerit vestimentis;

<span id="vii.iv-p12"></span>**8.** He *that* hath not given forth upon
usury, neither hath taken any increase, *that* hath withdrawn his hand
from iniquity, hath executed true judgment between man and man,

<span id="vii.iv-p13"></span>**8.** Cum usura non dederit et incrementum
 <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) non acceperit, ab iniquitate
retraxerit manum suam, judicium fideliter fecerit inter virum et virum,

<span id="vii.iv-p15"></span>**9.** Hath walked in my statutes, and hath
kept my judgments, to deal truly; he *is* just, he shall surely live,
saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="vii.iv-p16"></span>**9.** In statutis meis ambulaverit, et
judicia mea custodierit ad faciendum veritatem,  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) justus est, vivendo vivet, dicit
Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="vii.iv-p18"></span> 

<span id="vii.iv-p19"></span><span id="vii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p20"></span>Here the Prophet confirms his former
teaching by examples. For he first says, if any one faithfully keep the
law, he shall prosper, since God will repay the reward of justice:
afterwards he adds, if the just man beget a son unlike himself, the
justice of the father shall not profit the degenerate son, but he shall
receive the reward of his iniquity. But if this second person should
beget a son who does not imitate his father, God promises that this
third person shall be acceptable by him, because he is just, and
therefore enjoys prosperity and happiness. We see, then, that the
grandfather and grandson are here spoken of, and that the son of the
first, and father of the third, is placed between them. But this is the
Spirit’s intention, that God has prepared a reward for each according to
their lives, so that he does not permit them to be deprived of their
promised blessing, nor let the impious and despisers of his law escape.
Now let us come to the words, *if any one has been just,* says he*, he
shall be just, therefore he shall live*. He speaks generally first: he
afterwards enumerates certain species under which he embraces the sum of
the whole law. The full sentence is, if any one has been just, he shall
live in consequence of his justice. But the Prophet defines what it is
to be just, and he there chooses certain parts of the law: by putting a
part for the whole, as I have said, he signifies, that whoever
faithfully observes the law is esteemed just before God. Now we must
examine each of these kinds of justice, and afterwards come to the
general doctrine. He says first, *that he is just who does justice and
judgement*. By the word judgment holy Scripture signifies rectitude; but
when the two words are joined together, judgment seems to express more
than justice: for justice is nothing but equity, fidelity, integrity,
when we abstain altogether from fraud and violence, and deal with our
brethren as we wish them to deal with us. Whoever so conducts himself is
said to do justice; but judgment is extended further, namely, when we
not only desire to benefit but defend our brethren, when unjustly
oppressed, as far as we can, and when we oppose the lust and violence of
those who would overthrow all that is right and holy. Hence to do
judgment and justice is nothing else than to abstain from all injury by
cultivating good faith and equity with our neighbors: then to defend all
good causes, and to take the innocent under our patronage when we see
them unjustly injured and oppressed. But these duties belong properly to
the second table of the law. But it is clear from this that we fear God
when we live justly with our brethren, for piety is the root of charity.
Although many profane persons seem blameless in their life, and manifest
a rare integrity, yet no one ever loves his neighbor from his heart,
unless he fears and reverences God. Since, therefore, charity flows from
piety and the fear of God, as often as we see the duties of the second
table placed before us, we should learn them to be the testimonies to
the worship of God, as is this place: but then the Prophet also adds
certain parts of the first table.

<span id="vii.iv-p21"></span><span id="vii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p22"></span>He says then, *if he has not eaten upon the
mountains, and not raised his eyes to the abominable deeds of the house
of Israel.* These two points respect the worship of God: for by the
figure “a part for the whole” to eat, means to offer sacrifices: he
refers to those to which banquets were added as appendages. And truly
when Paul speaks of idolatry, he does not say, if any one bends his
knees before stone or wood, but he quotes the words of Moses, that the
people rose up to play after eating, that is, after banqueting. (<span
id="vii.iv-p22.1"></span>[1Co
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#007)<span id="vii.iv-p22.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.iv-p22.2"></span>[Ex
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006)<span id="vii.iv-p22.2"></span>.)
Hence a feast is there taken for that sacrilegious profaneness when the
people made for themselves a calf, and wished to worship God before it.
When, therefore, it is now said, *if any one has not eaten upon, the
mountains:* by a feast, as I have said, a sacrifice offered to idols is
intended. Now we know that altars were raised on high in every
direction, because they thought that they were near God when they
ascended to an elevated spot. Because, therefore, superstitions were so
exercised on the mountains, hence the Prophet relates what was
customary, *if any one has not eaten, upon the mountains*: then he
explains himself more clearly, *if any one has not raised his eyes to
the idols of the house of Israel*. To raise the eyes is here taken by a
figure of speech for to be urged with eagerness towards superstitions:
for we know that eyes are the principal outlets to the affections; for
when the affections burst forth in the eyes, and are conspicuous there,
it is not surprising if all our desires are marked by this form of
speech. Thus a person is said to raise his eyes to the house of his
neighbor when he covets it, and also towards his wife, or anything else,
when he is seized by a depraved lusting. The meaning is, then, that
those who do not contaminate themselves with idols are thought just
before God, as far as concerns the first table of the law, since they
are content with the simple and lawful worship of God, and do not
incline from it in any direction; nor, like the superstitious, allow
their eyes to be wandering and erratic: and so they are compared with
harlots who seek lovers on all sides. I repeat it again. — the meaning
is, that the true worshipers of God are those who are content with his
doctrine, and are not carried hither and thither by a perverse appetite,
and so fabricate for themselves idols. Besides, the Holy Spirit calls
idols <span id="vii.iv-p22.3"></span>גלולים, *gelolim*, “defilements,”
 <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) since all superstition should
be detested by us; for as we are prone by nature to all kinds of error,
we cannot be sufficiently restrained within the true and pure worship of
God. Since, then, unbelievers imagine their gods to be sacred, the Holy
Spirit, on the other hand, pronounces them to be defiling, since their
profane worship is disgusting and abominable. But he says, *the idols of
the house of Israel*, so that all shuffling must cease: because, if he
had spoken of idols only, they might have objected that they detested
the false and foolish gods of the Gentiles; but since many ceremonies
were through long use received among the elect people, these ought not
to be condemned like the impious rites of the heathen. The Holy Spirit
refutes this cavil, and says, that though the house of Israel has
approved such defilement’s, yet they are not to be excused for setting
aside the law of God, and devoting themselves to human fictions.

<span id="vii.iv-p24"></span>*And has not polluted his neighbors wife.*
The Prophet now returns again to the second table, and treats here of
adultery; and the language must be noticed, since such contamination
shows how holy God considers the marriage tie: hence we see the atrocity
of the sin, and the detestable nature of adultery; for both parties are
equally polluted, though it appears stronger in the female sex through
their natural modesty. We must hold, then, that the very body is
engrained with disgrace and infamy, as Paul says, when such sins are
committed. Other sins, says he, are without the body; but this is a sin
against the body itself which thus bears the marks of shame and infamy.
(<span id="vii.iv-p24.1"></span>[1Co
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#018)<span id="vii.iv-p24.1"></span>.)
Here, as I have said, Ezekiel treats the case of the woman, since the
offense is in her case more pernicious. It follows — and *has not
approached a female when legally unclean*: for we know this to be
prohibited under the law; as being contrary to nature; for it was not
necessary to define the matter by written law, as it speaks for itself.
and God detests such crimes, not only because their offspring would
contaminate cities and the nation at large, but because they are adverse
to the instincts of human nature. (<span id="vii.iv-p24.2"></span>[Le
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#019)<span id="vii.iv-p24.2"></span>;
<span id="vii.iv-p24.3"></span>[Le
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#018)<span id="vii.iv-p24.3"></span>.)
He afterwards adds, *if he has not oppressed* or afflicted *any one*.
This is general, just as if the Prophet had said, if he has abstained
from all fraud, violence, and injustice. But this is a great point to
live so innocently among men, that no one should complain of any injury
done to him, nor of any loss sustained. But it is not enough to preserve
this self-restraint unless we desire to profit our brethren, since God
wishes the good offices of life to be reciprocal: although, indeed, to
take care to be free from all injustice ought to precede other duties.
He says, *if he has returned his pledge to the debtor*. This ought not
to be taken generally, but depends on the precept of the law; for we
have often said, that the prophets are the interpreters of Moses, and so
they often touch briefly on what Moses expresses more clearly. But if we
wish to occupy ourselves usefully in reading them, we ought to determine
the meaning of the law, and then to accommodate what we read in the
prophets to what is there contained.  <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) So, in this passage, *to restore the
pledge to, the debtor,* is restricted to the poor and needy, who had
pledged either their garments, or their beds, or the tools by which they
acquired a livelihood: for God forbids taking a pledge of a widow or a
poor person: then he forbids taking a millstone, that is, any tool which
a workman uses to Judea his living; for if any one empties the workshop
of the miserable, he might just as well take his life. Hence Moses says,
His life is in the pledge, (<span id="vii.iv-p25.2"></span>[De
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006)<span id="vii.iv-p25.2"></span>,)
that is, if any one pledges his tools, it is like having his hands cut
off, since he cannot carry on his trade without His tools: hence you
take away his life. Hence God forbids taking a coverlet, or garments, or
bedding, for a wretched man would perish with cold were he to pledge
either his coverlet or his bedding. But if, on the other hand, men of
this kind are assisted without taking a pledge, they will bless those
who abstain from too much rigor. Lastly, God forbids the destruction of
the poor man’s house, lest he should be ashamed of his poverty, and then
because it is too cruel to penetrate into the house of another, and
inquire for its contents; nay, this is a species of robbery. We see now
how Ezekiel thought to be understood, *if he has restored a pledge to
the debtor*, that is, to the poor debtor, or the necessary pledge, as I
have said, such as tools and needful furniture, without which a person
cannot exercise his trade. *He has not seized a prey,* that is, has not
preyed upon his neighbors. For every kind of robbery is here marked by
the word <span id="vii.iv-p25.3"></span>גזל, *gezel*, violence. *And has
given his bread to the hungry*. Here the Prophet teaches what I have
lately touched on, that cautious self-restraint from all injury is not
sufficient, and sparing our neighbors; but that more is required, since
we ought to assist them as far as we possibly can. Unless this had been
added, many might object that they injured no one, never defrauded any,
nor took advantage of the simple. But since God has united men in the
bonds of mutual society, hence they must mutually perform good offices
for each other. Here, then, it is required of the rich to succor the
poor, and to offer bread to the hungry. But it is said, His bread, lest
any one should object, through his habit of being too restricted; but
there is no reason to bind me to bestow *my* goods on others: this is my
bread, and so I have a right to possess what is my own: if any one is
oppressed by want, I confess it to be praiseworthy to succor him, but no
one is compelled to this act of liberality. Lest any one should escape
thus, *behold*, says the Holy Spirit, *although you rightly call the
bread yours*, yet it is not so yours that you ought to refuse your
brother when his hunger provokes you to pity. *And has covered the naked
with a garment*: the rule for garment and for bread is the same. The
substance is, that others are not deemed just before God unless they are
inclined to benevolence, so as to supply the necessities of their
brethren, and to succor them in their poverty. It follows, *since he has
not given on usury and has not received increase.* Here, among other
crimes, Ezekiel enumerates usury — though the word usury is not properly
suitable to this passage <span id="vii.iv-p25.4"></span>נשך, *neshek*,
is deduced from biting, and so the Hebrews name usury, because it gnaws
and by degrees consumes the miserable. Ezekiel then says, that they are
considered observers of the law who abstain from usury. But because men
are very acute and cunning on this point, and devise subterfuges by
which they may hide their cruelty, he adds, *and has not received
increase:* for we know how various are the schemes for gain: for whoever
devotes his attention to unlawful gains, will find out many monstrous
things which no one would ever have thought of. Thus it happens that the
usurer will deny that he exacts usury, and yet he will spoil the
wretched and even suck out their blood. Under the name, <span
id="vii.iv-p25.6"></span>תרבית, *ther-bith*, Ezekiel comprehends those
more secret kinds of usury which the avaricious use with many disguises,
and when they spread such coverings before them, think themselves free
from all blame. Hence the Prophet says, even if the name of usury is
removed and is not taken into account, yet it is sufficient to condemn
men if they receive increase, that is, make a profit at the expense of
others. A question arises here, whether usury be in itself a crime,
since God formerly permitted his people to take interest of strangers,
and only forbade it among themselves. And there was the best reason for
that law. For if its just proportion had been overthrown, there would
have been no reciprocity, since the Gentiles could exact interest of the
Jews; and unless that right had been mutual and reciprocal, as the
phrase is, the condition of God’s people would have been worse than that
of the Gentiles. God therefore permitted his people to take interest,
but not among each other, as I have said: this was only allowable with
strangers. Besides, the law itself was political: but in this case the
Prophet seems to condemn all kinds of interest, and exaggerates the
weight of the sentence, when he adds increase, that is, whatever gains
the avaricious mutually strive for. So also in the 15th Psalm, where a
just mode of living is proscribed for us, David mentions, among other
things — who has not lent his money on usury, (<span
id="vii.iv-p25.7"></span>[Ps 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)<span
id="vii.iv-p25.7"></span>.) It seems, then, from these two places, that
usury is in itself unlawful. But because God’s law embraces complete and
perfect justice, hence we must hold that interest, unless it is opposed
to God’s law, is not altogether to be condemned, otherwise ignominy
would clearly attach to the law of God if it did not prescribe to us a
true and complete rule of living justly. But in the law there is that
perfection to which nothing can be added. If then we wish to determine
whether interest is unlawful we must come to the rule of the law, which
cannot deceive us: but we shall not find all interest contrary to the
law, and hence it follows that interest is not always to be condemned.
Here, too, we must remember that we must regard the subject rather than
the words, for men trifle by their own caviling, but God does not admit
of such fallacies. Hence, as I said, the substance ought to be weighed,
because the words alone will not enable us to decide whether interest be
sometimes lawful or not. For example, among the Latin’s the word for
interest is honorable in itself and has no disgrace attached to it, but
that for usury is odious. What causes disgrace to be thus hidden under
it, but they fancied that they abhorred usurers, hence the general term
interest contains within it all kinds of usury, and there was nothing so
cruel, so unjust, and so barbarous, which was not covered by that
pretense. Now since the name for interest was unknown to the French,
that for usury became detestable: hence the French devised a new
craftiness by which they could deceive God. For since no one could bear
the name of usury, they used “interest” instead: but what does this mean
but something which interests us, and thus it signifies all kinds of
repayment for loans, for there was no kind of interest among the
ancients which is not now comprehended in this word. Now since we have
said that interest cannot be totally and without exception condemned,
(for we must not play upon words, but treat the real point,) we must see
how far it can be proved not to be reckoned a crime. First of all, in a
well regulated state, no usurer is tolerated: even the profane see this:
whoever therefore professedly adopts this occupation, he ought to be
expelled from intercourse with his fellow-men. For if any illiberal
pursuits load those who pursue them with censure, that of the usurer is
certainly an illiberal trade, and unworthy of a pious and honorable man.
Hence Cato said that to take usury was almost the same as murder. For
when asked concerning agriculture, after he had given his opinion, he
inquired, But what is usury? Is it not murder? says he. And surely the
usurer will always be a robber; that is, he will make a profit by his
trade, and will defraud, and his iniquity will increase just as if there
were no laws, no equity, and no mutual regard among mankind. This is one
point: but there is another part of the occupation besides that of
taking interest. When any one sets up his table he uses the same art as
a farmer does in employing his labor in cultivating the fields. But any
one may receive interest without being a professed usurer. For example,
a person may have capital and put out a part of it on loan, and thus
receive interest: and if he do that once, he will not be called a
usurer; so that we must consider when and from whom a person exacts
interest. But this sentiment ought to prevail here: “neither everywhere,
nor always, nor all things, nor from all.” This indeed was said of
offices, and that law was imposed upon the governors of provinces: but
it agrees best with this subject. It is not suitable then to receive
“all things,” because if the profit exceed moderation it must be
rejected, since it is contrary to charity: we said also that the
continual habit and custom is not without fault. Neither “everywhere,”
since the usurer, as I have said, ought not to enter or be brought into
the Church of God. Then again, not “from all,” because it is always
wrong to exact usury from a poor man; but if a man is rich, and has
money of his own, as the saying is, and has a very good estate and a
large patrimony, and should borrow money of his neighbor, will that
neighbor commit sin by receiving a profit from the loan of his money?
Another borrower is the richer of the two, and might do without it and
yet suffer no loss: but he wishes to buy a farm and enjoy its fruits:
why should the creditor be deprived of his rights when his money brings
profit to a neighbor richer than himself? We see, then, that it may
sometimes happen that the receiver of interest is not to be hastily
condemned, since he is not acting contrary to God’s law. But we must
always hold that the tendency of usury is to oppress one’s brother, and
hence it is to be wished that the very names of usury and interest were
buried and blotted out from the memory of men. But since men cannot
otherwise transact their business, we must always observe what is
lawful, and how far it is so. I know that the subject might be treated
at greater length, but I have shortly expressed what is sufficient for
our purpose.

<span id="vii.iv-p26"></span>It follows, *And has withdrawn his hand
from iniquity.* Here again the Prophet commends innocence, when we are
cautious that our neighbor should not receive any damage or injury
through our fault. Hence abstaining from injury is again praised here,
but a new form of speech is used, since if men are not very anxious and
careful they easily extend the hand to iniquity: and why so? various
means of gain from many quarters present themselves to us, and we are
easily led captive by such enticements. Hence the Prophet, not without
reason, here commends *the servants of God to withdraw the hand from
iniquity*, that is, not only to abstain from injury, but when the
sweetness of gain entices us, and some plausible means of profit is
proposed, that they should restrain themselves this is the meaning of
*to withdraw the hand from iniquity*. The rest I leave for tomorrow.

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have so
instructed us by thy law in the rules of living justly, that we have no
excuse for error or ignorance: Grant, I say, that we may be attentive to
that teaching which you prescribe for us; and so anxiously exercise
ourselves in it, that each of us may live innocently among the
brotherhood: and then may we so worship thee with one consent and so
glorify thy name, that we may at length arrive at that happy inheritance
which you have promised for us in your only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="vii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Fifth.

<span id="vii.vi-p2"></span><span id="vii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p3"></span>We yesterday explained why the Prophet says
that no one is just unless *he withdraw his hands from iniquity,*
because many occasions tempt us to injure others: unless we restrain
ourselves in a middle course we often hurt our neighbors. Now among the
virtues of a just man he puts, *to judge according to truth: to act
truthfully,* says he*, between man and man*. This seems indeed to be the
proper duty of judges who discharge a public office, but yet it is
suitable to private persons; for although no one argues his own cause
except before some one endued with power to decide it, yet we see that
the inclinations of men often pervert equity and rectitude in judgments.
Again, many are chosen arbitrators who do not hold any public office.
The meaning is, that what Ezekiel previously sought concerning equity is
extended to the causes of others, that no one should turn aside from
right and equity through private friendship. Afterwards it follows*, if
he has walked in my statutes and kept my judgments, in acting with
truthfulness.* Again, the Prophet returns to general remarks: for he has
recorded certain kinds of justice, as we said yesterday, whence its
nature may be more clearly perceived. Besides, because God’s law
contains within it more than the prophet has thus far mentioned; hence
it was necessary to add this clause, who has walked in my decrees, says
he. It is too cold to restrict this to ceremonies, as is sometimes done;
hence I interpret it of edicts or decrees. The metaphor of walking does
not require a long explanation, as it is very common in Scripture.
Hence, *to walk in God’s precepts* is nothing else than to form his life
and morals according to the rule which has been prescribed by God; or,
what is the same thing, so to conduct oneself, that in desiring to be
deemed just a man should attempt nothing but what is agreeable to God’s
precepts. But since the observance of the law is difficult, first,
because we are not only of a frail disposition, but prone to sin; hence
the word “serving” is added, by which the Prophet commends diligence.
Whoever wishes to direct his life according to God’s precepts should
attentively keep them, since nothing is more natural than to transgress
and fall. He now adds, *for acting truthfully*. Integrity is here
denoted by the word truthfulness. We gather, then, from this word the
fruitful teaching, that the object of God’s whole law is to conduct
ourselves without deceit or fraud, and study to assist one another in
simplicity, and to conduct ourselves with sincerity in every duty. If
any one, then, asks the object of the law, the Prophet here describes it
to us — *the performance of truth*; and this is said rightly of the
second table. But this may be adapted to the former table, since the
Scripture teaches us that no dissembling can be pleasing to God. And we
see also what Paul says when he briefly defines the end of the law to be
charity out of any pure heart, and faith unfeigned. (<span
id="vii.vi-p3.1"></span>[1Ti 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span
id="vii.vi-p3.1"></span>.) But the word truth in this passage is, in my
judgment, referred to that sincerity which we must cultivate, so that no
one should deceive another, nor act fraudulently or knowingly, but be
really simple and sincere. He adds*, he is just, and in living he shall
live, says the Lord Jehovah*. At length he pronounces, as we said, that
he is just who has faithfully observed God’s law; then that a recompense
is prepared for all the just who thus sincerely worship God. Now let us
come to the second example.

<span id="vii.vii"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p1"></span><span id="vii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#010)<span
id="vii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p2"></span>**10.** If he beget a son *that is* a
robber, a shedder of blood, and *that* doeth the like to *any* one of
these *things*,

<span id="vii.vii-p3"></span>**10.** Et genuerit filium praedonem,
 <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) qui sanguinem effundit, et
facit fractri:  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) fratri (ergo)
unum ex his.  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214)

<span id="vii.vii-p7"></span>**11.** And that doeth not any of those
*duties*, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his
neighbour’s wife,

<span id="vii.vii-p8"></span>**11.** Et ipse haec omnia  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) non fecerit, quin potius omnia in
montibus comederit, et uxorem proximi sui corruperit.  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216)

<span id="vii.vii-p11"></span>**12.** Hath oppressed the poor and needy,
hath spoiled by violence, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted
up his eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination,

<span id="vii.vii-p12"></span>**12.** Pauperem et egenum oppresserit,
praedas rapuerit, pignus non reddiderit, et ad idola oculos suos
extulerit, abominationem fecerit.

<span id="vii.vii-p13"></span>**13.** Hath given forth upon usury, and
hath taken increase: shall he then live? he shall not live: he hath done
all these abominations; he shall surely die; his blood shall be upon
him.

<span id="vii.vii-p14"></span>**13.** Cum usura dederit, et incrementum
acceperit: et vivet?  <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) non vivet:
abominationes cunctas patravit, moriendo morietur, sanguis ejus in eo
erit.  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218)

<span id="vii.vii-p17"></span> 

<span id="vii.vii-p18"></span><span id="vii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p19"></span>*He has oppressed the poor and needy*: he
had simply said, He has oppressed a man; but now to make the greatness
of the crime appear, he speaks of the poor and needy: for cruelty in
oppressing them is less tolerable. Whatever the condition of the person
whom we treat, with injustice, our wickedness is in itself sufficiently
worthy of condemnation; but when we afflict the wretched, whose
condition ought to excite our pity, that, inhumanity is, as I have said,
far more atrocious. Hence this circumstance exaggerates what Ezekiel had
formerly simply expressed. In the phrase for *seizing booty*, the word
for booty is in the plural: in the next phrase he omits the word for
debtor, because it is sufficiently understood: in the next, he does not
add “of the house of Israel” to the word “idols;” and in the last clause
the word “abomination” seems to refer to one kind of grossness only: but
if any wish to extend its meaning further, I do not, object; but since
he lately used the word in the plural, I rather take this word in its
restricted sense. I pass thus rapidly over this second example, as I
shall over the third, because Ezekiel preserves the same sentiments, and
repeats almost the same words as he had just used. Hitherto he has
taught that life is laid up for all the just as the reward of their
justice: but he now sets before us a degenerate son, sprung from a just
father, running headlong into all kind of wickedness. He says, then, if
a man who desires to obey the law beget a son of a perverse disposition,
who rejects the discipline of his father, and at the same time violates
the whole law of God, *shall he surely live? No*, says he*, he shall
die, his blood shall be upon him;* that is, he cannot escape God’s
judgment;, because his crimes cry out, and are heard. Hence none who
turn aside from the right way shall remain unpunished: this is the
simple meaning of the Prophet. Let us now come to the third member.

<span id="vii.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p1"></span><span id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#014)<span
id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p2"></span>**14.** Now, lo, *if* he beget a son, that
seeth all his father’s sins which he hath done, and considereth, and
doeth not such like,

<span id="vii.viii-p3"></span>**14.** Et ecce genuerit filium, et
viderit cuncta scelera patris sui quae perpetravit, et timuerit, et non
fecerit secundum ipsa,

<span id="vii.viii-p4"></span>**15.** *That* hath not eaten upon the
mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of
Israel, hath not defiled his neighbour’s wife,

<span id="vii.viii-p5"></span>**15.** Super montes non comederit, et
oculos suos non extulerit ad idola  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) domus Israel  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) uxorem proximi sui non polluerit,

<span id="vii.viii-p8"></span>**16.** Neither hath oppressed any, hath
not withholden the pledge, neither hath spoiled by violence, *but* hath
given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a
garment,

<span id="vii.viii-p9"></span>**16.** Et neminem oppresserit, pignus non
pigneraverit,  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) et rapinam  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) non rapuerit: panem suum famelico
dederit,  <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) et nudum operuerit
vestimento.

<span id="vii.viii-p13"></span>**17.** *That* hath taken off his hand
from the poor, *that* hath not received usury nor increase, hath
executed my judgments, hath walked in my statutes; he shall not die for
the iniquity of his father, he shall surely live.

<span id="vii.viii-p14"></span>**17.** Ab egeno retraxerit manum suam,
foenus et inerementum non acceperit, judicia mea fecerit, in decretis
meis ambulaverit, ipse non morietur in iniquitate patris sui, vivendo
vivet.

<span id="vii.viii-p15"></span> 

<span id="vii.viii-p16"></span><span id="vii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p17"></span>In this third example Ezekiel announces,
that if a man be born of a wicked father, he may nevertheless be
pleasing to God, if he be unlike his father and thus he refutes the
proverb that was so common in Israel — that the father ate the sour
grapes, and the children’s teeth were set on edge. For if the sons were
sufferers through the father’s eating the sour grapes, then the pious
who drew their origin from wicked despisers of God would be freed from
all their sins. Thus Ezekiel would have been punished instead of his
father, Ahaz, and Josiah instead of Manasseh. But here the Prophet bears
witness that the good, however they may have been born from wicked
parents, should receive the reward of righteousness no less certainly
and faithfully than if they had come down from heaven, and if their
family had always been without the commission of any crime. Since,
therefore, God does not punish them for their fathers’ crimes, it
follows that the Israelites uttered this taunt not only foolishly, but
impiously, saying that their own teeth were set on edge, because their
fathers had eaten the sour grapes. Besides, as there is a difference in
the phrase, I shall notice briefly what is worthy of remark: *if he
begat a son who saw all that his father had done, and was afraid*. Here
the Prophet teaches that it needed the greatest attention for the son to
forsake the example of a bad father. For sons are blind to their
fathers’ vices; and although, when duty is set before them, they
carelessly despise it, yet they fancy themselves held so far by pious
reverence, that they dare not condemn their fathers. Hence it happens
that sons do not acknowledge their fathers’ crimes, and thus a wicked
father corrupts his son willingly. Bad discipline, therefore, is added
to this, so that it is not surprising if the offspring is worse than his
ancestors. For this reason the Prophet says, *if he has seen*, that is,
if a righteous child has observed his father’s sins, since sons shut
their eyes as much as possible to all their fathers’ crimes; nay, they
embrace their vices for the greatest virtues.

<span id="vii.viii-p18"></span>He then adds, *if he has feared.* It
would not be sufficient to take notice of this without adding the fear
of God. It is true, indeed, that many were unlike their parents, through
being restrained by shame; for when they heard the reproaches of their
parents, they were touched with ingenuous modesty, so as to be on their
guard against such enormities. But all these followed the empty shadow
of justice; and here the serious observance of the law is treated, which
cannot flow from anything else but, the fear of God, and this, as
Scripture says, is the beginning of wisdom. (<span
id="vii.viii-p18.1"></span>[Ps
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)<span
id="vii.viii-p18.1"></span>; <span id="vii.viii-p18.2"></span>[Pr
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)<span id="vii.viii-p18.2"></span>.)
A person thus may be blameless through his whole life, and yet not touch
on any part of justice, since righteousness flows from only one
principle — the fear of God. He afterwards adds, *and has not done
according to them.* We see, therefore, that those who implicate
themselves in others’ crimes are not otherwise deceived, unless they
purposely stifle all difference between good and evil; for if they had
attended to this, they would doubtless have been touched with some fear,
and thus have governed their life according to God’s precepts: but
scarcely one in a hundred thinks of this, and hence every one mingles
freely with his neighbors, and so all perish together. He afterwards
adds, *he has not eaten upon the mountains, has not raised his eyes to
the idols of the house of Israel:* we have explained all these: *and has
not oppressed any one, and has not received a pledge.* We said that this
ought not to be explained of every pledge; for it was lawful for any
one, on giving money, to receive a pledge for its return, but not from
one who is destitute of either garments or the necessary implements of
trade: so I pass this by. *He has not received a prey, has distributed
his bread to the hungry* He adds, what he had not touched on previously,
*he has withdrawn his hand from the poor*. This seems to differ from the
opinion which we had in the sixteenth chapter, (<span
id="vii.viii-p18.3"></span>[Eze
16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049)<span
id="vii.viii-p18.3"></span>.) Among the sins of Sodom, the Prophet there
puts this also, that they withdrew their hand from the poor and needy;
and surely, when we stretch forth the hand for the sake of help, it is a
true proof of charity; but if we withdraw the hand, it is a proof of
cruelty, since we do not deign to aid a brother who ought to obtain some
favor from us. But we must bear in mind that there are two senses in
which the hand is either extended or withdrawn. If I extend my hand to
the poor to supply what is wanting, and to the weak to render him aid,
this is the duty of charity. If, on the contrary, I withdraw my hand, I
unjustly turn away from him who implores my confidence, and whose misery
ought to win for him some favor. But we extend the hand when we seize on
a neighbor’s goods, and violently deprive him of them, and despoil the
innocent of their rights. On the contrary, he who withdraws his hand is
humane in sparing his brethren, and not enriching himself at their
expense, and profiting by their oppression. In this sense the Prophet
now enumerates *withdrawing the hand from the poor* in the list of
virtues, because the poor are subject to all kinds of injury. If,
therefore, when we see booty already prepared for us, and yet we refrain
from it, this is a proof of true charity. But again, we must remark upon
what I treated but briefly yesterday, namely, that *we must withdraw our
hands from the poor,* because nothing is more easy than to be enticed to
make a gain of the poor; and wherever occasion and impunity offer
themselves, avarice so seizes us, that we neither discern nor consider
what is right and fair. Every one who wishes to preserve his
self-restraint, and to subdue his affections, ought to attend to this
with all his strength and with constant struggling: thus the Prophet
says, *we must withdraw the hand*

<span id="vii.viii-p19"></span><span id="vii.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p20"></span>Now at last he concludes: *he shall not
die through his father’s iniquity; he shall surely live.* He does not
repeat that this is just, yet we must understand it so; but he stops at
the immediate effect, since God’s blessing awaits all the just, as
Isaiah says surely there is a reward to the just, (<span
id="vii.viii-p20.1"></span>[Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)<span
id="vii.viii-p20.1"></span>;) and the Prophet exclaims as if it were
believed with difficulty: for, since we see all things revolving
promiscuously in the world, we directly imagine either that God is at
rest in heaven, or that chance governs all things here on earth. But we
must strive against this perverse supposition, and determine, as Isaiah
teaches, that there is a reward for the just. The Prophet now expresses
this, while a difficult question arises from the passage; for he says
*that he is just who has kept the law,* and so God will bestow a
recompense upon. him: hence these two things are connected together, and
the question which I mentioned arises from the former clause; for the
whole Scriptures teach that no one is just, and that none can be
justified by the law. But these things are contrary to each other; to be
just and worthy of reward through keeping the law, since none is just,
all are transgressors, all devoid of justice, and so but one remedy
remains — that of seeking our safety from the gratuitous mercy of God.
But although, at first sight, this kind of it consistency disturbs the
rude and partially-exercised commentator, yet this solution is easy,
since, strictly speaking, justice is the observance of the law. If any
one asks, then, what justice is, the proper definition is, the
observance of law. Why so? Because the law, as I said yesterday, lays
down the solid rule of justice; whoever observes it will be esteemed
just; and thus justification is properly said to be placed in works.
But, on the other hand, Scripture pronounces what is very true, and
entirely confirmed by experience, that no one can satisfy the law, and,
on account of this defect, we are all deprived of justification by
works. What I have said may be made much clearer by many testimonies of
Scripture. Not the hearer of the law, says Paul, in the second chapter
of the epistle to the Romans, but the doer of the law, shall be
justified, (<span id="vii.viii-p20.2"></span>[Ro
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013)<span
id="vii.viii-p20.2"></span>.) There Paul speaks naturally, that those
are just who conform their whole life to the obedience of God’s law. So
also John, in his canonical epistle: He who does righteousness is
righteous. (<span id="vii.viii-p20.3"></span>[1Jo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007)<span id="vii.viii-p20.3"></span>.)
Now, if any one asks whether any perfect observer of the law can be
found, or one who does justice in every respect, the answer is at hand,
that we are all by nature very far gone from all righteousness, and all
our senses and affections are enemies which contend against God’s law,
as Paul teaches: The whole soul of man is perverse, and we are not fit
to think anything of ourselves, and that all our sufficiency is of God,
since we are slaves of sin. (<span id="vii.viii-p20.4"></span>[Ro
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)<span id="vii.viii-p20.4"></span>;
<span id="vii.viii-p20.5"></span>[2Co
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)<span id="vii.viii-p20.5"></span>;
<span id="vii.viii-p20.6"></span>[Romans
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#000)<span id="vii.viii-p20.6"></span>.)
But it would be superfluous to heap together many testimonies. Let it
suffice, then, that we are by nature all together rebels against God, so
that not the slightest particle of good can be found in us. As far as
concerns the faithful, they aspire indeed to righteousness, but lamely,
and at a great distance from their aim; they often wander from the way,
and they often fall, so that they do not satisfy the law, and hence
require God’s pity. Hence we must come to the second kind of
righteousness, which is improperly so called, namely, that which we
obtain from Christ. He who does righteousness is righteous. (l <span
id="vii.viii-p20.7"></span>[Joh
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#007)<span id="vii.viii-p20.7"></span>.)
None of us does it; but Christ, who fulfilled the law, is esteemed just
before God. Hence it is necessary that we should be approved by God
through his righteousness; that is, it is imputed to us, and we are
accepted through his righteousness. Hence justification by faith, as it
is called, is not properly righteousness; but on account of the defect
of true righteousness, it is necessary to fly to this as to a sacred
anchor; and Paul, in the tenth chapter to the Romans, explains this
briefly and clearly. The righteousness of the law, says he, thus speaks:
He who has done these things shall live in them; but the righteousness
of faith says, He who has believed shall be just. The Apostle here
speaks of a double righteousness — that of the law and of faith: he
says, that the righteousness of the law is situated in works, since no
one is thought just unless he fulfills the law. (<span
id="vii.viii-p20.8"></span>[Ro
10:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)<span
id="vii.viii-p20.8"></span>.) Since all are far distant from this
standard, another is added and substituted, namely, that we may embrace
the righteousness of Christ by faith, and so become just, by another
righteousness without us: for if any one again objects that
justification by the law is superfluous, I answer, that it profits us in
two ways; first, because the law brings in those convicted of their own
unrighteousness to Christ. This, then, is one fruit of the law, that we
renounce our own righteousness, when our iniquity so discloses itself,
that it compels us to be silent before God, as we formerly saw. A more
fruitful result follows; because, when God regenerates his elect, he
inscribes a law on their hearts and in their inward parts, as we have
elsewhere seen, and shall see again in the thirty-sixth chapter. (<span
id="vii.viii-p20.9"></span>[Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span
id="vii.viii-p20.9"></span>; <span id="vii.viii-p20.10"></span>[Ezek.
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#027)<span
id="vii.viii-p20.10"></span>.) But the difficulty is not yet solved;
because the faithful, even if regenerated by God’s Spirit, endeavor to
conform themselves to God’s law, yet, through their own weakness, never
arrive at that point, and so are never righteous: I answer, although the
righteousness of works is mutilated in the sons of God, yet it is
acknowledged as perfect, since, by not imputing their sins to them, he
proves what is his own. Hence it happens, that although the faithful
fall back, wander, and sometimes fall, yet they may be called observers
of the law, and walkers in the commandments of God, and observers of his
righteousness. But this arises from gratuitous imputation, and hence
also its reward. The works of the faithful are not without reward,
because they please God, and pleasing God, they are sure of
remuneration. We see, then, how these things are rightly united, that no
one obeys the law, and that no one is worthy of the fruits of
righteousness, and yet that God, of his own liberality, acknowledges as
just those who aspire to righteousness, and repay them with a reward of
which they are unworthy. When, therefore, we say that the faithful are
esteemed just even in their deeds, this is not stated as a cause of
their salvation, and we must diligently notice that the cause of
salvation is excluded from this doctrine; for, when we discuss the
cause, we must look nowhere else but to the mercy of God, and there we
must stop. But although works tend in no way to the cause of
justification, yet, when the elect sons of God were justified freely by
faith, at the same time their works are esteemed righteous by the same
gratuitous liberality. Thus it still remains true, that faith without
works justifies, although this needs prudence and a sound
interpretation; for this proposition, that faith without works justifies
is true and yet false, according to the different senses which it bears.
The proposition, that faith without works justifies by itself, is false,
because faith without works is void. But if the clause “without works”
is joined with the word “justifies,” the proposition will be true, since
faith cannot justify when it is without works, because it is dead, and a
mere fiction. He who is born of God is just, as John says. (<span
id="vii.viii-p20.11"></span>[1Jo
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018)<span
id="vii.viii-p20.11"></span>.) Thus faith can be no more separated from
works than the sun from his heat yet faith justifies without works,
because works form no reason for our justification; but faith alone
reconciles us to God, and causes him to love us, not in ourselves, but
in his only begotten Son. Now, therefore, that question is solved, when
the Prophet teaches that life is reposed in the just, even if they are
born of wicked and unholy parents.

<span id="vii.viii-p21"></span>Lastly, we must notice the word “life,”
since the word “living” ought not to be understood only of life on
earth, but looks to eternal life: and here some expositors are mistaken:
for because they could not free themselves from those difficulties which
I lately explained, they interpreted the words of Moses in a civil sense
— He who has done these things shall live in them. But Moses is speaking
of life eternal. Hence we must hold, not only that a reward is promised
in this life to the just observers of the law, but that eternal life is
also a promised reward. Besides, as I have said, since we are all
destitute of righteousness, so we thought not to hope for any reward,
since we are all under the law and under the curse, as Paul says:
neither is there any means of escape, as Paul again says, (<span
id="vii.viii-p21.1"></span>[Gal. 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="vii.viii-p21.1"></span>,)
unless we fly with complete and abject faith to the mercy of God alone,
and to the satisfaction by which Christ has reconciled us to his Father.
Here I shall finish.

<span id="vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have pointed
out to us the true way of safety, since you did perceive us all
deficient in this respect, and since the law which ought to have given
us life brought death through our transgressing it: Grant, I pray thee,
since you have set before us your only Son in whom we may be reconciled
and obtain the perfect righteousness which we need, that we may so
embrace the grace which is offered to us in the gospel, that we may
strive more and more to proceed in the pursuit of piety, till we arrive
at length at the blessed inheritance which the same, your only-begotten
Son, has acquired for us. — Amen.

<span id="vii.x"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Sixth.

<span id="vii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#018)<span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span>**18.** *As for* his father, because he
cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother by violence, and did *that* which
*is* not good among his people, lo, even he in shall die in his
iniquity.

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span>**18.** Pater ejus quia opprimendo
oppressit, et rapuit praedam a fratre, et quod non est bonum fecit in
medio populi sui: ecce is morietur iniquitate sua.

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span>**19.** Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son
bear the iniquity of the father? When the son hath done that which is
lawful and right, *and* hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them,
he shall surely live.

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span>**19.** Et dicitis, Quare non portabit
filius iniquitatem patris? eo quod filius fecit judicium et justitiam,
et custodivit omnia statuta mea fecitque ea: ideo vivendo vivet.

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span><span id="vii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p8"></span>He inculcates the same thing more at length,
not for the sake of ornament so much as to refute that impious saying in
which the Israelites so perniciously persisted. Since then it was
difficult to tear from their minds what was so deeply rooted in them,
the Prophet often exclaims that no one was punished except he deserved
it for his crimes. He adds in the next verse what seems superfluous and
absurd: for the Israelites did not contend with God for sparing the
innocent: but here Ezekiel represents them speaking as if they wished
the innocent son to be punished equally with the wicked father. But he
does not mean that they contended about the right, but about the fact,
as we usually say. For since they were imbued with that error, that
punishments extended beyond the criminals, on the other hand he
pronounces that the just were not absolved by their own goodness, if
they sprang from impious parents, although the people supposed so; for
they were buried under their own depraved judgment, otherwise they must
have perceived that justice is never deprived by God of its reward of
life.

<span id="vii.xii"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p2"></span>**20.** The soul that sinneth, it shall
die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall
the father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be
upon him.

<span id="vii.xii-p3"></span>**20.** Anima quae peccaverit ipsa
morietur: filius non portabit iniquitatem patris, et pater non portabit
iniquitatem filii: justitia justi super eum erit, et impietas impii
super eum erit.

<span id="vii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xii-p5"></span><span id="vii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p6"></span>Ezekiel still pursues the sentiment which
we have explained, namely, that God is a just judge and treats every one
according to his conduct; as Paul says, As each has lived in the flesh,
so God lays up a reward for him. (<span id="vii.xii-p6.1"></span>[Ro
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013)<span id="vii.xii-p6.1"></span>.)
But he more clearly refuted the proverb, that the sons should suffer for
their fathers’ sins. He says, then, that each when he comes before God’s
tribunal should be judged by his works. As far then as the general
sentiment is concerned, it is in accordance with common sense that God
should exact punishment of the wicked, and that they should receive the
just reward of their works. But in the next clause, the question arises
how the Spirit here pronounces that the son should not pay the penalty
due to the father, when God so often declares that he visits the sins of
the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation.
(<span id="vii.xii-p6.2"></span>[Ex
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span id="vii.xii-p6.2"></span>.)
That sentiment often occurs: but there are two passages peculiarly
remarkable, where it is annexed to the second precept of the law, (<span
id="vii.xii-p6.3"></span>[De 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xii-p6.3"></span>,) and then in that remarkable vision which
occurred to Moses, God pronounces the same thing as before, namely, that
the iniquity of the fathers should fall upon the sons. (<span
id="vii.xii-p6.4"></span>[Ex 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007)<span
id="vii.xii-p6.4"></span>.) These passages seem opposed to each other,
but it will be easy to remove the contradiction by beginning with the
fall of Adam, since if we do not consider the whole race fallen in Adam,
we can scarcely extricate ourselves from that difficulty which we often
feel as causing pungent scruples. But the principle of one universal
fall in Adam removes all doubts. For when we consider the perishing of
the whole human race, it is said with truth that we perish through
another’s fault: but it is added at the same time, that every one
perishes through his own iniquity. If then we inquire into the cause of
the curse which presses upon all the posterity of Adam, it may be said
to be partly another’s and partly our own: another’s, through Adam’s
declension from God, in whose person the whole human race was spoiled of
righteousness and intelligence, and all parts of the soul utterly
corrupted. So that every one is lost in himself, and if he wishes to
contend with God, he must always acknowledge that the fountain of the
curse flows from himself. For before the child was born into the world,
it was corrupt, since its menial intelligence was buried in darkness,
and its will was perverse and rebellious against God. As soon as infants
are born they contract pollution from their father Adam: their reason is
blinded, their appetites perverted, and their senses entirely vitiated.
This does not immediately show itself in the young child, but before
God, who discerns things more acutely than we do, the corruption of our
whole nature is rightly treated as sin. There is no one who during the
course of his life does not perceive himself liable to punishment
through his own works; but original sin is sufficient for the
condemnation of all men. When men grow up they acquire for themselves
the new curse of what is called actual sin: so that he who is pure with
reference to ordinary observation, is guilty before God: hence Scripture
pronounces us all naturally children of wrath: these are Paul’s words in
the second chapter of the epistle to the Ephesians, (<span
id="vii.xii-p6.6"></span>[Eph 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span
id="vii.xii-p6.6"></span>.) If then we are children of wrath, it follows
that we are polluted from our birth: this provokes God’s anger and
renders him hostile to us: in this sense David confesses himself
conceived in sin. (<span id="vii.xii-p6.7"></span>[Ps
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="vii.xii-p6.7"></span>.)
He does not here accuse either his father or his mother so as to
extenuate his own wickedness; but, when he abhors the greatness of his
sin in provoking the wrath of God, he is brought back to his infancy,
and acknowledges that he was even then guilty before God. We see then
that David, being reminded of a single sin, acknowledges himself a
sinner before he was born; and since we are all under the curse, it
follows that we are all worthy of death. Thus, the son properly speaking
shall not die through the iniquity of his father, but is considered
guilty before God through his own fault.

<span id="vii.xii-p7"></span>Now let us proceed further. When God
pronounces that the iniquity of the father returns into the bosom of the
son, we must remember that when God involves the son in the same death
with the father, he does so principally because the son of the impious
is destitute of his Spirit: whence it happens that he remains in the
death in which he was born. For if we do not consider any other
punishments than those which are openly inflicted, a new scruple will
again arise from which we cannot free ourselves, since this inquiry will
always recur, how can the son perish by his own fault, if he can produce
good fruit and so reconcile himself to God? But the first punishment
with which God threatens the reprobate is that which I have mentioned,
namely, that their offspring are destitute and deprived of spiritual
gifts, so that they sink deeper and deeper into destruction: for there
are two kinds of punishment, the one outward and the other inward, as we
express it. God punishes the transgressors of his law by either the
sword, or by famine, or by pestilence, as he everywhere denounces: he is
also armed with other means of slaughter for executing his wrath, and
all these punishments are outward and openly apparent. But there is
another sort inward and hidden, when God takes away the spirit of
rectitude from the reprobate, when he gives them up to a reprobate mind,
subjects them to foul desires, and deprives them of all his gifts hence
God is said to cause the fathers’ iniquity to recoil upon the children
not only when he outwardly punishes the little ones, but because he
devotes a cursed offspring to eternal destruction, through being
destitute of all the gifts of the Spirit,. Now we know that God is the
fountain of life, (<span id="vii.xii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span id="vii.xii-p7.1"></span>,)
whence it follows that all who are separated from him are dead. Now
therefore it is evident how God throws the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children, since when he devotes both father and son to eternal
destruction, he deprives them of all his gifts, blinds their minds, and
enslaves all their appetites to the devil. Although we may, in one word,
embrace the whole matter of the children suffering for the fathers when
he leaves them to simple nature, as the phrase is, since in this way he
drowns them in death and destruction. But outward punishments also
follow afterwards, as when God sends lightning upon Sodom many young
children perished, and all were absorbed with their parents. (<span
id="vii.xii-p7.2"></span>[Ge
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span id="vii.xii-p7.2"></span>.)
If any one asks by what right they perished, first they were sons of
Adam and so were accursed, and then God wished to punish the Sodomites
through their offspring, and he could do so deservedly. Concerning the
young who thus perished with their fathers, it is said, happy is he who
dashes thy young ones against the stones or the pavement. (<span
id="vii.xii-p7.3"></span>[Ps
137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009)<span id="vii.xii-p7.3"></span>.)
At first sight, indeed, that atrocity seems intolerable that a child
whose age and judgment is thus tender should be so cruelly slain: but as
we have already said, all are naturally children of wrath. (<span
id="vii.xii-p7.4"></span>[Eph 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span
id="vii.xii-p7.4"></span>.) No wonder, therefore, that God withdraws his
favor from the offspring of the reprobate, even if he executes these
outward judgments. But how will this now be suitable, *shall not the son
bear the iniquity of the father?* for Ezekiel here speaks of adults, for
he means that the son shall not bear his father’s iniquity, since he
shall receive the reward due to himself and sustain his own burden.
Should any one wish to strive with God, he can be refuted in a single
word: for who can boast himself innocent? Since therefore all are guilty
through their own fault, it follows that the son does not bear his
father’s iniquity, since he has to bear his own at the same time. Now
that question is solved.

<span id="vii.xii-p8"></span>He now adds, *the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the impiety of the impious shall be
upon him*. We said that this was the legal sentence: if God used the
same language everywhere, no hope of safety would be left to us. For who
would be found just if his life were judged strictly by the law? But it
has already been said, speaking accurately, that God rewards those
worshipers who observe his law, and punish those who transgress it. But
since we are all far from perfect obedience, Christ is offered to us,
from whom we may partake of righteousness, and in this way be justified
by faith. Meanwhile it is true, according to the rule of the law, *that
the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him*, since God will
not disappoint any, but will really perform what he has promised. But he
promises a reward to all who observe his law. If any one object that
this doctrine is useless and superfluous, we have an answer at hand,
that it is in many ways useful, since, first of all, we acknowledge that
God, although he owes us nothing, yet willingly binds himself to be
reconciled to us; and thus his surprising liberality appears. Then we
again collect, that by transgression we cannot profit or obtain any
advantage when God offers a reward to all who observe his law. For what
can we demand more equitable than that God should of his own accord be
our debtor? and should reward us while he holds us bound to himself, and
completely subject to him with all our works? And that pattern of Christ
must be considered, When you have done all that was commanded you, say,
We are unprofitable servants. (<span id="vii.xii-p8.1"></span>[Lu
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#010)<span id="vii.xii-p8.1"></span>.)
Why so? for we return nothing but what God has justly required of us. We
gather, then, from this sentence, that we cannot expostulate with God,
or complain of anything while the fault of our own condemnation resides
in us for not keeping the law. Thirdly, we acknowledge another instance
of God’s mercy in his clothing us in the righteousness of his Son, when
he sees us in want of a righteousness of our own, and altogether
destitute of everything good. Fourthly, we said that they are esteemed
just who do not satisfy the law, since God does not impute their sins to
them. Hence the righteousness of the law is not without fruit among the
faithful; since on account of that blessedness which is described in
<span id="vii.xii-p8.2"></span>[Ps
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span id="vii.xii-p8.2"></span>,
their works are taken into account and remunerated by God. *So the
righteousness of the righteous is upon him, just as the impiety of the
impious is upon him, and it shall recoil upon his own head.* It follows
—

<span id="vii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#021)<span
id="vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p2"></span>**21.** But if the wicked will turn from
all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do
that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

<span id="vii.xiii-p3"></span>**21.** Et si impius reversus fuerit ab
omni iniquitate sua quam fecit, et servaverit omnia edicta mea, et
fecerit judicium et justitiam, vivendo rivet, non morietur.

<span id="vii.xiii-p4"></span>**22.** All his transgressions that he
hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his
righteousness that he hath done he shall live.

<span id="vii.xiii-p5"></span>**22.** Omnes transgressiones quas fecit
non venient in memoriam ei,  <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) sed
in justitia sua quam fecit rivet.

<span id="vii.xiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.xiii-p8"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p9"></span>In this sentence God proposes the hope of
pardon, and invites and exhorts to penitence all the transgressors of
his law. But this doctrine is specially worthy of notice, that God
extends his arms, and is prepared to meet and receive all who betake
themselves to good fruits: for despair hurls us into madness, and then
hardens our hearts by abandoned obstinacy. Hence it is necessary that
God should extend his hand towards us, and animate us to penitence. This
is the meaning of this passage of the Prophets, *as soon as the impious
is turned away from his impiety, God will be at peace with him.* Now we
see that no excuse remains for us if this humane invitation of God does
not stir us up when he bears witness that he is propitious to us when we
heartily desire to be reconciled to him. But he here requires serious
repentance when he says, *if the impious has turned away from his
impiety, and has kept my statutes, and done justice and judgment, he
shall live*, says he. For a sort of half conversion is discerned in many
who think that in this way they are safe before God, but they are
greatly deceived; for many mingle virtues with vices, and imagine their
guilt blotted out, if they can only bring forward something as worthy of
praise. But this is just as if any one should offer muddy will to his
master, because he had mixed it not only with dregs, but even with
filth: so are all the works of those who do not put away all depraved
desires, and strive to free themselves from all the corruption’s of the
flesh. Thus what is here taught is worthy of notice, namely, that the
beginning of conversion is, when any one renounces himself and his own
lusts. But it is necessary to add another part of duty, that when any
one bids farewell to his vices, he must devote himself obediently to
God. The Prophet joins the two together, therefore, since one cannot be
separated from the other. Hence the Spirit here shortly defines what
true and legitimate conversion is. He says, that when any one is thus
converted, that his life is prepared for God, since God will forget all
his sins. This is a confirmation of the doctrine; for God cannot be
entreated as long as he imputes our sins to us: hence, that we may
determine him to be propitious to us, he promises, as soon as we repent,
that all our sins shall be buried, and no longer come into remembrance.
But this is the incomparable goodness of God, since he deigns to forget
all our sins as soon as he sees us earnestly desirous of returning to
him. On the whole, Ezekiel pronounces that all the penitent pass at once
from death to life, since God blots out all their transgressions by
voluntary oblivion. It afterwards follows —

<span id="vii.xiv"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023)<span id="vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p2"></span>**23.** Have I any pleasure at all that the
wicked should die? saith the Lord GOD: *and* not that he should return
from his ways, and live?

<span id="vii.xiv-p3"></span>**23.** An cupio cupiendo mortem impii,
dicit Dominator Iehovah? An non ut convertatur a viis suis, et vivat?

<span id="vii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p6"></span>He confirms the same sentiment in other
words, that God desires nothing more earnestly than that those who were
perishing and rushing to destruction should return into the way of
safety. And for this reason not only is the Gospel spread abroad in the
world, but God wished to bear witness through all ages how inclined he
is to pity. For although the heathen were destitute of the law and the
prophets, yet they were always endued with some taste of this doctrine.
Truly enough they were suffocated by many errors: but we shall always
find that they were induced by a secret impulse to seek for pardon,
because this sense was in some way born with them, that God is to be
appeased by all who seek him. Besides, God bore witness to it more
clearly in the law and the prophets. In the Gospel we hear how
familiarly he addresses us when he promises us pardon. (<span
id="vii.xiv-p6.1"></span>[Lu 1:78](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#078)<span
id="vii.xiv-p6.1"></span>.) And this is the knowledge of salvation, to
embrace his mercy which he offers us in Christ. It follows, then, that
what the Prophet now says is very true, that God wills not the death of
a sinner, because he meets him of his own accord, and is not only
prepared to receive all who fly to his pity, but he calls them towards
him with a loud voice, when he sees how they are alienated from all hope
of safety. But the manner must be noticed in which God wishes all to be
saved, namely, *when they turn themselves from their ways*. God thus
does not so wish all men to be saved as to renounce the difference
between good and evil; but repentance, as we have said, must precede
pardon. How, then, does God wish all men to be saved? By the Spirit’s
condemning the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment at this
day, by the Gospel, as he did formerly by the law and the prophets.
(<span id="vii.xiv-p6.2"></span>[Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span id="vii.xiv-p6.2"></span>.)
God makes manifest to mankind their great misery, that they may betake
themselves to him: he wounds that he may cure, and slays that he may
give life. We hold, then, that; God wills not the death of a sinner,
since he calls all equally to repentance, and promises himself prepared
to receive them if they only seriously repent. If any one should object
— then there is no election of God, by which he has predestinated a
fixed number to salvation, the answer is at hand: the Prophet does not
here speak of God’s secret counsel, but only recalls miserable men from
despair, that they may apprehend the hope of pardon, and repent and
embrace the offered salvation. If any one again objects — this is making
God act with duplicity, the answer is ready, that God always wishes the
same thing, though by different ways, and in a manner inscrutable to us.
Although, therefore, God’s will is simple, yet great variety is involved
in it, as far as our senses are concerned. Besides, it is not surprising
that our eyes should be blinded by intense light, so that we cannot
certainly judge how God wishes all to be saved, and yet has devoted all
the reprobate to eternal destruction, and wishes them to perish. While
we look now through a glass darkly, we should be content with the
measure of our own intelligence. (<span id="vii.xiv-p6.3"></span>[1Co
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="vii.xiv-p6.3"></span>.)
When we shall be like God, and see him face to face, then what is now
obscure will then become plain. But since captious men torture this and
similar passages, it will be needful to refute them shortly, since it
can be done without trouble.

<span id="vii.xiv-p7"></span>God is said *not to wish the death of a
sinner*. How so? since he wishes all to be converted. Now we must see
how God wishes all to be converted; for repentance is surely his
peculiar gift: as it is his office to create men, so it is his province
to renew them, and restore his image within them. For this reason we are
said to be his workmanship, that is, his fashioning. (<span
id="vii.xiv-p7.1"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="vii.xiv-p7.1"></span>.)
Since, therefore, repentance is a kind of second creation, it follows
that it is not in man’s power; and if it is equally in God’s power to
convert men as well as to create them, it follows that the reprobate are
not converted, because God does not wish their conversion; for if he
wished it he could do it: and hence it appears that he does not wish it.
But again they argue foolishly, since God does not wish all to be
converted, he is himself deceptive, and nothing can be certainly stated
concerning his paternal benevolence. But this knot is easily untied; for
he does not leave us in suspense when he says, that he wishes all to be
saved. Why so? for if no one repents without finding God propitious,
then this sentence is filled up. But we must remark that God puts on a
twofold character: for he here wishes to be taken at his word. As I have
already said, the Prophet does not here dispute with subtlety about his
incomprehensible plans, but wishes to keep our attention close to God’s
word. Now, what are the contents of this word? The law, the prophets,
and the gospel. Now all are called to repentance, and the hope of
salvation is promised them when they repent. this is true, since God
rejects no returning sinner: he pardons all without exception:
meanwhile, this will of God which he sets forth in his word does not
prevent him from decreeing before the world was created what he would do
with every individual: and as I have now said, the Prophet only shows
here, that when we have been converted we need not doubt that God
immediately meets us and shows himself propitious. The remainder
tomorrow.

<span id="vii.xv"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.xv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we are all lost
in ourselves, that we may desire to obtain life where it is laid up for
us, and where you do manifest it, namely, in thy Son: and grant that we
may so embrace the grace which has been exhibited to us in the sacrifice
of his death, that we may be regenerated by his Spirit; and thus being
born again, may we devote ourselves wholly to thee, and so glorify thy
name in this world, that we may at length be partakers of that glory
which the same, your only-begotten Son, has acquired for us. — Amen.

<span id="vii.xvi"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Seventh.

<span id="vii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#024)<span id="vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p2"></span>**24.** But when the righteous turneth
away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, *and* doeth
according to all the abominations that the wicked *man* doeth, shall he
live? All his righteousness that he hath done shall not be mentioned: in
his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath
sinned, in them shall he die.

<span id="vii.xvii-p3"></span>**24.** Et si aversus fuerit justus, a
justitia sua, et fecerit iniquitatem, secundum omnes abominationes quas
facit impius fecerit, an vivet? Omnes justitia, ejus quas fecit non
venient in recordationem:  <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) in
transgressione qua transgressus est, et in scelere, quo scelerate egit,
in ipsis morietur.

<span id="vii.xvii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.xvii-p6"></span><span id="vii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p7"></span>As in the last lecture the Prophet offered
to sinners a sure hope of pardon if they heartily repented, and promised
that God would be propitious to them as soon as they shall seek
reconciliation with him: so now, on the other hand, he pronounces, *if
the just shall decline from his justice*, whatever he has hitherto done,
shall not come into the account before God. He urged sinners to
repentance when he assured them that God was prepared to pardon them:
but he now frightens those who profess for the occasion to be pure and
sincere worshipers of God, if they fall back in the midst of their
course: as Paul says, Let him who stands take heed lest he fall. (<span
id="vii.xvii-p7.1"></span>[1Co
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xvii-p7.1"></span>.) Besides, we gather from this passage, as
Christ teaches, that those only are happy who persevere, (<span
id="vii.xvii-p7.2"></span>[Mt
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xvii-p7.2"></span>;) since a temporary righteousness will never
profit those apostates who afterwards turn aside from God. We see, then,
how these two clauses unite together, namely, that God invites all who
are in danger of perdition with extended arms, and promises them
salvation if they heartily return to him. Again, that he may restrain
within the bounds of duty those who have made some progress, and correct
their sloth and stir up their anxiety, he threatens, that unless they
pursue the course of a holy and pious life to the end, their former
righteousness will not profit them. But here a question arises, Can a
truly just person deflect from the right way? for he who is begotten of
God is so free from the tyranny of sin that he devotes himself wholly to
righteousness: and then if any do turn aside, they prove that they were
always strangers to God. If they had been of us, says John, they would
never have gone out from us. (<span id="vii.xvii-p7.3"></span>[1Jo
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="vii.xvii-p7.3"></span>.)
And regeneration is an incorruptible seed: so we must determine that the
faithful who are truly regenerate never fall away from righteousness,
but are retained by God’s unconquered power: for God’s calling in the
elect is without repentance. (<span id="vii.xvii-p7.4"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xvii-p7.4"></span>.) Hence he continues the course of his grace
even to the end. Nor are they to be listened to, who, in contradiction
to Scripture, teach that faith is extinct in the elect, when, through
its barrenness, they bring forth no fruit. In what sense, then, does
Ezekiel mean that the just fall away? That question is easily answered,
since he is not here treating of the living root of justice, but of the
outward form or appearance, as we commonly say. Paul reminds us that God
knows us, but adds, that this seal remains. (<span
id="vii.xvii-p7.5"></span>[2Ti
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="vii.xvii-p7.5"></span>.)
God therefore claims to himself alone the difference between the elect
and the reprobate, since many seem to be members of his Church who are
only outwardly such. And that passage of Augustine is true, that there
are many wolves within, and many sheep without.  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) For before God demonstrates his
election, the sheep wander, and seem altogether strangers to the hope of
salvation. Meanwhile many hypocrites make use of the name of God, and
openly boast themselves pre-eminent in the Church, but inwardly they are
wolves. But because it often happens that some make the greatest show of
piety and justice, the Prophet very properly says, that if such fall
away, they cannot boast of their former righteousness before God, since
its remembrance will be bloated out.

<span id="vii.xvii-p9"></span>In fine, we see that the word
righteousness is referred to our senses, and not to God’s hidden
judgment; so that the Prophet does not teach anything but what we
perceive daily: for those who seem to excel others desert their calling,
shake off every yoke, and cast away the fear of God, and sometimes rush
on with diabolical fury. When this result occurs we hear what the Spirit
pronounces by the mouth of the Prophet, *that none of their
righteousness shall be taken into account*. But weight is added to his
words when he says, *if you have turned aside from righteousness, and
done according to all the abominations of the impious,* (or wicked,)
*shall he live?* For the Prophet separates those who desert God and rush
into every wickedness from those who fall through infirmity or want of
thought, and from those also who would fall headlong into ruin, unless
God preserved them, yet do not utterly cast off his fear, and the desire
of living piously and righteously. For example: every one is
occasionally off his guard; and hence, in numberless ways, we offend God
through error: and hence David exclaims, Who can understand his faults?
(<span id="vii.xvii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xvii-p9.1"></span>.) We fall of our own accord, since we are
often conquered by temptations, even when our consciences accuse us; so
that, although sanctified, we decline from the path of uprightness
through ignorance, and depart from duty through infirmity. But what is
far worse, the saints sometimes rush headlong, as though utterly
desperate. For the example of David shows that the elect, although
regenerated by God’s Spirit, not only sin to a small extent, but, as I
have said, plunge into the very lowest abyss. David became a perfidious
homicide, and a traitor to the army of God; then that wretched king fell
into a series of crimes: yet he failed in only one thing, and showed
that God’s grace was only suffocated within him, and not altogether
extinguished. For as soon as Nathan reproves him, he confesses that he
had sinned, and is prepared to undergo any punishment which God may
inflict. Since, therefore, the saints sometimes fall, the Prophet here
stretches forth his hand, lest they should despair, and bears witness
that God does not reject them unless *they turn aside from their
righteousness and commit all the abominations which the impious do.* By
these words, as we see, he expresses a complete revolt, and he so
mitigates the severity of the sentence, lest the minds of those who had
only partially relapsed should despond. Now we see the meaning of this
language: *If he has done according to all the abominations of the
wicked, shall he live?* says he; *all the righteousness which he has
done shall not be remembered, because he shall perish.* Here the Prophet
shows that: a mere temporary righteousness will not profit us unless we
persevere unto the end in the fear of God.

<span id="vii.xvii-p10"></span>Here again the contrast is worthy of
notice, because it enables us to refute a fiction which is current in
the schools of the papacy. They say that guilt is remitted by God, but
the punishment is retained. Now what says our Prophet? *If the impious
turn away from his impiety, I will no longer remember any of his
iniquities*. Here the papists thrust for-ward the foolish distinction,
that God does not remember them as to their guilt, but he does as to
their punishment. But what follows a little afterwards? *If the just
turn away from his justice, his justice shall not be taken into
account*. But if they do not come into the account as to merit, and yet
do as to reward, what is the meaning of the passage? how will the
Prophet’s meaning stand? But it is necessary thus to receive what the
Prophet says; because, if the distinction of guilt and punishment
avails, that of merit and reward will avail also. Hence it will follow,
that as to merit God forgets all acts of righteousness; but as far as
reward is concerned, they are remembered since they are not abolished.
Since, then, it is sufficiently clear that the righteousness of the
backslider is not taken into account, so as to lead him to hope for
reward, it follows, on the other hand, that his sins are abolished not
only as to guilt, but also as to punishment. It now follows —

<span id="vii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#025)<span id="vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p2"></span>**25.** Yet ye say, The way of the Lord
is not equal. Hear now, O house of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not
your ways unequal?

<span id="vii.xviii-p3"></span>**25.** Et dixistis, Non rectificata est
via Domini: audite agedum domus Israel, Via mea non rectificabitur?
 <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) An non viae vestrae non sunt
rectae?  <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228)

<span id="vii.xviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.xviii-p7"></span><span id="vii.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p8"></span>The Prophet here shows that those who
used the vulgar taunt — that the children’s teeth were set on edge,
because their fathers had eaten sour grapes — had broken away from all
restraint; and nothing further remained to hinder them from uttering
their blasphemies arrogantly against God: but their insolence and
madness now increases when they say *that God’s ways are not equal*. And
this is discerned in almost all hypocrites: at first they indirectly
find fault with God, and yet pretend not to do so: while they endeavor
to excuse themselves, they accuse him of injustice, and of too much
rigor, yet they do not openly break out into such impiety as to dare to
charge God with this crime: but after they profit nothing by their
double dealing, the devil inflames them to such a pitch of boldness that
they hesitate not openly to condemn God himself. The Prophet refers to
this when he says that this disgraceful saying was bandied about among
the Israelites, *that the ways of the Lord are unequal*. Lest,
therefore, we should happen to resist God, and to contend with him, let
us learn to restrain our rashness in good time before he becomes enraged
against us. As soon as any thoughts spring up, tending to reflect upon
the character of the Almighty, let us quickly restrain them; for if we
do not, they will entangle us by degrees, and draw us into the extremity
of folly, and then no sense of either religion or shame will deter us
from open rebellion against God. But it is worth while noticing the
source of this impiety: first of all, when we think of men’s relation to
God, they should be ashamed to rise up against their Maker: for the clay
does not cry out against the potter; and we are a hundredfold more
insignificant than the clay, with reference to God. (<span
id="vii.xviii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009)<span id="vii.xviii-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.xviii-p8.2"></span>[Rom.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span id="vii.xviii-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xviii-p9"></span>But let us come to another consideration.
We know with how much greater clearness the angels are able reverently
to adore God’s wisdom than the human race. What, therefore, must we do?
Not only is God’s wisdom incomprehensible, but his justice is the most
perfect rule of all justice. Now, if we desire to pass opinions upon
God’s works according to our own perceptions, and to weigh them in our
balance, what else are we doing but passing judgment upon him? But we
must remember that passage of Isaiah, As I live, says Jehovah, every
knee shall bend before me, and every tongue shall swear by me. (<span
id="vii.xviii-p9.1"></span>[Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span
id="vii.xviii-p9.1"></span>.) Paul, too, is a faithful interpreter of
this sentiment, when he forbids mortals to judge arrogantly, by saying,
we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ (<span
id="vii.xviii-p9.2"></span>[Rom.
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011)<span id="vii.xviii-p9.2"></span>.)
Since, then, it will be necessary for us to render an account before
Christ heavenly tribunal, we must now acquiesce in God’s judgments;
because, when at length our license has entirely spent itself, and our
petulance has had its full scope, God will be our judge. We see,
therefore, that when men claim to themselves the right of daring to
pronounce their own opinions on God’s work, they first subject his
wisdom to their own fictions, and then feel too much hostility and
contempt towards his justice. But this one thing ought to be sufficient,
that men are too forgetful of their own condition when they dare to open
their mouth against their Maker, not only to murmur, but openly to
condemn him, as if they were his superiors. Let us then obey the
contrary rule; let us with sobriety and modesty learn to look upon those
works of God which are unknown to us, and to concede to him the praise
of supreme wisdom, although his counsels seem at first sight
contradictory. Hosea also briefly reminds us of this. For after God had
promised that he would be merciful to the people, and when he had
discoursed on the slaughter which he had inflicted, he says, that at
length he would heal them: he adds, Who is wise, and he shall understand
these things? (<span id="vii.xviii-p9.3"></span>[Ho
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xviii-p9.3"></span>;) because many might have thought it
inconsistent to remit so many sins for the abandoned people; and others
might object that what they heard was utterly incredible and absurd,
since God suffered the people to be utterly torn to pieces, so that no
hope remained. For this reason, then, the Prophet exclaims, that we have
need of rare and singular prudence to comprehend and embrace that
teaching. When he says, “who is wise?” it signifies that the number is
but small of those who will wait patiently till God really fulfills his
promises. Yet he adds, because the ways of the Lord are right, and the
just shall walk in them; but the impious shall stumble and perish. When
he speaks here of the ways of the Lord, he does not mean only precepts,
though the Scriptures often take the word in this sense; but he means
the whole order of government which God upholds, and all the judgments
which he exercises. He says, therefore, that all the ways of the Lord
are right, and the just shall walk in them, since the just will give God
the glory calmly, and with the proper docility; and when they are
agitated by various doubts, and through their infirmity are ever in a
ferment through the force of many temptations, yet they will always
repose on the providence of God, and briefly determine, by cutting off
every occasion for long and perplexing and thorny questions, that God is
just. Thus the just walk in the ways of the Lord, because they submit to
all his works.

<span id="vii.xviii-p10"></span>He says also, that the impious stumble
and fall; for as soon as they begin to think that God does not act
rightly or prudently, they are rebellious, and are carried away by blind
impulse, and their pride at length hurries them headlong into madness.
Thus they stumble in the ways of the Lord: because, as we see in this
passage, they vomit forth their blasphemies against God. Hence we ought,
to be influenced by this course of action, namely, adoring with humility
the counsel of God, although to us incomprehensible, and attributing the
praise of justice to all his works, though in our opinion they may not
correspond, or be consistent with each other. — This, then, is the sum
of the whole. Although the Prophet speaks of the penalties which God
inflicts on the reprobate, and of the reward which he has laid up for
the just, yet we ought to ascend still higher; and if God in his deeds
seems to pervert the whole course of justice, yet we should always be
sustained by this bridle — he is just; and if his deeds are disapproved
by us, it arises from our error and ignorance. For example, we not only
contend with God when he seems not to repay us a just reward for our
good works, or when he seems too severe towards us; but when his eternal
election is discussed, we immediately roar out, because we cannot
penetrate to so great a height: the pious, indeed, are not altogether
free from perplexing doubts which disturb them, but they restrain
themselves directly as I have said. But some restive men break out in
this way, — I do not comprehend — I do not understand: hence God is
unjust. We see how many blusterers in the present day betray their
desperate impudence, whence this teaching should recur to our minds —
*the ways of God are right.* But since we do not perceive how it is so,
another clause is added, *that our ways are not right*; that is, that
all our senses are defective, and our intellect blinded, and that we are
all so corrupt that our judgment is perverted. If, therefore, we
conclude with the Prophet, *that our ways are not right*, the glory of
God’s justice will remain untarnished and entire. Afterwards he adds —

<span id="vii.xix"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p1"></span><span id="vii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p2"></span>**26.** When a righteous *man* turneth away
from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and dieth in them; for
his iniquity that he hath done shall he die.

<span id="vii.xix-p3"></span>**26.** Si aversus fuerit justus a justitia
sua, et fecerit iniquitatem et mortuus fuerit in illis,  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) in iniquitate sua quam patravit
morietur.

<span id="vii.xix-p5"></span>**27.** Again, when the wicked *man*
turneth away from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that
which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.

<span id="vii.xix-p6"></span>**27.** Et si conversus fuerit sceleratus a
sceleribus suis quae fecit, et fecerit judicium et justitiam, ipse
animam suam vivificabit.  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230)

<span id="vii.xix-p8"></span>**28.** Because he considereth, and turneth
away from all his transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely
live, he shall not die.

<span id="vii.xix-p9"></span>**28.** Et viderit, et conversus fuerit ab
omnibus sceleribus quae patravit, vivendo vivet, non morietur.

<span id="vii.xix-p10"></span> 

<span id="vii.xix-p11"></span><span id="vii.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p12"></span>The Prophet repeats what we formerly saw,
namely, that the state of the case turned upon this, Whether the people
had any cause of complaint when God absolves those who repent, and
condemns the just who desert the course of a pious and holy life? Now,
we must always return to this cardinal point, that God rewards every one
according to his works, since he offers mercy to all the lost, and
demands nothing else but a sincere and hearty return to him. Since,
then, God treats the impious with such clemency, and is so ready to
pardon them, what is the reason why men contend with him? If the just
should retrace his steps, and after having shown some signs of the fear
of God, throw off all obedience, who can object when God punishes him,
and blots out the remembrance of his former righteousness? God,
therefore, determines the result fairly in each case. We have explained
how the phrase, *the just should turn aside from their righteousness*,
ought to be understood, not that the elect ever utterly fall away, as
many think their faith is extinguished, and every root of piety also in
the sons of God; that is too absurd, because, as I have said, the gift
of regeneration has perseverance always annexed to it: but here that
righteousness which mankind recognize is intended. But we know how
frequently it happens that what seemed entirely pure and perfect is
deficient. Now, God pronounces that he would punish all who fall away
from him, and would be accessible and propitious to miserable sinners
who desire to be reconciled to him; and he repeats again, if *the wicked
have seen and turned away from his wickedness*. We must mark this
phrase, for it shows that thinking rightly is the commencement of
repentance; because, though the reprobate knowingly and willingly
transgress God’s law, it is certain that they labor under blindness and
madness, so that the Scripture does not call them foolish and beside
themselves in vain. He does not extenuate their faults, as if they
sinned ignorantly; but he means that they were so blinded by diabolical
madness as to think of nothing; for surely horror would immediately
possess their minds if they only perceived God to be their adversary,
and themselves to be making war with him. For this reason, therefore,
when the Prophet describes to us the conversion of the wicked, he says,
*if he has seen*; that is, if at length he has returned to a sound mind,
and collected his senses, so that he may not rush on madly, as he has
been accustomed to do, but may look upon both God and himself. It now
follows —

<span id="vii.xx"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p1"></span><span id="vii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#029)<span id="vii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p2"></span>**29.** Yet saith the house of Israel, The
way of the Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal?
are not your ways unequal?

<span id="vii.xx-p3"></span>**29.** Et dixerunt domus Israel,  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) non rectificata est  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) via Domini: An viae meae non rectae
sunt, domus Israel? An non viae vestrae non rectae sunt?

<span id="vii.xx-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.xx-p7"></span><span id="vii.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p8"></span>Here God briefly shows how furious those are
who dare to rebel against him even when his justice is manifest: for
what can be desired more justly than that God should punish all the
transgressors of his law? and also, if sinners repent, that he should be
prepared to pardon them? But if it seems hard that punishment should
overtake the just if they fall away, common sense dictates that no
virtue can be approved without perseverance. Since, therefore, it is
very clear throughout this course of action, that God is just and
without blame, what madness it is to vomit forth blasphemies against
him, as if his ways were unjust! But God shows in one word, as I have
mentioned, that the Israelites had no excuse for such dishonesty and
impudence; and he repeats what he had formerly said, that men would
always be guilty of rashness in insolently cursing God when their own
ways are found oblique and perverse: but God will sufficiently vindicate
his own ways. But we must add what follows —

<span id="vii.xxi"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#030)<span id="vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p2"></span>**30.** Therefore I will judge you, O house
of Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord GOD. Repent,
and turn *yourselves* from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall
not be your ruin.

<span id="vii.xxi-p3"></span>**30.** Propterea quemque  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) secundum vias ejus judicabo in vobis,
 <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) domus Israel, dicit Dominator
Iehovah. Convertimini et redire vos facite  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) ab omnibus sceleribus vestris, et non
erit vobis in laqueum iniquitas.

<span id="vii.xxi-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.xxi-p8"></span><span id="vii.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p9"></span>Here God precisely points out that he would
discharge the office of judge, and then he reduces the Israelites to
order, and refutes their audacity: for, as long as men do not feel God’s
judgments hanging over them, and are not held completely in cheek, they
grow restive in their petulance. We see how ferocious and wanton the
reprobate are, because they are not held in by the fear of punishment,
nor do they dread the judgments of God. Hence that he may take away
every vestige of excuse, he says, *I will be your judge:* plead now; but
I will decide your strives in one word, since each of you shall be
judged by my will. It is certain, then, that God here asserts for
himself the praise of justice and rectitude; but at the same time he
brings forward his own authority, that he may strike terror into those
who thus madly dare to oppose his sway, and call upon him to render an
account. Now, therefore, we understand in what sense he says that *he
will judge them all according to their ways*; that is, although you do
not confess yourselves worthy of destruction, it is sufficient that I,
as the lawful judge, pronounce you so. *I will judge you justly,*
therefore, since I pronounce sentence *according to your ways* and to my
supreme power, that all your complaints and murmurs may cease. He
afterwards exhorts them to repentance, and signifies that they have no
other remedy than being dissatisfied with their sins, and deprecating
his wrath. Hence we collect that men rebel so extravagantly against God,
while they wander away from themselves, since, if they descended within
themselves, and sincerely examined their whole life, they would be
instantly humbled before God; hence that thought should stimulate them
to repentance: but because their conscience is stupid, and they are
willingly brutish, they boldly blaspheme God. On the other hand, God now
offers a remedy on their repentance and return from their wickedness.
The word being converted, or return, refers to the renovation of the
mind and heart: for this also is the beginning of repentance, that we
should be inwardly renewed in mind, as Paul says, and so be made new
men. (<span id="vii.xxi-p9.1"></span>[Eph.
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)<span id="vii.xxi-p9.1"></span>.)
And this deserves notice, because many, when repentance is spoken of,
fix their eyes only on the outward fruits of penitence. But we must
begin at the root, as the Prophet teaches, by saying *be you converted*.
But he afterwards adds, <span id="vii.xxi-p9.2"></span>והשיבו,
*veheshibu*, and return. This second word ought to be referred to the
fruits of penitence; for as interior conversion comes first in order,
when we leave off our peculiar vices, and renounce flesh and blood, the
fruits and proofs of repentance thought to follow, as John said, Bring
forth fruits as witnesses to your repentance. (<span
id="vii.xxi-p9.3"></span>[Mt 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008)<span
id="vii.xxi-p9.3"></span>; <span id="vii.xxi-p9.4"></span>[Lu
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxi-p9.4"></span>.)
We see, then, that the Prophet begins with purity of heart, and then
comes to hands, as the Scripture elsewhere says, flint is, to outward
works. He says, *from all your iniquities* or crimes, to show that a
partial repentance is not approved by God. It is true, indeed, that even
those who strive with all their might to act rightly, do not succeed in
discharging their duty without many faults remaining; but we are not
treating here of perfection, but only of sincere affection and serious
endeavors. Let us then only strive seriously to return into the way, and
to humble ourselves calmly and sincerely: this is the integrity which
the Prophet now requires.

<span id="vii.xxii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="vii.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since nothing is more
frail than we are, and even when you have once stretched forth your hand
to us, we labor under such infirmity, that numberless falls await us
unless you do succor us: Grant, I say, that being propped up by your
unconquered strength, we may proceed in the course of thy holy calling,
and may so bravely and perseveringly make war against all temptations,
that we may at length enjoy in heaven the fruit of our victory, through
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="vii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Eighth.

<span id="vii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="vii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#031)<span id="vii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p2"></span>**31.** Cast away from you all your
transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart
and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

<span id="vii.xxiv-p3"></span>**31.** Projicite a vobis omnes
iniquitates in quibus inique egistis: et facite vobis cor novum, et
spiritum novum: et quare moriemini domus Israel?

<span id="vii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="vii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p6"></span>Ezekiel again exhorts the people to leave
off complaining, and to acknowledge that there is no remedy for their
evils but to be reconciled to God. But that cannot be done unless they
repent. For God was not hostile to them in vain; nor did he, after the
manner of men, persecute with hatred the innocent, and those who did not
deserve it. Hence it was necessary to seek God’s pardon suppliantly.
Ezekiel had already touched upon this, but he now confirms it more at
length. He says, therefore, that they not only lost their labor, but
increased the flame of God’s wrath by striving with him, and complaining
that they were unworthily treated by him: *cast forth*, says he, *your
iniquities from you*. He shows that the cause of all evils is within
themselves: so that they have no excuse. But he afterwards expresses
more clearly that they were entirely imbued with contempt of God,
impiety, and depraved desires. For if he had only spoken of outward
wickedness, the reproof would have been partial, and therefore lighter;
but after he commanded them to bid farewell to their sins, he adds,
*make yourselves a new heart and a new spirit*. He requires, therefore,
from them a thorough renewal, so that they should not only conform their
life to the rule of the law, but should fear God sincerely, since no one
can produce good fruit but from a living root. Outward works, then, are
the fruits of repentance, which must spring from some root; and this is
the inward affection of the heart. What is added is to refute their
impiety, for they wished their destruction to be ascribed to God. Here
God takes up the character of a mourner, saying, *Why will ye die, O
house of Israel?* while the next verse confirms this more clearly.

<span id="vii.xxv"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv-p1"></span><span id="vii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032)<span id="vii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv-p2"></span>**32.** For I have no pleasure in the death
of him that dieth, says the Lord GOD: wherefore turn *yourselves*, and
live ye.

<span id="vii.xxv-p3"></span>**32.** Quia non oblector morte morientis,
dicit Dominator Iehovah: convertimini itaque, et vivite.

<span id="vii.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xxv-p5"></span><span id="vii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv-p6"></span>We see, therefore, how God throws off that
false reproach from himself with which the children of Israel taunted
him, saying, that they perished by his immoderate rigor, and could find
no reason for his severity against them. He announces, on the other
hand, that the cause of death rested with themselves; and then he points
out the remedy, that they should amend their life, not only in outward
appearance, but in sincerity of heart: and at the same time he testifies
of his willingness to be entreated; nay, he meets them of his own
accord, if they only repent heartily and unfeignedly. We now understand
the Prophet’s meaning. We said, that we are admonished in this way, that
if we desire to return to God we must begin at the beginning, namely,
renewal of the heart and spirit; because, as Jeremiah says, he looks for
truth and integrity, and does not value outward disguises. (<span
id="vii.xxv-p6.1"></span>[Jer 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)<span
id="vii.xxv-p6.1"></span>.) But it may seem absurd for God to exhort the
Israelites *to form their hearts anew*: and men badly trained in the
Scriptures erect their crests under the pretense of this passage, as if
it were in the power of man’s free will to convert himself. They
exclaim, therefore, either that God here exhorts his people deceitfully,
or else that when alienated from him we can by our own movement repent,
and return into the way. But the whole Scripture openly refutes this. It
is not in vain that the saints so often pray that God would renew them;
(<span id="vii.xxv-p6.2"></span>[Ps
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxv-p6.2"></span>,
and very often elsewhere;) for it would be a feigned and a lying prayer,
if newness of heart were not his gift. If any one requests of God what
he is persuaded that he has already, and by his own inherent virtue,
does he not trifle with God? But nothing occurs more frequently than
this mode of entreaty. Since therefore, the saints pray to God to renew
them, they doubtless confess that to be his peculiar gift; and unless he
moves his hand, they have no strength remaining, so that they can never
rise from the ground. Besides, in many passages God claims the renewal
of the heart as peculiar to himself. We noticed that remarkable passage
in the eleventh chapter of this Prophet, (<span
id="vii.xxv-p6.3"></span>[Eze
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019)<span id="vii.xxv-p6.3"></span>,)
he will repeat the same in the thirty-sixth chapter, (<span
id="vii.xxv-p6.4"></span>[Ezek. 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#027)<span id="vii.xxv-p6.4"></span>;)
and we know what Jeremiah says in his thirty-first chapter, (<span
id="vii.xxv-p6.5"></span>[Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span id="vii.xxv-p6.5"></span>.)
But Scripture is everywhere full of testimonies of this kind, so that it
would be superfluous to heap together many passages; nay, if any one
denies that regeneration is a gift of the Holy Spirit, he will tear up
by the roots all the principles of piety. We have said that regeneration
is like another creation; and if we compare it with the first creation,
it far surpasses it. For it is much better for us to be made children of
God, and reformed after his image within us, than to be created mortal:
for we are born children of wrath, corrupt and degenerate; (<span
id="vii.xxv-p6.6"></span>[Eph 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span
id="vii.xxv-p6.6"></span>;) since all integrity was lost when God’s
image was removed. We see, then, the nature of our first creation; but
when God re-fashions us, we are not only born sons of Adam, but we are
the brothers of angels, and members of Christ; and this our second life
consists in rectitude, justice, and the light of true intelligence.

<span id="vii.xxv-p7"></span>We now see that if it had been in man’s
free will to convert himself, much more would be ascribed to him than to
God, because, as we have said, it was much more valuable to be created
sons of God than of Adam. It ought, then, to be beyond all controversy
with the pious that men cannot rise again when they are fallen, and turn
of themselves when alienated from God; but this is the peculiar gift of
the Holy Spirit. And the sophists, who in all ways endeavor to obscure
God’s grace, confess that half the act of conversion is in the power of
the Holy Spirit: for they do not say that we are simply and totally
converted by the motion of our own free will, but they imagine a
concurrence of grace with free will, and of free will with grace. Thus
they foolishly represent us as cooperating with God: they confess,
indeed, that God’s grace goes before and follows; and they seem to
themselves very liberal towards God when they acknowledge this twofold
grace in man’s conversion. But God is not content with that partition,
since he is deprived of half his right: for he does not say that he
would assist men to renew themselves and to repent; but he attributes
the work to himself entirely: I will give you a new heart and a new
spirit. (<span id="vii.xxv-p7.1"></span>[Eze
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026)<span id="vii.xxv-p7.1"></span>.)
If it is his to give, it follows that the slightest portion of it cannot
be transferred to man without diminishing something from his right. But
they object that the following precept is not in vain, *that men should
make for themselves a new heart*. Now their deception arises through
ignorance, from their judging of the powers of men by the commands of
God; but the inference is incorrect, as we have said elsewhere: for when
God teaches what is right, he does not think of what we are able to do,
but only shows us what we ought to do. When, therefore, the power of our
free will is estimated by the precepts of God, we make a great mistake,
because God exacts from us the strict discharge of our duty, just as if
our power of obedience was not defective. We are not absolved from our
obligation because we cannot pay it; for God holds us bound to himself,
although we are in every way deficient.

<span id="vii.xxv-p8"></span>They object again, God then deludes men
when he says, *make yourselves a new heart.* I answer, we must always
consider to what purpose God thus speaks, namely, that men convicted of
sin may cease to throw the blame on any one else, as they often endeavor
to do; for nothing is more natural than to transfer the cause of our
condemnation away from ourselves, that we may seem just, and God appear
unjust. Since, then, such depravity reigns among men, hence the Holy
Spirit demands from us what all acknowledge they ought to pay: and if we
do not pay it, still we are bound to do so, and thus all strife and
complaint should cease. Thus, as it concerns the elect, when God shows
them their duty, and they acknowledge that they cannot discharge it,
they fly to the aid of the Holy Spirit, so that the outward exhortation
becomes a kind of instrument which God uses to confer the grace of his
Spirit. For although he gratuitously goes before us, and does not need
outward channels, yet he desires exhortations to be useful to this end.
Since, therefore, this doctrine stirs up the elect to deliver themselves
up to be ruled by the Holy Spirit, we see how it becomes fruitful to us.
Whence it follows, that God does not delude or deceive us when he
exhorts *each of us to form his heart and his spirit afresh*. In fine,
Ezekiel wished by these words to show that pardon would be prepared for
the Israelites if they seriously repented, and showed its effects
through their whole life. That was most true, because the elect did not
embrace this doctrine in vain, when at the same time God worked in them
by his Spirit, and so turned them to himself. But the reprobate, though
they do not cease to murmur, yet they are rendered ashamed, since all
excuse has been removed, and they must perish through their own fault,
since they willingly remained in their wickedness, and by
self-indulgence they cherished the old man within themselves, — a
fountain of all injustice. Whenever such passages occur, let us remember
that celebrated prayer of Augustine: grant us what you command, and
command what you wish, (Epist. 24;) for otherwise, if God should lay
upon us the slightest burden, we should be unable to bear it. Besides,
our strength will be sufficient to fulfill his requirements, if only he
supply it, and we are not so foolish as to think anything comprehended
in his precepts which he has not granted to us; because, as I have said
before, nothing is more perverse than to measure the angelic
righteousness of the law by our strength. By the word *heart*, I
understand him to mean the seat of all the affections; and by *spirit*,
the intellectual part of the soul. The heart is often taken for the
reason and intelligence; but when these two words are joined together,
the spirit relates to the mind, and so it is the intellectual faculty of
the soul; but the heart is taken for the will, or the seat of all the
affections. Hence we see how very corrupt the Israelites were, since
they could not be otherwise reconciled to God, unless by being renewed
in both heart and mind. Hence also we my gather the general doctrine,
that nothing in us is sound and perfect, and hence all entire renovation
is necessary that we may please God.

<span id="vii.xxv-p9"></span>The subjoined phrase, *why will ye die, O
house of Israel?* suggests many questions. Here unskillful men think
that God speculates on what men will do, and that the salvation or
destruction of each depends on themselves, as if God had determined
nothing concerning us before the foundation of the world. Hence they set
him at naught, since they fancy that he is held in suspense and doubt as
to the future end of every one, and that he is not so anxious for our
salvation, as to wish all to be saved, but leaves it in the power of
every one to perish or to be saved as he pleases. But as I have said,
this would reduce God to a specter. But we have no need of a long
dispute, because Scripture everywhere declares with sufficient clearness
that God has determined what shall happen to us: for he chose his own
people before the foundation of the world and passed by others. (<span
id="vii.xxv-p9.1"></span>[Eph 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span
id="vii.xxv-p9.1"></span>.) Nothing is clearer than this doctrine; for
if there had been no predestination on God’s part, there had been no
deity, since he would be forced into order as if he were one of us: nay,
men are to a certain extent provident, whenever God allows some sparks
of his image to shine forth in them. If, therefore, the very smallest
drop of foresight in men is laid hold of, how great must it be in the
fountain itself? Insipid indeed is the comment, to fancy that God
remains doubtful and waiting for what will happen to individuals, as if
it were in their own power either to attain to salvation or to perish.
But the Prophets words are plain, for God testifies with grief that he
*willeth not the death of a mortal*. I answer, that there is no
absurdity, as we said before, in God’s undertaking a twofold character,
not that he is two-faced himself, as those profane dogs blurt out
against us, but because his counsels are incomprehensible by us. This
indeed ought to be fixed, that before the foundation of the world we
were predestinated either to life or death. Now because we cannot ascend
to that height, it is needful for God to conform himself to our
ignorance, and to descend in some way to us since we cannot ascend to
him. When Scripture so often says that God has heard, and inquires, no
one is offended: all pass over those forms of speech securely, and
confess them adopted from human language. (<span
id="vii.xxv-p9.2"></span>[Ge
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#011)<span id="vii.xxv-p9.2"></span>,
and often.) Very often, I say, God transfers to himself the properties
of man, and this is admitted universally without either offense or
controversy. Although this manner of speaking is rather harsh: God came
to see, (<span id="vii.xxv-p9.3"></span>[Ge
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxv-p9.3"></span>,)
when he announces that he came to inquire about things openly known; it
is easily excused, since nothing is less in accordance with his nature:
for the solution is at hand, namely, that God speaks metaphorically, and
adapts his speech to the convenience of men. Now why will not the same
reasoning avail in the present case? for with respect to the law and the
whole teaching of the prophets, God announces his wish that all should
be saved. And surely we consider the tendency of the heavenly teaching,
we shall find that all are promiscuously called to salvation. For the
law was a way of life, as Moses testifies, This is the way, walk you in
it: again, Whosoever has done those things shall live in them: and,
again, This is your life. (<span id="vii.xxv-p9.4"></span>[Deut.
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)<span id="vii.xxv-p9.4"></span>;
<span id="vii.xxv-p9.5"></span>[De
32:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#047)<span id="vii.xxv-p9.5"></span>;
<span id="vii.xxv-p9.6"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxv-p9.6"></span>;
<span id="vii.xxv-p9.7"></span>[Isa
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxv-p9.7"></span>.)
Then of his own accord God offers himself as merciful to his ancient
people, so that this heavenly teaching ought to be life-giving. But what
is the Gospel? It is God’s power unto salvation to every believer, says
Paul. (<span id="vii.xxv-p9.8"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="vii.xxv-p9.8"></span>.)
Therefore God *delighteth not in the death of him who dieth,* if he
repent at his teaching. But if we wish to penetrate to his
incomprehensible counsel, this will be another objection: Oh! but in
this way God is chargeable with duplicity; — but I have denied this,
though he takes up a twofold character, because this was necessary for
our comprehension. Meanwhile Ezekiel announces this very truly as far as
doctrine is concerned, *that God wills not the death of him that
perishes*: for the explanation follows directly afterwards, *be you
converted and live.* Why does not God delight in the death of him who
perishes? Because he invites all to repentance and rejects no one. Since
this is so, it follows that he is not delighted by the death of him who
perishes: hence there is nothing in this passage doubtful or thorny, and
we should also hold that we are led aside by speculations too deep for
us. For God does not wish us to inquire into his secret. Counsels: His
secrets are with himself, says Moses, (<span
id="vii.xxv-p9.9"></span>[De
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029)<span id="vii.xxv-p9.9"></span>,)
but this book for ourselves and our children. Moses there distinguishes
between the hidden counsel of God, (which if we desire to investigate
too curiously we shall tread on a profound abyss,)and the teaching
delivered to us. Hence let us leave to God his own secrets, and exercise
ourselves as far as we can in the law, in which God’s will is made plain
to us and to our children. Now let us go on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc23006.htm#fr_198) <span
id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span> That is, “that you use this saying or
apothegm.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc23006.htm#fr_199) <span
id="vii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span> Sour grape — I know not why some translate
it “the wild vine,” for it does not suit. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc23006.htm#fr_200) <span
id="vii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span> Or, “hereafter.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc23006.htm#fr_201) <span
id="vii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span> Or, “utter this proverb.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc23006.htm#fr_202) <span
id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span> That is, “are my own.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc23006.htm#fr_203) <span
id="vii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span> That is, “are my own.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc23006.htm#fr_204) <span
id="vii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span> Properly, “to the filthiness.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc23006.htm#fr_205) <span
id="vii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span> Or, “of his neighbor.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc23006.htm#fr_206) <span
id="vii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p10"></span> Or, “oppressed.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc23006.htm#fr_207) <span
id="vii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p11"></span> Verbally, “has not seized booty.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc23006.htm#fr_208) <span
id="vii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p14"></span> Or, “reward, gain.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc23006.htm#fr_209) <span
id="vii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p17"></span> That is, “to conduct himself faithfully.”
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc23006.htm#fr_210) <span
id="vii.iv-p22.4"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p23"></span> The older lexicons connect this word with
that for filth, <span id="vii.iv-p23.1"></span>*dii stercorii*,
following the Jewish commentators: it occurs forty-seven times in the
Old Testament, and our translators have always translated it “idols.”
The margin of <span id="vii.iv-p23.2"></span>[De
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#017)<span id="vii.iv-p23.2"></span>,
has *dungy gods*.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc23006.htm#fr_211) <span
id="vii.iv-p24.4"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p25"></span> This canon of sacred criticism was not
received by the Jews. The Talmud informs us of discussions among their
doctors, pointing out the discrepancy between this chapter of Ezekiel
and the Pentateuch, and objecting to the writings of this prophet being
received into the Canon. See Bartolocci Biblioth. Heb., volume 2, and
Wolf. Bibl. Heb., volume 2, as quoted in Norton’s Genuineness of the
Gospels, volume 2 Additional Notes, p. 141.; and also the Dissertation
on this chapter at the end of this volume.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc23006.htm#fr_212) <span
id="vii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p4"></span> Or, “a destroyer:” <span
id="vii.vii-p4.1"></span>פרף, *pheretz*, signifies to corrupt, destroy;
whence, <span id="vii.vii-p4.2"></span>פרצין, *pher-tzim*, means thieves
who dig through the walls of houses. But that derivation seems to me
forced: I rather interpret the word as “a violent man,” and one who
breaks through all rectitude. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc23006.htm#fr_213) <span
id="vii.vii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p5"></span> So I interpret it: others read “one
thing;” but we shall afterwards see that the word brother is better. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc23006.htm#fr_214) <span
id="vii.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p6"></span> That is, “any one.” — *Calvin.* Three
manuscripts with the Syriac version omit the word <span
id="vii.vii-p6.1"></span>אח, *ach*, brother; but the Chaldee, and
Houbigant, with Archbishop Newcome, all agree with Calvin in inserting
it.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc23006.htm#fr_215) <span
id="vii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p9"></span> The precepts of the law, which he had
mentioned before. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc23006.htm#fr_216) <span
id="vii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p10"></span> “Polluted,” as we said yesterday. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc23006.htm#fr_217) <span
id="vii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p15"></span> That is, “shall he live?” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc23006.htm#fr_218) <span
id="vii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p16"></span> That is, “shall rest upon himself.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc23006.htm#fr_219) <span
id="vii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p6"></span> Or, “pollutions” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc23006.htm#fr_220) <span
id="vii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p7"></span> The house of Israel is expressed here as
in the first set. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc23006.htm#fr_221) <span
id="vii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p10"></span> Verbally; but because there is a
difference between the Latin words for to give and receive a pledge, it
makes the sense clearer to say, not to receive a pledge. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc23006.htm#fr_222) <span
id="vii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p11"></span> He now uses the singular number, “a
prey.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc23006.htm#fr_223) <span
id="vii.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p12"></span> Or, “distributed.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc23006.htm#fr_224) <span
id="vii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p6"></span> That is, “against him.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc23006.htm#fr_225) <span
id="vii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p4"></span> That is, “be taken into account.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc23006.htm#fr_226) <span
id="vii.xvii-p7.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p8"></span> Augustine. Comment, in <span
id="vii.xvii-p8.1"></span>[Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="vii.xvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc23006.htm#fr_227) <span
id="vii.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p4"></span> That is, “is not straightforward.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc23006.htm#fr_228) <span
id="vii.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p5"></span> <span id="vii.xviii-p5.2"></span>תמן,
*theken*, signifies “to weigh;” but it means also “to balance
accurately.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc23006.htm#fr_229) <span
id="vii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p4"></span> The number is changed from singular to
plural, “in his wickedness.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc23006.htm#fr_230) <span
id="vii.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p7"></span> That is, “he shall snatch from death, or
restore to life.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc23006.htm#fr_231) <span
id="vii.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p4"></span> That is, “the Israelites said” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc23006.htm#fr_232) <span
id="vii.xx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p5"></span> The tense is future, but continued action
is intended. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc23006.htm#fr_233) <span
id="vii.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p4"></span> Verbally, “each man.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc23006.htm#fr_234) <span
id="vii.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p5"></span> Or, “between you.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc23006.htm#fr_235) <span
id="vii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p6"></span> “And bring you back:” others, “bring your
neighbors back;” but this is far-fetched. I prefer “bring yourselves
back.” — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](cc23007)
