[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc23009)  [Next](cc23011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 23: Ezekiel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF THE

<span id="xi-p2"></span>FIRST TWENTY CHAPTERS

<span id="xi-p3"></span>OF THE PROPHECIES OF EZEKIEL,

<span id="xi-p4"></span>AS MODIFIED BY THESE COMMENTARIES.

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1** NOW it came to pass in the thirtieth
year,  <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) in the fourth month, on
the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river
Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2** In the fifth day of the month, in the
fifth year of the captivity of King Jehoiakim,

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**3** The word of Jehovah came to Ezekiel, son
of Buzi the priest, in the land of the Chaldreans, near the river
Chebar, and the land of Jehovah was upon him there.

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**4** And I looked, and, behold, tempestuous
wind coming from the north; a great cloud, and a fire folding round
itself, and a brightness was round about it; and out of the midst there
was, as it were, the appearance of Hasmal in the midst of the fire.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>**5** And in the middle of this, was the
likeness of four living creatures, and their aspect was the likeness of
a man:

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**6** They had each four faces and four wings,

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>**7** Their feet were straight, and the sole
of their feet like that of a calf’s foot, (or round, volume 1,) and they
cast forth sparks like the appearance of polished brass:

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>**8** And they had human hands under their
wings on their four sides; and they had four faces and wings.

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>**9** And each wing was connected with the
next wing: when they moved they did not turn back: each animal went
forward in the direction of his face.

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>**10** As to the likeness of their faces,
these four had the face of a man and the face of a lion on the right
side; and on the left, these four had the face of an ox and the face of
an eagle.

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>**11** Their faces, then, and their wings
were extended  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) from above, and
each wing was bound to its neighbor, and two covered their body.

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**12** And each walked in the direction of
its face; and wheresoever the spirit (or will,) proceeded, they
proceeded they did not return in their course.

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>**13** As to the likeness of the living
creatures, their aspect was like coals of burning fire, like the
appearance of lamps passing up and down between the living creatures:
and the fire was ‘bright, and lightning’ issued from it.

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span>**14** And the living creatures ran and
returned like lightning.

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>**15** While I was; beholding’ the living
creatures, behold one wheel on the earth, near each living, creature, at
right angles,  <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) at the face of
each.

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span>**16** The appearance of the wheels and their
workmanship was like chrysolite: and they were all alike’ and their
appearance and their form were like one wheel within another.

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span>**17** When they moved forward, they went
upon their four sides: they did not turn back when they proceeded.

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span>**18** And I beheld their circumferences, and
their size, and their terribleness; and their strakes were full of eyes,
round about these four.

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span>**19** And when the living creatures walked,
the wheels moved beside them; and when the living creatures were raised
from the earth, the wheels were raised with them.  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298)

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span>**20** Withersoever the spirit led the living
creatures, tither it also led the wheels: the wheels were raised up also
with the living creatures, because their spirit was in the wheels also.

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span>**21** When the animals moved forward, the
wheels did the same: they both were stationary and both elevated
together; because the spirit of the animals was in the wheels.

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span>**22** Above the heads of the living
creatures was the likeness of a firmament, as the appearance of terrible
crystal stretched over and above their heads.

<span id="xi.i-p29"></span>**23** And under the firmament their wings
were straight, each towards its neighbor: and each living creature had
two wings, which covered their bodies on this side and on that.

<span id="xi.i-p30"></span>**24** And I heard the voice of their wings,
like the voice of mighty waters, and like the voice of God’ the voice of
their speech was like the sound of an army when they moved forward; and
when they stood, they let down their wings.

<span id="xi.i-p31"></span>**25** And there was a voice from the
firmament over their heads when they stood and let down their wings.

<span id="xi.i-p32"></span>**26** And above the firmament over their
heads was the likeness of a throne, like the vision of a sapphire stone:
and above the likeness of the throne was an image like the aspect of a
man upon it.

<span id="xi.i-p33"></span>**27** And I saw, as it were, the color of
amber, like the appearance of fire round about within it: from the
appearance of his loins, both upwards and downwards, I saw the aspect of
fire, and a brightness all round about him.

<span id="xi.i-p34"></span>**28** Like the appearance of a bow in a
cloud on a rainy day, such was the aspect of his brightness round about.
This was a vision of the similitude of Jehovah’s glory: and I gazed at
it, and fell upon my face, and heard a voice speaking unto me. And he
said unto me, —

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>**1** Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I
will speak unto thee.

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span>**2** And the Spirit came to me when he
addressed me, and placed me upon my feet: and I heard him address me;
and he said unto me —

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span>**3** Son of man, I send thee to the children
of Israel, To revolting tribes who have rebelled against me: They and
their fathers have acted perfidiously against me, Even to this very day.

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span>**4** They are children of a hard face, and
of a stiff heart. Therefore I send thee unto them; And you shall say to
them — Thus says the Lord Jehovah

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span>**5** And they, whether they will hear, or
whether they will not, For they are a rebellious house, Yet shall know
that a Prophet has been among them.

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>**6** And you, son of man, be not afraid of
them; Fear not their words, though they are rebellious, And are thorns
towards time, and you dwellest with scorpions. Be not afraid of their
language; Be not dismayed at their looks, Since they are a rebellious
house.

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>**7** And you shall utter my words unto them,
Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear; For they are
rebels.

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span>**8** And you, son of man, hear what I say
unto thee: Be not you rebellious like that. rebellious house; Open thy
mouth, and eat what I put before thee.

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span>**9** Then I looked up, and, behold, a hand
extended to me; And lo! a roll of a book was in it:

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span>**10** Then he spread it before my face; And
lo! The roll was written behind and before, And the writing was
lamentations, and morning, and wo.

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span>**1** After that he said to me, Son of man,
eat completely what you has found; namely, this roll, And go and speak
to the house of Israel.

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span>**2** So I opened my mouth, and he fed me
with that roll.

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span>**3** And said to me, Son of man, Feed thy
belly, and fill thy bowels with this roll which I give thee. So I ate
it, and it was in my mouth Like honey for sweetness.

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span>**4** Then he said to me, Son of man! Go to
the house of Israel and address them in my words,

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span>**5** Since you art not sent to a people
profound in lip and hard of speech, You art sent to the house of Israel:

<span id="xi.iii-p8"></span>**6** Not to many peoples profound in lip
and heavy in speech, Whom you canst not understand;  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) Had I sent thee unto them, they would
have hearkened unto thee.

<span id="xi.iii-p10"></span>**7** But the house of Israel will not hear
thee; Because they will not hear me; Since the whole house of Israel are
hard of front and stout of heart.

<span id="xi.iii-p11"></span>**8** Lo! I have made thy face hard against
their faces, And thy forehead hard, against their forehead.

<span id="xi.iii-p12"></span>**9** As an adamant, harder than flint,
Have I made thy forehead: fear them not: Be not broken down at their
presence, For they are a house of rebellion.

<span id="xi.iii-p13"></span>**10** Moreover, he said to me, Son of man!
All my words which I shall speak to thee, Receive in your heart and hear
with your ears:

<span id="xi.iii-p14"></span>**11** And go — Judea thee to the captives,
to the children of thy people, And speak unto them and tell them, — Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, Whether they will hear, or whether they will
not.

<span id="xi.iii-p15"></span>**12** Then the Spirit raised me up: and I
heard behind me A voice of mighty rustling, which said, Blessed be the
glory of Jehovah from his place!

<span id="xi.iii-p16"></span>**13** 1 heard also the sound of the wings
of the living’ creatures, Each kissing that of its companion, And the
noise of the wheels beside them — the sound of a mighty shaking.

<span id="xi.iii-p17"></span>**14** Then the Spirit raised me, and took
me away, And I set forth in bitterness and indignation of spirit, And
the hand of Jehovah was strong upon me.

<span id="xi.iii-p18"></span>**15** Then I came to the captives at
Thel-abib, They were seated by the river Chebar: there they sat: And I
also sat there seven days desolate in the midst of them.

<span id="xi.iii-p19"></span>**16** Then it happened at the end of the
seven days, Thai the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,

<span id="xi.iii-p20"></span>**17** Son of man! I have appointed thee a
watchman over the house of Israel; Hence you shalt hear words from my
mouth, And shall warn them from me.

<span id="xi.iii-p21"></span>**18** When I say unto the wicked, You
shall surely die: And you warnest him not, and speakest not unto him;
And warnest him not from his wicked way to save his life: That wicked
man shall die in his iniquity; But his blood. will I require at thy
hand.

<span id="xi.iii-p22"></span>**19** Yet if you warn the wicked, and he
turn not from his impious and evil way, He shall die in his iniquity;
But you has freed your own soul.

<span id="xi.iii-p23"></span>**20** If a just man shall turn from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity: And I put a stumbling-block before
his face, he shall die: Because you has not warned him, he shall die in
his sins, The righteousness which he has done shall not be remembered;
But his blood will I require at thy hand.

<span id="xi.iii-p24"></span>**21** Then if you warn the righteous that
he sin not, And he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he is
warned, You also has delivered your own soul.

<span id="xi.iii-p25"></span>**22** Then the hand of Jehovah was upon
me, and he said to me, Arise, go unto the plain, and there I will speak
to thee.

<span id="xi.iii-p26"></span>**23** Then I arose, and went to the plain,
and lo! The glory of Iehovah stood there, As the glory which I had
beheld by the river Chebar:

<span id="xi.iii-p27"></span>**24** And I fell upon my face, and the
Spirit entered into me, And placed me upon my feet, and addressed me,
and said, Go — shut thyself within your house.

<span id="xi.iii-p28"></span>**25** And now — son of man! — lo! they
shall put chains upon thee, And shall bind thee with them, and you shall
not go forth into the midst of them:

<span id="xi.iii-p29"></span>**26** Then I will make thy tongue cleave
to thy palate, And you shall be dumb, and be no longer a reprover to
them: Because they are a house; of rebellion.

<span id="xi.iii-p30"></span>**27** But when I shall speak to thee, and
shall open thy mouth, You shall say unto them, Thus says the Lord
Jehovah, He who hears, may hear: he who forbears, may forbear; Since
they are a house of rebellion.  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300)

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span>**1** Thou also, son of man! take thee a
tile, And put it before thy face, And paint upon it the city Jerusalem:

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span>**2** Lay siege against it, and build a tower
against it: Cast a mound against it, and set a camp against it: Set
battering rams against it all round.

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span>**3** Then take an iron pan, and set it for a
wall between thee and the city; Strengthen thy face against it, and it
shall be besieged, And you shall besiege it. This is a sign to the house
of Israel.

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span>**4** He you also on thy left; side, and
place the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it; According to the
number of the days during which you shall he upon it You shall bear
their iniquity.

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span>**5** For I have appointed unto thee the
years of their iniquity, According to the number of the days, three
hundred and ninety days: Thus shall you bear the iniquity of the house
of Israel.

<span id="xi.iv-p8"></span>**6** And when you have finished those days,
Then again you shall he on thy right side, And you shall bear the
iniquity of the house of Judea forty days; Each day for a year, as I
have appointed thee.

<span id="xi.iv-p9"></span>**7** Then you shall direct thy face toward
the siege of Jerusalem, And thine arm shall be uncovered, And you shall
not prophesy against it.

<span id="xi.iv-p10"></span>**8** Lo! I have put cords upon thee, And
you shall not turn from side to side Until you have fulfilled the days
of thy sieges.

<span id="xi.iv-p11"></span>**9** Take you also wheat; and barley, and
beans, and lentiles, and millet, and fitches, And put them in one
vessel, and make it into bread for time, According to the number of the
days on which you shall he on thy side: Three hundred and ninety days
shall you eat it.

<span id="xi.iv-p12"></span>**10** And the food which you shall eat by
weight, Shall be twenty shekels a day: from time to time shall you eat
it.

<span id="xi.iv-p13"></span>**11** And water shall thou drink by
measure, the sixth part of a hin: From time to time shall you drink it.

<span id="xi.iv-p14"></span>**12** Then you shall eat barley cake, and
shall bake it With human dung before their eyes: And Jehovah said,

<span id="xi.iv-p15"></span>**13** Even thus shall the children of
Israel cat their defiled bread Among the Gentiles wither I have driven
them.

<span id="xi.iv-p16"></span>**14** Then I said, Alas, O Lord Jehovah!
Lo! my soul has not been polluted, And from my youth up never have I
eaten What died of itself, or was torn to pieces; And abominable flesh
has never entered my mouth.

<span id="xi.iv-p17"></span>**15** Then he said, See! I have given thee
The dung of oxen for that of men, And you shall cook thy bread with
this.  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301)

<span id="xi.iv-p19"></span>**16** Moreover, he said to me, Son of man!
Lo! I break the staff of bread in Jerusalem; And they shall eat bread by
weight and with fear; And shall drink water by measure and with
astonishment,

<span id="xi.iv-p20"></span>**17** So that bread and water shall fail
them, And they shall be astonished one with another, And consume away in
their iniquity.  <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302)

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span>**1** And you, son of man f take thee a sharp
sword, Take thee a barber’s razor, and pass it over thy head and thy
beard: Then take thee a just balance and divide the hair.

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span>**2** A third part you shall burn in the midst
of the city, When the days of the siege are fulfilled; A third part
shall you smite about with the sword; And another third shall you
scatter to the wind; And I will unsheathe the sword after them.

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span>**3** Then you shall take a few of them, And
bind them in thy skirts.

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span>**4** Then take some of them. and cast them
into the fire, And burn them; for thence shall fire go forth Upon all
the house of Israel.

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span>**5** Then says the Lord Jehovah, This is
Jerusalem: In the midst of the nations and of the surrounding countries
Have I placed her.

<span id="xi.v-p8"></span>**6** And she has changed my judgments into
wickedness Beyond all the nations, and my statutes beyond all the
surrounding people: They have despised my judgments, And have not walked
in my statutes.

<span id="xi.v-p9"></span>**7** Therefore, thus says the, Lord Jehovah,
Because of your multiplication more than the nations round about you,
And your not walking in my statutes, and not keeping my judgments, And
your not acting like the nations around you,

<span id="xi.v-p10"></span>**8** Wherefore, thus says the Lord Jehovah,
Behold, I ant against thee, even I: And I will execute my judgments in
the midst of thee Before the eyes of the Gentiles.

<span id="xi.v-p11"></span>**9** And I will execute against thee what I
never yet have done, Nor will ever do in future, On account of all your
abominations.

<span id="xi.v-p12"></span>**10** Therefore fathers shall devour their
sons, And sons their fathers, in the midst of thee: I will execute
judgments against thee, And disperse all thy remnants to all winds of
heaven.

<span id="xi.v-p13"></span>**11** Because I live, says the Lord Jehovah,
Since you has polluted my sanctuary  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) With all thy detestable and abominable
things, Therefore I will break thee in pieces: My eye shall not spare,
neither will I pity thee.

<span id="xi.v-p15"></span>**12** A third part shall die of the
pestilence, And be consumed by famine in the midst of thee; A third part
shall be consumed by the sword round about thee; A third part will I
disperse towards every wind, And will draw out a sword after them.

<span id="xi.v-p16"></span>**13** Thus shall mine anger be accomplished,
And I will cause my burning anger to rest upon them; And I will enjoy
consolation; and they shall know that I am Jehovah, Who have spoken in
my zeal, when I shall have accomplished my fury on them.

<span id="xi.v-p17"></span>**14** Moreover, I will lay thee waste, And
make thee a reproach among the nations around thee In the eyes of every
passer by.

<span id="xi.v-p18"></span>**15** So you shall be a reproach and a
reviling, A chastisement and an astonishment to the nations round about
thee, While I shall execute judgments against thee In anger and burning,
and furious rebukes. I Jehovah have spoken it.

<span id="xi.v-p19"></span>**16** When I shall send upon them the evil
arrows of famine For their destruction, which I shall dart upon them to
destroy them;  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) Then will I add
famine against them, And will break their staff of bread.

<span id="xi.v-p21"></span>**17** Then will I send against you famine
and wild beasts, And they shall bereave you: and pestilence and blood
shall pass through thee; And I will cause the sword to come upon thee.
 <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) I Jehovah have spoken it.

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="xi.vi-p3"></span>**1** The word also of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="xi.vi-p4"></span>**2** Son of man! set thy face towards the
mountain of Israel, And prophesy against them, and say,

<span id="xi.vi-p5"></span>**3** You mountains of Israel, hear the word
of the Lord Jehovah: Thus says the Lord Jehovah to the mountains and the
inns, To the rivers and the valleys: Behold! I will bring the sword
against you, and destroy your high places;

<span id="xi.vi-p6"></span>**4** And your altars shall be desolate, Your
idols shall be broken; And I will cast down your slain before your
idols.

<span id="xi.vi-p7"></span>**5** Then I will place the carcass of the
sons of Israel Before your idols; I will scatter them before the idols.
I will sprinkle your bones round about your altars.

<span id="xi.vi-p8"></span>**6** In all your habitations cities shall be
desolate,  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) And high places shall
be reduced to devastation, That your altars may be wasted and desolated,
And your idols may be broken up and abolished, And your images cut.
down, and your works blotted out.

<span id="xi.vi-p10"></span>**7** Then the slain shall fall in the midst
of you, And you shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.vi-p11"></span>**8** Still, I will leave a remnant, that
you may have some Who shall escape the sword among the nations, When you
shall be scattered through the countries.

<span id="xi.vi-p12"></span>**9** And the remnant shall remember me
among the nations, Among which they shall become captives, Because I am.
broken down with their adulterous heart, Which has departed from me, and
with their eyes, Which are full of lust after their idols; And they
shall loathe themselves for all the evils Which they have committed in
all their abominations.

<span id="xi.vi-p13"></span>**10** Then they shall know that I Jehovah
said not in vain, I will cause them to suffer this evil.  <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307)

<span id="xi.vi-p15"></span>**11** Thus says the Lord Jehovah, Strike
with thy hand, and stamp with thy feet, And say, Alas! for all the evil
abominations of the house of Israel, For they shall fall by the sword,
and famine, and pestilence.

<span id="xi.vi-p16"></span>**12** He who shall be afar off shall die by
the pestilence; He who shall be near shall fall by the sword;  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) He who shall remain and be besieged
shall die through hunger; And I will fulfill my indignation upon them.

<span id="xi.vi-p18"></span>**13** And you shall know that I am Jehovah,
When their wounded shall be among their idols round about their altars,
Upon every high hill, in, on all the heads of the mountains, Under every
green tree and every thick oak, In the place where they offered the
incense of sweet fragrance to all their idols.

<span id="xi.vi-p19"></span>**14** So I will stretch out my hand upon
them, And I will make the land desert and desolate — More than the
desert of Diblathah, in all their dwellings; And they shall know that I
am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.vii"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xi.vii-p3"></span>**1** Then the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="xi.vii-p4"></span>**2** You also, son of man, thus says the
Lord Jehovah Concerning the land of Israel, All end, an end is come Upon
the four quarters of the land.

<span id="xi.vii-p5"></span>**3** Now an end is come upon thee, And I
will send my indignation against thee, And I will judge thee according
to thy ways, And I will put upon thee all your abominations.

<span id="xi.vii-p6"></span>**4** Then mine eye shall not spare thee,
nor will I pity thee; Because I will recompense thy ways upon thee, And
thy abominations shall be in the midst of thee, And you shall know that
I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.vii-p7"></span>**5** Thus says the Lord Jehovah, Lo! evil,
and only evil shall come.  <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309)

<span id="xi.vii-p9"></span>**6** An end is come — an end is come; It
has watched against thee; behold! it is come.

<span id="xi.vii-p10"></span>**7** The morning is come upon thee, e
dweller in the land; The time is come; the day of tumult is near, and
not the clamor of the mountains.

<span id="xi.vii-p11"></span>**8** Now I will shortly pour out my
indignation upon thee, And I will accomplish my anger against thee, And
I will judge thee according to thy ways, And I will put upon thee all
thine abominations.

<span id="xi.vii-p12"></span>**9** Mine eye shall not spare, neither
will I pity; According to thy ways will I put upon thee, And your
abominations shall be in the midst of thee; And you shall know that I
Jehovah am smiting thee.

<span id="xi.vii-p13"></span>**10** Behold the day: behold it is come;
The morning has advanced, the rod has flourished;

<span id="xi.vii-p14"></span>**11** Pride has flourished: violence has
sprung up into a staff of impiety: None of them, nor yet their opulence,
shall remain: There shall be no noise nor any lamentation for them:

<span id="xi.vii-p15"></span>**12** The appointed time is come; the day
has approached: The buyer shall not rejoice; the seller shall not be
sorrowful; Because indignation shall be on all their multitude.

<span id="xi.vii-p16"></span>**13** Since the seller shall not return to
his merchandise, And their life is yet among the living; Because the
vision is concerning the whole multitude,  <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) It shall not return; and no man shall
strengthen his soul in his iniquity.

<span id="xi.vii-p18"></span>**14** They have blown the trumpet; they
have prepared all things; But none is gone out to battle, because my
wrath Is upon the whole multitude.

<span id="xi.vii-p19"></span>**15** The sword abroad; pestilence and
famine at home. He that is in the field shall die by the sword; He that
is in the city shall be consumed by famine and pestilence.

<span id="xi.vii-p20"></span>**16** And the escapers of them shall
escape, And shall be upon the inns like doves of the valleys, All
mourning,  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) every one in his
iniquity.

<span id="xi.vii-p22"></span>**17** All hands shall be loosened; all
knees shall flow like water.

<span id="xi.vii-p23"></span>**18** And they shall gird themselves with
sackcloth, And dread shall cover them, And shame shall be upon all
faces, And baldness upon all heads.

<span id="xi.vii-p24"></span>**19** They shall east their silver into
the street, And their gold shall be an unclean thing. Their silver and
their gold shall not deliver them In the day of. Jehovah’s wrath: They
shall neither satisfy their souls nor fill their bellies, Because it
was; the stumbling-block of their iniquity.

<span id="xi.vii-p25"></span>**20** As to the beauty of their ornaments,
they turned it to pride, And they made the images of their abominations
And of their defilement’s out of it (i.e., gold)  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) Therefore I have east it from them.

<span id="xi.vii-p27"></span>**21** And I will deliver it into the hand
of strangers for a prey, And of the wicked of the land for a spoil; And
they shall profane it.

<span id="xi.vii-p28"></span>**22** My face also will I turn from them,
For they will profane my secret place: And robbers will enter into it
and profane it.

<span id="xi.vii-p29"></span>**23** Make a chain: — for the, land is
fined With a judgment of bloods, The city, too, is full of violence.

<span id="xi.vii-p30"></span>**24** For I will bring on it the wicked
among the Gentiles; And they shall possess their houses: I will also
cause their pride to cease, And their sanctuaries shall be polluted.

<span id="xi.vii-p31"></span>**25** Destruction is come and they shall
seek peace when there is none.

<span id="xi.vii-p32"></span>**26** Calamity shall come upon calamity,
and rumor upon rumor; Then they shall seek a vision from a prophet; But
the law shall perish from the priest, And counsel from the aged.

<span id="xi.vii-p33"></span>**27** The king shall mourn, and the
princes shall be clothed with desolation, And the hands of the people of
the land shall be troubled: According to their ways will I act towards
them, According to their judgments will I judge them. And they shall
know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.viii"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xi.viii-p3"></span>**1** And it happened in the sixth year, in
the sixth month, in the fifth day, I was sitting in my house, and the
elders of Judea were sitting before my face, and there the hand of the
Lord Jehovah fell upon me.

<span id="xi.viii-p4"></span>**2** I looked, and behold a likeness as
the appearance of fire: From the appearance of its loins downwards,
fire; And from its loins upwards, as the appearance of brightness, Like
the figure of Hasmal.

<span id="xi.viii-p5"></span>**3** And he sent the likeness of a hand,
And raised ma by a lock of my head; And the Spirit lifted me up between
earth and heaven, And led me to Jerusalem in the visions of God, To the
door of the inner gate looking towards the north; Where was the seat of
the idol jealousy, causing jealousy.

<span id="xi.viii-p6"></span>**4** Then lo! there was the glory of the
God of Israel, According to the vision which I saw in the plain.

<span id="xi.viii-p7"></span>**5** And said to me, Son of man, lift up
your eyes now To the way of the north: So I raised my eyes towards the
north, And lo! towards the north at the gate of the altar, That idol —
jealousy — at the entrance.

<span id="xi.viii-p8"></span>**6** And he said to me, Son of man, seest
you their deeds? The great abominations which the house of Israel
perpetrate here, That I should depart far from my sanctuary? But turn
thee yet again, and you shall see greater abominations.

<span id="xi.viii-p9"></span>**7** Then he led m, to the door of the
court, And I looked, and lo! an opening in the wall. Then he said to me,
Son of man, dig now into the wall; And I dug in the wall, and behold a
door.

<span id="xi.viii-p10"></span>**8** Then he said to me, Enter and see
the evil abominations which they do.

<span id="xi.viii-p11"></span>**9** Then I entered and beheld, and lo!
every likeness of a reptile,

<span id="xi.viii-p12"></span>**10** And abominations of animals, and,
all idols of the house of Israel, Were depicted on the wall round about.

<span id="xi.viii-p13"></span>**11** And seventy men of the elders of
the house of Israel, And Jazaniah, son of Saphan, stood in the midst of
them, Who stood before them, and to each r, censer in his hand, And a
thick cloud of incense ascended.

<span id="xi.viii-p14"></span>**12** Then he said to, me, Has you seen,
son of mall, What the elders of the house of Israel do in darkness, Each
in the hidden places of his imagery? Who say, Jehovah does not see us;
Jehovah has deserted the land.

<span id="xi.viii-p15"></span>**13** Then he said to me, Turn thee
again, And you shall see the great abominations which they do.

<span id="xi.viii-p16"></span>**14** Then he brought me to the door of
the gate of Jehovah’s house, Which looks to the north: and lo! there sat
women Lamenting for Thammuz.

<span id="xi.viii-p17"></span>**15** Then he said to me, Son of man,
turn thee again, And you shall see greater abominations than these.

<span id="xi.viii-p18"></span>**16** Then he led me to the inner court
of Jehovah’s house, And lo! at the gate of Jehovah’s temple, between the
entrance and the altar, About five and twenty men, with their backs
towards Jehovah’s temple, And their faces towards the east, worshipping
the rising sun.

<span id="xi.viii-p19"></span>**17** Then he said to me, Has you seen
this, son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judea To do these
abominations which they have done there? Because they have fined the
land with violence, And have returned to provoke me, And lo! they put
the branch to their nose.

<span id="xi.viii-p20"></span>**18** I also in return will deal in my
fury: Mine eye shall neither spare nor pity; And when they cry in mine
ears with a loud voice I will not hear them.

<span id="xi.ix"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xi.ix-p3"></span>**1** He cried also in mine ear with a loud
voice, saying, Let the rulers of the city approach, Every one with his
weapon of destruction in his hand.

<span id="xi.ix-p4"></span>**2** And lo! six men coming from the way of
the higher gate, which is towards the north, And each had his
slaughter-weapon in his hand; And one man in the midst of them clothed
in linen, With a writer’s inkhorn at his side: Then they went in and
stood near the brazen altar.

<span id="xi.ix-p5"></span>**3** Then the glory of the God of Israel
ascended from the cherubim Above which it rested, to the threshold of
the house, And cried to the man clothed in linen, with the inkhorn at
his side;

<span id="xi.ix-p6"></span>**4** Then Jehovah said to him, Pass through
the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, And make a sign
upon the foreheads of the men who sigh And cry for all the abominations
which they suffer in the midst of it.

<span id="xi.ix-p7"></span>**5** But to the others he said in my
hearing, Go you after, him through the city, and smite; Let not your eye
spare, and do not pity:

<span id="xi.ix-p8"></span>**6** Old and young, girl, boy, and woman
slay to the death; Yet approach not any who bears the sign, And begin
from my sanctuary. Then they began at the elders who were in front of
the house.

<span id="xi.ix-p9"></span>**7** And he said to them, Pollute the house,
and fill the altars with the slain: Go you forth. And they went forth,
and made a slaughter in the city.

<span id="xi.ix-p10"></span>**8** And it happened while they were
slaying that I was left: Then I fell upon my face, and cried out and
said, Aha! Lord Jehovah, wilt you slay all the relics of Israel By
pouring forth your anger upon Jerusalem?

<span id="xi.ix-p11"></span>**9** Then he said to me, The iniquity of
the house of Israel and Judea Is great beyond measure, and the land is
full of blood, And the city is full of perversity: because they said,
Jehovah has deserted the land: Jehovah regardeth it not.

<span id="xi.ix-p12"></span>**10** As for me also, mine eye shall not
spare them, I will not pity them their ways will I recompense on their
heads.

<span id="xi.ix-p13"></span>**11** And lo! the man clad in linen, who
had the inkhorn by his side, Returned and made his report., saying, I
have done as you did command me.

<span id="xi.x"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xi.x-p3"></span>**1** Then I looked, and lo! above the
firmament, which was above the head of the cherubim, As it were a
sapphire-stone, Like the appearance of a throne which was seen above
them.

<span id="xi.x-p4"></span>**2** Then he spoke to the mall clad in linen
garments, and said, Go in to the midst of the wheels under the cherub,
And fill thy palms with coals of fire from the midst of the cherubim,
And scatter them over the cry. And he went in my sight.

<span id="xi.x-p5"></span>**3** And the cherubim stood on the right of
the house when the man came. And a cloud fined the inner court.

<span id="xi.x-p6"></span>**4** Then the glory of Jehovah was raised
above the cherub towards the threshold of the house; And the house was
fined with cloud, And the court was fined with the brightness of
Jehovah’s glory.

<span id="xi.x-p7"></span>**5** Then the sound of the wings of the
cherubim was heard to the outer court, Like the voice of the Omnipotent
God when he speaketh.

<span id="xi.x-p8"></span>**6** And it happened when he had commanded
the man clothed with linen, Saying, Take fire from between the wheels,
from the midst of the cherubim; Then he went in and stood beside the
wheel.

<span id="xi.x-p9"></span>**7** And one cherub stretched His hand from
the midst of the cherubim, To the fire which was in the midst of the
cherubim, And he took it, and put it into the palms of the man clothed
in linen; Then he took it and departed.

<span id="xi.x-p10"></span>**8** And there appeared in the cherubim
themselves, The likeness of a man’s hand under their wings.

<span id="xi.x-p11"></span>**9** Then I looked, and lo! four wheels near
the cherubhis, One wheel by one cherub, another wheel near another
cherub: And the appearance of the wheels was like the stone tharsis.

<span id="xi.x-p12"></span>**10** And as for their aspect, the
appearance of each was the same,  <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) As if a wheel was in the midst of a
wheel.

<span id="xi.x-p14"></span>**11** When they moved, they went on their
four sides; They did not return in going forward, Since they moved
towards the direction of their head; They did not return as they went.

<span id="xi.x-p15"></span>**12** And their whole body, and backs, and
hands, and wings, The four wheels, indeed, themselves were full of eyes
all round.

<span id="xi.x-p16"></span>**13** He cried to the wheels in my hearing,
O wheel!

<span id="xi.x-p17"></span>**14** And each living creature had four
faces: The face of the first that of a cherub; The face of the second
that of a. man; Of the third that of a lion; and the fourth an eagle’s.

<span id="xi.x-p18"></span>**15** And the cherubim were raised up. This
is the living creature which I saw by the river Chebar.

<span id="xi.x-p19"></span>**16** Then when the cherubim moved, the
wheels moved near them; And when the cherubim raised their wings aloft
From the earth, The wheels did not turn away from the side of them.

<span id="xi.x-p20"></span>**17** When the living creatures stood, they
stood; When they were lifted up, the wheels also were raised: Because
the spirit of the living creature was in them.

<span id="xi.x-p21"></span>**18** Then the glory of Jehovah went forth
from the threshold of the house, And stood over the cherubim.

<span id="xi.x-p22"></span>**19** Then the cherubim raised their wings,
and went up from the earth in my sight: When they went forth, the wheels
also went before them, And each stood above the threshold of the east
gate of Jehovah’s house; And the glory of the God of Israel was above
them.

<span id="xi.x-p23"></span>**20** It is the very living creature which I
saw Under the God of Israel by the river Chebar; And I knew them to be
cherubim.

<span id="xi.x-p24"></span>**21** Each had four faces apiece, and four
wings; And the likeness of the hands of a man under their wings.

<span id="xi.x-p25"></span>**22** And the likeness of their faces was
that which I saw at the river Chebar, Both their appearance and
themselves:  <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) Each moved towards
his own face.

<span id="xi.xi"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xi.xi-p3"></span>**1** Then the spirit raised me up, and
brought me To the eastern gate of Jehovah’s house; and lo! At the
threshold of the gate, five and twenty men; Then I saw in the midst of
them Jaazaniah, son of Asur; And Pelthiah, son of Benaiah, princes of
the people.

<span id="xi.xi-p4"></span>**2** Then he said to me, Son of man, these
men divine vanity, And plan perverse counsel in this city;

<span id="xi.xi-p5"></span>**3** Who say, It is not near; let us build
houses: The city is the caldron, and we are the flesh:

<span id="xi.xi-p6"></span>**4** Wherefore, prophesy against them,
prophesy, son of man.

<span id="xi.xi-p7"></span>**5** Then the Spirit of Jehovah fell upon
me, and said to me, Say, Thus saith Jehovah, Thus have you spoken, O
house of Israel, The mountings of your spirit, I know them:

<span id="xi.xi-p8"></span>**6** You have multiplied your slain in this
city, And you have fined its streets with the slain.

<span id="xi.xi-p9"></span>**7** Wherefore, thus says the Lord Jehovah,
Your slain, Whom you placed in the midst — they shall be the flesh, And
the city the caldron; and I will cast you forth from the midst of it:

<span id="xi.xi-p10"></span>**8** You have feared the sword, and I will
bring the sword upon you, saith the Lord Jehovah:

<span id="xi.xi-p11"></span>**9** And I will eas, you out of the midst
of it. And will deliver you h, to the hand of strangers, And will
exercise judgments against you.

<span id="xi.xi-p12"></span>**10** Then you shall fall by the sword: in
the border of Israel Will I judge you; and you shall know that I am
Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xi-p13"></span>**11** It shall not be your caldron, And you
shall not be in the midst of it for flesh; In the border of Israel will
I judge you.

<span id="xi.xi-p14"></span>**12** And you shall, Know that I am
Jehovah; Because you ha, re not; walked in my statutes, And have not
executed my judgments; But you have done according to the judgments of
the nations around you.

<span id="xi.xi-p15"></span>**13** And it happened, while I prophesied,
That Phalatias, the son of Benaiah, died: Then I fell upon my face, and
cried with loud voice, and said, Ah! Lord Jehovah! will you consume the
remnant of Israel!

<span id="xi.xi-p16"></span>**14** Then the word of Jehovah came to me
again, saying,

<span id="xi.xi-p17"></span>**15** Son of man, thy brethren, thy
brethren, Thy kindred, and all the whole house of Israel, To these the
inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Depart you far from Jehovah, the
land is given as an heritage to us.

<span id="xi.xi-p18"></span>**16** Wherefore say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, Because you have been east far away among the Gentiles, And
dispersed through the lands, Therefore will I be to them a sanctuary of
fewness  <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) In the lands to which
they have come.

<span id="xi.xi-p20"></span>**17** Wherefore you shall say, Thus says
the Lord Jehovah, I will gather you out of the peoples, and collect you
out of the lands To which you have been driven, and I will give you the
land of Israel.

<span id="xi.xi-p21"></span>**18** And they shall come there, and take
away all its idols, And all its abominations out of it.

<span id="xi.xi-p22"></span>**19** Then I will give them one hear, and
will put a new Spirit within them; And I will take away the stony heart
from their flesh, And will give them a heart of flesh:

<span id="xi.xi-p23"></span>**20** That. they may walk in my statutes,
And keep my judgments, and do them: Then they shall be my people, and I
will be their God.

<span id="xi.xi-p24"></span>**21** Then I will repay on their own head
the way of those Whose heart walks after, heart of foulness  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) and grossness, Saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xi-p26"></span>**22** Then the cherubim raised their wings,
and the wheels beside them, And the glory of the God of Israel was over
above them.

<span id="xi.xi-p27"></span>**23** And the glory of Jehovah ascended out
of the midst of the city, And stood over the mount on the east of the
city.

<span id="xi.xi-p28"></span>**24** Then the spirit raised me, and
brought me to Chaldsea, To the captivity, In a vision, in t. he Spirit
of God. Then the vision which I saw went up from me.

<span id="xi.xi-p29"></span>**25** And I spoke to the captivity All the
words of Jehovah which he had shown me.

<span id="xi.xii"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="xi.xii-p3"></span>**1** The word of Jehovah came also unto me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xii-p4"></span>**2** Son of man, you dwellest in the midst
of a rebellious house: They have eyes to see, and they see not; They
have ears to hear, and they hear not, Because their house is revoking.

<span id="xi.xii-p5"></span>**3** And you, son of man, make thyself
vessels for removal, And remove in the day-time before their eyes: Then
you shall move from thy place to another in their sight, Since perhaps
they may consider, for they are a rebellious house

<span id="xi.xii-p6"></span>**4** And bring forth vessels like vessels
for removal In the day-time in their sight: And you shall go forth at
even in their sight, Like a departure into captivity.

<span id="xi.xii-p7"></span>**5** In their sight; you shall dig thyself
a wall, And carry out (thy goods) by it:

<span id="xi.xii-p8"></span>**6** In their eyes upon thy shoulder shall
you carry (them); In darkness shall you go forth: You shall cover thy
face, and not look upon the ground, Because I have placed thee as a sign
to the house of Israel.

<span id="xi.xii-p9"></span>**7** Then I did as I was commanded. My
vessels I carried forth like vessels for captivity In the daytime; Then
in the evening I dug through the wall by my hand;  <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) In the darkness I led them forth, Upon
my shoulder I carried them in their sight.

<span id="xi.xii-p11"></span>**8** Then in the morning the word of
Jehovah came to me, saying,

<span id="xi.xii-p12"></span>**9** Son of man, has not the house of
Israel, the rebellious house, said to thee,

<span id="xi.xii-p13"></span>**10** What doest you? Say to them, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah: This burden  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) relates to the prince in Jerusalem,
And to all the house of Israel in the midst of them.

<span id="xi.xii-p15"></span>**11** Say unto them, I am your portent: As
I have done, so shall it be done to them: They shall be taken away and
led into captivity.

<span id="xi.xii-p16"></span>**12** Then the prince in the midst of them
Shall carry on his shoulder in the darkness, And go forth through the
wall, Through which they have dug for carrying out by it: He shall cover
his face so as not to look upon the ground.

<span id="xi.xii-p17"></span>**13** Then I will spread my net over him,
and he shall be taken in my snare: Then I will lead him away to Babylon
in the land of Chaldea; Yet he shall not see it, though he shall die
there.

<span id="xi.xii-p18"></span>**14** And all who are about him to help
him, and all his garrison, Will I scatter to every wind, and I will
unsheath my sword after them  <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319)

<span id="xi.xii-p20"></span>**15** Then they shall know that I ant
Jehovah, After I shall have scattered them among the nations, And shall
have dispersed them through their lands.

<span id="xi.xii-p21"></span>**16** And I will make the remnant of them
but few By the sword, and famine, and pestilence; That they may narrate
all their abominations Among the Gentiles to whom they come; And they
shall know that; I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xii-p22"></span>**17** Moreover, the word of Jehovah came
to me, saying,

<span id="xi.xii-p23"></span>**18** Son of man, eat thy bread with
trembling, and drink thy water With tumult and anxiety: And you shall
say to the people of the land,

<span id="xi.xii-p24"></span>**19** Thus says the Lord Jehovah to the
dwellers at Jerusalem, And on the land of Israel, They shall eat their
bread in torture,  <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) And shall
drink their water in desolation, That the land rosy be spoiled of its
fullness, On account of the violence of all its inhabitants.

<span id="xi.xii-p26"></span>**20** And inhabited cities shall be
reduced to solitude, And the land laid waste; and you shall know that I
am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xii-p27"></span>**21** Then the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xii-p28"></span>**22** Son of man, What is this proverb of
yours in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prostrated, and all
prophecy has ceased?

<span id="xi.xii-p29"></span>**23** Wherefore you shall say to them,
Thus says the Lord Jehovah, I will make this proverb cease, And they
shall no more use this proverb in Israel; But rather say to them, The
days are at hand, And the word of every vision.

<span id="xi.xii-p30"></span>**24** Because there shall no longer be any
lying vision, Nor any flattering divination in the midst of the house of
Israel.

<span id="xi.xii-p31"></span>**25** Since I Jehovah will speak: And the
word which I shall speak, I will also perform; It shall no longer be
prolonged: Since in your days, O exasperating house, The word which I
shall speak, I will perform, says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xii-p32"></span>**26** Then the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xii-p33"></span>**27** Son of man, behold the house of
Israel say, The vision which he saw is extended to many days, And he
prophesieth for times afar off.

<span id="xi.xii-p34"></span>**28** Wherefore you shall say to them,
Thus says the Lord Jehovah, It shall not be put off any longer; All the
words which I have spoken, even every word, Will I fulfill, says the
Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 13.

<span id="xi.xiii-p3"></span>**1** And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xiii-p4"></span>**2** Son of man, prophesy against the
prophets of Israel That prophesy, and say unto them that prophesy out of
their own hearts, Hear you the word of Jehovah;

<span id="xi.xiii-p5"></span>**3** Thus says the Lord Jehovah, Wo unto
the foolish prophets, Who walk after their own spirit, and have seen
nothing!  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321)

<span id="xi.xiii-p7"></span>**4** Like foxes in the deserts, are thy
prophets, O Israel.

<span id="xi.xiii-p8"></span>**5** You have not gone up to the broken
places, Nor repaired the hedge around the house of Israel, To stand in
the battle in the day of Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiii-p9"></span>**6** They have seen vanity, they have
divined a he, Saying, Jehovah says, and Jehovah has not sent them; And
they caused men to hope for the confirmation of their word.

<span id="xi.xiii-p10"></span>**7** Have you not seen a vision of
vanity, and spoken a divination of is? And yet you say Jehovah says it,
and I have not spoken it.

<span id="xi.xiii-p11"></span>**8** Wherefore thus says the Lord
Jehovah,  <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) Because you have
spoken vanity, and have seen a he, Wherefore behold! I am against t.
hem, Says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiii-p13"></span>**9** And my hand shall be against the
prophets who see vanity and divine a lie: They shall not be in the
counsel of my people, And shall not be written in the catalogue of the
house of Israel, And they shall not return to the land of Israel; And
you shall know that I am the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiii-p14"></span>**10** Because, even because, they have
deceived my people, By saying, Peace, and there was no peace: And one
built up a wall, and, behold, others daubed it with untempered mortar:

<span id="xi.xiii-p15"></span>**11** Say to those who daub it with
untempered mortar, It shall fall: There shall be an inundating shower:
And I will send hailstones; And the breath of whirlwinds shall rend it.

<span id="xi.xiii-p16"></span>**12** Lo! the wall shall fall: shall it
not be said to you, Where is the daubing with which you have daubed it?

<span id="xi.xiii-p17"></span>**13** Besides, thus says the Lord
Jehovah, I will make it fall:  <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323)
There shall be the breath. of tempests in my wrath, And an inundating
shower in my anger, And hailstones in my fury to consume them.

<span id="xi.xiii-p19"></span>**14** Then I will overthrow the wall
which you have daubed with untempered mortar, And I will bring it down
to the ground; Then its foundation shall be discovered when it shall
fall, And you shall be consumed in the midst of it; And you shall know
that I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiii-p20"></span>**15** I will also satisfy mine
indignation upon the wall As well as upon its daubing, and will say to
them, The wall is gone, and the daubers of it are no more.

<span id="xi.xiii-p21"></span>**16** The prophets of Israel prophesied
concerning Jerusalem, And saw a vision of peace for it; Yet there is no
peace, says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiii-p22"></span>**17** Son of man, do you set thy face
against the daughters of thy people, Who prophesy out of their own
heart, and prophesy against them,

<span id="xi.xiii-p23"></span>**18** And you shall say, Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah, Wo to those who sow pillows to all armholes, And make
coverings for the head of every stature, To hunt souls! Will you hunt
the souls of my people? And will you preserve your own souls alive?

<span id="xi.xiii-p24"></span>**19** Will you profane me before my
people for handfuls of barley and pieces of bread, To slay the souls
that were not dying, And to give life to the souls that were not alive,
By deceiving my people who listen to your is?

<span id="xi.xiii-p25"></span>**20** Because thus says the Lord Jehovah,
Behold! I am against your pillows by which you there hunt souls for
their escape; And I will tear them from your arms, And set free the
souls which you have hunted, that they may escape.

<span id="xi.xiii-p26"></span>**21** I will also rend your coverings,
and deliver my people out of your hands; They shall no longer be a prey
in your hands; And you shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiii-p27"></span>**22** Because you have grieved the heart
of the just by falsehood, And I have not grieved him; And you have
strengthened the hands of the wicked, So that he should not be converted
from his evil way

<span id="xi.xiii-p28"></span>**23** For saving his life: wherefore you
shall not see a he Nor divine a divination any more; For I will rescue
my people from your hands: And you shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiv"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="xi.xiv-p3"></span>**1** Then men came to me from the elders of
Israel, And sat before my face.

<span id="xi.xiv-p4"></span>**2** Then came the word of Jehovah to me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xiv-p5"></span>**3** Son of man, these men have set their
idols up in their heart, And have put a stumbling block of iniquity
before their face. Shall I verily be inquired of by them?

<span id="xi.xiv-p6"></span>**4** Wherefore speak unto them, and say,
Thus says the Lord Jehovah, Every man of the house of Israel, who
setteth up his idols in his heart, And has put the stumbling block of
his iniquity before his face, And has come to the Prophet; I Jehovah
Will answer him according to the multitude of his idols;  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324)

<span id="xi.xiv-p8"></span>**5** That I may seize the house of Israel
in their own heart, Because they have entirely separated themselves from
me by their idols.

<span id="xi.xiv-p9"></span>**6** Therefore say unto the house of
Israel, Thus says the Lord Jehovah, Turn you, Even turn yourselves from
your idols; And turn your faces from all your abominations.

<span id="xi.xiv-p10"></span>**7** For every one of the house of Israel,
or of the strangers sojourning in Israel, Who is separated  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) from following after me, And has set
up his idols in his heart, And put the stumbling-block of his iniquity
before his face, And cometh to the Prophet to inquire of me through him;
I Jehovah will answer him for myself.

<span id="xi.xiv-p12"></span>**8** Then will I set my face against that
man, And set him for a sign and a proverb, And I will cut him off from
the midst of my people; And you shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiv-p13"></span>**9** And when a prophet is deceived in
uttering his speech, I Jehovah have deceived that prophet; And I will
stretch forth my hand upon him, And will blot him out of the midst of my
people Israel.

<span id="xi.xiv-p14"></span>**10** They shall also bear their iniquity;
As the iniquity of the inquirer, so shall be the iniquity of the
prophet;

<span id="xi.xiv-p15"></span>**11** That the house of Israel may stray
from me no more, Neither be polluted any more with all their wickedness;
That they may be my people, and I may be their God, says the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiv-p16"></span>**12** Then the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xiv-p17"></span>**13** Son of man, when a land has acted
wickedly against me,  <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) And I
shall stretch out my hand upon it, And shall break the staff of its
bread, And shall send famine upon it, and cut off from it man and beast:

<span id="xi.xiv-p19"></span>**14** Though these three men were in it,
Noah, Daniel, and Job, They shall deliver but their own souls in their
righteousness, Says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xiv-p20"></span>**15** If I cause an evil beast to pass
through the land, And it bereave it and lay it waste, So that no man can
pass through on account of the beast:

<span id="xi.xiv-p21"></span>**16** Though these three men were in it,
as I live, says the Lord Jehovah, If they shall deliver their own souls,
They alone shall be delivered, and the land shall be laid waste.

<span id="xi.xiv-p22"></span>**17** Or if I make a sword pass through
that land, And I say to the sword, Pass through the land, So that: man.
and beast may be cut off from it:

<span id="xi.xiv-p23"></span>**18** And these three men are in the midst
of it, As I live, says the Lord Jehovah, They shall not deliver their
sons and their daughters, Since they alone shall be set free.

<span id="xi.xiv-p24"></span>**19** Or if I shall send a pestilence upon
that land, And pour out my wrath upon it in blood, To destroy from it
man and beast:

<span id="xi.xiv-p25"></span>**20** And Noah, Daniel, and Job were in
the midst of it, As I live, says the Lord Jehovah, They shall not
deliver either son or daughter; They shall free their own soul in their
righteousness.

<span id="xi.xiv-p26"></span>**21** Therefore thus says the Lord
Jehovah, How much more when I send my four grievous judgments against
Jerusalem, The sword, and famine, and evil beast, to destroy from it man
and beast?

<span id="xi.xiv-p27"></span>**22** And lo! the remnant that is left in
it,  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) The remnant of those who go
forth, namely, sons and daughters, They shall go forth unto you: And you
shall see their ways and their works, And you shall console yourselves
for all the evil Which I have brought upon Jerusalem, Yea, all that I
have brought upon her.

<span id="xi.xiv-p29"></span>**23** Then shall you be comforted when you
shall see their ways and their works: And you shall know that I have not
done in vain Whatever I have done in it, says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xv"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 15

<span id="xi.xv-p3"></span>**1** Then came the word of Jehovah unto me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xv-p4"></span>**2** Son of man, What is the wood of the
vine Better than any branching-tree among the trees of the wood?

<span id="xi.xv-p5"></span>**3** Shall wood be taken from it to form any
work? Or will it make a peg to hang any vessel thereon?

<span id="xi.xv-p6"></span>**4** Behold, it is east into the fire for
burning; The fire devoured both ends of it, and its middle is burnt
 <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) Is it useful for any purpose?

<span id="xi.xv-p8"></span>**5** Lo! when it was entire, it was not used
for any purpose: How much less when the fire has consumed it, And it is
burnt up, shall it be useful for any purpose?

<span id="xi.xv-p9"></span>**6** Therefore thus says the Lord Jehovah,
As the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest, Which I have cast
into the fire for fuel, So have I given the inhabitants of Jerusalem:

<span id="xi.xv-p10"></span>**7** Then will I set my face against them;
They shall pass through fire, and fire shall consume them; And they
shall know that I am Jehovah, When I have set my face against them.

<span id="xi.xv-p11"></span>**8** Then will I make the land desolate,
Because they have transgressed with transgression  <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) Says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 16

<span id="xi.xvi-p3"></span>**1** Then the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xvi-p4"></span>**2** Son of man, lay open to Jerusalem her
abominations.

<span id="xi.xvi-p5"></span>**3** Thus shall you say, Thus says the Lord
Jehovah unto Jerusalem, Thy source and thy birth-place was the land of
Canaan; Thy father was an Amorite, thy mother a Hittite.

<span id="xi.xvi-p6"></span>**4** Then as to thy nativity, in the day of
thy birth, Thy navel was not cut: you was not washed with water To
supple thee: you was not salted with salt,  <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) Nor wrapped in swaddling clothes.

<span id="xi.xvi-p8"></span>**5** No eye pitied thee, to do unto thee
any one of these things, In considering thee; and you was cast forth On
the surface of the field, to the disgrace of thy person, in the day of
thy birth.

<span id="xi.xvi-p9"></span>**6** Then I passed near thee and saw thy
defilement’s, And I said to thee in thy bloods, Live; Yea, I said to
thee in thy bloods, Live.

<span id="xi.xvi-p10"></span>**7** Then I made thee grow as a germ of
the field, And you did increase and flourish; You became remarkably
beautiful;  <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) Thy breasts became
prominent and your hair profuse, Yet you was naked and bare.

<span id="xi.xvi-p12"></span>**8** Then I passed by and saw thee: and
lo! the time, the time for love: Then I stretched out my skirt over
thee, And covered thy nakedness; and I swore to thee, And made a
covenant with thee, And you was mine, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xvi-p13"></span>**9** Then I washed thee with water, and
cleansed thy blood from thee, And anointed thee with oil. and clothed
thee in a Phrygian robe;

<span id="xi.xvi-p14"></span>**10** Then I shod thee with badgers’ skin,
and dressed thee in fine linen; Then I arrayed thee in silk, and adorned
thee with ornaments,

<span id="xi.xvi-p15"></span>**11** And put bracelets on thy hands, and
a chain round thy Deck.

<span id="xi.xvi-p16"></span>**12** Then I put a ring through thy nose,
 <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) and earrings in your ears, And
a crown of comeliness on thy head.

<span id="xi.xvi-p18"></span>**13** I adorned thee with gold and silver,
and clothed thee with fine linen, And silk and broidered work you did
eat fine flour, and honey, and oil; And you was beautiful exceedingly,
And you did proceed prosperously to thy kingdom.

<span id="xi.xvi-p19"></span>**14** Then thy fame went forth among the
nations for beauty, Because you was perfect in the beauty Which I caused
unto thee, says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xvi-p20"></span>**15** But you did trust in thy beauty, and
commit fornication through thy renown, And did pour out thy fornications
to every passer by;

<span id="xi.xvi-p21"></span>**16** His it was. — Then you has taken of
thy garments, And made thee high places sprinkled with spots, And has
committed fornication upon them: They do not come, and it shall not be.
 <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333)

<span id="xi.xvi-p23"></span>**17** You has also taken vessels of thy
beauty of my gold And of my silver which I had given thee; And you has
made for thyself images of men, And has committed fornication with them.

<span id="xi.xvi-p24"></span>**18** Then you has taken of thy variegated
garments, And has clothed them: and my oil and mine incense Has you set
before them.

<span id="xi.xvi-p25"></span>**19** My bread also which, I gave thee,
fine flour and oil, And honey with which I fed thee, You has set it
before them for a sweet savor; And so it has happened, says the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xvi-p26"></span>**20** Then you has taken thy sons and thy
daughters which you has borne to me, And has slain them to be devoured:
Are then thy fornications a small thing?

<span id="xi.xvi-p27"></span>**21** Then you has slain my sons, and
caused them to be thrown to idols.  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334)

<span id="xi.xvi-p29"></span>**22** And in all your abominations and thy
lewdness You has not remembered the days of thy youth, When you was
naked and bare, and defiled in thy bloods.

<span id="xi.xvi-p30"></span>**23** So after all thy wickedness it has
happened to thee, Wo! wo! unto thee, says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xvi-p31"></span>**24** Then you has built a high place for
thyself, And has made thee a raised spot in every street.

<span id="xi.xvi-p32"></span>**25** At the head of every way you has
built thy high place; Then you has made thy beauty abominable, And has
spread thy feet to every passer by, And has multiplied thy lewdness’.

<span id="xi.xvi-p33"></span>**26** You has also committed adultery with
the Egyptians Thy neighbors, great of flesh: and over and over again Has
committed lewdness to irritate me.

<span id="xi.xvi-p34"></span>**27** Then lo! I stretched out my hand
over thee, And I diminished thy portion, and delivered thee up To the
lust of the daughters of the Philistines, who hated thee, And were
ashamed of your abandoned ways.

<span id="xi.xvi-p35"></span>**28** Then you has committed adultery with
the sons of Ashur, Since you was not satisfied, you has been lewd with
them; Yet even then you was not, satisfied.

<span id="xi.xvi-p36"></span>**29** Then you has increased thy
lewdnesses In the land of Canaan unto Chaldea; And even this did not
satiate thee.

<span id="xi.xvi-p37"></span>**30** How soft is your heart, says the
Lord Jehovah, Since you doest all the work of a bold abandoned woman!

<span id="xi.xvi-p38"></span>**31** Since you has raised your high place
at the head of every way, And has made thy lofty place in every
celebrated spot; And has not been like a harlot in scorning hire.  <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335)

<span id="xi.xvi-p40"></span>**32** An adulterous woman receiving
strangers instead of her husband!

<span id="xi.xvi-p41"></span>**33** To all harlots men give a reward;
But you has given thy gifts to all thy lovers, And you has hired them to
come to thee from all sides

<span id="xi.xvi-p42"></span>**34** For thy fornications — for in thy
lewdness You have inverted the custom of other women; Since there is no
fornication like thine: Because you has given instead of receiving a
gift, Then you has acted contrary to others.

<span id="xi.xvi-p43"></span>**35** Wherefore, O harlot, hear Jehovah’s
word!

<span id="xi.xvi-p44"></span>**36** Thus says the Lord Jehovah, Because
thy shamelessness is poured out, And thy baseness detected in thy
lewdness towards thy lovers, And towards all the idols of your
abominations, And in the bloods of thy children whom you has given to
them;

<span id="xi.xvi-p45"></span>**37** Wherefore lo! I will assemble all
thy lovers Whom you has attracted, and all whom you has loved and hated;
I will assemble them from all around thee, And I will lay bare thy
nakedness before them, And they shall behold all thy turpitude.

<span id="xi.xvi-p46"></span>**38** Then will I judge thee with the
judgment of adulteresses, And of those who pour out blood; and I will
give thee The blood of fury and of jealousy.

<span id="xi.xvi-p47"></span>**39** And I will give thee into their
hand, And they shall pull down thy high place, And destroy thy raised
places, and shall spoil thee of thy robes; They shall also take the
vessels of thy glory, And send thee away, naked and bare.

<span id="xi.xvi-p48"></span>**40** Then they shall stir up a crowd
against thee, And stone thee with stones, and thrust at thee with
swords.

<span id="xi.xvi-p49"></span>**41** Then they shall burn thy houses with
fire, And shall execute judgments against thee in the eyes of many
women: Then will I cause thee to cease from fornication, Neither shall
you offer a gift any more.

<span id="xi.xvi-p50"></span>**42** And I will cause my fury towards
thee to rest, And my jealousy shall depart from thee, And I will rest
and be no longer angry.

<span id="xi.xvi-p51"></span>**43** Because you has not remembered the
days of thy youth, But has provoked me in all those things; I will even
recompense thy way upon your head, Says the Lord Jehovah; since you has
taken no thought For all your abominations.  <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336)

<span id="xi.xvi-p53"></span>**44** Lo! every user of proverbs shall use
this proverb against thee, Saying, As the mother is, so is the daughter.

<span id="xi.xvi-p54"></span>**45** You art the daughter of thy mother,
who has east away her husband and her sons; And the sister of thy
sisters, who loathe their husbands and children; Your mother was a
Hittite, and your father an Amorite:

<span id="xi.xvi-p55"></span>**46** And your elder sister is Samaria,
and her daughters those who dwell at thy left hand; And thy younger
sister, who dwells at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

<span id="xi.xvi-p56"></span>**47** Yet you has not walked in their
ways, And you has not done according to their abominations, As if it had
been a very small firing, And you has been more corrupt than they in all
thy ways.

<span id="xi.xvi-p57"></span>**48** As I live, says the Lord Jehovah, If
Sodom thy sister and her daughters have done As you and thy daughters
have done.

<span id="xi.xvi-p58"></span>**49** Lo! this was the iniquity of Sodom
thy sister, Pride, fullness of bread, and security of ease Belonged to
her and her daughters and she did not lay hold Of the hand of the poor
and needy; but she was haughty,

<span id="xi.xvi-p59"></span>**50** And did abomination before me, Hence
I took them away as it pleased me.  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337)

<span id="xi.xvi-p61"></span>**51** And Samaria has not committed half
of thy sins; But you has multiplied your abominations beyond them, And
has justified thy sisters in all the abominations which you has done.

<span id="xi.xvi-p62"></span>**52** Bear you, then, thy disgrace by
which you has pleaded for thy sister, By thy crimes which you has
committed beyond them; They are justified more than you be you then
ashamed, And bear thy disgrace, since you has justified thy sisters.

<span id="xi.xvi-p63"></span>**53** Yet will I turn the captivity, yea,
the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, And the captivity of Samaria
and her daughters, And the captivity of thy captivities in the midst of
them,

<span id="xi.xvi-p64"></span>**54** That you mayest bear thy reproach,
and mayest be ashamed Of all that you has done in consoling them.

<span id="xi.xvi-p65"></span>**55** And thy sisters Sodom and her
daughters shall return to their former state, And Samaria and her
daughters shall return to theirs, And you and thy daughters shall return
to yours.

<span id="xi.xvi-p66"></span>**56** Then thy sister Sodom was not
mentioned by thee, In the day of thy pride, before thy wickedness was
detected;

<span id="xi.xvi-p67"></span>**57** As in the time of thy reproach from
the daughters of Syria, And from all around of the daughters of the
Philistines, Who despised thee round about.

<span id="xi.xvi-p68"></span>**58** As for thy depraved thoughts and
abominations, You has borne them, says Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xvi-p69"></span>**59** For thus saith the Lord Jehovah, I
will also do to thee as you has done, Who has despised the oath and
broken the covenant.

<span id="xi.xvi-p70"></span>**60** Yet I will remember my covenant with
thee In the days of thy youth, and I will establish a perpetual covenant
with thee.

<span id="xi.xvi-p71"></span>**61** Then you shall remember thy ways and
be ashamed, When you shall receive thy sisters, both elder and younger
than thyself; And I will give them unto thee for daughters, But not by
thy covenant.

<span id="xi.xvi-p72"></span>**62** For I will establish my covenant
with thee, And you shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xvi-p73"></span>**63** That you mayest remember and be
ashamed, And not open thy mouth any more because of thy disgrace, When I
am propitious to thee for all thy deeds, Says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xvii"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 17

<span id="xi.xvii-p3"></span>**1** Then the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xvii-p4"></span>**2** Son of man, put forth an enigma and
utter a proverb to the house of Israel;

<span id="xi.xvii-p5"></span>**3** And say, Thus says the Lord Jehovah,
A mighty eagle, with great wings, long feathers, and full of plumage, Of
various colors, came to Mount Lebanon, And took the highest branch of a
cedar;

<span id="xi.xvii-p6"></span>**4** He cropped off the top of its young
twigs, And carried it into the land of the merchant; He planted it in a
city of merchants.

<span id="xi.xvii-p7"></span>**5** He took also of the seed of the land,
And put it in a fruitful field; He planted it near many waters, like a
willow.  <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338)

<span id="xi.xvii-p9"></span>**6** Then it grew and became a luxuriant
vine, low of stature, So that its branches turned towards the eagle, And
its roots were under him; and it became a vine, And brought forth
branches, and sent out boughs.

<span id="xi.xvii-p10"></span>**7** There was also another large eagle,
 <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) of great wings and of copious
plumage, And lo! this vine bent its roots towards him, And sent forth
its branches towards him, That he might water it from the beds of his
plantation.

<span id="xi.xvii-p12"></span>**8** In a good soil near many streams was
it planted, That it should produce leaves and bring forth fruit, So as
to be a magnificent vine.

<span id="xi.xvii-p13"></span>**9** Say you, Thus says the, Lord
Jehovah, Shall it prosper? Shall not one pluck up its roots and cut down
its fruits, And dry up all its branches, that it may wither? Then it
shall not be for a great arm or much people To take it  <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) away from its roots.

<span id="xi.xvii-p15"></span>**10** Yet, behold, when planed, shall it
prosper? Shall it not completely wither when the east wind has touched
it.? Upon the beds of its plantation shall it wither.

<span id="xi.xvii-p16"></span>**11** Then the word of Jehovah came to
me, saying,

<span id="xi.xvii-p17"></span>**12** Say, I pray thee, to the rebellious
house, Know you not what this means? Say, Lo! the king of Babylon is
come to Jerusalem, And has taken away its king and its elders, and
carried them with him to Babylon;

<span id="xi.xvii-p18"></span>**13** Then he took from the royal seed,
and struck an agreement with him, And made him descend to an oath; Then
he took also the mighty of the land;

<span id="xi.xvii-p19"></span>**14** That the kingdom should be low, and
not raise itself up, And keep its agreement and stand in it.

<span id="xi.xvii-p20"></span>**15** But he rebelled against him, by
sending his ambassadors To Egypt, that horses and much people might be
given him: Shall he who doeth these things prosper and escape? Shall he
who breaks the treaty get off?

<span id="xi.xvii-p21"></span>**16** As I live, says the Lord Jehovah,
if he shall not die In the place of the king who made him reign, Whose
oath he has despised, and whose treaty he has made vain, In the midst of
Babylon.

<span id="xi.xvii-p22"></span>**17** Neither with a mighty army nor a
great host Shall Pharaoh meet with him in battle, By throwing up a mound
and by building a tower, to cut off many souls.

<span id="xi.xvii-p23"></span>**18** Through breaking the covenant he
has despised his oath, And, behold, he has stretched forth his hand, And
has done all this, and shall not escape.

<span id="xi.xvii-p24"></span>**19** Besides, thus says the Lord
Jehovah, As I live, If I do not recompense on his own head My oath which
he has despised, and my covenant which he has broken,

<span id="xi.xvii-p25"></span>**20** Then I will stretch my net over
him, and he shall be taken in my snare; And I will lead him to Babylon,
and will plead with him there, Concerning the transgression which he has
transgressed against me.

<span id="xi.xvii-p26"></span>**21** And all his fugitives,. with all
his forces, shall fall by the sword; And the remnant shall be scattered
to every wind; And you shall know that I Jehovah have spoken.

<span id="xi.xvii-p27"></span>**22** Thus says the Lord Jehovah, I will
take from the top of the lofty cedar, And I will tear off a tender
branch from its twigs and will set it: And I will plant it on a lofty
and elevated mountain;

<span id="xi.xvii-p28"></span>**23** On a lofty mountain of Israel will
I plant it; And it shall bring forth a bough and bear fruit, and shall
be a tall cedar;  <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) Then every
bird shall dwell under it; Every winged thing shall shelter itself under
the shadow of its branches.

<span id="xi.xvii-p30"></span>**24** Then all the trees of the field
shall know that I am Jehovah, Who humble the high tree and raise aloft
the low tree; I dry up the green tree, and make the dry tree fruitful I
Jehovah have spoken and have done it.

<span id="xi.xviii"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 18

<span id="xi.xviii-p3"></span>**1** Then the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="xi.xviii-p4"></span>**2** What mean you by using this proverb
 <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) about the land of Israel,
Saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, And the children’s teeth are
set on edge?

<span id="xi.xviii-p6"></span>**3** As I live, says the Lord Jehovah,
You shall not hereafter Use this proverb any more in Israel.

<span id="xi.xviii-p7"></span>**4** Behold, all souls are mine; as the
soul of the father, So the soul of the son is mine. The soul which has
sinned shall die itself.

<span id="xi.xviii-p8"></span>**5** But if a man have been just, and
done judgment and justice,

<span id="xi.xviii-p9"></span>**6** And have neither eaten upon the
mountains, nor raised his eyes To the idols of the house of Israel, and
have not polluted His neighbor’s wife, nor approached a female when
separated;

<span id="xi.xviii-p10"></span>**7** If he have not afflicted any one,
and have restored to the debtor his pledge, Have not seized the prey,
have given his bread to the hungry, And have covered the naked with a
garment:

<span id="xi.xviii-p11"></span>**8** Have not given upon usury, and have
taken no increase, Have withdrawn his hand from iniquity, And have done
justice faithfully between man and man;

<span id="xi.xviii-p12"></span>**9** Have walked in my statutes, and
kept my judgments, to do the truth  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) He is just, he shall surely live,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xviii-p14"></span>**10** But if he beget a son, who is a
robber and a shedder of blood, And who doeth to his brother  <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) any one of these things,

<span id="xi.xviii-p16"></span>**11** And has not done all these
precepts of the law, But has eaten on the mountains, and defiled his
neighbor’s wife;

<span id="xi.xviii-p17"></span>**12** Has oppressed the poor and needy,
has spoiled by violence, Has not restored the pledge, has lifted up his
eyes unto idols;

<span id="xi.xviii-p18"></span>**13** Has done abomination, has given on
usury and taken increase; Shall he live? He shall not live; he has done
all these abominations; He shall surely die: his blood shall be on him.

<span id="xi.xviii-p19"></span>**14** And lo! if he beget a son, and he
see all the wickedness which his father has committed, And feared, and
hath not done according to them;

<span id="xi.xviii-p20"></span>**15** Has not eaten upon the mountains,
and has not raised his eyes To the idols of the house of Israel, and has
not defiled his neighbor’s wife; Hath oppressed no one, has not taken a
pledge,

<span id="xi.xviii-p21"></span>**16** Hath not spoiled by violence, hath
given his bread to the hungry, And has covered the naked with a garment;

<span id="xi.xviii-p22"></span>**17** Has withdrawn his hand from the
poor, Has not received increase and usury, has done my judgments, Has
walked in my decrees; he shall not die Through the \]iniquity of his
father; he shall surely live.

<span id="xi.xviii-p23"></span>**18** His father, — because by
oppressing he has oppressed, And has snatched the prey from his brother,
And has done that which is not good in the midst of the people, —
Behold, he shall die in his iniquity.

<span id="xi.xviii-p24"></span>**19** And you say, Why? shall not the
son bear his father’s iniquity? Because the son has done judgment and
justice, And has kept all my statutes and has done them, Therefore shall
he surely live.

<span id="xi.xviii-p25"></span>**20** The soul which has sinned, that
shall die. The son shall not bear the father’s iniquity, And the father
shall not bear the son’s iniquity; The righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, And the impiety of the impious shall be upon him.

<span id="xi.xviii-p26"></span>**21** Then, if the wicked man shall
withdraw from all the wickedness which he has done, And have kept all my
sayings, and have done justice and judgement, He shall surely live — he
shall not die.

<span id="xi.xviii-p27"></span>**22** All the transgressions which he
has committed Shall not come into memory to him; But in his
righteousness; which he has done shall he live.

<span id="xi.xviii-p28"></span>**23** Do I earnestly desire the death of
the wicked, says the Lord Jehovah? Do I not desire that he turn from his
evil ways and live?

<span id="xi.xviii-p29"></span>**24** Then, if a just man turn aside
from his justice, And do iniquity, according to all the abominations
Which the wicked man has done, shall he live? All his righteous deeds
shall not come into remembrance?  <span
id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) In the transgression which he has
transgressed, And in the wickedness which he has wickedly done, In them
shall he die — yet you have said —

<span id="xi.xviii-p31"></span>**25** The way of the Lord is not
upright. Hear you then, O house of Israel, is not my way upright? Are
not your ways perverse?  <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346)

<span id="xi.xviii-p33"></span>**26** If the just man has turned aside
from his justice, And has done iniquity, and has died in it, In his own
iniquity which he has committed shall he die.

<span id="xi.xviii-p34"></span>**27** And if the wicked man has turned
aside from the wickedness which he has done, And has done judgment and
justice, he shall preserve his soul alive.  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347)

<span id="xi.xviii-p36"></span>**28** Then, if he have seen and have
turned away from all the wickedness Which he has done, he shall surely
live — he shall not die.

<span id="xi.xviii-p37"></span>**29** Yet, the house of Israel have
said, The way of the Lord is not upright. Are not my ways upright, O
house of Israel? Are not your ways perverse?

<span id="xi.xviii-p38"></span>**30** Wherefore I will judge each of you
according to his ways, O house of Israel, says the Lord Jehovah. Turn
you, and depart from all your transgressions, And let not iniquity be
your snare.

<span id="xi.xviii-p39"></span>**31** Cast away from you all your
iniquities whereby you have transgressed; And make you a new heart and a
new spirit: For why will you die, O house of Israel?

<span id="xi.xviii-p40"></span>**32** Since I do not delight in the
death of the dying, Says the Lord Jehovah — wherefore turn you, and
live.

<span id="xi.xix"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 19

<span id="xi.xix-p3"></span>**1** Wherefore take you up this mournful
strain against the princes of Israel,

<span id="xi.xix-p4"></span>**2** And say, Why did thy mother — a
lioness — Lie down among lions? she brought up her whelps In the midst
of lions.

<span id="xi.xix-p5"></span>**3** Then she bore one of her whelps, and
he was made a lion: Then he learnt to seize his prey, and he devoured
men.

<span id="xi.xix-p6"></span>**4** Then the Gentiles heard of him; he was
taken in their pit, And they led him in chains into the land of Egypt.

<span id="xi.xix-p7"></span>**5** Then she saw what she had hoped for,
and how her hope had perished; And she took another of her whelps, and
made him a lion.

<span id="xi.xix-p8"></span>**6** Then he walked in the midst of lions,
and became a lion; And he learnt to seize the prey, and devoured men.

<span id="xi.xix-p9"></span>**7** Then he harassed their palaces and
destroyed their cities; And the land was rendered desolate, and all its
fullness, By the voice of his roaring.

<span id="xi.xix-p10"></span>**8** Then the nations set themselves
against him From all sides and regions, and spread their net over him.
He was taken in their pitfall: and they put him in ward,

<span id="xi.xix-p11"></span>**9** And brought him in chains to the king
of Babylon. They led him into strongholds, that his voice Might be no
longer heard in the mountains of Israel.

<span id="xi.xix-p12"></span>**10** Thy mother, when she bore thee,
 <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) was planted like a vine near
the waters: She was fruitful and branching beside many waters.

<span id="xi.xix-p14"></span>**11** And the rods of her strength were
for scepters for rulers, And her stature was elevated, and appeared
aloft In the multitude of her branches.

<span id="xi.xix-p15"></span>**12** Then she was torn in fury, and cast
on the ground; And the east wind dried up her fruit; Her strong rods
were broken off and dried up; The fire consumed them; and now she is
planted

<span id="xi.xix-p16"></span>**13** In the desert, in a land of dryness
and thirst.

<span id="xi.xix-p17"></span>**14** Then a fire went forth from the rod
of her branches, and devoured her fruit; And there was not a rod of
strength in her — a scepter for ruling. This is the lamentation, and
shall be for a wailing.

<span id="xi.xx"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p1"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p2"></span>CHAPTER 20

<span id="xi.xx-p3"></span>**1** It occurred in the seventh year, the
fifth month, the tenth day of the month, Men from the elders of Israel
came to consult Jehovah, And sat before my face. And the word of Jehovah

<span id="xi.xx-p4"></span>**2** Came to me, saying, Son of man, speak
to the elders of Israel,

<span id="xi.xx-p5"></span>**3** And say unto there, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, Are you come. to inquire of me? As I live, If I will be sought
by you, saith the Lord Jehovah,

<span id="xi.xx-p6"></span>**4** Wilt you judge them, wilt you judge
them, son of man? Explain to them the abominations of their fathers;

<span id="xi.xx-p7"></span>**5** Then you shall say unto them, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, In the day on which I chose Israel, and lifted
up my hand To the seed of the house of Jacob, and was known to them in
the land of Egypt, Then I raised my hand to them, saying, I am Jehovah
your God:

<span id="xi.xx-p8"></span>**6** In that day I lifted up my hand towards
them, To bring them from the land of Egypt into a land which I espied
for them, Flowing with milk and honey, desirable beyond all lands.

<span id="xi.xx-p9"></span>**7** Then I said to them, Cast you away
every one the abominations of his eyes, And pollute not yourselves with
the idols of Egypt: I Jehovah am your God; and they rebelled against me,

<span id="xi.xx-p10"></span>**8** And were unwilling to hear me: they
did not cast away The idols of their eyes: they did not desert the idols
of Egypt: Then I said that I would pour out my wrath upon them; To fill
up nay fury against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.

<span id="xi.xx-p11"></span>**9** But, I acted for my name’s sake, that
it should not be profaned in the eyes of the nations, In the midst of
which they were; in whose sight I was known to them, By bringing them
forth from the land of Egypt.

<span id="xi.xx-p12"></span>**10** Then I led them out from the land of
Egypt, and brought them into the desert.

<span id="xi.xx-p13"></span>**11** And I gave them my decrees, and made
known my judgments unto them, Which if a man do, he shall live in them.

<span id="xi.xx-p14"></span>**12** Moreover I gave them my Sabbaths for
a sign between me and them, That they might know that I am he who
sanctifieth them.

<span id="xi.xx-p15"></span>**13** But the house of Israel rebelled
against me in the desert: They walked not in my decrees, And despised my
judgments, Which if a mall do, he shall live in them. And my sabbaths
they greatly violated: Then I said I would pour out my wrath in the
desert to consume them.

<span id="xi.xx-p16"></span>**14** Then I acted for my name’s sake, that
it should not be profaned In the eyes of the nations, in whose sight I
led them out.

<span id="xi.xx-p17"></span>**15** Yet I lifted up my hand to them in
the desert, That I should not lead them into the land which I had given
them, Flowing with milk and honey, the desire of all lands,

<span id="xi.xx-p18"></span>**16** Because they despised my judgments,
and walked not in my decrees, And polluted my sabbaths; because their
heart walked after their idols.

<span id="xi.xx-p19"></span>**17** Then mine eye spared them, so that I
did not destroy them, And did not consume them in the desert.

<span id="xi.xx-p20"></span>**18** Then I said unto their sons in the
desert, Walk you not in the decrees of your fathers, And keep not their
judgments, and pollute not yourselves with their idols:

<span id="xi.xx-p21"></span>**19** I Jehovah am your God, walk you in my
decrees, And keep my judgments, and do them:

<span id="xi.xx-p22"></span>**20** And hallow my Sabbaths; and they
shall be a sign between me and you, That you may know that I Jehovah am
your God.

<span id="xi.xx-p23"></span>**21** Then these sons became rebels against
me: They walked not in my decrees, and kept not my judgments To do them,
which if a man do, he shall live in them; They profaned my Sabbaths: and
I said That I would pour out my wrath upon them, To accomplish my fury
against them in the desert.

<span id="xi.xx-p24"></span>**22** Then I withdrew my hand, and acted
for my name’s sake, That it should not be profaned in the eyes of the
nations, Before whose sight I led them out.

<span id="xi.xx-p25"></span>**23** I also lifted up my hand to them in
the desert To scatter them among the nations, and disperse them through
the lands;

<span id="xi.xx-p26"></span>**24** Because they did not perform my
judgments, And despised my statutes, and violated my Sabbaths; And their
eyes were after their fathers’ idols.

<span id="xi.xx-p27"></span>**25** I therefore gave them decrees that
were not good, And judgments by which they could not live;

<span id="xi.xx-p28"></span>**26** And I contaminated them in their
gifts, By casting away every first-born offspring, To destroy them,
that. they may know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xx-p29"></span>**27** Wherefore, speak to the house of
Israel, son of man, and say to them, Thus says the Lord Jehovah, Hither
to your fathers Have dishonored me in this by prevaricating greatly
against me:

<span id="xi.xx-p30"></span>**28** For I introduced them into the land,
for which I raised my hand to give it them; And they saw every high inn,
and every branching tree: Then they sacrificed there their offerings,
And offered there the irritation of their oblation, And placed there the
odor of their sweet fragrance, And poured out there their libations.

<span id="xi.xx-p31"></span>**29** Then said I unto them, What is the
high place to which you approach? For its name is called “Lofty” unto
this day.

<span id="xi.xx-p32"></span>**30** Wherefore, say unto the house of
Israel, Thus says the Lord Jehovah, Are you polluted after the way of
your fathers? And do you commit adultery after their idols?

<span id="xi.xx-p33"></span>**31** For in offering your gifts, and in
passing your sons through the fire, You pollute yourselves in all your
idols unto this day Then shall I be inquired of by you, O house of
Israel! As I live, says the Lord Jehovah, if I shall be inquired of by
you.

<span id="xi.xx-p34"></span>**32** That also which comes it to your mind
shall not happen, Since you say, We will be as the nations, as the
families of the lands,

<span id="xi.xx-p35"></span>**33** To serve wood and stone. As I live,
says the Lord Jehovah, If I will not rule over you with a strong hand,
and an extended arm, and in fury poured forth.

<span id="xi.xx-p36"></span>**34** And I will lead you out from the
people, and collect you from the lands Through which you were dispersed,
by a strong hand, and with an extended arm,

<span id="xi.xx-p37"></span>**35** And with fury poured forth. Then I
will lead you into the desert of the Gentiles, And will plead with you
there face to face.

<span id="xi.xx-p38"></span>**36** As I pleaded with your fathers in the
desert of the land of Egypt, So will I dispute with you, says the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xx-p39"></span>**37** Then I will make you pass under the
rod, And bring you within the bond of a covenant:

<span id="xi.xx-p40"></span>**38** Then will I purge out from among you
the rebels, And the transgressors against me from the land of their
habitation Will I bring the impious, and they shall not enter the land
of Israel; And you shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xx-p41"></span>**39** As for you, O house of Israel, thus
says the Lord Jehovah, Go you, let each serve his idols, since you do
not hear me, And the name of my sanctity profane no longer

<span id="xi.xx-p42"></span>**40** With your gifts and your idols, since
in the mountain of my sanctity, In a lofty mountain of Israel, says the
Lord Jehovah, There shall the whole house of Israel worship me; All, I
say, in the land there will I be propitious to them; And there will I
require your oblations, And the first-fruits of your gifts in all your
purification’s.

<span id="xi.xx-p43"></span>**41** In the odor of sweet fragrance will I
be propitious to you, When I shall have brought you from the people, And
gathered you from the lands through which you will be dispersed; And I
will be sanctified in you in the eyes of the nations.

<span id="xi.xx-p44"></span>**42** Then shall you know that I am
Jehovah, When I shall have brought you back into the land of Israel,
Into the region about which I raised my hand to give it to your fathers.

<span id="xi.xx-p45"></span>**43** And there I will remember your ways,
and all your works, In which you were polluted; and you shall be
confused in face  <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) Through all
your wickedness which you have committed.

<span id="xi.xx-p47"></span>**44** Then shall you know that I am
Jehovah, when I shall have done among you According to. my name, not
according to your evil ways, Nor according to your corrupt doings, O
house of Israel, says the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xi.xx-p48"></span><span id="xi.xx-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p49"></span>As Calvin’s Latin Translation ends here, so
the version by the Translator comes naturally to a close. It has not
been thought necessary to re-translate from the original the remainder
of Ezekiel, as the previously quoted labors of Newcome and Rosenmuller
are sufficiently accessible and explanatory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc23010.htm#fr_295) <span
id="xi.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span> The thirtieth year. The date at which this
reckoning commences is doubful Calvin dates from a Jubilee, (vol. 1, p.
52.,) but Jerome from the 18th year of King Josiah, when the book of the
law was found. Origen, Hom. I., understands it of Ezekiel’s age; and so
does Gregory, Hom. II. Maldonatus interprets it of the captivity, and
quotes the authority of Theodoret. Pradus, as quoted by Rosenmfiner,
agrees with Jerome. The Editor refers his readers once for all to the
valuable commentary of Rosenmuller on this Prophet for all kinds of
valuable critical information; while the English student will find the
notes to Archbishop Newcome’s version very judicious.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc23010.htm#fr_296) <span
id="xi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span> Or, “divided.” See vol. 1, p. 75, note.. The
MSS. vary slightly. Calvin has translated very literally; and the
Prophet’s language being so elliptical, it is almost impossible to
present a perfectly accurate representation of “a cherub” to a modern
inquirer.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc23010.htm#fr_297) <span
id="xi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span> Explained in a note, p. 82, vol. 1 See
Jerome in Comment. ad Heseam, cap. 12, and Chrysos. Orat. 35, p. 448,
ed. Morell...Rosen. in ver.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc23010.htm#fr_298) <span
id="xi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span> Alexander Knox, who beautifies whatever he
touches upon, has applied this verse most happily in illustration of the
“exquisitely regular” movements of the almighty, and the “attendant
machinery of Providence.” — Remains, <span id="xi.i-p25.1"></span>[Eze
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#009)<span id="xi.i-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc23010.htm#fr_299) <span
id="xi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p9"></span> See vol. 1, p. 131, note.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc23010.htm#fr_300) <span
id="xi.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p31"></span> See vol. 1, p. 168, note.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc23010.htm#fr_301) <span
id="xi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p18"></span> See vol. 1, p. 186, note.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc23010.htm#fr_302) <span
id="xi.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p21"></span> See vol. 1, p. 187, note.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc23010.htm#fr_303) <span
id="xi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p14"></span> The rendering according to note,vol. 1, p.
205.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc23010.htm#fr_304) <span
id="xi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p20"></span> See vol. 1, p. 213, note.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc23010.htm#fr_305) <span
id="xi.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p22"></span> See vol. 1, p. 215, note.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc23010.htm#fr_306) <span
id="xi.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p9"></span> Explained by Calvin, vol. 1, p. 224, note.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc23010.htm#fr_307) <span
id="xi.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p14"></span> For Calvin’s sense of “evil,” see vol. 1,
p. 232, note.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc23010.htm#fr_308) <span
id="xi.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p17"></span> For another rendering, see vol. 1, p. 235,
note.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc23010.htm#fr_309) <span
id="xi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p8"></span> Another reading proposed, vol. 1, p. 245,
note,Archbishop Newcome adopts the reading of the note, which is
supported by more than twenty MSS., “Lo! evil cometh after evil.”

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc23010.htm#fr_310) <span
id="xi.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p17"></span> See another rendering,vol. 1, p. 255.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc23010.htm#fr_311) <span
id="xi.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p21"></span> See vol. 1, p. 259, note.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc23010.htm#fr_312) <span
id="xi.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p26"></span> See vol. 1, p. 264.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc23010.htm#fr_313) <span
id="xi.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p13"></span> See note onvol. 1, p. 330.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc23010.htm#fr_314) <span
id="xi.x-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p26"></span> See vol. 1, p. 345, note.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc23010.htm#fr_315) <span
id="xi.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p19"></span> See vol. 1, p. 362, note.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc23010.htm#fr_316) <span
id="xi.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p25"></span> See vol. 1, p. 382, note.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc23010.htm#fr_317) <span
id="xi.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p10"></span> See vol. 1, p. 396, note: “for myself.”

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc23010.htm#fr_318) <span
id="xi.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p14"></span> See vol. 1, p. 395, note; where Calvin
explains the word “burden.”

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc23010.htm#fr_319) <span
id="xi.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p19"></span> See vol. 1, p. 402, note.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc23010.htm#fr_320) <span
id="xi.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p25"></span> See vol. 1, p. 406, note.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc23010.htm#fr_321) <span
id="xi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p6"></span> See vol. 2, p. 9, note.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc23010.htm#fr_322) <span
id="xi.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p12"></span> See vol. 2, p. 14, note.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc23010.htm#fr_323) <span
id="xi.xiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p18"></span> See vol. 2, p. 22, note.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc23010.htm#fr_324) <span
id="xi.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p7"></span> See vol. 2, p. 47, note.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc23010.htm#fr_325) <span
id="xi.xiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p11"></span> See vol. 2, p. 51, note.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc23010.htm#fr_326) <span
id="xi.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p18"></span> “By prevaricating prevarication,” vol. 2,
p. 67, note.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc23010.htm#fr_327) <span
id="xi.xiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p28"></span> See vol. 2, p. 79, note.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc23010.htm#fr_328) <span
id="xi.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p7"></span> See vol. 2, p. 84, note.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc23010.htm#fr_329) <span
id="xi.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p12"></span> See vol. 2, p. 91, note.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc23010.htm#fr_330) <span
id="xi.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p7"></span> See vol. 2, p. 96, note.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc23010.htm#fr_331) <span
id="xi.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p11"></span> See vol. 2, p. 100, note.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc23010.htm#fr_332) <span
id="xi.xvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p17"></span> See vol. 2, p. 105, note.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc23010.htm#fr_333) <span
id="xi.xvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p22"></span> The meaning of this clause is doubtful.
See Calvin’s Commentary,vol. 2, p. 113. Newcome very judiciously
translates, “whither you shouldst not have come, neither should it have
been done.”

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc23010.htm#fr_334) <span
id="xi.xvi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p28"></span> See vol. 2, p. 121, note.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc23010.htm#fr_335) <span
id="xi.xvi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p39"></span> Calvin in his comment explains the sense
in which “scorning” is used, vol. 2, p. 135; but Newcome justly supposes
the original word to be the Chaldee for “to gather.”

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc23010.htm#fr_336) <span
id="xi.xvi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p52"></span> See vol. 2, p. 148, note.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc23010.htm#fr_337) <span
id="xi.xvi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p60"></span> See vol. 2, p. 156, note.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc23010.htm#fr_338) <span
id="xi.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p8"></span> Newcome adopts the rendering of the
Septuagint and Cocceius, “with much care,” <span
id="xi.xvii-p8.1"></span>curatio, observatio, but quotes Dathe and
Golius, page 1362, for the Arabic, in the same sense as Calvin, “a
willow.”

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc23010.htm#fr_339) <span
id="xi.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p11"></span> See vol. 2, p. 192, note.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc23010.htm#fr_340) <span
id="xi.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p14"></span> See vol. 2, p. 193, note.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc23010.htm#fr_341) <span
id="xi.xvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p29"></span> See vol. 2, p. 208, note.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc23010.htm#fr_342) <span
id="xi.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p5"></span> Saying or apothegm; vol. 2, p. 213, note.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc23010.htm#fr_343) <span
id="xi.xviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p13"></span> Conduct himself faithfully; vol. 2, p.
219, note.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc23010.htm#fr_344) <span
id="xi.xviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p15"></span> See vol. 2, p. 231, note.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc23010.htm#fr_345) <span
id="xi.xviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p30"></span> See vol. 2, p. 249, note.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc23010.htm#fr_346) <span
id="xi.xviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p32"></span> Accurately balanced: vol. 2, p. 252,
note.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc23010.htm#fr_347) <span
id="xi.xviii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p35"></span> See vol. 2, p. 256, note.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc23010.htm#fr_348) <span
id="xi.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p13"></span> Calvin translates with the authorized
version <span id="xi.xix-p13.1"></span>*in tuo sanguine*, “in thy
blood,” and explains it as above, <span id="xi.xix-p13.2"></span>*dum
peperit*. Capellus and Pradus, by a slight alteration of the Hebrew
letters from <span id="xi.xix-p13.3"></span>בדמך, *bedemek*, to <span
id="xi.xix-p13.4"></span>כרמן, *keremen*, translate “like a
pomegranate.” Doederlein, in his Annotations on Grotius, prefers this
sense; but Jerome, Rab. Solomon, and Rab. David, take it as Calvin does.
Both Rosenmuller and Newcome discuss the point with ability.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc23010.htm#fr_349) <span
id="xi.xx-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p46"></span>See vol. 2, p. 342, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of Major Interpreters](cc23011)
