[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc23004)  [Next](cc23006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 23: Ezekiel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 17

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying,

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me, dicendo,

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Son of man, put forth a riddle, and
speak a parable unto the house of Israel;

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Fili hominis, aenigmatisa aenigma, et
proverbia proverbium  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) ad domum
Israel.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span><span id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>In this chapter the Prophet shows that the
Jews were utterly foolish in thinking themselves safe, since they had
God as their adversary. At the end of the chapter he promises indeed the
restoration of the Church, and heralds the kingdom of Christ: but the
principal part of the chapter is consumed with this teaching, that the
Jews were utterly foolish in promising themselves safety for the city,
the temple, and their kingdom: for, as it now appeared, they had
violated the covenant of God and he had rejected them. When deprived of
God’s help, what could they do? This was egregious folly to hope for a
prosperous state of their kingdom when their power was diminished and
cut off, and they were reduced almost to the very last straits. But
since the Prophet’s discourse came be understood without a knowledge of
the history, I shall therefore make a beginning: When Nebuchadnezzar
appointed Zedekiah king, he also made him tributary to himself. He was
made king at the will or rather by the lust of the king of Babylon, when
Jeconiah was led captive. (<span id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>[2Ki
24:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015)<span id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p9.2"></span>[2Ch
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010)<span id="vi.i-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p9.3"></span>[Jer
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p9.3"></span>.)
Jeconiah had not sinned greatly, but when he saw himself unable to
resist, he surrendered himself with his mother and children; he was
carried away to Babylon, and there was treated humanely and even
splendidly, although not royally. Nebuchadnezzar, foreseeing much
trouble if he set any of his satraps over Judea, and fearing daily
tumults, appointed Mattaniah king, to whom he gave the name Zedekiah;
this was the last king: already, as I have said, the royal dignity was
greatly diminished: it was tributary to Nebuchadnezzar, and Zedekiah’s
sway was but precarious. His position depended on the will of his
conqueror, and he who placed him on the throne could remove him as often
as he pleased. A little while afterwards, when he saw that
Nebuchadnezzar was at a distance, he made an agreement with the king of
Egypt, and thought he should have sufficient help if Nebuchadnezzar were
to return again with an army. And the Egyptians, as we have elsewhere
said, were sufficiently desirous of this treaty. For they saw the
Babylonian monarchy gradually increasing, and it was probable that, when
the Jews were utterly subdued, Nebuchadnezzar would not be content with
those boundaries, but would attack Egypt in like manner, and absorb that
kingdom, as he had done others. Hence a reason for their entering into
the treaty was at hand, since the king of Egypt thought that Judea would
be a defense if Nebuchadnezzar should come down with his army: and
certainly the Jews must receive the assault first. Whatever be the
meaning, Zedekiah, through despising his oath, as we shall see, revolted
to the Egyptians, and when Nebuchadnezzar afterwards demanded tribute,
Zedekiah refused, through reliance on that covenant which he had made
with the Egyptians. We now see how foolish the Jews were in sleeping
carelessly in that miserable state to which they had been reduced. For
when their power was unbroken they could not sustain the attack of the
king of Babylon: their king was then a mere dead image, and nothing but
a shadow: yet they indulged in pride not only against Nebuchadnezzar but
also against the Prophets and God himself, just as if they were
flourishing in wealth and power and complete prosperity. Hence Ezekiel
now refutes and rebukes this arrogance. He shows how easy it was for the
Babylonians to overthrow them again, since when they attacked them
before they were subdued, they easily compelled them to surrender.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span><span id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>But I come to the words *Son of man, set
forth in enigma*: the noun and the verb mutually answer to each other,
hence any one may if he please render the Prophet’s words, by saying
enigmatize an enigma: for the Prophet here speaks of allegorical
language, <span id="vi.i-p11.1"></span>חידה, *chideh*, signifies the
same as “allegory,” where the words are different from the sense, that
is, where the sense is wrapped up in obscure involutions: but we know
that God sometimes spoke enigmatically when unwilling to be understood
by the impious and disbelieving. But here the obscurity of the sentence
has another meaning, namely, that the Jews should be waked up, and this
prophecy should penetrate their minds: we know their extreme hardness,
and hence if the Prophet had spoken simply and in his accustomed
language, they had not been so attentive. This therefore is the reason
why, God orders him to speak enigmatically. He now adds, <span
id="vi.i-p11.2"></span>משל ומשל, *vemeshel meshel*. We know that
*meshel* is a remarkable sentence, and is the word used by Solomon as
the title of his proverbs: <span id="vi.i-p11.3"></span>משל, *meshel*,
then, means the same as apothegm: but it is sometimes taken for
likeness: and in this place God so denounces destruction upon the
Israelites in an allegory, as to illustrate his language by a
comparison, since otherwise it would have been obscure. Be this as it
may, God so prefaced his address, that the Jews might acknowledge the
message to be no common one, but that it ought to affect them seriously.
The usual reason for speaking enigmatically does not hold good here,
namely, that the Jews were unworthy of the doctrine of salvation, since
the Prophet will very shortly explain what he had hitherto uttered in
figure and allegory. It is indeed true, that Christ spoke in parables to
the people, because the disciples alone were capable of familiar and
pure teaching. Of unbelievers, also, Isaiah says, Prophecy shall be to
you a sealed book. Hence I will speak with this people in a strange and
barbarous tongue, and they shall not proceed beyond the rudiments.
(<span id="vi.i-p11.4"></span>[Matt.
13:0](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#000), [Mark
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#000), [Luke
8:0](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#000), [Isa.
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011), [Isa.
12:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#000)<span id="vi.i-p11.4"></span>.)
But, as I have said, the obscurity of this teaching was only a
preparation, that the people should strictly attend to the subject here
set before them.

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** And say, Thus says the Lord GOD; A
great eagle with great wings, longwinged, full of feathers, which had
divers colours, came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the
cedar:

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Et dic, Sit dicit Dominator Iehovah,
aquila magna, magna alis, longa penna  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) plena  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) plumis quae illis variae  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) erant venit ad montem Libanum, et
accepit summitatem cedri.

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>**4.** He cropped off the top of his young
twigs, and carried it into a land of traffick; he set it in a city of
merchants.

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>**4.** Caput  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) surculorum ejus avellit, et transtulit
in terram mercatoris,  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) in urbe
mercatorum posuit eam.  <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160)

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span><span id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>Here the Prophet reasons from the greater to
the less: for if Nebuchadnezzar was able to subdue the whole kingdom
with ease, when as yet the Jews were untouched, how much more readily
would he overthrow them when wretched and all but ruined: for nothing
remained which was not threatened with ruin; and this is the meaning of
the Prophet. But he compares King Nebuchadnezzar to an eagle, *whom he
says was great*, and then with large or extended *wings*. There is no
doubt that *by wings, feathers, and plumes*, he means the regions and
peoples over which Nebuchadnezzar presided; for we know that the
Chaldaeans possessed the monarchy of the East. Since, therefore, so many
regions and people obeyed Nebuchadnezzar’s sway, it is not surprising
that the Prophet calls him a great eagle, with ample wings, and with
numerous feathers or plumes; for where he now says, <span
id="vi.ii-p14.2"></span>מלא הנוצה, *mela henotzeh*, full of feathers, he
will shortly say, <span id="vi.ii-p14.3"></span>רב נוצה, *reb notzeh*,
many feathers, when speaking of the king of Egypt. He says, *the wings
were of divers colors*; it is the same noun which the Prophet used in
the last chapter, when he said that the people were clad in precious
garments; for thus the Hebrews speak of Phrygian texture: hence he
compares the wings of the king of Babylon to a woven garment,
resplendent with various colors; for although Nebuchadnezzar held his
throne at only one place, yet he had seized and subdued many tributaries
on all sides. This, therefore, is the reason for this variety; — but I
cannot proceed further at present.

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have treated
us so liberally by opening the immense and inestimable treasures of thy
grace, that being mindful of our condition we may always bewail it, and
remember what we were when you desire to adopt us as sons, and how often
and how variously we have provoked thee, and rendered thy covenant vain:
Grant, also, that we may glorify thee in our shame, and perpetually
magnify thy name by our humility, until we become partakers of that
glory which your only-begotten Son has procured for us through his own
blood. — Amen.

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-First

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span><span id="vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span>WE began yesterday to explain the saying of
the Prophet, *that an eagle came to mount Lebanon, and there cropped off
the top of a cedar*, that is, the highest bough. Some interpreters seem
to me to labor in vain about the word Lebanon. They think it means
Jerusalem, and cite the passage in Zechariah where it is said, Open thy
gates, O Lebanon. (<span id="vi.iv-p3.1"></span>[Zec
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv-p3.1"></span>.)
But Zecharia does not speak of the city here, but of the temple, because
it was built of a great mass of cedar. But here Ezekiel means the land,
and names Lebanon rather than other places, not only because that
mountain was the remarkable ornament of the region on account of its
lofty cedars, and balsam and aromatic trees, but because this was
needful to complete his allegory. If he had said that an eagle had come
to a city, it would have been absurd. Hence we see that the word Lebanon
is taken for that part of Judea in which the most beautiful trees spring
up and flourish. But he says, *that it plucked off a bough, from the top
of the cedars*, because Nebuchadnezzar, who is intended by the eagle
took away King Jeconiah as we said yesterday. Hence King Jeconiah is
compared *to a very lofty bough of a cedar*, because at that time all
thought that the kingdom was superior to every danger; for the Jews
boasted that they were under God’s protection, and that the city was
impregnable: hence that occurrence was incredible. Now the Prophet adds,
*that the eagle plucked off the head* or summit of the boughs, as the
Hebrews call the tender shoots; and here the word means the tender
branches: and it means, as we shall afterwards see, the elders who were
dragged away into exile. *It took away the head into the land of the
merchant* We said that this was a mere appellative here, *chnaan*,
because it follows a little afterwards in the plural number: <span
id="vi.iv-p3.2"></span>בציר רכלימ שמו, *begnir-reklim shemo*, in the
city of merchants he set it: he says, then, *that the boughs were placed
in a city of merchants*. This name was given to Babylon, not only
because it was a celebrated mart of trade, but because it was a firm and
strong place of custody through the multitude of inhabitants, so that it
was not easy to draw captives from it. For any one could easily be
rescued from a solitude without resistance; but in a great concourse it
is not so easy to plan or attempt anything. I do not doubt, therefore,
that the Prophet means that the higher classes of the kingdom, together
with Jeconiah, were shut up in firm custody that they should not escape.
It follows —

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005)<span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>**5.** He took also of the seed of the land,
and planted it in a fruitful field; he placed *it* by great waters,
*and* set it *as* a willow-tree.

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span>**5.** Et sustulit  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) e semine terrae, et posuit illud in
agro seminis,  <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) sumpsit super
aquas multas, tanquam salicem posuit illud.

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span>**6.** And it grew, and became a spreading
vine of low stature, whose branches turned toward him, and the roots
thereof were under him: so it became a vine, and brought forth branches,
and shot forth sprigs.

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span>**6.** Et germinavit, et fuit in vitem
luxuriantem, humilem statura, ut respicerent palmites ejus ad ipsam,
 <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) et radices ejus sub ea essent:
et fuit in vitem, et produxit palmites  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) et emisit propagines.

<span id="vi.v-p10"></span> 

<span id="vi.v-p11"></span><span id="vi.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p12"></span>After Ezekiel has narrated that Jehoiacin was
carried away with his counselors and the flower of the whole people, and
was so deprived of his native country as to be without hope of return,
he now says, *that the eagle took up the seed in Judea, and placed it in
a fertile land*; for he calls it a land of seed, since it was cultivated
and produced fruit abundantly. He says, that the seed was afterwards
hidden in the soil, that it grew immediately, and became a luxuriant
vine. He says also, *that its roots were irrigated, like a willow
planted by a river’s bed.* The Prophet afterwards explains himself:
hence it is sufficient to state briefly what he means. The seed, then,
which he here means is Zedekiah, the last king. It is said *to have been
planted beside the waters*; for his condition was tolerable, since the
royal name and dignity and wealth was left to him. For although he was
tributary, the kindness with which he was treated by Nebuchadnezzar was
not to be despised, since, by the right of war, he was able to lead him
captive. together with his nephew; for Zedekiah was the uncle of
Jeconiah or Jehoiacin. But he said, *that this vine,* which sprang from
a seed or germ, *grew so that it was of low stature*; the Prophet means
by these words, as we shall afterwards see, that Zedekiah was not a
king, that he was restrained by a bridle from daring to rebel against
the king of Babylon; and hence it is added, *that its branches turned
towards the eagle, and its roots were under him;* but in the next clause
Ezekiel announces, *that it became a vine which set forth branches, and
shot forth boughs*, which he repeats again, that Zedekiah’s ingratitude
may appear the greater, who, not content with his moderate confinement,
perfidiously revolted from the king of Babylon, through reliance on the
new treaty, on which we touched yesterday. It now follows —

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>**7.** There was also another great eagle
with great wings and many feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend her
roots toward him, and shot forth her branches toward him, that he might
water it by the furrows of her plantation.

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span>**7.** Et fuit aquila una  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) magna, magnis alis, et copiosa plumis:
et ecce vitis ista collegit radices suas ad eam,  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) et palmites suos emisit ad eam, ut
irrigaret ipsam alveis  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167)
plantationis suae.  <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168)

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span><span id="vi.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p10"></span>He now detects, under a figure, the perfidy
of Zedekiah, since he very soon applied himself to the king of Egypt,
and bent his roots and branches towards him, that they might be
irrigated. I do not disagree with the opinion of those who think that
the Prophet alludes to an Egyptian custom; for we know that they dug
furrows through which water flowed through the whole region: hence the
fruitfulness of the soil; and thus Egypt is elsewhere compared to a
garden. (<span id="vi.vi-p10.1"></span>[De
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi-p10.1"></span>.)
Whatever the meaning is, the Prophet shows that Zedekiah was deceived by
a foolish confidence when he thought himself safe under the protection
of the king of Egypt; for he had said that the seed was so planted that
the vine did not rise to a great height, but spread itself under the
wings of the eagle. But Zedekiah despised the king of Babylon, thinking
that he should improve his condition by entering into a treaty with the
king of Egypt. It now follows —

<span id="vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#008)<span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p2"></span>**8.** It was planted in a good soil by
great waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear
fruit, that it might be a goodly vine.

<span id="vi.vii-p3"></span>**8.** Super agrum bonum  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) juxta aquas multas  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) ipsa plantara erat, ut produceret
folia, et proferret fructum ut esset in vitem magnificam.  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171)

<span id="vi.vii-p7"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii-p8"></span><span id="vi.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p9"></span>He exaggerates the ingratitude of Zedekiah,
because, as we have said, he had been treated humanely by the king of
Babylon; for he had been but a private man till that time: he was
elevated to a throne and to a sway over the people beyond his
expectation, and he had an avenger if any one despised him. For when he
was tributary to the king of Babylon, he would doubtless have been
assisted by him in adversity: hence his revolt was less excusable, since
he had been treated liberally beyond all anticipation. For this reason
it is said, the vine was planted in a good soil, and near many waters,
that it might put forth branches and bear fruit, so that it might be a
goodly vine. It follows —

<span id="vi.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p1"></span><span id="vi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#009)<span id="vi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p2"></span>**9.** Say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Shall it prosper? shall he not pull up the roots thereof, and cut off
the fruit thereof, that it wither? it shall wither in all the leaves of
her spring, even without great power or many people to pluck it up by
the roots thereof.

<span id="vi.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Dic, Sic dicit Dominator Iehovah, An
feliciter aget?  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) an non radices
ejus evellet? et fructum ejus succidet? et siccabit omnes surculos
germinis ipsius, ut arefiat  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) et
non brachio magno et populo multo ad tollendum  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) e radicibus suis.

<span id="vi.viii-p7"></span>**10.** Yea, behold, *being* planted, shall
it prosper? shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it?
it shall wither in the furrows where it grew.

<span id="vi.viii-p8"></span>**10.** Et ecce plantata: an prosperabitur?
 <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) an non cum attigerit  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) ipsam ventus orientalis arescendo
arescet super areas  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177)
plantationis suae scet?

<span id="vi.viii-p12"></span> 

<span id="vi.viii-p13"></span><span id="vi.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p14"></span>Here God announces that this vine could
not flourish any longer and bring forth fruit; for it had been planted
to flourish under the shadow of an eagle, and it had removed itself
away. Nothing therefore remains, than that the former eagle should
avenge the injury committed against it. This is the meaning of the
passage: hence he says, *Shall it prosper? Shall not the eagle tear up
its roots, and cut off its fruit?* Ezekiel assumes this principle*, that
the vine could not* be otherwise preserved than by the power and aid of
the eagle which had planted it; for when it passed away from that eagle
to another, the Prophet says that the end of the ungrateful vine was at
hand; *all the leaves of its branches shall wither, and so be dried up,
and that not in, a mighty branch, nor in much people*. It is certain
that Nebuchadnezzar was accompanied with a great army when he came down
upon Judea. But the Prophet means, even if Nebuchadnezzar had only
brought with him a small band, yet Zedekiah could not remain king, since
destruction awaited him through perfidy and revolt, as will afterwards
be said. The Prophet often speaks by concession, as if he had said that,
by a singe blast, Zedekiah and all the people would wither away, since
he could not remain in safety unless he drew sap from his own root; but
he had removed his root elsewhere, and so Ezekiel pronounces that he
must immediately wither away. *It was not then in the power of much
people to tear it from its own roots*; for Zedekiah had purposely cut
off his own roots, when, through his own levity, he had transferred
himself to the king of Egypt *Behold,* says he, *he had been planted;
but should he have good success?* as if he had said, it is vain for
Zedekiah to hope for safety from him, whom his own perfidy prevented
from befriending him; and therefore the comparison of an east wind is
added*: since then the east wind has struck it, will it not wither and
decay, even upon the furrows of its branches?* that is, although it has
furrows whence it may expect perpetual moisture; for Egypt was, as we
have said, artificially watered; and the Prophet describes Zedekiah’s
state just as if the king of Egypt were nourishing him by a stream of
water: *upon his beds, or furrows, will he wither when the east wind
shall strike it.* We know that the east wind destroys the fruits in that
region, and so it is often mentioned in a bad sense. It now follows —

<span id="vi.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p1"></span><span id="vi.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#011)<span id="vi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p2"></span>**11.** Moreover the word of the LORD came
unto me, saying,

<span id="vi.ix-p3"></span>**11.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me, dicendo,

<span id="vi.ix-p4"></span>**12.** Say now to the rebellious house, Know
ye not what these *things mean*? tell *them*, Behold the king of Babylon
is come to Jerusalem, and hath taken the king thereof, and the princes
thereof, and led them with him to Babylon;

<span id="vi.ix-p5"></span>**12.** Dic quaeso,  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) domui rebelli  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) an non cognoscitis quid hoc sit? dic,
Ecce venit rex Babylonis Hierosolymam, et abstulit regem ejus, et
proceres ejus, et adduxit eos ad se Babylonem.

<span id="vi.ix-p8"></span>**13.** And hath taken of the king’s seed,
and made a covenant with him, and hath taken an oath of him: he hath
also taken the mighty of the land:

<span id="vi.ix-p9"></span>**13.** Et sumpsit e semine regio, et
percussit cum eo foedus, et descendere fecit  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) ad jusjurandum: et fortes terrae
accepit,

<span id="vi.ix-p11"></span>**14.** That the kingdom might be base, that
it might not lift itself up, *but* that by keeping of his covenant it
might stand.

<span id="vi.ix-p12"></span>**14.** Ut esset regnum humile, ac ne se
afferret, ut servaret foedus suum; ut staret in ipso.

<span id="vi.ix-p13"></span>**15.** But he rebelled against him in
sending his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and
much people. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such *things*?
or shall he break the covenant, and be delivered?

<span id="vi.ix-p14"></span>**15.** Et rebellis fuit ei ad mittendum
nuntios suos in Egyptum, ut darentur equites, et populus multus. An
feliciter aget? an evadet qui hoc fecit? et qui irritum fecit foedus an
evadet?  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181)

<span id="vi.ix-p16"></span>**16.** *As* I live, saith the Lord GOD,
surely in the place *where* the king *dwelleth* that made him king,
whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, *even* with him in
the midst of Babylon he shall die.

<span id="vi.ix-p17"></span>**16.** Vivo ego, dicit Dominator Iehovah,
si non in loco regis qui regnare fecit eum, cujus sprevit jusjurandum,
et cujus irritum fecit foedus cum ipso in medio Babylonis moriatur.

<span id="vi.ix-p18"></span> 

<span id="vi.ix-p19"></span><span id="vi.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p20"></span>An explanation of the allegory is now added.
The figure being dropped, God shows what he had hitherto set forth
enigmatically. We said the object of the allegory was to induce the Jews
to apply their minds more diligently to the Prophet’s destruction; for
if he had used common and ordinary language, we know how carelessly they
were accustomed to despise all rebukes and threatenings; but a riddle,
while it held them in suspense, at the same time roused them, and so
they were prepared for receiving the instruction which now follows. God
says, therefore, *that the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem*. This
reason has induced some to think that Lebanon is metaphorically called
Jerusalem, but falsely, as we have already said. As long as the Prophet
spoke figuratively, the parts ought to be mutually fitted to each other,
as a tree and its branches have some connection with an eagle. *The king
of Babylon came to Jerusalem, and took the king away, and the elders,
and led them off to Babylon*. Although the Jews thought to be
sufficiently moved by simple narrative, yet God here reproves them,
because he saw how sluggish they were. First, he calls them a
*rebellious house*; then he asks*, Whether they know the meaning of all
this?* This is a kind of reproach by which God reminds them of their
stupidity; since that riddle was not so obscure as to prevent them from
understanding what had happened, unless they had been destitute of
reason and judgment. But the Prophet thrusts at them more pointedly, by
calling them a *rebellious house*, although at the same time he
obliquely reproves their stupidity in not immediately perceiving the
meaning of the riddle. He now adds, that the king of Babylon had taken
from the royal seed. We said that Zedekiah was the uncle of Jehoiakim:
he was placed on the throne beyond all expectation; because, if
Jehoiakim had begat sons when he was still secure, they would have been
his successors: hence it was an extraordinary advantage to Zedekiah in
being placed on the throne. But he says, *that he was so created king,
that the king of Babylon made a covenant with him, and induced him to
take an oath*. Here God shows that, humanly speaking, Zedekiah’s revolt
could not prosper; for even profane men are always persuaded that the
perfidy of him who breaks his word will not go unpunished, especially in
treaties, which are held sacred by common consent. Since, therefore, the
sacredness of treaties was so great, that they could not be violated
without weakening the bonds of society, hence the general persuasion
that the falsehood of all truce-breakers will turn out unhappily. Now,
therefore, God leaves his own cause, and takes up that of King
Nebuchadnezzar: Behold, says he, you was made king by gratuitous
liberality: a conqueror indeed imposed conditions upon thee, but still
thy state was desirable — you could rule your own people splendidly and
with moderate dignity: now, because thy covenant has been despised, and
your oath broken, you has been ungrateful to the king of Babylon, who
had bound thee to himself by his munificence: how can this perfidy
prosper? Now, therefore, we see the Prophet’s meaning, when he says
*that the king of Babylon made a treaty with King Zedekiah, and took an
oath of him*: this is added for the sake of amplifying; for although men
never enter into treaties without a mutual oath, yet Ezekiel seems to
have doubled the crime of Zedekiah, when he expresses *that an oath
intervened*. He says *that he took the strong of the land,* namely, as
hostages. There is no doubt that Nebuchadnezzar assembled this troop
around him that the Jews might be more quiet: for he knew the turbulent
character of the nation, and that the maintenance of so many was
expensive: but, as I have said, it was his plan to hold the whole
country at peace in this way. But Zedekiah rendered his own brothers and
relations liable to death, since Nebuchadnezzar might be induced, by
just anger, to slay them all. Hence Zedekiah’s revolt was the betrayal
of his brothers: for this reason the Prophet adds, *that the strong ones
of the people were led away to Babylon*; that is, those of the first
rank, who were held in honor by the people.

<span id="vi.ix-p21"></span><span id="vi.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p22"></span>He now adds, *that the kingdom might be
humbled.* Zedekiah then could not pretend error, nor turn his back, as
if he had been outwitted by the cunning and secret counsels of the king
of Babylon: for Nebuchadnezzar dealt with him openly, and proscribed the
conditions on which he wished him to reign. Since, then, the king of
Babylon showed Zedekiah openly and sincerely what he wished him to do,
that wretched man could not say that he was imposed upon, and not made
sufficiently aware of the cunning of the king of Babylon: no such excuse
was left to him. And therefore the Prophet clearly expresses that
Nebuchadnezzar imposed conditions upon Zedekiah, that *his kingdom
should be lowly, so as not to lift itself up*, but that it should keep
the agreement. This was most equitable: for when he appointed a king, he
might have imposed upon him very hard conditions, but he was content
with moderation, which was surely tolerable even among the best friends.
For he made a treaty with him, and then he wished the kingdom to be
lowly for its preservation. For it is just as if the Prophet had said,
that Nebuchadnezzar thought of nothing else than that Zedekiah might
reign in peace; and since he saw it to be useful to the king and the
whole people to be restrained within some bounds, he followed that plan.
Since, then, Nebuchadnezzar consulted the public advantage by this
method of action, Zedekiah was the more wicked in not allowing his own
safety to be consulted, since nothing was better or more desirable than
for him to remain humble, and not to raise himself up to his own
destruction, as afterwards happened. It now follows, *that he rebelled
by sending his messengers into Egypt, that they might give him horses
and much people*. These points ought to be mutually compared; that the
contrast might correspond: Nebuchadnezzar regarded nothing else but the
peace of the country, for he wished to prevent all fears and
disturbances. What, then, was Zedekiah? *a rebel.* And why? *for sending
messengers to Egypt to fetch many troops of both horse and foot* to
succor Judea against Nebuchadnezzar. After the conclusion of the war he
had done nothing hostile, for it was a part of his paternal anxiety to
give them a king of their own nation, and so to set the whole country at
rest, that there should be no occasion for tumult. Why, then, should
Zedekiah seek help from the Egyptians? Thus we see that the Prophet is
removing from him all excuses for self-defense. He now adds*, shall he
prosper? shall he who has acted thus escape?* The Prophet asks with
emphasis; because, as I have said, this persuasion was engraved on the
minds of all, that vengeance must overtake all the perfidious,
especially if they had violated their oath in treaties. The Prophet,
therefore, does not simply pronounce that Zedekiah should perish through
violating the treaty, but he rises more confidently, and inquires, as of
a thing settled and undoubted, *Shall he prosper? shall he who has
planned such a crime escape?* He now adds, *shall he who has violated a
treaty escape?* This repetition is not superfluous: he had formerly
said, *shall he who has done this escape?* he immediately repeats,
*shall he who has violated a treaty escape?* There was nothing obscure
in the first clause: but the Prophet added this, not for the sake of
perspicuity, but to give more weight. to the sentence. The conclusion
is, that it was not possible to escape God’s vengeance for such perfidy,
as we shall treat the point more at length tomorrow.

<span id="vi.ix-p23"></span><span id="vi.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p24"></span>It now follows, *As I live, says the Lord
Jehovah, in the dwelling of the king who placed him on a throne, shall
he die.* Although the Prophet had sufficiently shown that Zedekiah could
not escape the penalty of his revolt, yet God here again comes forward,
and swears by himself, or by his life, that he would punish Zedekiah.
Hence the great stupidity of the people appears, for God never acts
falsely by his own name, or brings it forward in vain, but when
necessity demands it, he swears by himself. And by his own example he
prescribes to us, that we should not rush rashly upon an oath, but be
sober in this respect. But God swears *that Zedekiah should die on the
spot, that is, at the capital of the king who put him on the throne*;
that is Babylon, where he died: and yet he did not see Babylon, because
his eyes were put out at Riblath, as we saw elsewhere. (<span
id="vi.ix-p24.1"></span>[Jer 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#007)<span
id="vi.ix-p24.1"></span>; <span id="vi.ix-p24.2"></span>[Jer
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011)<span id="vi.ix-p24.2"></span>.)
But the Prophet simply denounces the penalty, that he should die in
exile, *and in the dwelling of the king who had placed him on his
throne, and from whose covenant he had departed, and whose oath he had
despised.*

<span id="vi.x"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you show thy regard
for mutual fidelity between man and man, that we may so conduct
ourselves in every way that we may not deceive our brethren, but assist
each other with sincere affection: Grant, also, that with true consent
we may afford thee that confidence which you require, and which we are
bound to pay thee; since you desire not only to enter into covenant with
us by means of your only-be-gotten Son, but also to seal it with his
blood, until we enjoy that inheritance which you have obtained for us by
the sacrifice of his death. — Amen.

<span id="vi.xi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Second.

<span id="vi.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#017)<span id="vi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p2"></span>**17.** Neither shall Pharaoh with *his*
mighty army and great company make for him in the war, by casting up
mounts, and building forts, to cut off many persons:

<span id="vi.xii-p3"></span>**17.** Et non in exercitu magno, et in
multitudine multa faciet cum eo Pharao in praelio, fundendo aggerem, et
extruendo turrem  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) ad excidendum
animas multas.

<span id="vi.xii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.xii-p6"></span><span id="vi.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p7"></span>As Ezekiel has before pronounced that there
was no need of great forces when God wished to punish Zedekiah by means
of the king of Babylon; so he now teaches, on the other hand, how great
and powerful an army Pharaoh would collect, and yet it would profit
nothing, since Nebuchadnezzar would be victorious. Some interpreters
explain the passage otherwise, namely, that Pharaoh would not perform
his promise; for kings are accustomed to boast of their supplies when
they enter into treaties: they promise 50,000, but only supply 10,000.
They think, therefore, that these vain promises by which Zedekiah was
deceived are here reproved, since Pharaoh boasted that he would come
with very great forces, so as easily to repel the Babylonian army. But
the sense which I propose is far more suitable, namely, that whatever
Pharaoh should attempt, it would fail to assist him. Although he should
come well attended, and oppose the Chaldaeans by immense forces, *yet he
should effect nothing in battle with him*: although this may be true
equally of Zedekiah as of the king of Babylon. For Pharaoh did nothing
with King Nebuchadnezzar, since he was quickly compelled to retreat into
his own territories, and could scarcely defend his own kingdom, for he
did not succeed against Nebuchadnezzar: and he did Zedekiah no good,
since he did not assist him in his misfortunes, as he had promised. But
as far as concerns the general sense, we see that the Prophet means that
Zedekiah would be deceived although Pharaoh should faithfully perform
his promises, since he was undertaking an expedition against the will of
God, which must turn out disastrous. He adds*, when he shall throw up a
mound and build a tower*, (towers are meant, for there is a change of
number,) as is customary in besieging cities. This thought to be
referred to Nebuchadnezzar, for he began to cast up mounds and build
towers against Jerusalem when Pharaoh led away his army. Since
Nebuchadnezzar could not contend with both the Egyptians and Jews
together, he raised the siege and set out to meet Pharaoh, who, when
conquered, retreated with trembling within his own boundaries.
Nebuchadnezzar afterwards returned, and after preparing all things, he
did not desist till he had stormed the city. Now Ezekiel means this,
that Pharaoh would come to his help in vain, when Nebuchadnezzar began
to cast up his mounds and build towers against the city. It follows —

<span id="vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#018)<span id="vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p2"></span>**18.** Seeing he despised the oath by
breaking the covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand, and has done all
these *things*, he shall not escape.

<span id="vi.xiii-p3"></span>**18.** Sprevit jusjurandum ad abolendum
foedus, et ecce porrexit manum suam: et totum hoc fecit, non evadet.
 <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)

<span id="vi.xiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.xiii-p6"></span><span id="vi.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p7"></span>Ezekiel repeals again, that, even speaking,
Zedekiah could not succeed, since he violated the treaty for we
yesterday said that this persuasion is always fixed in men’s minds, that
treaties are sacred, and cannot be broken with impunity. Since,
therefore, the sacredness of treaties was always prevalent among men,
Ezekiel here pronounces that the issue would be disastrous, because
Zedekiah *despised his oath when he broke the treaty after stretching
out his hand*. He describes a gesture, as I think, customary among men —
that of stretching forth the hand when they wish to witness a covenant.
The alliance, then, between the Egyptians and the Jews is here described
by an outward gesture, because Zedekiah stretched forth his hand, and
yet had violated it in this way: but since he perfidiously revolted from
King Nebuchadnezzar, to whom he had pledged his faith*, he has done all
this, says he, therefore he shall not be liberated*. It follows —

<span id="vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p1"></span><span id="vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#019)<span id="vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p2"></span>**19.** Therefore thus says the Lord GOD;
*As* I live, surely mine oath that he hath despised, and my covenant
that he hath broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head.

<span id="vi.xiv-p3"></span>**19.** Propterea sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah, Vivo ego, si non jusjurandum meum quod sprevit, et foedus meum
quod irritum fecit, rependam  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) in
ejus caput.

<span id="vi.xiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.xiv-p6"></span><span id="vi.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p7"></span>The former sentence is confirmed. The
Prophet had spoken after the usually received manner when he said that
Zedekiah’s perfidy would not be unrevenged; but he now brings forward
God as the speaker, because, unless he appeared as an avenger of
perfidy, mankind would scarcely ever be seriously persuaded that
punishment was prepared for perjurers and truce-breakers. As I have said
that this opinion was fixed in the hearts of all, so it must be
understood that this opinion was received, and that men were fully
persuaded of it: but persuasions which are called “common”  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) vanish away; there are common thoughts
which are almost born with us, and follow nature, but they are not firm,
because the profane do not hold the principal point, that God is the
judge of the world: this sentence, therefore, is added of necessity. Now
God swears that Zedekiah should suffer punishment, because *he had
despised the oath and rendered the covenant void*. But we must notice
the epithet; for God calls the oath and the covenant *his own: he has
despised*, says he, not simply the oath, but *mine*: he has violated
*my* treaty. The reason of this language is, that God wishes fidelity
between man and man to be cultivated: and so he detests all perjury and
all frauds. Now, since there is no more sacred method of contracting a
treaty than by solemn rites, there also God shows his judgment in a
peculiar manner. In fine, we may deservedly call him the guardian of
treaties; for when heathens entered into treaties, they were accustomed
to bring forward the name of Jupiter the supreme, because they thought
he would inflict vengeance on all who violated their pledge. But God
here comes forward, not like an imaginary Jupiter, but because he wished
confidence to flourish in human society; since, unless men act sincerely
to each other, all society would be broken up. This, then, is the reason
why Ezekiel says that the treaty struck with King Nebuchadnezzar was
divine, since God would be its vindicator. Meanwhile we must remark that
this treaty was lawful and pleasing to God. (<span
id="vi.xiv-p8.2"></span>[Jer
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#017)<span id="vi.xiv-p8.2"></span>.)
And we see from <span id="vi.xiv-p8.3"></span>[Jeremiah
28](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#000)<span id="vi.xiv-p8.3"></span> and
<span id="vi.xiv-p8.4"></span>[Jeremiah
29](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#000)<span id="vi.xiv-p8.4"></span>.,
that God wished the Jews to suffer under this disgrace for a time. For
King Zedekiah, if he had truly discharged his office, was an image of
the Messiah, the first-born among the kings of the earth: Hence it was
unworthy of him to become tributary to a profane monarch and a cruel
tyrant. But since God had so imposed slavery on his own people, Zedekiah
ought to be under the yoke, as it is there said, Be you servants to King
Nebuchadnezzar and live; that is, there is no other method of obtaining
safety, unless you suffer the Chaldaeans to rule over you, and you bear
their sway calmly, since Nebuchadnezzar is God’s scourge. This covenant,
as I have said, was approved by God, otherwise he could not have been
its avenger. We know that there are three kinds of treaties. When there
has been war between two kings, if the conqueror wishes to spare his
enemy, he receives him into covenant, but imposes conditions at his own
discretion. We know that the Romans followed that custom, since it was
too difficult for them to hold in subjection all whom they had subdued,
and especially at the beginning; and thus they entered into treaties
with many tribes under many circumstances. Another sort of agreement is,
that between either kings or people when at variance with each other;
but before they actually engage, they make a truce with each other, and
so remove the occasion of the war — this is another kind. Lastly, those
who never were enemies enter into an alliance; and such was the treaty
between Zedekiah and the king of Egypt. For they wished to be cautious,
and to anticipate the danger which he feared from the Chaldaeans; and
hence he entered into the agreement,. Thus the Israelites were formerly
joined with the Syrians, and afterwards with the Assyrians. So we saw
that the Jews committed adultery when they ran about first to Egypt,
then to Assyria, and then to Chaldaea. But this treaty, of which mention
is now made, was necessary; for Zedekiah could not escape from embracing
the conditions imposed on him by King Nebuchadnezzar. For this reason
God pronounces himself the avenger of perfidy.

<span id="vi.xiv-p9"></span>It is now asked, Whether we may never break
our word when any one has been violently attacked, and promised what was
otherwise unjust? The reply is at hand, that God’s name is more precious
than all human advantages. If any one, therefore, object that he was
deceived, and oppressed by unjust conditions, still God’s name must
prevail. Hence we must always weigh what is due to the name of God; and
hence we shall readily conclude that those can never be excused who
violate their engagements on the pretext of being violently compelled,
or induced by fraud, or not allowed the liberty of considering whether
their promise was according to equity. For this reason, also, it is said
in the 15th Psalm, (<span id="vi.xiv-p9.1"></span>[Ps
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004)<span id="vi.xiv-p9.1"></span>,)
that the sons of God swear and suffer loss, because when God’s, name has
been interposed, no utility ought to be of such importance as to
outweigh the oath that has been taken. And so not without reason God now
pronounces that he would avenge the perjury which Zedekiah had
committed, since, in truth, we cannot depart from promises which have
been sanctioned by an oath in God’s name, without seeming to slight the
Almighty himself. Meanwhile, it is certain that there was another reason
why God punished the Jews; but here, as I have previously shown, the
Prophet mentions what was more familiar to men. The first cause of the
destruction of the city and of the whole kingdom, was idolatry, as we
saw before, and then the many crimes of the people were added. For from
the period of the corruption of true religion, the pollution of many
vices increased through the city and the whole land. Hence it happened
that God destined his people to destruction; hence also King Zedekiah
was deprived of sight. For, as the sacred history testifies, God wished
to destroy the whole people: for this reason Zedekiah fell, and provoked
the Chaldaeans against him. We see, therefore, that there is a continued
series of causes in the eternal providence of God, but not as the Stoics
supposed; for they concocted their fate from complex windings or
implicit causes, without any will of Deity in that confusion. But God,
as I have said, has different reasons why he does one thing or another.
Some causes are remote and incomprehensible to us, and others manifest
to us: so the proximate cause of the destruction of the people was the
revolt of Zedekiah from King Nebuchadnezzar; but there was another more
important reason, namely, that the people deserved to perish. Hence
Zedekiah was rendered blind by the just judgment of God, since he passed
over perfidiously to the king of Egypt, and so armed himself against
King Nebuchadnezzar. But we must hold that the reason universally
manifest is here reviewed. It follows —

<span id="vi.xv"></span>

<span id="vi.xv-p1"></span><span id="vi.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#020)<span id="vi.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xv-p2"></span>**20.** And I will spread my net upon him,
and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and
will plead with him there for his trespass that he hath trespassed
against me.

<span id="vi.xv-p3"></span>**20.** Et extendam  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) super ipsum rete meum, et capietur in
plagis meis,  <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) et venire faciam
ipsum Babylonem, et judicabo  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188)
cum eo illic de transgressione  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189)
qua praevaricatus est contra me.

<span id="vi.xv-p8"></span> 

<span id="vi.xv-p9"></span><span id="vi.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xv-p10"></span>Here he points out the kind of punishment
which he was about to inflict on King Zedekiah. He had said generally
that his perfidy should fall upon his own head, but he now proceeds
further, namely, that Zedekiah should be a captive. For God might
chastise him by other means, but the prophecy was thereby confirmed,
since the Prophet had clearly threatened Zedekiah as we see. But he
speaks in the person of God that his language may have more weight. *I
will spread my net,* says God*, and he shall be taken in my snares.* The
passage is metaphorical, but it best explains what often occurs in
Scripture, namely, that while the impious take first one course and then
another, they are agents of God who governs them by his own secret
virtue, and directs them wherever he wishes. As, therefore, men false up
all things confusedly, and are, as we see, driven about hither and
thither by their lusts, and disturb heaven and earth; yet God moderates
their attacks by his secret providence. We gather this from the
Prophet’s words when he calls the army of the king of Babylon, and his
plans, and the apparatus of war, *God’s net and snares.* Although
Nebuchadnezzar was impelled by his own ambition and avarice, and did not
suppose himself under the divine sway, yet we see what the Spirit
pronounces. And we must diligently observe this doctrine, because, if we
repose on the paternal solicitude of God, although armies surround us on
all sides, yet we may confide securely, and await the end with quiet and
tranquil minds, since men can do nothing without God. But when we
provoke God’s wrath against us, we must bear in mind, that while men
have their reasons for being hostile to us, yet God governs them, or
that they are his nets or snares, as the Prophet here says.

<span id="vi.xv-p11"></span>*I will bring him,* says he*, to Babylon,
and there will I dispute with him in judgment, according to the
prevarication by which he has prevaricated*. Not only did God dispute
with Zedekiah there, but he inflicted a heavy and formidable judgment
upon him in Riblah, when he saw his own sons put to death first, and
then his own eyes were put out, and then he was bound by chains. But he
almost pined away in his captivity, and was treated shamefully even unto
death; for this reason God says that he would judge him at Babylon: and
yet there will be nothing out of place if we comprehend Riblah also. For
although Zedekiah had been partially punished before he entered Babylon,
yet God there inflicted his own sentence, after he was dragged from his
country and led into exile. He was buried indeed not without honor, as
we saw in Jeremiah, (<span id="vi.xv-p11.1"></span>[Jer
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005)<span id="vi.xv-p11.1"></span>,)
for they bewailed him at his burial — Alas, my brother! alas, O master!
as the Prophet says: yet till his death he was like the vilest prisoner,
for he pined away in his chains, and was meanly clothed, when the king
treated Coniah nobly and splendidly: hence Zedekiah’s captivity was the
seal of this prophecy for Ezekiel could not have pronounced this
sentence, unless he had been the organ of the Holy Spirit. It follows —

<span id="vi.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#021)<span id="vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p2"></span>**21.** And all his fugitives with all his
bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered
toward all winds: and ye shall know that I the LORD have spoken *it*

<span id="vi.xvi-p3"></span>**21.** Et omnes profugi ejus in omnibus
copius ejus in gladio cadent: et qui residui erunt ad omnem ventum
dispergentur: et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah loquutus sim.

<span id="vi.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xvi-p5"></span><span id="vi.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet now descends to the whole
people, especially to the soldiers, whom Zedekiah himself thought would
be fit guardians of the city. He says, then, *thus shall all his forces
be dissipated, so that they shall be dispersed hither and thither and
all by the sword*. By these words he means the slaughter of the army,
since as long as soldiers stand in their own ranks they sustain and
repel a hostile attack; but when they are dispersed, every one is
subject to the enemy, and hence a promiscuous slaughter arises. He says,
therefore, that Zedekiah’s soldiers *would be fugitives amidst all their
bands:* that is, although he had a large army, yet all his forces should
be dispersed, and while each should consult his own advantage, he should
fall into the enemy’s hands: thus, *all shall fall by the sword; then
those who remain shall be dispersed towards every wind.* We saw the same
thing before, for when the Prophet had declared that all the people
should suffer by the sword, he added, at the same time, that all the
survivors should be fugitives, just as if any one should throw out
refuse or hair which the wind would blow hither and thither. Hence he
repeats the same now, namely, that the whole people would be like a torn
body, since if they escaped the sword, yet they would find no place of
rest. Hence while a few would flee to Egypt, some to the Moabites, and
others to the neighboring nations, the whole body of the people, would
be dissipated. He adds, *and you shall know that I Jehovah have spoken*.
We have explained the meaning of this, and why the Prophet repeats it so
often, namely, because the Jews were untractable and derided all God’s
threats: the Prophet teaches that they should really feel that he had
spoken, and this is the wisdom of fools, as the common proverb expresses
it. For because they do not obey any counsels, nor admit any
admonitions, and receive no teaching, they are instructed only by the
event itself. It follows —

<span id="vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022)<span id="vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p2"></span>**22.** Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will
also take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set *it*; I
will crop off from the top of his young twigs a tender one, and will
plant *it* upon an high mountain and eminent:

<span id="vi.xvii-p3"></span>**22.** Sic dicit Dominator Iehovah, Et
assumam  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) e summitate cedri
excelsae,  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) et ponam e capite
propaginum ejus, tenerum evellam, et plantabo ego super montem excelsum
et elevatum.

<span id="vi.xvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.xvii-p7"></span><span id="vi.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p8"></span>Here the Prophet begins to treat of the
restoration of the nation and kingdom. Thus this prophecy without doubt
refers to Christ, because although in some sense God had pity on the
people when they enjoyed the liberty of returning under Cyrus and
Darius, yet what is here written was never fully exhibited except under
Christ. It is indeed true, as I have elsewhere expressed, that when the
prophets promise restoration to the Church, that they do not restrict
their discourse to the person of Christ, but begin with the return of
the people for that was the beginning of the full and solid liberty
which was at length made manifest in Christ. And Christian writers have
erred in urging so precisely that anything said about the restitution of
the Church must be understood of the person of Christ, and thus they
make themselves ridiculous to the Jews. But, as it has been said
already, as often as the Prophets hold out the hope of liberty to the
elect and the faithful, they embrace the whole of the time from the
return of the people, or from the end of their exile to the end of the
kingdom of Christ. When, therefore, the reign of Christ is treated, we
must date its commencement from the period of the building of the temple
after the people’s return from their seventy years captivity: and then
we must take its boundary, not at the ascension of Christ, nor yet in
the first or second centuries, but through the whole progress of his
kingdom, until he shall appear at the last day. Now let us come to the
Prophet’s words, *thus says the Lord Jehovah, I will take from the top
of the lofty (*or *tall) cedar*. God pursues the allegory which we saw:
for as he said that the top was torn off, or that the highest branch was
plucked from the cedar of Lebanon, so he now says, *that he would take
from the top of the cedar, and after he had plucked* or *wrenched* *off
a bough, and planted it*, such would be the increase, that all the trees
would acknowledge that to be a wonderful work. Now this restoration is
described to us variously, because after God had spoken of a lofty
bough, he descends to a low and abject one; he then pronounces that such
should be the beginning of the new kingdom, that he would make the dry
tree to bud and humble the lofty one. These things at first sight seem
to be opposite to each other, but they agree very well, because God took
from the top of a lofty cedar when he planted a new king. For Christ, as
respects God’s eternal decree, was always more excellent than heaven and
earth; at the same time God afterwards says that he was humble, as he
certainly was. But let us follow up the words, *I will take,* says he*,
from the top of a lofty cedar, and I will set it: from the top of its
twigs I will pluck a tender one, and I will plant it upon a lofty and
elevated mountain*. Here, as I have said, he speaks of a tall and lofty
cedar, and then he speaks of a high branch, but he adds afterwards, *I
will pluck a tender one from it*, by which he means that the twig which
he should pluck and plant would be without strength. Here, therefore, is
shown the contemptible beginning of the reign of Christ, as the Prophet
afterwards more clearly explains himself.

<span id="vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#023)<span id="vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p2"></span>**23.** In the mountain of the height of
Israel will I plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit,
and be a goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing;
in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.

<span id="vi.xviii-p3"></span>**23.** In monte excelso Israel plantabo
illud, et tollet ramum, et faciet fructum, et erit in cedrum elegantem:
 <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) et habitabit sub eo  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) omnis avis  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) omne pennatum  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) in umbra surculorum  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) ejus habitabit.

<span id="vi.xviii-p9"></span> 

<span id="vi.xviii-p10"></span><span id="vi.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p11"></span>When God announces *that the twig which
he will plant shall become a lofty cedar,* he shows by lofty words that
the increase of Christ’s kingdom shall be so wonderful, that it shall
surpass the common rule of nature; which indeed was shadowed forth in
the person of Zerubbabel, who was chosen to bring back the people from
their sad and disgraceful captivity. (<span
id="vi.xviii-p11.1"></span>[Ezr
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#002)<span id="vi.xviii-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.xviii-p11.2"></span>[Hag
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xviii-p11.2"></span>.) For it does not naturally happen that a
twig increases in a short time to a lofty cedar, for we know how slowly
cedars grow, and hence we see the Spirit’s intention in saying that a
tree should spring from a very small twig. And this prophecy answers to
one of Isaiah’s, where he says, (<span id="vi.xviii-p11.3"></span>[Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xviii-p11.3"></span>,) A branch shall spring from the root of
Jesse: for the house of Jesse was cut off, and he names the house of an
obscure and private man as if the remembrance of David were utterly
lost. The house of Jesse then was cut off like a tree: that twig, says
he, shall spring from its root. Now the Prophet signifies the same
thing, and almost under the same similitude. I leave the rest for the
next lecture.

<span id="vi.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have deigned
to enter into a perpetual and inviolable covenant with us which you have
sanctioned by the blood of your only-begotten Son, that we may
faithfully stand to it: and may we be so obedient to thee unto the end,
that we may experience thee a propitious Father to us, until we enjoy
that eternal inheritance which you have prepared for us in heaven,
through the same Christ our Lord.-Amen.

<span id="vi.xx"></span>

<span id="vi.xx-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Third.

<span id="vi.xx-p2"></span>In the last lecture we began to explain that
passage of the Prophet in which God. promises that he would take from
the boughs of the lofty cedar a tender branch, which should soon grow
into a tall tree. We said that the restoration of the people was the
foretaste of this grace, since God already showed that he cared for his
people whom he seemed utterly to reject when he suffered them to be
dragged into exile. We said also, that although Zerubbabel was a captive
and an exile, yet that he was the twig plucked from the tall tree, as he
was of the royal stock whence Christ would at length spring forth. But
at the same time we added that this prophet was not complete until the
kingdom of Christ of which it was the beginning, when he was manifest in
the flesh, and thence it made daily progress until the end of the world.
Thus then we see that the twig was plucked from the cedar*, and from a
tall or lofty one, and it was planted upon a mountain.* The mountain on
which the branch was to be planted was called sublime and lofty, and
there is no doubt that God meant Mount Zion: it is indeed a small hill,
but Isaiah shows us the reason why it was called lofty, because it
excelled in dignity and eminence all the heights of the world. (<span
id="vi.xx-p2.1"></span>[Isa. 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="vi.xx-p2.1"></span>.) It
is there said, I will make Mount Zion conspicuous above all lofty
mountains: that eminence indeed was not perceptible by the eye, but the
Prophet at the same time declares what he means, since a law should go
forth from Zion and God’s word from Jerusalem. We see, therefore, that
Mount Zion, although low among hills, was eminent and conspicuous among
the highest mountains, since God’s glory shone forth from it, and it was
rendered conspicuous to even the ends of the earth. Hence the Prophet
repeats a second time, *On a, lofty mountain of Israel will I plant it,*
namely, the twig, and *it shall raise or bear a bough, and produce
fruit, and it shall be a magnificent* or elegant *cedar*, as we said,
*and every bird,* that is, all birds, *shall dwell under it, every
winged thing,* or flying thing, *shall dwell under the shadow of its
branches* or boughs. The repetition shows that something rare is here
denoted, and what would scarcely be comprehended in an ordinary sense,
when God speaks of a high and elevated mountain. So that it confirms
what we said, that this place thought to be understood of Mount Zion,
which was supernaturally elevated when Christ’s scepter went forth from
it, by which he reduced the whole world under his yoke. He now adds,
*that it should be a magnificent cedar, so that the birds of the air
should nestle in it and rest under its shadow*. This simile is used by
Daniel when treating of the sway of Nebuchadnezzar, (<span
id="vi.xx-p2.2"></span>[Dan. 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#009),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017)<span id="vi.xx-p2.2"></span>,) it
is common to all kingdoms to protect men under their shadow, as birds
find their dwelling-place only in trees, and repair and collect
themselves there. But meanwhile the Prophet shortly states that the
kingdom of which he is would be for the common safety and advantage of
the whole people. For as kings usually think the human race created for
their sakes, they are taken up with their own private reasoning, and do
not consult the interests of the wretched people whom they are divinely
appointed to cherish under their wings. The Prophet therefore shows that
the kingdom which God had determined to set up in his chosen people
would be useful to all, when he says, under its shadow there would be
safety for all birds. It now follows —

<span id="vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#024)<span id="vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p2"></span>**24.** And all the trees of the field shall
know that I the LORD have brought down the high tree, have exalted the
low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to
flourish: I the LORD have spoken and have done *it*

<span id="vi.xxi-p3"></span>**24.** Et cognoscent omnes arbores agri,
quod ego Iehovah, qui humilio arborem excelsam, et extollo in sublime
arborem humilem: arefacio arborem viridem, et fructuosam reddo arborem
aridam: ego Iehovah loquutus sum, et feci.  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197)

<span id="vi.xxi-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxi-p6"></span><span id="vi.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p7"></span>In this verse the Prophet signifies that
God’s work would be memorable. For when he says that all trees should
feel themselves in God’s hand and power, to raise what was fallen, and
to cast down and to prostrate what was elevated, he doubtless expresses
no common action. By trees he means all the kings of the earth, and all
possessed of any dignity. For he follows up his own metaphor: as he
called the kingdom of Christ a tree or cedar which grew from a small
twig, so he now speaks metaphorically of kings when he says, *that all
should take notice; for they shall know that Jehovah brings down the
high tree*. Ezekiel may here seem to be inconsistent with himself, as I
have already noticed, because God said that he would take from a lofty
cedar a little twig, which he wished to plant: but he now says that God
would raise what was low and abject. But we have dissipated this
absurdity, because, from the beginning Christ was in the glory of his
Father, and thus, as Micah says, his beginning was from eternity. (<span
id="vi.xxi-p7.1"></span>[Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span
id="vi.xxi-p7.1"></span>.) This excellency of Christ, therefore, is
noticed, because, from the time when God erected David’s throne, he at
the same time gave a visible sign of the more excellent kingdom which
was then secretly hoped for. For this reason Christ was taken from his
lofty place, and since he not only put on the form of a slave, but
emptied himself even unto death, (<span id="vi.xxi-p7.2"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="vi.xxi-p7.2"></span>,) it
is not surprising that the Prophet should say, *like a tree cast down.*
Although, as I have remarked, this sentence is not to be restricted to
the person of Christ, but thought to be adapted to his kingdom; that is,
to his manner and way of governing: since we know, and it has been
lately stated, that the gospel is like a scepter, by which Christ
subdues all people, and rules them for himself. Now if we reflect on
what the preaching of the gospel was, we shall see, as in a glass, the
Prophet’s meaning here, that the low tree was elevated, since no one
would have thought, that from such slender beginnings the increase which
God afterwards bestowed on it could arise. It follows, then, that the
height was wonderful, since it could not be comprehended by the human
senses.

<span id="vi.xxi-p8"></span>Meanwhile he adds, *I am he who humbles the
lofty tree,* which is not only understood of the Jews, but, in my
judgment, embraces all the empires and principalities of the world. God,
therefore, humbles lofty trees, because, whatever opposes itself to
Christ’s kingdom, must necessarily fall; and this is described more at
length in Daniel. (<span id="vi.xxi-p8.1"></span>[Da
4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#000)<span id="vi.xxi-p8.1"></span>.) For
although all the empires of the world are founded in Christ, and
sustained by his virtue, yet, since earthly kings rise up and desire to
lay Christ prostrate, their pride is the reason why Christ’s empire
causes their ruin. This contrast, then, must be noticed, that God sets
up low trees, or takes them away, and casts down lofty ones, since we
are here taught to hope better of the reign of Christ than we can
estimate by our senses; since, if we cast our eyes round us, many things
meet us which diminish and weaken our hope. For what is the outward
appearance of Christ’s kingdom? In truth we shall feel nothing but
despair if we judge of Christ’s kingdom by the present state of affairs.
But when we see how the gospel creeps along the ground, this passage
should come to our minds, that God will raise up the tree that is abject
and contemptible. At the same time, let us learn, that the changes which
happen and are perceived in the world are to be imputed to the pride of
those who are blinded by their own boasting; for kings, as we have said,
forget that they are men, and so rebel against God: hence they must of
necessity fall. If this is not fulfilled immediately, let us learn
patiently to await the effect of this prophecy. Whatever happens, God
has so established the kingdom of Christ alone, that it shall last as
long as the sun and moon, but the other empires of the world shall
vanish away with their own splendor, and their loftiness shall fall
although at present they overtop the clouds. *I,* says *Jehovah, have
spoken, and I will do it*. God here recalls the minds of the faithful to
his power, because, from the time the people were dispersed — I speak of
the final overthrow of the city and temple — there was no hope of
restoration. Since, then, it was difficult to persuade men of what God
now pronounces, he brings pointedly forward his own prowess, in order
that men, by holding in check their carnal senses, should raise
themselves above the world, and wait for the inestimable prowess of God
which does not yet appear to them. It now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc23005.htm#fr_154) <span
id="vi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span> That is, “bring forward a remarkable
sentence.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc23005.htm#fr_155) <span
id="vi.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span> Or, “wings” — there is a change of number. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc23005.htm#fr_156) <span
id="vi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span> Or, “thick with,” “plentiful in.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc23005.htm#fr_157) <span
id="vi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span> The number, though singular, is taken for
plural, that is, “of divers colors.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc23005.htm#fr_158) <span
id="vi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span> Or, “the top.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc23005.htm#fr_159) <span
id="vi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span> The word <span
id="vi.ii-p10.1"></span>כנען, *cengnen*, (or, chnaan,) is not a proper
name, but is taken appellatively. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc23005.htm#fr_160) <span
id="vi.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span> Or, “that top.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc23005.htm#fr_161) <span
id="vi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span> “He took.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc23005.htm#fr_162) <span
id="vi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span> That is, “a fertile or rich field.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc23005.htm#fr_163) <span
id="vi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span> “The eagle.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc23005.htm#fr_164) <span
id="vi.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span> Or, “twigs.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc23005.htm#fr_165) <span
id="vi.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span> That is, “another eagle.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc23005.htm#fr_166) <span
id="vi.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span> That is, “applied.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc23005.htm#fr_167) <span
id="vi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span> Or, “beds, or rows or furrows,” <span
id="vi.vi-p6.1"></span>ערגות, *gnergoth*, signifies properly “furrows.”
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc23005.htm#fr_168) <span
id="vi.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span> Or, “in its plantation,” to make the sense
clearer. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc23005.htm#fr_169) <span
id="vi.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p4"></span> That is, “in a good soil.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc23005.htm#fr_170) <span
id="vi.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p5"></span> Or, “copious.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc23005.htm#fr_171) <span
id="vi.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p6"></span> Or it is usually rendered, “others have a
beautiful vine:” <span id="vi.vii-p6.1"></span>אדר, *ader*, signifies
properly to strengthen: hence it may be translated a strong vine; but
here it means beautiful, elegant, or superb. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc23005.htm#fr_172) <span
id="vi.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p4"></span> Or, as they commonly say, “shall it
prosper?” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc23005.htm#fr_173) <span
id="vi.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p5"></span> Or, “grow dry.” — Calvin

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc23005.htm#fr_174) <span
id="vi.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p6"></span> It is a noun put in the place of an
infinitive, “for taking it away,” or” for its being taken away.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc23005.htm#fr_175) <span
id="vi.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p9"></span> That is, “shall it do prosperously or
happily?” or, “shall it have good success?” for prosperari is not a
sufficiently classical word, unless derived from prosperare, used by
Horace, and so is passive. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc23005.htm#fr_176) <span
id="vi.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p10"></span> Or, “shall have struck or touched,” for
it signifies either. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc23005.htm#fr_177) <span
id="vi.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p11"></span> Or, “furrows.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc23005.htm#fr_178) <span
id="vi.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p6"></span> “Say now.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc23005.htm#fr_179) <span
id="vi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p7"></span> Or, “bitter.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc23005.htm#fr_180) <span
id="vi.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p10"></span> Lead him to take.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc23005.htm#fr_181) <span
id="vi.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p15"></span> “The copula is here redundant, or is taken
for a note of interrogation.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc23005.htm#fr_182) <span
id="vi.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p4"></span> Or, “turrim.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc23005.htm#fr_183) <span
id="vi.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p4"></span> Or, “be liberated.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc23005.htm#fr_184) <span
id="vi.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p4"></span> Or, “I will throw it back.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc23005.htm#fr_185) <span
id="vi.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p8"></span> <span id="vi.xiv-p8.1"></span>κοίνας
ἐννοίας. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc23005.htm#fr_186) <span
id="vi.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xv-p4"></span> Or, “I will spread.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc23005.htm#fr_187) <span
id="vi.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xv-p5"></span> Some translate “drag-net,” but erroneously,
for the word is derived from hunting. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc23005.htm#fr_188) <span
id="vi.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xv-p6"></span> Or, “plead in a trial.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc23005.htm#fr_189) <span
id="vi.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xv-p7"></span> Or, “prevarication.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc23005.htm#fr_190) <span
id="vi.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p4"></span> “The copula is redundant.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc23005.htm#fr_191) <span
id="vi.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p5"></span> Or, “of a tall.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc23005.htm#fr_192) <span
id="vi.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p4"></span> Or, “magnificent;” it is the same word of
which we spoke yesterday. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc23005.htm#fr_193) <span
id="vi.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p5"></span> Under that branch or cedar.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc23005.htm#fr_194) <span
id="vi.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p6"></span> That is, “birds of all kinds.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc23005.htm#fr_195) <span
id="vi.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p7"></span> Or, “flying thing.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc23005.htm#fr_196) <span
id="vi.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p8"></span> Or, “boughs.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc23005.htm#fr_197) <span
id="vi.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p4"></span> Or, “I will do it.” — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](cc23006)
