[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssm11)  [Next](ssm13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

### CHAPTER IX

### RELIGION IN EGYPT AND INDIA

THE EGYPTIAN PANTHEON.--Many of our religious conceptions today are
strong reflections of the old Egyptian. One might say indeed that our
present day religion came to us from Egypt via the Jews. For that reason
I have decided to give in this book an Egyptian Pantheon, which I have
made up from the Egyptian Book of the Dead.

In many cases, it will be seen that the symbol of a certain belief or
conception is represented by more than one god shown in the Pantheon.
Under different guises and different names they, however, symbolize but
a single conception. This comes from the scrambling of two sets of
symbols when Upper and Lower Egypt were joined and became one kingdom.

I am giving 24 figures placing them 6 on a page for easy reference.
There are many others which I have not included; these are the principal
ones only. I can only give an outline description, space will not permit
of more. If more data is required about them, it will be found in many
books written about Egypt.

Amen was the great god at Thebes, and was ad

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

 

<span id="img_25300"></span>

[![](tn/25300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25300.jpg)

 

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

dressed as the "King of the gods." The Latinized form of the name is
Ammon. The Romans identified him with Jupiter. The Greeks called him
Zeus. He is also called "the hidden god." Before the 18th Dynasty he was
worshipped at Thebes as *Amen* simply; but was afterwards merged into
*Amen Ra*: "the hidden Sun." His color was a light blue.

Kneph was called "the moulder." He was known by the Greeks as Knonphis.
Kneph is one of the oldest of the Egyptian gods and was especially
worshipped in Nubia and Philae. His headdress is a ram's head surmounted
with a solar disk and uraeus. Kneph is spoken of as "the soul of the
Universe" and "The Creator." His color was bright green. Kneph's female
consort was Sati.

Sati was the female consort of Kneph, and was looked upon as the
Egyptian Juno. Her principal seat of worship was Elephantine, and
throughout Nubia and Ethiopia. Her headdress was the Crown of Upper
Egypt with a pair of cow's horns extending from it. Sati's color was a
warm red human flesh color. I think that there can be no question but
what Kneph and Sati were intended to symbolize the two principles of the
Creator: male and female.

Khem was one of the deified attributes of the Creator. His special seat
of worship was Chemmo (Panopolis). He was worshipped at Thebes and to
some extent throughout Egypt. His headdress consisted of two straight
feathers. He was generally colored blue.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

"*Ptah the Opener*" was the oldest of the Egyptian gods. His principal
seat of worship was at Memphis. Ptah was the symbol of the Creative
power of the Deity. The Egyptians called him "the divine artificer." One
of his symbols was the two-sided square. <span id="img_25500"></span>
![](img/25500.jpg) He had many titles; one was: "The Father of
beginnings." The Greeks considered Ptah the same as their Vulcan His
name, peculiar to Memphis, was Ptah-Sokar-Osiris. The regular Egyptian
name, however, was Ptah-Sekar-Usar. His color was blue. Ptah was without
doubt the symbol of the Four Great Primary Forces--The Sacred Four.

Neith was the Egyptian Minerva, and was the goddess of the lower
heavens. She is generally pictured holding up the heavens on her head.
Neith was the special goddess at Sais. A corresponding symbol--a god
upholding the heavens on his head-is found in the Maya of Yucatan. His
color was blue. Neith was the symbol of The Four Great Pillars that
upheld the Universe--The Sacred Four.

Maut called "the Mother" was the consort of Amen Ra at Thebes, and in
this capacity represented the Mother of all: thus in Amen Ra and Maut we
find another symbolization of the dual principle of the Creator. Maut
was especially worshipped at Thebes in connection with Amen and at Chons
with Amen Ra. She was also honored throughout Nubia and Ethiopia. Her
color was warm, flesh colored red.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

 

<span id="img_25600"></span>

[![](tn/25600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25600.jpg)

 

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

Ra was the name of the Sun as the monotheistic symbol of The
Creator--monotheistic or collective. In the "Litany of Ra" he is called
"the Supreme Power," "the only one," et cetera. To the initiated, he
symbolized the power of the Deity; but to the populace he was stated to
be a created god, the Son of Ptah and Neith. More errors have been made
about this symbol by historians than any other symbol used by the
ancients. His color was red.

Khepra. Although this symbol is found in the Egyptian Pantheon, it did
not originate in Egypt but in the Motherland and was brought to Upper
Egypt by the Nagas from the Motherland via Burma and India. The symbol
is the Scarab beetle, which is placed over the head of a human figure in
the Egyptian symbol. The Scarab symbolizes creative energy.

From the Papyrus Ani., King's Companion to Seti II: "Among the
Egyptians, the Scarabeaus Beetle is no god, but one of the emblems of
the Creator, because it rolls a ball of mud between its feet and sets
therein its eggs to hatch. As the Creator rolls the world around, and
causes it to produce life."

The foregoing passage is one that should be especially studied by
students of the ancient past: for it shows us that the Egyptians up to
the time of Seti 2nd understood the ancients' sciences and the workings
of the Great Cosmic Forces, both of which are unknown to the scientists
of today.

Before our sciences can advance to any perceptible

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

degree the present grotesque myths, the orthodox scientific teachings,
must be abandoned and a study of the Four Great Primeval Forces made. On
them the true sciences must be built up--sciences which teach us what
life is and how it originates, the workings of the Four Great Forces
throughout the Universe, with their origin, et cetera.

The vignette shows an engraving which I found in a very ancient Maya
carving in India. It is thousands of years older than the first
occupation of Egypt by man. The engraving is symbolical, as it shows the
Creator symbolized by a Scarab, which is placed within rays of glory and
rests on the symbol of Mu. Kneeling in adoration on either side of the
rays is first man shown by his symbol Kėė the deer.

<span id="img_25800"></span> ![](img/25800.jpg)

This vignette is taken from the Egyptian sacred book, the Book of the
Dead. It symbolizes man in adoration of the Scarab Beetle as the symbol
of the Creator. The Egyptian god Khepra undoubtedly comes out of the
Nagas--Kėė

Atum or Turn was the god of the setting Sun: otherwise Amenti--the Sun
below the horizon.

Shu was the firstborn of Ra and Hathor and brother of Tefnut. Shu was
looked upon as a symbol of the Celestial Forces. His color was generally
black.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

 

<span id="img_25900"></span>

[![](tn/25900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25900.jpg)

 

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

Mentu was one of the deified attributes of the Sun and often bears the
name Mentu-Ra. He was merely a phase of Ra who with Atum symbolized the
rising and the setting Sun. Mentu was the special protector of Egypt.

Osiris was one of the oldest of the Egyptian gods. Later in this chapter
I shall give the history of Osiris and show who he was. In the text of
the Book of the Dead it is stated that he was the son of Seb and Nut.

Hathor was simply another name for Isis and is represented with the
attributes of Isis. She was sometimes called Isis Hathor. Hathor
personified Nature with all that was true and beautiful in it--the
female principle of the Creator.

Isis is the goddess of the triad--Osiris, Isis and Horus. In the triad
she was the wife of Osiris.

Horus was the son of Osiris and Isis and symbolized the Sun.

Seb was the father of Osiris and Isis and was called "the father of
gods." Tefnut was his consort. In Seb and Tefnut again we find the dual
principles of the Creator symbolized.

Khons was worshipped at Thebes, and, with Amen and Maut, formed the
Theban triad. Khons symbolized the moon; he wears the disk and crescent
moon.

Thoth was the god of writing, learning, and medicine. It was he who
composed the early and most important portions of the Book of the Dead.
Thoth is *supposed* to be the Egyptian Hermes.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

 

<span id="img_26100"></span>

[![](tn/26100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26100.jpg)

 

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

Nephthys was the sister of Isis and Osiris and consort of Set.

Anubis was the god of embalming and embalmed his father Osiris.

Tefnut was the goddess of the rain and dew. She held a conspicuous place
among the contemporary deities of Thebes.

Ma or Maat was the goddess of truth. She represents the truth and
justice of the Supreme God.

Nu or Nut. Nut is the feminine form of Nu. Nu was the father, Nut the
mother--the life givers.

Bast was the wife of Ptah and with their son Tum or Atum formed the
great triad of Memphis.

Set was the son of Nut and brother of Osiris. According to the myth he
murdered Osiris.

Anuka was the third member of the triad of Thebaid, composed of Khnum
(Kneph), Sati and Anuka.

OSIRIS.--Osiris was one of the oldest of the Egyptian gods. His worship
was universal throughout Egypt at all times. Osiris was the
representative of all that was good.

The myths in Egypt about Osiris are bewildering. They claim that Osiris
was once the monarch of Upper and Lower Egypt. It is claimed that Osiris
was buried at Philae--other towns claim his remains. According to all
these myths, Osiris must have lived since the union of Upper and Lower
Egypt was accomplished under Menes about 5,000 B. C.

Against this we find that Thoth, the founder of the \[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

 

<span id="img_26300"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;Osiris&lt;/I&gt;.](tn/26300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26300.jpg)  
*Osiris*.  

 

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

Lower Egyptians taught at Sais the Osirian Religion and this was 14,000
B. C. There were no kings of Egypt for an immensely long period after
Thoth's time. Egypt was a sub-colony of the Motherland under direct
control of the colonial empire--Atlantis.

Now let us see who Osiris actually was and the time when he lived. In
two Himalayan monasteries--one in India, the other in Tibet--there are
two Naacal tablets belonging to the Sacred Inspired Writings of the
Motherland: they are identically the same, word for word, were copied
from the originals in the Motherland and brought to the continent of
Asia by Naacal missionaries. They belong to the historical section of
the Sacred Books. They relate:

"Osiris, when entering manhood, left the home of his birth, Atlantis,
and came to the motherland where he entered one of the Naacal colleges.
Here he studied the religion and Cosmic Sciences of the Motherland. When
he passed his degree of Master and adept, he returned to his own
country, Atlantis. There he devoted his life to the teachings of the
people, the first religion of man, and to weeding out and eliminating
extravagances, inventions and misconceptions that had crept into the
religion of Atlantis under a rank priesthood."

Osiris became the Hieratic Head of Religion in Atlantis which office he
held during a long life. The people loved and worshipped him for his
gentleness, goodness and kindness. They wished to dethrone Ouranos the
King and place Osiris on the throne. This \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

Osiris would not allow to be spoken of and so condemned the idea that it
was abandoned.

He was murdered by a brother on account of jealousy--this was about
20,000 B. C. His name was so revered, and he so beloved, that at his
death he was deified, and as a lasting monument to his name religion was
called after him, viz., "The Osirian religion," just as today we have
the Christian religion. I could not find the name of the brother who
murdered him, so the probability is the Egyptians invented the name. Nor
do I find anything about Isis and Nephthys, but it is mentioned that he
had a son, who became the Hieratic Head of Atlantis at the death of his
father. I do not, however, find his name.

Osiris and Christ taught identically the same religion. Some of their
preachings are word for word, line for line, and sentence for sentence
the same. Both learned from the same book--the Sacred Inspired Writings
of the Motherland.

THE RELIGION OF EGYPT.--The first we know about the religion of Egypt is
where an ancient record states that about 16,000 years ago Thoth, the
son of an Atlantian Priest, planted the Egyptian colony at the mouth of
the Nile, and at Saïs on the banks of the Nile built a temple and taught
the Osirian religion.

The Osirian religion as I have previously shown was the religion of Mu
after Osiris had cleansed it of all the extravagances that had crept
into it in Atlantis, 22,000 years ago, the religion being then called
after

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

him the Osirian religion. When he died his son became the hieratical
head and was supposed to be called Horus, but whether Horus was his
actual name or a title I cannot say, but a Horus was always the
hieratical head of the Osirian religion down to the time of Menes or
about S,000 B. C. Thus it is shown that the religion of Egypt commenced
with that of the Motherland as taught in the Sacred Inspired Writings.

From the time of Thoth down to the time of Menes, the Egyptian colony
was ruled by the church, under the head of a Horus. The last Horus is
recorded when Menes took the throne.

Manetho, the Egyptian priest historian, says that during the 11th
Dynasty the priesthood began to teach the people to worship the Sacred
Symbols instead of the [Deity](errata.htm#5) Himself as heretofore. This
was the first step to the debauchery of the Egyptian religion which
reached its peak during the 18th Dynasty and ended in every conceivable
extravagance coupled with idolatry. The advent of Mohammedanism wiped
out the old religion of Egypt, although the Christian religion had made
a little headway owing to a people called the Copts.

We must now go back some few hundred years to the time when the
Israelites were the slaves of the Egyptians. A Master rose up among
them--Moses. Who was Moses? And how did he form a religion? Who he was
is a question; but he was the most proficient Master of his time, and,
at one time, was the High Priest of the temple at Sinai, which then was
an \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

Osirian temple. Whatever Moses was, it is known that his wife was an
Israelite and that he threw in his lot with the Israelites in all their
troubles and adversities contingent with slavery. They elected him their
head. He saw the Osirian or the Inspired Religion being debased by
idolatry and was determined to save his people from it, so he modified
the ancient Osirian religion to suit the then existing surroundings and
conditions. The symbols of the attributes of the Deity, he discarded
almost entirely, retaining only a few which could not very well be
worshipped. He made the worship of one Lord God only--the Deity.

Many of the teachings in the Osirian religion were in the form of
questions. These he condensed and put into the form of commands. As for
example: Osirian--Have you honored and do you honor your father and
mother, et cetera. Moses--Honor your father and your mother, et cetera.
There were forty-two questions in the Osirian. Moses turned them into
ten commands.

Many readers of the Bible have been nonplussed when they come across the
passage where Moses makes a serpent for the people to look upon in the
Wilderness. Some claim that it was a touch of idolatry. It was nothing
of the kind. Circumstances warranted him in returning to symbolism for
the occasion. The symbol--the Serpent--was to concentrate their thoughts
on God as the Creator and the Giver of All Good Things.

One of the ceremonies among the Jews was a burnt sacrifice. The Bible
tells us that the sons of the *first* 

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

man, Adam, offered up burnt sacrifices. Yet among ancient records we
find that 60,000,000 of people lost their lives at one time in the same
land before sacrifices were commenced.

I never came across the word sacrifice or its equivalent in any of the
writings of the First Civilization. The first time I saw the word was in
an old Maya book about 5,000 or 6,000 years old in which it says: "And
during the night Mu was *sacrificed*." In the writings of the First
Civilization offerings only are mentioned; these offerings consisted
generally of fruit, flowers and products of the fields and gardens.
These were taken to the temple and placed on an altar specially provided
for the ceremony. On the front of this altar were inscribed the Tau and
underneath each arm was a double triangle that reads: "Place thine
offering upon this altar."

After Mu went down with her 60,000,000 of souls, all the surviving
people of the world commemorated her memory in one way or another, some
by literature, some by edifices and others by fire in some form. The
Quiche Mayas had a fiery house in their religious ceremonies; the
Egyptians a fiery tank in theirs; and without doubt burnt sacrifices in
the beginning was the form the Semites chose. In later years the Jews
applied a theology to the ceremony. I wonder if there is a single Jew
living today who knows the origin of their burnt sacrifices. I have
never yet found one. The Phoenicians, another Semitic race, adopted
idolatry and fell so low

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

as to degrade themselves by offering human beings for sacrifice.

Was Moses an Israelite? An Egyptian record would lead one to believe
that he was not a pure Israelite. The record I refer to says: "Moses was
the son of an Egyptian Princess who afterwards became the great Queen
Hatshepsut." Not a word is said about the bull-rushes.

As an example of the gross extravagances in symbols and teachings of the
Egyptian priesthood I shall take the triad--Osiris, Isis and Horus. Let
us see who they were and what was taught from them.

Osiris was a *man* who lived on earth and about whom there are many
Egyptian myths. There is also a short authentic history about him,
showing that he was a great Master and lived about 22,000 years ago.
Isis was the *symbol* of the Creator's female attribute. From this union
a son was born called Horus. Isis had a sister called Nephthys and a
brother called Set. So that the female attribute of the Creator had
three members--two females and one male--Isis, Nephthys and Set.

In plain unadorned language the foregoing says: An *earthly man* Osiris
marries *a spirit a female attribute of the Creator* Isis and they have
a son. But Isis was *only one* forming the *female* attribute of the
Creator. The writings of the Motherland say the Creator was Lahun, *two
in one, not* four in one.

Can anything more grotesque or atrocious than the foregoing be imagined?
Yet this seems to be the theology

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

and teachings of the Egyptian priesthood for a long period in their
history--thousands of years. Is it any wonder that they were thrown into
the discard? Dozen of other examples could be quoted, but I think this
one all sufficient to show the abuses engrafted into their religion.

During the early part of the history of religion in Egypt, such
grossness does not appear. As soon as we know anything about her
religion we find its theology very complicated and, without question,
this complicated theology was the parent of the diabolical abuses which
crept into religion later on.

In the early Egyptian religion I find symbolizations ran somewhat
parallel with that of the Polynesians. For instance, the marriage of
gods. There is, however, this difference. The result of the marriage of
Egyptian gods with other gods was only further to complicate theology.
With the Polynesians the marriage of gods resulted in phenomena, such as
light, sound, et cetera, which is correct, being the workings of the
Cosmic Forces. I shall now give some examples both Egyptian and
Polynesian.

The Polynesians believe that all that has been created came from the
marriage of gods. The first four gods were the Four Great Primary
Forces--a name given them during the earth's First Great Civilization.
The Polynesians say: "In the beginning there was no light, life or sound
in the world. A boundless night called Po enveloped everything, over
which Tanaoa (darkness)

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

and Mutu-Hei (silence) reigned supreme. Then the god of light separated
from Tanaoa (darkness), fought him and drove him away, and confined him
to the night. Then the god Ono (sound) was evolved from Atea (light) and
banished silence. From all this struggle was Atauana (dawn) born. Atea
(light) married Atauana (dawn) and they created earth, animals and man."

Now let us have a little Egyptian Cosmogony:--

Seb and Tefnut: offspring, the gods: Osiris, Isis, Nephthys, and Set.

Ra and Hathor: offspring, the gods: Shu and Tefnut.

Osiris and Isis: offspring, the god: Horus.

There were also the marriages of the gods and goddesses:

Amen Ra and Maut.

Kneph and Sati.

Ptah and Bast.

Set and Nephthys.

I have shown what all these gods symbolized, in a short way, in the
Pantheon.

THE ISRAELITES IN EGYPT.--While we are on the subject of the Israelites,
let us follow them in their Exodus from Egypt.

When the Israelites made their exodus from Egypt, they left Goshen which
is a part of the Nile Delta, and, according to Egyptian records
(papyrus), they crossed the "*Sea of Reeds*" and passed into Asia. The
Sea of Reeds or rushes is situated at one of the mouths of the

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

Nile. The water is very shallow and most of it can be waded without
danger. When they arrived at the Sea of Reeds a submarine earthquake
occurred in the Mediterranean Sea off the mouth of the Nile--probably on
the gas belt which runs down from Crete and extends under Africa a short
distance from the Nile Delta. This quake first drew off the water,
leaving the Sea of Reeds dry--the Israelites passed over, the Egyptian
army followed. During its passage the returning cataclysmic wave rolled
in over the Sea of Reeds overwhelming the Egyptians. A mistranslation
evidently occurs in the Bible. The Sea of Reeds was mistaken for the Red
Sea. The Red Sea at the point where it is stated the Israelites crossed
lies 200 miles from Goshen. The Sea of Reeds joined Goshen. To have
crossed the Red Sea, the Israelites would have had to pass through 200
miles of enemy country, with an army in close pursuit, which means that
they would have been overtaken and slain.

Pillars: The Israelites when in bondage in Egypt erected two pillars of
brick at the entrance of their temples. In the inner part of these
temples was the Holy of Holies where only the high priest might enter.

The Hebrews: The word "hebrew" comes from ebber meaning further back.
Apparently, the Jews descended from four groups. Two of the tribes
entered Palestine about 1375-1350 B. C. Later ten tribes joined them.
These came from Egypt about 1200 B. C. or from 150 to 175 years later
than the two tribes.

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

About 973 B. C. the tribes separated, the two seceded and appointed
Jeraboam their king. Reaboam was at the time the king of the ten tribes.

Years later, the Assyrians attacked the ten tribes, and history states
that the Assyrians destroyed them. Whether or not they were wholly
destroyed they disappeared from history and are now spoken of as "*the
lost tribes*."

It cannot be conceived that all were put to the sword. Unquestionably
some were taken into captivity, and became assimilated with the
Assyrians, especially as both were Semites.

The Assyrians in turn were overthrown by the Medes and Persians. What
has become of the Assyrians? Among their descendants today, we should,
no doubt, find some of the descendants of the ten tribes, but whether
there would be any of them with pure Israelitish blood in them is very
doubtful.

Still later, the Babylonians conquered the two remaining tribes. These
still survive in our Jews of today. They are, however, scattered
throughout the world among all nations.

These Jews hold the Feast of the Passover-- Why? They are the
descendants of the two tribes who were not in Egypt. It was the ten lost
tribes that were concerned in the Exodus and consequently the Passover.

Ezra and his associates wrote the Bible. What is known as the Book of
Moses was written by them from documents obtained from the ten tribes
who were

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

in Egypt. The writings of Moses were partly in Naga and partly in
Egyptian. Ezra obtained a slight knowledge of Naga in a Chaldi during
the time he was in captivity; but neither Ezra nor any of his associates
were Egyptian scholars. Is it any wonder they made so many errors in
translating the Egyptian? Yet for all their errors their work was
wonderful.

THE RELIGION OF INDIA.--The religion of very ancient India was that of
the Motherland, brought there from Mu by the Naacals, a holy
brotherhood. These men were taught religion and the Cosmic Sciences in
the Motherland and when proficient were sent to the colonial empires to
form colleges and perfect the local priesthoods, who in turn taught the
people.

About 5,000 years ago, a race of Aryans began to drift down into India
from the bleak valleys of the Hindu Koosh and adjoining mountains. Their
first settlement was among the Nagas in the Saraswatte Valley. They were
just hardy mountaineers, uncouth and uneducated. The Nagas, the most
highly educated race in the world, took compassion on them, welcomed
them into their schools and colleges, educated and advanced them. The
Nagas received them too well for their own good, for, it called from the
mountains nearly all who had multiplied there since the destruction of
the great Uighur Empire of whom they were descendants. In time these
Aryans dominated the whole of the Northern parts of India including
their schools and colleges. Thinking they had learnt from the Naacals
all there

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

was to be learnt, they proceeded to drive their gentle, kindly
instructors out of the country into the snowcapped mountains of the
North.

After a period a sect was formed which was called Brahmins who took or
usurped the charge of religious teachings. To attain their own ends,
they introduced into religion perverted, incomprehensible theologies
having all kinds of extravagance. This was the commencement of the
downfall of India, which gained impetus as time went on. They introduced
caste, commencing with three only. The caste system was extended, until
at last the lowest caste was looked upon as untouchables, and for a
touch of an untouchable, the receiver of a higher caste must go into a
purification before he could be received again by his own people. The
result of this was the final step which brought India down from the high
position of leading the world in religion, arts and sciences. All that
was left were a few embers where at one time was the bright light of a
fire representing everything worth-while in life.

Then a great one sprang up among them, a Prince Guatama. He went back to
the original teachings of the Sacred Writings. A vast throng followed
his teachings and these became the Buddhists. Buddhism was carried
throughout the Orient and was the universal religion.

It was only a question of time before a crafty priesthood began its
negative work. The Buddhist priesthood of Northern India fell away from
the gentle

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

teacher, Guatama Buddha, and introduced all sorts of impossible
theologies and theories for the sole purpose of enslaving the people.
Only those in the South remained true to Guatama's actual teachings.
Today the center of Buddhism is a little unostentatious temple at Kandy,
in the Central Mountains of Ceylon. But with all these priestly traps
and pitfalls common to religions today a spark of the truth has been
again kindled and will soon shine throughout the world. Priesthoods and
politicians never have seen nor ever will see "the writing on the wall"
until those walls are falling on them and it becomes too late to escape.
This has been the history of the world for the past 12,000 to 15,000
years. The people rise and crush the politicians and the Lord, in *His
own way*, weeds his garden.

<span id="img_27600"></span> ![](img/27600.jpg)

A U M is an inscription that has baffled scholars and scientists
throughout the world, the Hindus included, for more than 2,300 years.
Its import was lost when the Naacals were driven out of India by the
Brahmins. Many scholars have attempted to fathom its meaning. None,
however, arrived at any satisfactory conclusions; even the oldest are
indefinite. Examples:

Manava dharma Sastra an ancient Hindu book. Book 2. Sloka 74. "In the
beginning the Infinite only existed called Aditi. In this Infinite dwelt
A U M

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

whose name must precede all prayers and invocations."

Book of Manu, Sloka 77. "The monosyllable A U M means earth sky and
heaven."

I. T. Wheeler, History of India, Vol. 2. Page 481 says:

"As regards the three letters A U M little can be gathered, excepting,
that when brought together in the word A U M they are said by Manu to
form a symbol of the Lord of created things--Brahma."

H. T. Colebrook in *Asiatic Research* says: "According to Noruka which
is an ancient glossary of the Vedas the syllable A U M refers to *every*
Deity.

"The Brahmins may reserve for their initiates an esoteric more ample
than that given by Manu."

Noruka must have been reading a Brahminical version of the Vedas, which
they stole from the Naacals, changed it to suit their own vile purposes
and then foisted it on the world as their own writings.

The *Original Vedas* are a Naacal writing. The Naacals acknowledged
*One* Deity only. Therefore, when Noruka mentions "*every* Deity" it
shows without the possibility of contradiction that the Vedas which he
refers to were altered and doctored and were not the original writings.

A U M conveys identically the same meaning and conception as the
Mysterious Writing and Niven's Mexican tablet No. 2379. The difference
between these and A U M is in the form of the writing. The Mysterious
Writing and the Mexican tablet are in the old

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

temple esoteric numeral writing. The Hindu A U M is written in
alphabetical symbols which reads:

|          |                              |
|----------|------------------------------|
| A--Ahau  | Masculine-Father             |
| U--      | Feminine--Mother--She        |
| M--Mehen | The engendered--The Son--Man |

 

Note: U is here used as the feminine pronoun--She. M would have been
used but it would have been con founded with the following M for Mehen.

The Brahmins formed a complicated theology around this conception,
introducing a confusion absolutely incomprehensible to the people. It
became a wonderful breeder of awe and superstition.

BIBLICAL SYMBOLISMS TAKEN LITERALLY. *Tower of Babel*: The Biblical
*Tower of Babel* has been literally taken as a structure of stone or
brick. From some old writings, I am brought to believe that it is a
purely symbolical term: that "confusion of tongues" is the crux of the
legend.

This legend was not written during the life of Mu. It came later, many
years later, when ancient history was being recorded again and mankind
once more widely populated the earth. It was therefore a product of the
New Civilization.

Extravagances in theology and technology in the various temples,
colleges and schools were the cause of the "Confusion of tongues" and
the whole structure of Religion and Science was the Tower. Each temple
had its own terms and words for its theology. Each college and school
had its own particular words and

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

terms for its technical teachings. So that no temple or college could
understand the teachings of another. All in fact spoke different
languages, no one understanding another. This made a "Tower of
Confusion," "A Babel of Tongues": so that the name given to the
condition was the only one which would adequately describe it.

Today we are running headlong into another such storm, another such
confusion of tongues. We have over 100 sects of Christianity, yet there
is only one God. Each sect declares all others are in error. They cannot
comprehend each other's language. In Mu there were no sects, no
theology. All teachings and wording were so simple that the most
uncultivated mind could comprehend them. Mu's religious teachings lasted
200,000 years. When the present Tower of Babel comes crashing to the
ground, a new structure will arise on its ruins. And that structure will
be the simple religion of Mu.

The *Flood*: The Biblical legend of the Flood is not a myth nor is it
symbolical. It has been wrongly described. Those who wrote the Biblical
description simply failed to understand the writings of Moses.

There was a flood which destroyed about one half of the earth and all
life thereon; but it was not due to a heavy rain. The Flood resulted
from magnetic influences.

The Last Magnetic Cataclysm, the Biblical Flood and the Geological Myth,
the Glacial Period, are all one and the same thing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Twin Sisters--Religion and Science](ssm13)
