[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssm10)  [Next](ssm12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

# THE MOUND BUILDERS OF NORTH AMERICA

NONE of the prehistoric races that have inhabited North America have
caused more interest and speculation than the Mound Builders. Among
their remains, in their mounds and burial grounds, have been found
pottery of a high order, bone needles with eyes, stone pipes with
elbows, strings of fine beads made from shells, fragments of cloth,
ornaments of catlinite, silver, copper and tortoise shell, and some
strings of extraordinarily large pearls, etc. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

On their ornaments and pottery are found various religious symbols,
connecting them with a prehistoric race in Mexico and with Mu, the
Motherland of Man. By these symbols it is shown that they possessed a
highly scientific knowledge, for they perfectly understood the great
Cosmic Sciences which today are just dawning on our scientific world.
The Cosmic Sciences include the origin and workings of the Four Great
Primary Forces, the parents of all forces. My object is not to attempt
to give a history of the Mound Builders but simply to give some of the
high lights about them which

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

apparently have been overlooked by the archaeological authorities who
have been keeping the public informed regarding the mysteries of the
Mound Builders. My object is to show their great civilization, which I
think has been underestimated, and that they came from Mu via Mexico.

Regarding the time when they were living in America I have found nothing
whereby even an approximate date could be suggested except that it was
*after* Atlantis went down about 11,500 years ago. My opinion is that
they were among the last of the prehistoric races that can be called
prehistoric.

Geographically they occupied what may be termed the Mississippi
Watershed. This area before the sinking of Atlantis was a shallow inland
sea extending north from the Gulf of Mexico. The sinking of Atlantis in
the Atlantic Ocean formed an immense hole in the Atlantic. To fill this
in and level off the waters the surrounding waters were drawn in. This
drew off the waters from various shallow inland seas, made them either
dry habitable lands, or swamps. It also extended the coast lines. During
the process of the readjustment of the waters the Mississippi Valley was
drained. Even after the land was drained it was a long time before it
assumed a condition where man could live and thrive upon it. This
condition seems verified by the fact that no remains of the Cliff
Dwellers, or those that preceded them, have been discovered in the
Mississippi Valley proper.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

The end of the Mound Builders, like the Khymers of Cambodia, apparently
came very suddenly, leaving no trace behind it. While the Mound Builders
show no cause for their apparent sudden disappearance the Khymers do,
for it is geologically shown that the Khymers were destroyed by a flood,
a cataclysmic wave having rolled up the Meikong River and surrounding
Khymer country.

The Mound Builders as a people are gone, but did they leave no
descendants in America? If Sacred Symbols, which I have found the most
reliable source with which to trace the movements of people from time to
time, are acceptable (I say this after fifty years of study), then we
have something with which to make a start. This, with other evidence
which may hereafter be found, may eventually show that they have
descendants still among us in some of the Indian tribes of our
southwestern states.

Fig. 1. Is a bottle recovered from a mound on a line between Southeast
Missouri and Arkansas. Therefore, this is of ancient workmanship.

Fig. 2. Is a water bottle I personally own. It was bought from Indians
in New Mexico within the last ten years and was perfectly new when given
to me. This, therefore, is modern. The main figure on each of these two
bottles is identical, with the exception of coloring. The ancient has a
creamy white ground with brilliant figures. The modern has a brick red
ground with black figures edged with white.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

The symbol referred to is the same, line for line, and is an artistic
design of the cross symbolizing the Sacred Four, the Four Great Primary
Forces. The lines of the cross are drawn to extend in westerly
directions, thus running from west to east. This is also shown on some
of the Mexican tablets.

There is evidence that the Mound Builders of North

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p><span id="img_22100"></span> <img src="img/22100.jpg" alt="&lt;I&gt;1&lt;/I&gt;.&lt;BR&gt; &lt;I&gt;Ancient&lt;/I&gt;" /><br />
<em>1</em>.<br />
<em>Ancient</em></p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p><span id="img_22101"></span> <img src="img/22101.jpg" alt="&lt;I&gt;2&lt;/I&gt;.&lt;BR&gt; &lt;I&gt;Modern&lt;/I&gt;" /><br />
<em>2</em>.<br />
<em>Modern</em></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

\[paragraph continues\] America had an advanced knowledge of the Cosmic
Forces which they could have attained only by some connection with, or
direct, from the Motherland. Thus it is shown that their forefathers
came from Mu, but by what gate did they enter America? I find among the
traditions and lore of the Indians who now are on the lands where the
mounds are found that: "*The Mound Builders came to the Mississippi
Valley from Mexico*." Can these traditions of the Indians which say that
the Mound Builders came to North America from Mexico be proven?

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

I already have shown one example where an ancient prehistoric people of
Mexico had the same symbols as the Mound Builders, conveying identically
the same meaning in both cases. By comparing other symbols of the Mound
Builders with those found carved on Niven's Mexican tablets it appears
to show some definite connection between them, and that these Indian
legends are history, orally handed down.

<span id="img_22200"></span> ![&lt;I&gt;Water Bottle&lt;BR&gt; From a
mound, Mississippi County, Missouri&lt;/I&gt;](img/22200.jpg)  
*Water Bottle  
From a mound, Mississippi County, Missouri*

<span id="img_22201"></span> ![](img/22201.jpg)

As an example, I will take the symbols found on another Mound Builder's
water bottle and compare them with some of the symbols on the Mexican
tablets. Here we find an exceedingly strong link connecting the American
\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

Mound Builders with the prehistoric race of Mexico, heretofore referred
to.

<span id="img_22300"></span> ![&lt;I&gt;Symbol of the construction and
workings of the Sun&lt;/I&gt;](img/22300.jpg)  
*Symbol of the construction and workings of the Sun*

This symbol is one of many found on a Mound Builder's water jar in
Mississippi County, Missouri, and is a diagram showing how the Forces of
the Sun are generated and carried throughout the Solar System. The
dissection of it shows:

That the Sun has a hard crust and a soft center.

That the Sun is being revolved by her Superior Sun from west to east.

The revolving hard crust carries around the soft center in the same
direction, but not at the same velocity, thus forming a frictional line,
a magnet. This is shown by the soft material in the center being curved.

It is shown to refer to the Four Great Primary Forces by the central
soft material being divided into four arms forming a cross, the first
and original symbols of the Four Great Forces.

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

The form of the rays of the Sun are in the shape of the symbol for
activity, thus saying that the rays are active in carrying the Forces
somewhere, *i.e.*, the generated Forces are taken from the hard crust by
the rays and delivered in a manner to carry out certain functions not
shown in this diagram.

This diagram of the American Mound Builders is the only one I have come
across so far that fully carries out the writings about this phase of
the Sun, which are found in the Books of the Golden Age, and thus
showing the excellence of the scientific knowledge of the Mound Builders
of America. Many of the Mexican tablets give parts of it but none in
whole as does this one. Writings from Egypt show that they understood
the Cosmic Forces in 1200 B. C., but how much later I cannot say.

The Mound Builders of America date back to when? This brings forward a
question--since when were the Cosmic Sciences lost to the world? Yet,
they have never been entirely lost. The old Rishi understood them.
Scraps of them still are known in the Orient and among the Polynesians,
and I am not so sure that some scraps are not known among some of the
tribes of the North American Indians. I have good reasons for saying
this. In this diagram the Sun is drawn as representative of Kin, the
Celestial Orb, and not as Ra, the monotheistic symbol of the Deity.

The foregoing are definitely the teachings found in the Sacred Writings.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

<span id="img_22500"></span> ![](img/22500.jpg)

This is a compound cross symbolizing the Sun as the Celestial Orb with a
white cross in the center surmounted with a red cross. The white open
cross reads *U luumil*, which translated is the Country of, the Land of,
the Empire of--and being within the Sun, reads--the Empire of the Sun,
Mu.

The plain cross surmounting the white open cross is the oldest and
original symbol for the Four Great Primary Forces, sometimes depicted
with the Swastika, subsequently termed the "Good Luck" symbol.

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p><span id="img_22501"></span> <img src="img/22501.jpg" alt="&lt;I&gt;Mound Builders&lt;/I&gt;" /><br />
<em>Mound Builders</em></p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p><span id="img_22502"></span> <img src="img/22502.jpg" alt="&lt;I&gt;Mexican&lt;/I&gt;" /><br />
<em>Mexican</em></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Showing the Four Primary Forces moving from West to East

 

I have selected just one of the Mexican Tablets to show beside a Mound
Builder's symbol, Niven's No. 1331. I have taken this Mexican tablet for
comparison as I have hitherto, in various of my writings, stated that
this tablet was one of the most important among \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

Niven's collection of over 3000, and one of the most important finds in
any part of the world.

In both cases the Mound Builders and the Mexican show the Four Great
Primary Forces emanating from the Creator, and are said by the ancients
"To be His commands, His desires, His wishes." They are, in both
symbols, shown moving from west to east, thus causing the whole universe
to revolve from west to east, and all living moving spheres to revolve
on their axes from west to east.

<span id="img_22600"></span> ![](img/22600.jpg)

This is a universal symbol found in all ancient countries throughout the
world. It is a picture of the Sun as Ra, the monotheistic symbol of the
Deity.

MOUND BUILDERS' SYMBOLS.--

Line 1. Figs. 1 to 5. All these symbols are pictures of the Sun, and are
universal, that is, they are found among the writings of all ancient
peoples.

Line 2. Figs. 6 to 10. These five symbols are all recording the Four
Great Primary Forces, and that they emanate from the Creator. Figs. 6,
7, and 8 are frequently found among Niven's Mexican tablets, and in the
Mexican they are always shown as originating from the demand or order of
the Creator. Figs. 9 and 10 are more universally found among ancient
writings.

Line 3. Figs. 11 to 15. These figures symbolize the

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

 

<span id="img_22700"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;Mound Builders' Symbols&lt;/I&gt;](tn/22700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22700.jpg)  
*Mound Builders' Symbols*  

 

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

earth's Forces and their origin and the manner in which they work. Figs.
11 and 12 are skeleton, or outline, drawings of 13 and 14. These four
figures show the earth's molten center being carried around and grinding
against the earth's hard crust. This grinding forms a frictional line
between the two, which in turn forms a magnet. The magnet has two
divisions, one affecting Forces, the other, elementary matter. The
Division, having control over elements, is what is commonly known as the
Force of Gravity, therefore, what is known as the Force of Gravity is
the power of the Cold Division of the Earth's great Central Dual Magnet.
The Division, having power over Forces, affects the *Earth's Forces
only*. It has no control over any Forces emanating from beyond the
earth's atmosphere. Fig. 15 shows the earth's Forces passing out of her
body into the atmosphere (they are thus drawn out by their affinitive
Forces carried in the Sun's rays). Earthly Forces like elements become
exhausted, and when exhausted the Sun's affinitive Forces have no
further attraction or control over them. The Central Magnet then
proceeds to draw them back into the great frictional line where they are
regenerated and again sent to perform the duties required of them by
nature. I may say further that this example of the workings and origin
of earthly Forces may also apply to all revolving bodies throughout the
universe, and thus show that a single Divine system is controlling the
Universe.

Line 4. Figs. 16 to 20. These are also symbols of

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

the Four Great Primary Forces. Figs. 17, 19 and 20 are shown as
emanating from the Deity. Fig. 16 is the original and oldest symbol for
the Sacred Four or the Four Great Primary Forces as it is found in the
Sacred Writings of Mu, which are more than 70,000 years old.

All of these symbols are found embodied in the Mexican tablets. Fig. 19
is an exact duplicate of what I have heretofore given as the Pyramid
Cross.

Line 5. Figs. 21 to 24. In this line I shall note only one figure, 22.
The others are common and universal. Fig. 22 is a very rare symbol. I
have found only one duplicate of it, and that is the Hindu writings of
about 4000 to 5000 years ago. This figure symbolizes the Sun sending
forth his rays throughout his System (the solar). They are shown as
being of two varieties--dark and invisible because of their intensity,
and light, which are apparent to vision. The rays are in the form of
Forces, as shown by the Force symbol. Again they are curved, pointing to
the east and thereby telling us that they are working from west to cast
and forming a circle. As they are taking a circular route all rays
coming from the Sun would not strike the earth in a straight line from
the Sun but in a curve.

This again shows that our prehistoric Americans were further advanced in
science than we are today. Do our present scientists appreciate this
fact? Does this not show that we are thousands of years behind in our
knowledge of science, based on theory alone? Personally, I think so.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span id="img_23000"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;A Mound Builder's Calendar Stone Found in the Ouachita
River, Hot Springs, Arkansas&lt;/I&gt;&lt;BR&gt; From Col. J. R.
Fordyce, Little Rock, Arkansas](tn/23000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23000.jpg)  
*A Mound Builder's Calendar Stone Found in the Ouachita River, Hot
Springs, Arkansas*  
From Col. J. R. Fordyce, Little Rock, Arkansas  

A MOUND BUILDER'S CALENDAR STONE.--

Dimensions. The stone is pear shaped. Length about 16 inches, and about
13 inches across at its widest part. "It is a sandstone bowlder such as
found in shale near Hot Springs. It weighs 22½ pounds."

Description. In the center is a slightly raised ring 7¼ inches in
diameter. This ring is divided into thirteen equal divisions. On each
division is inscribed a figure or a glyph. Superimposed on this circle
is another which is much higher. This, I presume to be meant for a
picture of the Sun, as the symbol of the Deity. Above this main figure
is engraved a caption, the Moon in its various phases during a calendar
month. This tells us the meaning of what is below, namely: the circle
with the thirteen divisions represents thirteen calendar months, making
one year. The thirteen

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

months, forming a circle, tell us that the year is completed, the
beginning and the end. Over the caption is shown the All Seeing Eye
looking down from heaven above. This is an ancient symbol dating back to
the earliest writings, and universally found. Outside of the calendar
proper, to the edge of the stone, various animals are shown, including
Man.

The Calendar Glyphs.

1\. This is too indistinct to say positively what is meant or
represented. However, it appears to be a bird with wings outspread. If
this is correct, then it probably would be the American Indian Thunder
Bird.

2\. This seems to portray the Maya month of Zac, the white month, when
snow covers the ground with a white blanket.

3\. This is a new symbol to me. I do not know its meaning.

4\. This is a fish which is symbolically heading upstream, denoting that
during this month fish are most plentiful, the time when they make their
spring run up to their spawning beds.

5\. This glyph is one of the letters in Mu's alphabet. It has an
esoteric meaning.

6\. This is a picture of the Sacred Lotus flower, Mu's floral symbol.
The lotus was the most beloved and revered of all Mu's symbols. The
Egyptians always ref erred to Mu as the Lotus.

7\. Without this is a line drawing of the head of the Mound Builders'
conventional serpent. I do not know

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

what it is. Among the etchings at the Pipestone Quarry, Minnesota, there
are some that are almost identically like it. The Pipestone are without
question the heads of the Serpent.

8\. This is a sacred symbol common in Oriental countries. Once, and only
once, before have I found it in America. That was among the Mound
Builders' remains taken from one of their burial grounds. It is one of
those ancient religious symbols whose meaning was lost when the Brahmins
persecuted and drove their teachers, the Naacals, out of India into the
snowcapped ranges of the Himalayas about 2000 to 2500 B. C. The meaning
of the symbol is expressed in four words of the ancient tongue. These
words were used before the commencement of a supplication, or prayers.
They are being repeated to this day but the priesthood does not know
their meaning. The meaning of AUM was forgotten about the same date. So
far in months 6 and 8 we find a direct connection between the people who
made this calendar stone and the *Mound Builders*, *Mu* and the
*Orient*.

9\. This glyph is new to me. It appears to picture ripe grain being cut
and harvested. The time on this stone is given about August or
September. It would thus correspond with harvest time when grain is
reaped and stored.

10\. This symbol is frequently found in ancient writings. It pictures
the fall of the year when trees and

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

shrubs shed their leaves, leaving the branches bare and leafless.

11\. This is one of the most conclusive symbols on this stone and
directly connects the makers of this stone calendar with the *Mound
Builders*, the *Polynesians*, and therefore, *Mu*, as their ancestors
came from the Motherland. The symbol is the Grey and Black Pointed
Spider, which is discussed later in this chapter. I have received
information that similar spiders have been found among the treasures
recovered by Schliemann in ancient Troy, Asia Minor. These, however, I
have not seen.

12\. This symbol is questionable. Is it the outline of a deer?

13\. This is certainly an outline drawing of a bison. It is now the last
month in the year, the head of this buffalo is pointing in. Is this the
time of the year when food has become scarce further north and he is now
working in to the south where conditions for the time being suit him
better? I think so. The same question applies to the 12th, the deer.

Comments. There are various animals shown on the outer side of the
stone. These I have not taken into account although two are very
prominent in ancient picture writings and in Indian legends.

It must be apparent that the designers of this Calendar Stone were
acquainted with the Cosmic Forces and the Cosmic Sciences as taught
during the First \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

Great Civilization. Therefore, America at one time was enjoying the
highest civilization the earth has ever known.

THE GREAT SERPENT MOUNDS.--The feature which has captivated the public
interest most in the Mound Builders is their great serpent-shaped
mounds. That these serpent mounds were symbolical there can be no doubt.
Serpents of various patterns and designs have always, from the beginning
of religion, played an important part in religious ceremonies, not among
one particular race but among *all* ancient people from the time symbols
were first used.

One of the most important of the American Serpent Mounds is situated at
Brush Creek near Peebles, Ohio. I cannot say definitely in what way this
Serpent Mound was symbolically used--whether as the Seven Great Commands
of Creation, the Waters, or the destruction of Mu, the Motherland.
Possibly it may have included two of the foregoing. That it, or
ceremonies connected with it, referred to Mu there is ground for belief
for the following reason: it is stated that some of the Serpent Mounds
have sacrificial stones or altars upon them, with the possibility that
all had them originally. As Mu went down it was into "a fiery abyss,"
fires of the underneath. It became a custom among all surviving peoples
thereafter at various times and occasions to commemorate her destruction
by fire. Fire is shown to have been used in commemorative services by
the Mayas and Quiches who had their fiery house, and the

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

Egyptians who used a fiery tank, and others who used burnt sacrifices of
some description.

In England near Stonehenge there is a Serpent Mound said to be an exact
duplication of the American at Peebles, Ohio. Thus, we find in England a
specialized symbol of the same as used by the Mound Builders of America,
and in both cases the same meaning and conception is conveyed. What is a
reasonable deduction? Common origin, without doubt. By what route did
the Mound Builders get into England? It is questionable when we trace
the various symbols that have been found in England, and the still more
pronounced display found in Egypt.

<span id="img_23500"></span>

[![](tn/23500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23500.jpg)

SPIDERS.--While the great Serpent Mounds have captured the most public
interest among the Mound Builders' relics, the Spiders have the greatest
fascination for me, personally. While exploring among the South Sea
Islands some fifty years ago I constantly came across legends about the
Grey and Black Pointed Spider. These legends showed that the Spider was
symbolic of something, and that it was a sacred symbol,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

but of what I could not determine. The legends were all too obtuse. As
examples:

"There the Grey and Black Pointed Spider would have mounted to Heaven,
but he was held back by the bitterness of the cold."

"The roads were cunningly constructed to represent the web of the Grey
and Black Pointed Spider, and no man could discover the beginning or the
end thereof."

Now after waiting fifty years and having given up all hope of ever
solving the riddle of the Grey and Black Pointed Spider I find the
answer given at our very doorstep. Truly, here in America lies the key
to unlock the great past history of man.

These Spiders were brought to my notice by my friend, Dr. Thomas M.
Stewart, of Cincinnati, Ohio. They are engraved on circular pieces of
shell, and on each of their backs is a symbol showing what they
represented. These peculiar relics have been found in the burial vaults
of the Mound Builders of Missouri, Arkansas and Tennessee. Because of
the location of the places where they have been found Dr. Stewart
suggested that they might have been used in the same manner as the
Scarab in the Egyptian burial chambers.

The symbols on the backs of these Spiders are duplications of the
symbols found as ornaments on the Water Bottle shown on page
[241](#page_241). No. 1 is the original symbol for the Four Great Forces
shown in No. 2 on page [241](#page_241). No. 2 shows the Forces working
from west

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

to east as in No. 3 on page [241](#page_241). No. 3 is the same compound
symbol as shown in No. 2, page [241](#page_241).

Some of these symbols are shown on pottery recovered from the ancient
ruined cities in Crete, Cyprus and ancient Troy <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) in Asia Minor.

Although exceedingly rare, I think that the Grey and Black Spider, as a
symbol, had a wide range at one time and we still may find many of them
on pottery that have been overlooked because their import was unknown.

I think that the foregoing bears out my assertion that merely digging up
old remains, symbols, inscriptions and writings is not archaeology, that
archaeology is the reading of these symbols and writings when found. A
builder, digging a foundation for a structure, who unearths a stone
bearing an ancient inscription does not make the builder an
archaeologist--he is only a builder. A farmer, ploughing his ground,
turns over an old stone with an inscription on it. This does not make
the farmer an archaeologist--he is only a cultivator of the soil. Or his
son may be digging potatoes and unearth an old piece of pottery. The son
is only a potato digger, not an archaeologist.

The Mound Builders' Symbols, before they are read, are only artistic
ornamentations and mean nothing, just potatoes on a piece of pottery.
But, when read, they may give a line on a page of the early history of
North \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

America by telling us that a mysterious race called the Mound Builders,
who once occupied a part of our land, originally came from Mu via
Mexico, that they were a highly civilized and enlightened people, having
a knowledge of the Cosmic Forces and their workings, thus showing that
they had a scientific knowledge greater than we have today.

THE OCTOPUS, A SACRED SYMBOL

THE OCTOPUS.--The Octopus is one of the very rare sacred symbols. By
this I do not mean that it was seldom used, but that only a few symbols
of it have been found. As a matter of fact I think it was a very common
symbol among some of the ancient peoples. At present when found,
generally on pottery, archaeologists have looked upon them as mere
decorations and ignored the fact that many of the specimens show,
without a doubt, that they were sacred symbols.

The Octopus is often found on the ancient Greek pottery. It was used in
Peru, Brazil, North America, Greece and Scandinavia until a few thousand
years ago. Judging by the way it was used it was the symbol of a *Water
Demon, the Enemy of Life*. Its rôle was to prevent the advent of life on
earth.

Most of the ancient writings telling about the advent of life on earth
symbolize it in such a manner that it represents a battle between the
Sun and the Waters for supremacy over something, but does not say what
that something is.

 

<span id="img_23800"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;Vase of the Late Minoan I Period (about 1600-1100 B. C.)
found on Gournia, Crete&lt;BR&gt; Courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum of
Art&lt;/I&gt;.](tn/23800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23800.jpg)  
*Vase of the Late Minoan I Period (about 1600-1100 B. C.) found on
Gournia, Crete  
Courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum of Art*.  

For example: the Babylonians say Belmarduk, the Sun, fights Tiamet, the
Waters. From a Cuneiform Tablet-"The gods are preparing for a grand
contest against the monster, Tiamet." "The god Belmarduk overthrows
Tiamet." The Egyptians have it that Horus, the Sun, overcomes and kills
the serpent Aphopis, the Waters. The Hindus say that Krisna, the Sun,
destroyed the serpent Anatha, the Waters. And the Greeks record that
Apollo, the Sun, overcomes Python, the Waters. The Fifth Command of the
Sacred Writings of Mu is: "And the arrows of the Sun met the arrows of
the Earth in *the mud of the waters* and out of particles of the mud
formed cosmic eggs"--life germs.

From the foregoing, combined with the legends about the Octopus, it
appears that the Octopus was the symbol of the *resistance* of the mud
against allowing the Sun's Forces to draw the Earth's Forces out into
the water to form life's cosmic eggs. The Sun's Forces, however,
prevailed and met the Earth's Forces and formed cosmic eggs, and life
commenced according to Divine Command.

The legends as told today about the Octopus are perfect myths, but by
going behind the myth and finding its origin we discover the true
legend.

It was very noticeable that wherever a legend is found the phenomenon is
shown to have occurred in that particular spot. This is especially so
among savage and semi-savage people. As examples: the Fijians have

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

a legend about the "Tower of Babel." According to them the "Tower of
Babel" was being built on one of the Fijian Islands. The Fijians are
courteous to visitors and will take anyone gladly to the spot where it
stood. The Polynesians have a legend about the "Ark." They claim that it
was built on one of their islands. The Maoris have a legend about "Cain
and Abel." They tell you that Cain and Abel were New Zealanders and that
the murder of Abel occurred in New Zealand.

The symbolic Octopus, like the Sun, is known by many names, its name
being taken from the language of the people where it is found. With all
people the Octopus was a *Water Demon* and *the Enemy of Life*. It had
no other meaning.

SHADOWS FROM GREECE AND ASIA MINOR.--From the ancient cities of the
Grecian Archipelago and Asia Minor, which have been and are being
unearthed, many pieces of pottery have been found which have the Octopus
either engraved, raised or painted on them, making prominent and
striking decorations. In Crete, Cyprus and Troy many fine and perfect
specimens have been discovered. Fortunately, the motif designs vary
considerably which gives one a fair chance to read their correct
meaning, as for instance, on vases B and C in the Cyprus Group. On both
the tentacles and body are intact. Here the Octopus is simply a reminder
of that which it symbolizes. Vase A, from the same ruined city, shows a
totally different phase. Here the Octopus

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

is depicted as having been in battle and got the worst of the encounter.
This is shown by his broken and cut tentacles, his fighting weapons.

<span id="img_24100"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;A group of octopus vases from
Cyprus&lt;/I&gt;](tn/24100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24100.jpg)  
*A group of octopus vases from Cyprus*  

From where did the Greeks get the octopus? First, the octopus appears to
have been one of the symbols used by Mu. From the Motherland it was
taken by the Carians into Peru and Brazil. Second, when the Carians, the
forefathers of the Greeks, continued their

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

advance towards the cast and finally settled at the eastern end of the
Mediterranean they carried their sacred symbols along with them and
among these was the Octopus.

I think the foregoing shows sufficient proof that the Octopus was one of
the early sacred symbols and that it was carried to the southeastern
parts of Europe and Asia Minor by the Carians. But what people carried
it to Scandinavia is an open question.

<span id="img_24200"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;The Pipestone Octopus&lt;BR&gt; Witoonti, Pipestone,
Minnesota&lt;/I&gt;](tn/24200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24200.jpg)  
*The Pipestone Octopus  
Witoonti, Pipestone, Minnesota*  

THE PIPESTONE OCTOPUS.--In trying to read this pictograph one apparently
is met by three contradictions: \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

First, the Octopus has within the grasp of one of its upper tentacles a
Serpent, a specialized Serpent, an exact duplication of one of the Mound
Builders' Serpent Mounds. What connection is there between the Mound
Builders and the people who carved this rock picture? Were they the same
people? Or was this peculiar specialized Serpent used by various peoples
and was this picture etched by one of them? The Octopus, having the
Serpent within the grasp of one of its tentacles, intimates that the
circle from which the tentacles project is the body of the Octopus; but
being a circle it is a picture of the Sun. This would suggest that the
circle was a Sun symbol and not the body of the Octopus.

Second, as against reading the circle as a Sun symbol we see projecting
from the lower side of the circle the beak of the Octopus in the form of
the ancient symbol for a cutting or dividing Force. This symbol also
appears on the Mexican tablet No. 1584, Woman's Creation. Added to this
in the small Fig. B, the Octopus is shown with a real body, nearly
round, with the Serpent held in one of the tentacles.

Third, the foregoing shows a possibility that the circle forming the
body in Fig. A may actually be symbolizing the Sun's Forces as Kin, the
Celestial orb, and not Ra, the monotheistic symbol of the Deity.

One of the difficulties in attempting to read this picture is that the
ends of most of the tentacles are so indistinct that their meanings are
doubtful. This picture

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

requires a great deal of study with the assistance of other pictures
referring to the same subject to obtain the full meaning in detail. The
fact remains that it may convey the same meaning as the Octopus on the
Cyprus Vase A and many other pictures of the Greeks, Egyptians, Hindus,
Babylonians, etc.

At the lower right hand corner is shown either a wolf or a dog. In the
Scandinavian myths this dog or wolf plays an important part.

THE PIPESTONE QUARRY.--This quarry in Pipestone, Minnesota, is the
oldest quarry on earth to have been worked by man, for it was known and
worked back in the Tertiary Era, before the mythical Glacial Period, the
last Magnetic Cataclysm.

<span id="img_24400"></span> ![&lt;I&gt;Gilders Pipe, Omaha, Nebraska,
over 15,000 years old, made out of the red mottled stone of Pipestone
Quarry&lt;/I&gt;](img/24400.jpg)  
*Gilders Pipe, Omaha, Nebraska, over 15,000 years old, made out of the
red mottled stone of Pipestone Quarry*

The age of the Pipestone Quarry is proven by two facts. First, by
Gilders Pipe which was found among the remains of man who lived during
the Tertiary Era. The clay from which this pipe is made is found only at
one spot on earth (as far as is known to geology), and that is at
Pipestone. The geological name of this

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

stone is Catlinite. (It has been claimed by some that Catlinite is also
found at Feuerte Farm about three miles from Portsmouth, Ohio. The only
way that this can be decided satisfactorily is by comparing the chemical
analysis of the two--the Pipestone deposit and that found at
Portsmouth.)

According to Indian traditions the location of the Pipestone Quarry was
lost for a long period of time. Its rediscovery forms one of the Sioux
legends. The Indian legends about the Pipestone and other subjects are
fascinating, and when shorn of their mythical adornments tell us that
the first Americans came from Mu, which adds another link to the
overwhelming chain of evidence that America was Mu's first colony and
that America today is the oldest land above water that has been
inhabited by man. America antedates Atlantis, Egypt, Greece, Babylonia,
India and. all other ancient nations. The Pipestone Indian legends also
show that the first Americans were highly civilized people, and that
they came from a land in the west beyond the Setting Sun.

In reference to the rediscovery of the quarry, Omaha and Yaukton Indian
legends relate that "Walregela, the Omaha wife of a Yaukton Sioux,
following the trail of a white bison discovered the Pipestone on the
banks of the Pipestone Creek, where it had been ex posed by the bison s
hoofs."

Extracts from Chon-oopa-sa.--Legend by Pa-la-nea-pa-pe (Man that was
struck by the Ra).

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

The Advent of Man

  "In the far off past  
A million, million, million moons ago,  
The first of mortals to this earth below  
  By great Wo-kon was cast:  
The first Dakota moulded from a star  
  He tossed and watched him fall  
*Down through the dark*, till he alighted there  
*Upon soft ground*. He was not hurt at all  
And Wa-kin-yan, first Sioux."

"He ranged the land in hunting many a year  
Until at last this solitary man"

"*Where afar we see the sunset  
Summer days* in golden glory  
In *the mystic land of legend*  
In that far land of *the west*  
*Land of Red-man's home* and story.  
*Land of legend*, strange tradition,  
Vale of dim *unwritten hist'ry*."

The Woman

"And Wa-kin-yan prayed hourly (never tired . . .  
Wa-kon to send him what he most desired . . .  
And Wa-kon heard his pleading,--broke a beam <span id="page_247">p.
247</span>  
  At noon from off the blazing summer Sun  
And moulded, fashioned-beauteous as a dream,--  
The first of all her sex-the longed for One!  
. . . Sweet Co-tan-ka--"

The Demon Octopus

"Wi-toon-ti, he that stayed  
By day in the river's *mud*."

"Wi-toon-ti, he that feared  
Wa-kin-yan's bow and shaft."

"A monster he."

"Then Wa-kon-da, vengeance taking  
For the murdered Sunbeam's daughter."

"Then he seized a blazing tail star  
Formed another mighty arrow  
Sent it flying to Wa-kin-yan."

"The Wa-kin-yan rose up quickly  
By the blazing shaft he sighted!  
Twang! behold it forward flying  
See it flare and flash and hurtle  
Through the rain of fiery sparks  
Through Wi-toon-ta . . ."

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

\[paragraph continues\] This appears to me to be another version of the
fight between the Sun and the Waters, for the creation of Life, so
frequently found in the ancient writings on the Creation.

While other Indian legends refer to Mu none of them say what she and her
people were like or where she lay except that she was "Beyond the
Setting Sun." This Sioux legend goes further--it describes the land as
being tropical "Summer days in golden glory." That the teller of the
legend was cognizant of the fact that Mu had disappeared and was no more
is shown in the passage, "The mystic land of legend." It also tells us
that legends about her greatness and civilization were being orally
handed down. "Land of Red-man's home and story" informs us that the
Indians know that originally they came from Mu. "Dim unwritten hist'ry"
tells us that as far as the Indian knows there is no written history of
Mu, only legendary.

Another interesting bit of Pipestone lore is the symbolic Bird of
Creation. Here at Pipestone among the Sioux legends we again find the
Bird of Creation the symbol of the Creative Forces throughout the world.
Catlin, in 1836, recounting his visit to the Pipestone, says: "Not far
from us, in the solid rock, are the deeply impressed footprints of the
Great Spirit in the form of the tracks of a Great Bird. (See Fig. C.
Page 242.)

The following are extracts from a Sioux legend: "*'Before* the creation
of man, the Great Spirit, whose

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

tracks are yet to be seen on the stones of the Red Pipe in the form of
that of a great bird."

"Here the Great Spirit used to slay the buffaloes and eat them on the
edge of the rock. The blood running over the rocks turned them red."

"One day a large *snake* had crawled into the nest of the bird to eat
his eggs. One of the eggs hatched out in a clap of thunder, and the
Great Spirit catching hold of a piece of pipestone to throw at the snake
(here part of the legend missing) moulded it into a man. The man's feet
grew fast in the ground, where it stood fast for many ages like a great
tree, therefore he grew very old. (In all of the ancient pictures of Mu
she is depicted as a very old woman.) At last another *tree* grew up
beside him when a large *snake* ate them both off at the *roots* and
they wandered off together. From these have sprung all the people now on
earth." Here we have two of the ancient writings merged into one--the
Advent of Man on Earth, and the Destruction of Mu.

Although no particular name has been given to the Great Bird in this
Sioux legend beyond the Great Spirit I think that by its connection with
thunder it was the Thunder Bird of all the Indians to the west of the
Sioux and was, as told by the old Hayden chief, the symbol of the
Creative Forces. The Great Bird eating buffaloes is without question a
perfect myth invented by some old Medicine Man to save his face

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

when pressed by his followers to account for the pipestone being red.
The legend says *before* man came on earth the Great Spirit used to slay
buffalos to eat. First, spirits do not eat anything material. Second, it
occurred before man was on earth, "A million, million, million moons
ago." And third, the buffalo is a recent addition to the picture gallery
of life of America.

Man first appeared on Mu. One of the names given to Mu was the *Tree* of
Life. In this legend the man and the tree are combined in one. Yet this
is not so far wrong, for the Sacred Writings of Mu tell us that Mu was
the Tree of Life and that Man was its fruit. This is corroborated where
the Sioux legend tells of a great *serpent* biting off the trees at
their roots. A serpent was always the symbol for the waters and when Mu
was destroyed she was swallowed by the waters. Biting, in the Sioux
legend, is a correct word to use symbolically, for Mu was certainly
bitten off from the rest of the land above water. "From these have
sprung all the people that now inhabit the earth" clearly shows that
this refers to the migrated children of Mu and is confirmed by the
saying, "They wandered off" for they had left the land of their birth
where they grew up, to go to other lands where they might find living
easier.

All extracts, pictures and information about the Pipestone are taken
from a booklet entitled, *The Pipestone Indian Shrine*, by Miss Winifred
Bartlett, President of the Pipestone Indian Shrine Association, who
kindly and courteously sent me the booklet from which

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

to make notes, with a view of placing America where it belongs on the
ancient map, and to give the Redskin his just due. The translations of
the Indian legends are by D. Ivan Downs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[218:1](ssm11.htm#fr_0) The pearls, fragments of
cloth, ornaments of silver and copper were found in the Bainbridge Mound
in Ohio.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[237:1](ssm11.htm#fr_1) Schliemann's "Treasures
of Priam."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Religion in Egypt and India](ssm12)
