[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota44)  [Next](wota46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

### XLIV.

<span class="smallcaps">Nature</span> unbosoms all her secrets to the
votary at her shrine. But when the crude and materialistic approach,
they find thick veils interposing between their eyes and spiritual
realities.

To the physical scientist the spiritual side of Nature needs must remain
a *terra incognita*, so long as he seeks to explain all phenomena by
means of physical laws.

Simply because a man fails to understand the occult side of Nature, that
is no reason why he should deride and ridicule those who have seen the
light and know whence it cometh.

The wise man ridicules no one; accepts what appeals to his spiritual and
intellectual nature, and leaves the rest for those who can make use of
it.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

To him Nature seems broken up into isolated points until the spiritual,
that which unites them all into one perfect whole, stands revealed.

In order that one may have a correct apprehension of truth, it is
necessary to know what has been as well as what now is, and also
understand the *rationale* of the whole.

The problem of life will never be solved by investigations conducted
solely on the physical plane.

Truly may it be said, only to the seer or mystic does the grain of sand
unbosom all its secrets.

He who listens to the myriad voices of Nature patiently and long will be
rewarded by hearing the low, soft, sweet undertone which is the voice of
indwelling spirit.

Having heard the voice and interpreted its message, the man must become
all that it imports

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

before he can gain that freedom from animality that leads to true
spirituality.

To him the gates of other worlds shall fly open, and the soul travel at
will amid the splendors and glories of the Upper Worlds.

Not merely the thinking and the knowing that a thing is so, but the
being that very thing gives this power to the soul.

Not all who knock at the temple and cry out, "Lo, I am here! Open unto
me!" shall be received.

They only who have met and conquered the adverse experiences in life,
and who have come up out of deep sorrows and the bitterest of
tribulations, shall be admitted to the inmost mysteries.

These are they whose footprints are visible along the shores of time,
whom the ages have crowned with the laurel wreath of the victor.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

Indeed are they worthy of all truth, for they have been weighed in the
balances of the ages, and have not been found wanting.

Thorns have pierced their brows, sharp stones their feet, envy and
malice their souls.

Yet they have proven true to the light within; have ever obeyed the
mandates of the spirit; have ministered to the poor and lowly; have
bound up aching and bleeding hearts; and have caused the light of love
to illuminate many a darkened pathway.

From the heights the angels cry out: Hail, all hail! Immortal and
deathless soul! Thou hast completed the task, henceforth only the
perfect form shall be thine own! Thou shalt blaze like a star at
midnight, and thy light shall be like that of a beacon along the
darksome way of so many human lives. Pursue thine ever onward journey
from star to star, from universe to universe!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLV](wota46)
