[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota35)  [Next](wota37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### XXXV.

<span class="smallcaps">He</span> who sends the healing thought is
doubly blest, blest in giving that which others need, and blest in
receiving that which he had not before.

Send forth no vacillating thought, freighted with the hope and trust for
better conditions and higher things.

Instead, let thy thought be charged with the positive currents of love
that know no defeat.

Hast thou not declared Omn to be omnipotent and omnipresent?

Believest thou this to be a truth? Then, inasmuch as thou art a part of
the divine, all power centres in thee.

Thou art circumscribed and limited only by thy denials.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

Ignorance builds up a wall that crumbles and falls at the approach of
knowledge.

So all difficulties fade and disappear when one arises above the sphere
of denial into that of affirmation.

When thou sittest in the silence to help or benefit another, concentrate
thy mind upon the object to be accomplished. Be so desirous of doing
good that no other thought shall possess thee.

Be not so foolish as to deny the existence of disease, poverty and
sorrow, but affirm the possibility of rising above all that clogs or
hampers the spirit.

<span class="smallcaps">Spirit, assert thyself</span>!

Arise! shake off all that impedes thine upward progress.

Thou art creator of opportunities.

At thy bidding all the doors of knowledge are opened.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

There are no secrets Nature holds that may not be revealed unto thee.

To the awakened soul there are no occult or hidden forces in nature. All
are luminous with the light of spirit, and none are hidden save by the
flimsy veil of ignorance.

Every breeze that sweeps over the land, every wave that beats against
the shore, every ray of light that cometh from most distant star, has a
message for thee, oh, man, if thou wilt only receive it.

Star-dust and earth-dust are one and the same, save only in the one the
vibrations may be intenser than in the other.

On earth varied names are given to the so-called primal elements, but he
whose spiritual vision is quickened perceives that there is but one
substance in all universes.

Under all must be one,—that one we term spirit, the only substance.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

Elements are the clothes that spirit wears. Hence all the varied forces
are ever directed by spirit.

If the individual spirit is both self-conscious and self-centred, it
calls other spirits to itself to aid in its every beneficent work.

A legion of spirits may do thy bidding if thy commands are wise and
right.

A good thought speeding on its mission of love and beneficence calls to
its aid the powers of many wise and good spirits.

Live above the atmosphere of ignoble thoughts and thy life will reflect
only the noblest of impulses.

And these impulses shall be made to live in the lives of others.

They shall bring up out of despair, suffering and gloom those who never
before have felt or known the sweet sunbursts of love.

In him from whom they proceed shall be

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

wrought as great a transformation as in the ones they reach.

He who gives the most receives the most.

For angels are ever showering upon the head of the giver benedictions
that are not of this world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVI](wota37)
