[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota34)  [Next](wota36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

### XXXIV.

<span class="smallcaps">Spirit</span> not only moulds and shapes the
physical body which becomes its outward expression, but is also
vibrating in its every atom.

If a part or portion of this outward expression of spirit is loaned
another individualized spirit, the original creator of that part or
portion never entirely disassociates itself from it.

In fact, the every atom called within the atmosphere of the indwelling
spirit reflects in greater or less degree the attributes of that spirit.

Even when a member is loaned another, the personality whose vibrations
are felt by the remotest atoms of the outward expression is never
entirely submerged in the personality that usurps and controls the organ
for the time

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

being; therefore, in spite of every precaution, it flashes across the
pathway of the thought being expressed.

But the spirit speaking cares little for this unless it may interfere
with the expression of truth.

Then, is it not far wiser for men to be seekers after spiritual truths
than for the evidences of special spirit control?

I that indite these papers speak far oftener for the many than for the
one individuality known as Zertoulem.

What matters it whether the truth is found struggling in the mind of the
medium, and is quickened into outward expression by the touch from
without, or cometh entirely from an extraneous source?

The all-important thing is the clear perception of the truth.

Truth owns no special country as the land

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

of its birth; neither the East nor the West can claim it as its own.

Prophet-souls in every land and every age have heard its voice.

Obedient to the message received, they have gone forth into the world as
Heaven-sent messengers.

The truths they uttered in the long ages past have never been lost.

No word, no wisdom is lost past recovery.

Sigh not, then, over the esoteric wisdom of the past; if thou art ready
for it, thou shalt receive it all.

It has been seemingly lost because the world was engrossed in material
things, and had no time for those of the spirit.

Spirit needs no introduction to the ages past and gone. The ancient
peoples are not stranger men and women to it, and the civilizations of
old are not unknown to it.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

It is for me and you to press the hands of these people, to walk with
them shoulder to shoulder, to read with them the records of their
struggles and triumphs, to reap the results of their civilizations, and
to be exalted by the wisdom they possessed.

And this exaltation, not because the wisdom is ancient and belonged to a
peculiar people, but because the wisdom contained within itself a spring
of perpetual youth, and belongs neither to one age nor one people, but
to eternity and to all men.

It is for thee to perceive as great truths as the world has ever
perceived.

If thou wilt thou canst stand where the greatest have stood.

Thou must lift the clouds that hang over thee. Thou must plant thy feet
firmly upon the earth beneath thee.

For it is not well to forget the needs

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

of the outward, the external expression of spirit.

A god dwells within; the house should be beautiful and clean.

Through its every door should shine the ineffable light and glory of the
exalted spirit, the inmate of the house not less beautiful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXV](wota36)
