[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota47)  [Next](wota49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### XLVII.

<span class="smallcaps">Again</span> my teachings have been
misunderstood when thou sayest, oh, Neontu, that man should ever look
inward. I have declared again and again that the source of all truth is
within, but, at the same time, its streams are ever flowing outward
toward the circumference. It is always well for thee to know the results
that obtain in the physical domain. I have not found fault with the
physical scientist because he studies the shell of the universe, but
have tried to impress upon thee that it would be far wiser on his part
if he would occasionally look within, and thus learn the source of all
phenomena. Curb not the aspirations of thy nature that reach outwardly.
Like ships sailing over unknown seas they may return laden with the
richest of cargoes.

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yet do I boldly
declare unto thee that all the riches thou mayst be able to gather from
the material realms will prove of little value unto thee unless thou art
able to perceive in and through all the underlying spirit of all things.
Here alone wilt thou be able to find permanency. The clothing thou
wearest to protect thy body after a time is laid aside for new. And even
the atoms that compose thy body are continually being discarded that
their places may be given to others. The compelling power of all Nature
that causes the ceaseless urge in every atom as well as in every flaming
sun and star is spirit, the only Absolute Reality. Yet as spirit worketh
in all, the humblest forms may teach thee important lessons. Ever have I
sought to impress upon thee the sacredness of all things—that nothing is
moving across the infinite stage of action aimless and purposeless.
While I

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

would not have thee ignore the organization, yet I would not have thee
linger too long in the form-realm, for I would have thy spiritual sight
opened, so that thou couldst behold the architect of each and every
form. The form may be indeed beautiful, but far more beautiful is always
the builder of that form. If ye delve simply amid the outward forms,
mystery will ever enshroud all things. To thy vision the face of Nature
will ever wear an impenetrable veil. But if thou wilt cultivate the
interior senses, they that be of the spirit, it shall be thy privilege
to lift the veil from the face of Nature, and in ecstacy almost divine,
behold such beauty and glory as never before fell upon the vision of thy
spirit.

It is true, oh, Neontu, that thou wouldst not have been placed in this
outward world unless its lessons were of importance and value to thee.
Therefore it is well that thou shouldst

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

become a close student of all the many things that surround thee, but at
the same time thou shouldst not allow thyself to become so thoroughly
entangled in the meshes of the web that Maya weaves around thee that
thou canst not at any moment free thyself and soar on the pinions of the
soul to those heights around which the ethers of the heavenly spheres
are ever playing. Be not content to plod on thy way, grovelling ever in
the midst of those conditions that hold thee in the sphere of
materiality, but instead develop that higher spirituality at whose
bidding shall open all the secret chambers of being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVIII](wota49)
