[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota17)  [Next](wota19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

### XVII.

<span class="smallcaps">Think</span> ye that life is not worth the
living because it is a ceaseless struggle after the unattained?

Because so many of thy hopes and aspirations fall to the ground
seemingly fruitless?

If thou thinkest thus thy view is narrow and limited.

How know ye that thy hopes and aspirations are fruitless?

May not their branches extend so far above thy head that their fruits
are beyond the circle of thy vision?

Trouble not the limpid waters of thy soul with fear and doubt.

Cultivate that faith that leads to belief in the divine possibilities of
the soul. And when I say the soul, I mean thy soul, every soul

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

that is. For these possibilities are not for the few, but the all.

Life never can be a failure even in the poorest expressed soul of earth.

Even in the reeking haunts of vice and crime life is fulfilling its
sacred and holy mission.

All life is sacred, holy, divine, but much of life is as yet poorly
expressed.

As, in the world of music, not all are geniuses who touch chords that
vibrate afar, so in the great world of the ordinary expression of life,
the movement is slow and sluggish—yet, even in the meanest, it is an
upward movement.

Sorrow, as well as joy, hath its mission in the world, for like the
refiner's fire it purifies of all dross.

Thy desires are not attained! Thy hopes fall fruitless to the ground!

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

Stop, my child! As much of life lies before thee as is behind.

Why spend thy time in worthless grieving over the seeming failures of
life, when eternity and all her years are thine?

That for which thou grievest to-day, to-morrow, laughingly, thou wilt
throw aside.

Thy hopes dead! Thy desires unattained! Never was hope more alive than
when clouds of sorrow come sweeping in upon thee. Never were thy desires
nearer thy grasp.

Through the pearly gate of sorrow the soul rises on wings of triumph.

Hope is the bright star whose light gives the silver lining to every
cloud.

Struggle on, brave soul; be not overcome with discontent. Look up, for
to! the morning dawns upon thee that dispels all shadows that have
dimmed thy vision.

Be not led astray by the cunning sophistries

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

of the world, the pessimism of the night that only points to chaos and
to death. But follow the light within that points to the ultimate
victory of knowledge over ignorance, and reveals good emanating out of
all the evils of earth.

Over all tired and weary hearts Peace shall yet fold her wings and Love
shall lull to quiet slumbers, out of which the soul shall awaken into
that serene and perfect life that fully reveals the true worth of
striving and living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII](wota19)
