[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota50)  [Next](wota52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

### L.

<span class="smallcaps">Open</span>, ye pearly gates that lead to
eternal bliss! A soul imprisoned would seek the freedom of the Upper
Spheres!

While yet enrobed in flesh, he fain would partake of the celestial
viands and sip the nectar of the gods.

Thou art long in coming, oh, Death, and the soul, grown impatient at the
delay, knocks at the gates of life eternal, demanding that they no
longer keep it from its divine birthright.

Thou hast served me well, old body, moulded into most exquisite form
from out the potter's clay. Through constant use and contact with the
rough, wild elements of space and time thou hast grown more and more
ethereal, each day reflecting more and more perfectly the workings of
spirit within.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

Soon thou shalt fall off from me as the leaves in autumn time fall from
the trees of the forest. I would declare that thou hast been a most
faithful servant, for most faithfully hast thou reflected all the
fancies, caprices and imaginings of the arbitrary ruler who sits upon
his throne within. I shall miss thee and drop a tear of sincere regret
when the last vestige of thy form fades into the All of Nature.

Yet, whilst we two walk hand in hand together, I would peer out along
that path the soul must take when we shall part company never to meet
again.

Open, ye pearly gates! I knock! I knock! A soul imprisoned seeks to know
the secrets of the Upper Spheres!

Silently, as the coming of the morn, the gates swing inward. A light
sweeps by me in billowy waves that make all earthly light seem

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

but shade and deepest shadow, revealing far, far off in the distance,
mountains of amethyst, topaz, chrysolite, turquoise, flaming and
flashing with light, leaping from peak to peak, on and on throughout the
vast empyrean of heaven!

Filled with awe and reverence, my upturned eyes drink in the unspeakable
glory of the celestial realms; trees with iridescent foliage; flowers
that seem to express the very thought of the angels; seas of burnished
gold and silver and soft greens and blues, and hanging dreamily over all
fleecy clouds.

Here and there the eye beholds forms of divinest beauty, either speeding
on errands of mercy and love or seeking mid the ever-changing forms
about them the processes of their evolution.

Overcome with awe and reverence, the bewildered soul turns once more
earthward.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

For it is not yet prepared to dwell in the midst of such glory and
magnificence. For it still must come the toil, the disappointments, the
inharmonies of the sense-world, until all bonds are broken, all fetters
loosened, and purified of all earthly dross it shall rise from sphere to
sphere, ever nearer and nearer to the light ineffable that flashes on
from century to century, from æon to æon, from time to eternity, the
light that ever veils the countenance of the Eternal

<span class="smallcaps">Omn!!</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tlaskan Words](wota52)
