[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota22)  [Next](wota24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### XXII.

<span class="smallcaps">Neontu</span> said unto Zertoulem: Behold how
the people suffer! Go into the homes of the people, likewise into the
great hospitals and asylums, and the sights thou shalt see and the
sounds thou shalt hear will make even one like thee think the world is
anything but beautiful. My heart is sad within me and my soul is sick
unto death at what it has seen and heard. Pray, tell me, is there any
way to overcome all this suffering?

When he ceased speaking, Zertoulem said unto him: Oh, Neontu, has all my
teaching been in vain? Have I not already told thee that pain and
disease are to be conquered only through efforts of the will, and that
back of the will lies the illimitable ocean of spirit, the source of all
power?

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

Dost thou think that one may find a panacea for all human ills in the
bottles and jars of the apothecary? That some of these things are
palliative I most fully believe. But I would not look to them for the
cure of disease any more than I would look to war for the cure of the
lust of the nations. Health is the natural condition of the physical
body when spirit fully asserts itself through all its members. When
there are obstructions along the pathway of spirit they must be removed,
else will pain declare the presence of disease. Spirit holds the atoms
of matter together; when it is withdrawn, disintegration commences and
the atoms fly apart. The struggle of these atoms to obtain their liberty
is what causes the sensation of pain. As matter approaches the formless
it becomes grotesque and repulsive in appearance.

When man not only learns the way but also

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

walks therein, pain and disease shall be known no more.

Oh, Neontu, if thou shouldst suffer great pain, it would not be
necessary for thee to have faith in me in order that I might relieve
thee. The two things necessary are these—that I have faith in myself,
and also believe that at my command is the exhaustless power of the
Infinite One.

Bear in mind, oh, Neontu, also this important fact, that if thou art the
possessor of the pearl without price, faith in the divine possibilities
of thine own soul, thou wilt never need other physician than thyself.

Thou canst call unto thee from across the depths and over the heights
All that Is.

If this power was not thine, thou couldst not be a son of the Infinite
One.

If thou art that son, thy power can be no less.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

When the world accepts these thoughts and lives them, the way to
overcome pain, suffering and disease shall be made clear. Then the sons
and daughters of earth shall walk forth clad in new garments of dazzling
whiteness, for Truth and Love, Peace and Purity shall claim them as
their own.

Until that day pain and suffering shall not be completely overcome.

Hold, oh, Neontu, the Higher Thought, and from thy soul, and also from
all noble souls, let its vibrations stream forth until the last groan of
agony shall cease and hells on earth be no more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII](wota24)
