[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Hindu](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](sak01) [Next](sak1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PREFACE.

   T<span class="small">HE</span> great body of Hindu Philosophy is
based upon six sets of very concise Aphorisms. Without a commentary, the
Aphorisms are scarcely intelligible; they being designed, not so much to
communicate the doctrine of the particular school, as to aid, by the
briefest possible suggestions, the memory of him to whom the doctrine
shall have been already communicated. To this end they are admirably
adapted; and, this being their end, the obscurity which must needs
attach to them, in the eyes of the uninstructed, is not chargeable upon
them as a fault.

   For various reasons it is desirable that there should be an accurate
translation of the Aphorisms, with so much of gloss as may be required
to render them intelligible. A class of pandits in the Benares Sanskrit
College having been induced to learn English, it is contemplated that a
version of the Aphorisms, brought out in successive portions, shall be
submitted to the criticism of these men, and, through them, of other
learned Bráhmans, so that any errors in the version may have the best
chance of being discovered and rectified. The employment of such a
version as a class-book is designed to subserve, further, the attempt to
determine accurately the aspect of the philosophical terminology of the
East, as regards that of the West.

   These pages, now submitted to the criticism of the pandits who read
English, are to be regarded as proof-sheets awaiting correction. They
invite discussion.

J. R. B.      

      BENARES COLLEGE,  
   *5th January*, 1852.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](sak1)
