[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Symbolism](../../sym/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fsca17)  [Next](fsca19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q8Y/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fictitious and Symbolic Creatures in Art*, by John Vinycomb, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

### The Crocodile as the Prototype of the Dragon

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the existing representatives of the
antediluvian saurians, the crocodile and alligator, we see the
prototypes of the dragons and hydras of poetic fancy. The crocodile is a
well-known huge amphibious reptile, in general contour resembling a
great lizard covered with large horny scales that cannot be easily
pierced, except underneath, and reaching twenty-five to thirty feet in
length. The crocodile was held sacred by the ancient Egyptians, the Nile
was and is its best-known habitat; it is also found in the rivers of the
Indian seas. Though an awkward creature upon land, it darts with
rapidity through the water after fish, which is its appropriate food,
but it is dangerous also to dogs and other creatures, as well as to
human beings entering the water or lingering incautiously on the bank.

It is the *Lacerta crocodilus* of Linnæus, from Greek κροκοδειλος
(krokodeilos) a word of uncertain origin. The Alligator, the American
crocodile, takes its name from the Spanish *El Legarto*, the lizard. The
Latin form is *Lacertus* or *Lacerta*.

Miss Millington, in her "Heraldry in History, Poetry and Romance," says
that both dragon and crocodile seem anciently to have been confounded
under one name, and that Philip de Thaun, in his "Bestiarus," says that
"crocodille signifie diable en ceste vie." Guillim, an old heraldic
writer, says:

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "The dragons are
naturally so hot that they cannot be cooled by drinking of waters, but
still gape for the air to refresh them, as appeareth in Jeremiah xiv.
6."

Young, author of "Night Thoughts," in a footnote appended to the
magnificent description of the leviathan (crocodile), in his paraphrase
of part of the book of Job says: "The crocodile, say the naturalists,
lying under water, and being there forced to hold its breath, when it
emerges, the breath long repressed is hot, and bursts out so violently
that it resembles fire and smoke. The horse suppresses not his breath by
any means so long, neither is he so fierce and animated," yet the most
correct of poets ventures to use the same metaphor regarding him:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Collectumque premens volvit sub naribus
ignem."</span>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Heraldic Dragon](fsca19)
