[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4516)  [Next](sbe4518) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIFTEENTH LECTURE.

###### THE TRUE MONK <span id="fr_187"></span>[2](#fn_186).

He who adopts the Law in the intention to live as a monk, should live in
company (with other monks), upright, and free from desire; he should
abandon his former connections, and not longing for pleasures, he should
wander about as an unknown beggar: then he is a true monk. (1)

Free from love he should live, a model of

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

righteousness <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_187), abstaining from
sins, versed in the sacred lore, protecting his soul (from every wrong),
wise, hardy, observing everything; he who is attached to nothing, is a
true monk. (2)

Ignorant of abuse and injury, a steadfast monk should be a model of
righteousness, always protecting his soul (from sins), neither rash nor
passionate; when he endures everything, then he is a true monk. (3)

He who is content with lowly beds and lodgings, bears heat and cold,
flies and gnats, is neither rash nor passionate, and endures everything,
he is a true monk. (4)

He does not expect respectful treatment, nor hospitality, nor reverence,
nor, indeed, praises; he controls himself, keeps the vows, practises
austerities, lives together with other monks, meditates on his soul;
this is a true monk. (5)

If he does not care for his life, or abandons every delusion, if he
avoids men and women, always practises austerities, and does not betray
any curiosity, then he is a true monk. (6)

He who does not profess and live on divination from cuts and
shreds <span id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_188), from sounds on the earth
or in the air, from dreams, from diagrams, sticks, and

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

properties of buildings, from changes in the body, from the
meaning <span id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_189) of the cries (of
animals)--he is a true monk. (7)

Spells, roots, every kind of medical treatment, emetics, purgatives,
fumigation, anointing of the eye, and bathing, the patient's
lamentation, and his consolation--he who abstains from all these things,
is a true monk. (8)

He who does not praise, or pay attention to, the warriors, Ugras <span
id="fr_191"></span>[2](#fn_190), princes, Brâhma*n*as, Bhôgas, and
artists of all sorts, who abstains from this, he is a true monk. (9)

He who does not, for earthly gain, improve his acquaintance with
householders, with whom he fell in as a monk, or was in friendly
relation before that time, he is a true monk. (to)

A Nirgrantha is forbidden to take from householders, if they do not give
it themselves, bed, lodging,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

drink, food, or any dainties and spices; he who is not angry at such
occasions, he is a true monk. (11)

If a monk gets any food and drink, or dainties and spices, and does not
feel compassion (on a sick fellow-monk) in thoughts, words, and deeds,
(then he is not a true monk) <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_191); but
if he has his thoughts, words, and acts under strict discipline, then he
is a true monk. (12)

Dish-water <span id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_192), barley-pap, cold sour
gruel <span id="fr_194"></span>[3](#fn_193), water in which barley has
been washed: such loathsome food and drink he should not despise, but
call at the lowliest houses (for alms); then he is a true monk. (13)

There are many voices on the earth, of gods, of men, and of beasts,
dreadful, frightful, and awful noises; if he hears them without
trembling, then he is a true monk. (14)

He who understands all religious disputations, \[who lives together with
fellow-monks\] <span id="fr_195"></span>[4](#fn_194), who practises
self-discipline <span id="fr_196"></span>[5](#fn_195), who meditates on
his soul, who is wise, hardy, and observes everything, who

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

is calm, and does not hurt anybody, he is a true monk. (15)

He who, not living by any art, without house,

without friends, subduing his senses, free from all ties, sinless, and
eating but little, leaves the house and lives single, he is a true monk.
(16)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_186"></span>[69:2](sbe4517.htm#fr_187) The name of this
lecture, sa bhikkhû, is derived from the burden which runs through the
whole of it and winds up every verse.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[70:1](sbe4517.htm#fr_188) Lâ*dh*ê, explained
sada*n*ush*th*ânatayâ pradhâna*h*. Lâ*dh*a is also the name of a country
in western Bengal, inhabited, at Mahâvîra's time, by uncivilised tribes,
see part i, p. 84, note 1. The etymology of both words is doubtful.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[70:2](sbe4517.htm#fr_189) Compare the note on
p. 161 of part i. The 71st chapter of Varâha Mihira's B*ri*hat Sa*m*hitâ
treats of vastra*kh*êda, rents, &c. of clothes; the 51st, of aṅgavidyâ,
forebodings from the body; and the 53rd, of vâstuvidyâ, property of
buildings; chapters 88, 90, and 95 are devoted to the forebodings from
the cries of birds, female jackals, and crows.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[71:1](sbe4517.htm#fr_190) A conjectural
rendering of vi*g*aya, which cannot be taken in its ordinary meaning
'victory.' The commentary explains it
*s*ubhâ*s*ubhanirûpa*n*âbhyâsa*h*.--Notice the absence of astrology from
the above list of prophetical arts practised by strolling friars
apparently to insinuate themselves into the good graces of laymen and
women. If Greek nativity had already risen to importance, it certainly
would have been mentioned. For it has ever since held a firm hold on the
Hindu mind.--This remark also applies to XX, 45. But in Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga
I, 12, 9, astrology (sa*m*va*kkh*ara) is mentioned; it is, however, the
ancient astrology of the Hindus, not the Greek one.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[71:2](sbe4517.htm#fr_191) The Ugras and Bhôgas
were Kshattriyas. The former were, according to the *G*ainas,
descendants of those whom *Ri*shabha, the first Tîrthakara, appointed to
the office of kô*t*wals or prefects of towns, while the Bhôgas were
descendants from those whom *Ri*shabha acknowledged as persons deserving
of honour. Comp. Hoernle, Uvâsaga Dasâo, Appendix, p. 58, and my edition
of the Kalpa Sûtra, p. 103, note on § 18.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[72:1](sbe4517.htm#fr_192) The commentators
supply these words; something to that purport is wanted to make out a
consistent meaning, but there is not so much as a hint of it in the text
itself. As it stands now, the meaning would be just the opposite of that
given in the translation, which is in better accordance with the
established custom.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[72:2](sbe4517.htm#fr_193) Âyâmaga, it is
rendered â*k*âmaka in Sanskrit, and explained ava*s*râva*n*a, i.e.
avasrâva*n*a. See also Leumann, Aupapâtika Sûtra, Glossar s*v*.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[72:3](sbe4517.htm#fr_194) Sauvîra, explained
kâ*ñg*ika, the water of boiled rice in a state of spontaneous
fermentation.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[72:4](sbe4517.htm#fr_195) This is a later
addition, proved to be such by the metre, though the commentators
comment upon it.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[72:5](sbe4517.htm#fr_196) Khêyâ*n*ugaê. The
commentators explain khêda by sa*m*yama.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sixteenth Lecture. The Ten Conditions of Perfect
Chastity](sbe4518)
