[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4527)  [Next](sbe4529) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

### TWENTY-SIXTH LECTURE.

###### THE CORRECT BEHAVIOUR.

I shall declare the correct behaviour (sâmâ*k*ârî) which causes freedom
from all misery; by practising it the Nirgranthas have crossed the ocean
of Sa*m*sâra. (1)

The correct behaviour of monks consists of (the following) ten parts: 1.
âva*s*yikâ; 2. naishêdhikî; 3. âp*rikkh*anâ; 4. pratip*rikkh*anâ; 5.
*kh*andanâ; 6. i*kkh*âkâra; 7. mithyâkâra; 8. tathâkâra; 9. abhyutthâna;
10. upasampad. (2-4)

The âva*s*yikâ is required when he leaves a room (or the presence of
other monks on some necessary business); the naishêdhikî, on entering a
place; âp*rikkh*anâ, (or asking the superior's permission) for what he
is to do himself; pratip*rikkh*anâ, for what somebody else is to do;
*kh*andanâ, (or placing at the disposal of other monks) the things one
has got; i*kkh*âkâra, in the execution (of one's intention by oneself or
somebody else); mithyâkâra, in the blaming oneself (for sins committed);
tathâkâra, (assent) in making a promise; abhyutthâna, in serving those
who deserve respect; and upasampad, in placing oneself under another
teacher. Thus the twice fivefold behaviour has been declared. (5-7)

After sunrise during the first quarter (of the first Paurushî) <span
id="fr_362"></span>[1](#fn_361) he should inspect (and clean) his things
and pay his respects to the superior. (8)

Then, with his hands joined, he should ask him:

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'What shall I do
now? I want to be employed, sir, in doing some work or in studying.' (9)

If he is ordered to do some work, he should do it without tiring; if he
is ordered to study, he should do it without allowing himself to be
affected by any pains. (10)

A clever monk should divide the day into four (equal) parts (called
paurushî), and fulfil his duties (uttaragu*n*a) in all four parts. (11)

In the first Paurushî he should study, in the second he should meditate,
in the third he should go on his begging-tour, and in the fourth he
should study again. (12)

In the month Âshâ*dh*a the Paurushî (of the night) contains two feet
(pada) <span id="fr_363"></span>[1](#fn_362); in the month Pausha, four;
in the months *K*aitra and A*s*vayu*g*a, three. (13)

(The Paurushî) increases or decreases a digit <span
id="fr_364"></span>[2](#fn_363) (aṅgula) every week, two digits every
fortnight, four digits every month. (14)

The dark fortnight of Âshâ*dh*a, Bhâdrapada, Kârttika, Pausha, Phâlguna,
and Vai*s*âkha are known as avamarâtrâs <span
id="fr_365"></span>[3](#fn_364). (15)

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

In the quarter of the year comprising the three months *G*yêsh*th*âmûla,
Âshâ*dh*a, and *S*râva*n*a, the (morning-) inspection is to last six
digits (beyond ¼ Paurushî); in the second quarter, eight; in the third,
ten; in the fourth, eight <span id="fr_366"></span>[1](#fn_365). (16)

A clever monk should divide the night too into four parts, and fulfil
his duties (uttaragu*n*a) in all four parts. (17)

In the first Paurushî he should study, in the second he should meditate,
in the third he should leave off sleep, and in the fourth he should
study again. 08)

When the nakshatra which leads the night <span
id="fr_367"></span>[2](#fn_366) has reached the first quarter of the
heaven, at dawn he should cease to study. (19)

When a small part of the quarter is left <span
id="fr_368"></span>[3](#fn_367), in which the (leading) nakshatra
stands, during that space of time, being considered intermediate <span
id="fr_369"></span>[4](#fn_368) (between two) days, a monk should watch.
(20)

In the first quarter (of the first Paurushî) he should inspect (and
clean) his things, pay his respects to his superior, and then begin to
study, not allowing himself to be affected by any pains <span
id="fr_370"></span>[5](#fn_369). (21)

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

In the (last) quarter of the first Paurushî, after paying his respect to
the Guru, a monk should inspect his almsbowl, without, however,
performing the Kâla-pratikrama*n*a <span
id="fr_371"></span>[1](#fn_370). (22)

He should first inspect his mouth-cloth <span
id="fr_372"></span>[2](#fn_371), then his broom <span
id="fr_373"></span>[3](#fn_372), and taking the broom in his hand he
should inspect his cloth. (23)

Standing upright he holds his cloth firmly and inspects it first
leisurely, then he spreads it, and at last he wipes it. (24)

(He should spread the cloth) without shaking or crushing it, in such a
way as to make the folds disappear, and to avoid friction of its parts
against each other; he should fold it up six times in length, and nine
times in breadth, and then he should remove living beings with his hand
(spreading the cloth on the palm of his hand) <span
id="fr_374"></span>[4](#fn_373). (25)

He must avoid want of attention: 1. in beginning his work; 2. in taking
up the corners of the cloth; 3. in folding it up; 4. in shaking out the
dust; 5. in putting it down (on some other piece of cloth); 6. in
sitting upon the haunches <span id="fr_375"></span>[5](#fn_374). (26)

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

(One must further avoid) to hold the cloth loosely, or at one corner, or
so as to let it flap, or so as to subject it to friction, or so as to
shake it in different ways, or if one has made a mistake in the number
of foldings (see verse 25) to count (aloud or with the help of the
fingers, &c.) <span id="fr_376"></span>[1](#fn_375) (27)

There should be neither too little nor too much of inspection, nor an
exchange (of the things to be inspected); this is the right way to do
(the inspection), all other methods are wrong:-- (28)

(This is) if one engaged in inspecting his things converses or gossips
(with anybody), renounces something <span
id="fr_377"></span>[2](#fn_376), teaches another his lesson, or receives
his own lesson from another, (he neglects his inspection). (29)

He who is careful in the inspection, protects the six kinds of living
beings, viz. the earth-bodies, water-bodies, fire-bodies, wind-bodies,
plants, and animals. (30)

He who is careless in the inspection, injures the six kinds of living
beings (just enumerated) <span id="fr_378"></span>[3](#fn_377). (31)

In the third Paurushî he should beg food and drink, (he may do so) for
any of the following six reasons: (32)

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

1\. To prevent an illness; 2. to serve the Guru; 3. to be able to comply
with the rules about walking <span id="fr_379"></span>[1](#fn_378); 4.
to be able to comply with the rules of self-control <span
id="fr_380"></span>[2](#fn_379); 5. to save one's life; 6. to be able to
meditate on the Law. (33)

A zealous Nirgrantha or Nirgranthî may omit to beg food for the
following six reasons, when it will not be considered a transgression of
his duties: (34)

1\. In case of illness; 2. in case of a disaster; 3. to preserve one's
chastity and the Guptis; 4. out of compassion for living beings; 5. in
the interest of penance; 6. to make an end of one's life <span
id="fr_381"></span>[3](#fn_380). (35)

Taking his whole outfit a monk should inspect it with his eye; he then
may walk about, but not beyond half a Yô*g*ana. (36)

In the fourth Paurushî he should put away his almsbowl (after having
eaten his meal), and then begins his study which reveals all existent
things. (37)

In the last quarter of the fourth Paurushî he should pay his reverence
to the Guru, and after having performed Kâla-pratikrama*n*a <span
id="fr_382"></span>[4](#fn_381), he should inspect his lodging. (38)

A zealous monk should also inspect the place where to discharge his
excrements and urine, and then (till the sun sets) he should go through
Kâyôtsarga without allowing himself to be affected by any pains. (39)

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

Then he should, in due order, reflect on all transgressions he has
committed during the day, with regard to knowledge, faith, and conduct.
(40)

Having finished Kâyôtsarga, and paid his reverence to the Guru, he
should, in due order, confess his transgressions committed during the
day. (41)

Then having recited the Pratikrama*n*a Sûtra <span
id="fr_383"></span>[1](#fn_382), and having annihilated his sins, he
should pay his reverence to the Guru (asking absolution) <span
id="fr_384"></span>[2](#fn_383), and go through Kâyôtsarga without
allowing himself to be affected by any pains. (42)

Having finished Kâyôtsarga, and paid his reverence to the Guru, he
should pronounce the customary (three) praises, and then wait for the
proper time. (43)

In the first Paurushî (of the night) he should study; in the second he
should meditate; in the third he should leave off sleep; and in the
fourth he should study again <span id="fr_385"></span>[3](#fn_384). (44)

In the fourth Paurushî he should wait for the proper time and then begin
to study without waking the householders. (45)

In the last quarter of the fourth Paurushî he should pay his reverence
to the Guru, and performing Kâla-pratikrama*n*a <span
id="fr_386"></span>[4](#fn_385) he should wait for the proper time. (46)

When the (time for) Kâyôtsarga has arrived, he

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

should go through it, without allowing himself to be affected by any
pains. (47)

Then he should, in due order, reflect on all transgressions he has
committed during the night with regard to knowledge, faith, and conduct.
(48)

Having finished Kâyôtsarga and paid his reverence to the Guru, he
should, in due order, confess his transgressions committed during the
night. (49)

Then having recited the Pratikrama*n*a Sûtra &c. (see verse 41). (50)

He should consider what kind of austerities he will undertake. Having
finished his Kâyôtsarga, he pays his reverence to the Guru. (51)

Having finished Kâyôtsarga and paid his reverence to the Guru, he should
practise those austerities which he has decided upon, and praise the
perfected saints. (52)

Thus has been summarily declared the correct behaviour, by practising
which many souls have crossed the ocean of Sa*m*sâra. (53)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_361"></span>[142:1](sbe4528.htm#fr_362) The southern half
of the sky or horizon, between east and west, is divided into four
quarters, each of which corresponds in time to a paurushî, the fourth
part of a day or a night.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[143:1](sbe4528.htm#fr_363) A paurushî is the
fourth part of a day or a night; about the time of the equinoxes, when
the day as well as the night contains twelve hours, the paurushî
contains three hours. At the same time, in the months Kaitra and
Â*s*vina, as we learn from our verse, the paurushî has three feet,
padas. The pada therefore is equal to one hour exactly. The duration of
the night at the summer solstice was therefore estimated at eight hours
and at the winter solstice at sixteen, just as in the Vedic *G*yôtisha.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[143:2](sbe4528.htm#fr_364) A digit, aṅgula, is
apparently the twelfth part of a foot, pada = one hour. The digit is
therefore equal to five minutes.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[143:3](sbe4528.htm#fr_365) The fortnights,
mentioned in the text, consist of fourteen days only, the remaining ones
of fifteen days. In this way the lunar year is made to consist of 354
days.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[144:1](sbe4528.htm#fr_366) Or thirty, forty,
fifty, forty minutes respectively.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[144:2](sbe4528.htm#fr_367) I.e. the nakshatra
which is in opposition to the sun, and accordingly rises at the same
time with the setting sun, and sets with the rising sun, compare
Râmâya*n*a III, 16, 12.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[144:3](sbe4528.htm#fr_368) I.e. is about to
set.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[144:4](sbe4528.htm#fr_369) Vêrattiya,
translated vairâtrika; but there is no such word in Sanskrit. It
apparently stands for dvairâtrika, belonging to two days. As the Hindus
reckon the day from sunrise, the time immediately preceding it may be
considered to belong to two days.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[144:5](sbe4528.htm#fr_370) Compare verse 8.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[145:1](sbe4528.htm#fr_371) I.e. expiation of
sins concerning time, cf. Bhandarkar's Report, p. 98, note ‡. It seems
to consist in Kâyôtsarga.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[145:2](sbe4528.htm#fr_372) This is a piece of
muslin which the *G*aina monks place before their mouth in speaking, in
order to prevent insects being drawn in the mouth by the breath.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[145:3](sbe4528.htm#fr_373) It is here called
gô*kkh*aga = gu*kkh*aka, originally a bunch of peacocks' feathers, it is
so still, if I am not mistaken, with the Digambaras, whilst the
*S*vêtâmbaras use other materials, especially cotton threads.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[145:4](sbe4528.htm#fr_374) Much in my
translation is conjectural. There are some technicalities in these
verses which I fail to understand clearly, notwithstanding the
explanations of the scholiasts.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[145:5](sbe4528.htm#fr_375) Vêdikâ.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[146:1](sbe4528.htm#fr_376) I am not sure of
having hit the true meaning. The commentators reckon this counting as a
fault, while the text itself seems to enjoin it.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[146:2](sbe4528.htm#fr_377) Dêi
pa*kk*akkhâna*m*. The meaning is, I believe, that during the time of
inspection one should not make up one's mind to abstain from this or
that because one is to devote one's whole attention to the inspection of
one's things.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[146:3](sbe4528.htm#fr_378) The Dîpikâ places
this verse before the last and construes it with verse 29, making out
the following meaning: if one, engaged in inspecting his things,
converses or gossips, &c., then, being careless in the inspection, he
injures, &c.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[147:1](sbe4528.htm#fr_379) Iriya*tth*âê; for
one will not be careful about walking (îryâ-samiti) if too hungry or
thirsty.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[147:2](sbe4528.htm#fr_380) For one might eat
forbidden food if too hungry.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[147:3](sbe4528.htm#fr_381) It may be remarked
here that the verses 25, 16, 19, 20, 24, 26, 27, 29, 33, 34, 35 are in
the Âryâ-metre while the rest of the lecture is in Slôka.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[147:4](sbe4528.htm#fr_382) Compare note
[1](#fn_370), [p. 145](#page_145).

<span id="fn_382"></span>[148:1](sbe4528.htm#fr_383) Pa*d*ikamittu =
pratikramya, explained pratikrama*n*asûtram uktvâ.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[148:2](sbe4528.htm#fr_384) According to the
Dîpikâ: having repeated the three Gâthâs beginning âriyauva*ggh*âya.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[148:3](sbe4528.htm#fr_385) This verse is the
same as verse 18, except a verbal difference in the last line.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[148:4](sbe4528.htm#fr_386) Pa*d*ikamittu
kâlassa, see [p. 145](#page_145), note [1](#fn_370). The Dîpikâ here
explains this phrase by: doing acts proper for that time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twenty-Seventh Lecture. The Bad Bullocks](sbe4529)
