[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4526)  [Next](sbe4528) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### TWENTY-FIFTH LECTURE.

###### THE TRUE SACRIFICE.

There was a famous Brâhma*n*a, *G*ayaghôsha by name, who was born in a
Brâhmanical family, but who was pledged to the performing of the
yamas <span id="fr_350"></span>[1](#fn_349). (1)

This great sage, who subdued all his senses, and who walked on the right
road, came, on his wandering from village to village, to the town of
Benares. (2)

There outside of Benares he took up his lodgings in a pleasant park;
there he took up his abode in a pure place to live and sleep in. (3)

At the same time a Brâhma*n*a, versed in the Vêdas, Vi*g*ayaghôsha by
name, offered a sacrifice in that town. (4)

Now this houseless (monk) at the end of a fast of a month's duration,
went to the sacrifice of Vi*g*ayaghôsha to beg alms. (5)

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

The priest wanted to turn the approaching monk off: 'I shall not give
you alms, mendicant, beg somewhere else. (6)

'Priests who are versed in the Vêdas and are chaste as behoves offerers,
who are versed in the *G*yôtishâṅga <span
id="fr_351"></span>[1](#fn_350) and are well grounded in the sacrificial
science, who are able to save themselves. and others, such priests ought
to be presented with food and all they desire.' (7, 8)

When the great sage was thus refused by the priest, he was neither angry
nor pleased, as he always strove for the highest good. (9)

Not to obtain food, or drink, or whatever else he wanted, but to save
these people he spoke the following words: (10)

"You do not know what is most essential <span
id="fr_352"></span>[2](#fn_351) in the Vêdas, nor in sacrifices, nor in
the heavenly bodies <span id="fr_353"></span>[3](#fn_352), nor in
duties <span id="fr_354"></span>[4](#fn_353). (11)

"Nor do you know those who are able to save themselves and others; but
if you do, then speak out!" (12)

The priest did not make a reply to defend himself against his
insinuation; but he and all there assembled joined their hands and
questioned the great sage: (13)

'Tell us the most essential subject in the Vêdas, and tell us what is
most essential in the sacrifice;

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

tell us the first of the heavenly bodies, and tell us the best of
dharmas. (14)

'Who are able to save themselves and others (viz. tell me). I ask you to
solve this my doubt, O saint.' (15)

"The most essential subject in the Vêdas is the agnihôtra, and that of
the sacrifice is the purpose of the sacrifice <span
id="fr_355"></span>[1](#fn_354); the first of the heavenly bodies is the
moon, and the best of dharmas is that of Kâ*s*yapa (i.e. *Ri*shabha).
(16)

"The beautiful (gods) with joined hands praise and worship the highest
Lord (i.e. the Tîrthakara) as the planets, &c., (praise) the moon. (17)

"The ignorant (priests) pretend to know the sacrifice, those whose
Brâhmanical excellence consists in (false) science; they shroud
themselves in study and penance, being like fire covered by ashes. (18)

"He who is called by people a Brâhma*n*a and is worshipped like fire (is
no true Brâhma*n*a). But him we call a true Brâhma*n*a, whom the wise
point out as such. (19)

"He who has no worldly attachment after entering the order, who does not
repent of having become a monk <span id="fr_356"></span>[2](#fn_355),
and who takes delight in the noble words, him we call a Brâhma*n*a. (20)

"He who is exempt from love, hatred, and fear,

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (and who shines
forth) like burnished gold, purified in fire <span
id="fr_357"></span>[1](#fn_356), him we call a Brâhma*n*a. (21)

"A lean, self-subduing ascetic, who reduces his flesh and blood, who is
pious and has reached Nirvâ*n*a, him we call a Brâhma*n*a. (22)

"He who thoroughly knows living beings, whether they move or not, and
does not injure them in any of the three ways <span
id="fr_358"></span>[2](#fn_357), him we call a Brâhma*n*a. (23)

"He who does not speak untruth from anger or for fun, from greed or from
fear, him we call a Brâhma*n*a. (24)

"He who does not take anything that is not given him, be it sentient or
not sentient, small or large, him we call a Brâhma*n*a. (25)

"He who does not carnally love divine, human, or animal beings, in
thoughts, words, or acts, him we call a Brâhma*n*a. (26)

"He who is not defiled by pleasures as a lotus growing in the water is
not wetted by it, him we call a Brâhma*n*a. (27)

"He who is not greedy, who lives unknown, who has no house and no
property, and who has no friendship with householders, him we call a
Brâhma*n*a. (28)

"He who has given up his former connections (with his parents, &c.),
with his kinsmen and relations, and who is not given to pleasure, him we
call a Brâhma*n*a. (29)

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

"The binding of animals (to the sacrificial pole), all the Vêdas, and
sacrifices, being causes of sin, cannot save the sinner; for his works
(or Karman) are very powerful. (30)

"One does not become a *S*rama*n*a by the tonsure, nor a Brâhma*n*a by
the sacred syllable ô*m*, nor a Muni by living in the woods, nor a
Tâpasa by wearing (clothes of) Ku*s*a-grass and bark. (31)

"One becomes a *S*rama*n*a by equanimity, a Brâhma*n*a by chastity, a
Muni by knowledge, and a Tâpasa by penance. (32)

"By one's actions one becomes a Brâhma*n*a, or a Kshattriya, or a
Vai*s*ya, or a *S*ûdra. (33)

"The Enlightened One has declared these (good qualities) through which
one becomes a (true) Snâtaka <span id="fr_359"></span>[1](#fn_358); him
who is exempt from all Karman, we call a Brâhma*n*a. (34)

"The most excellent twice-born men <span id="fr_360"></span>[2](#fn_359)
who possess these good qualities, are able to save themselves and
others." (35)

When thus his doubt had been solved, Vi*g*ayaghôsha, the Brâhma*n*a,
assented <span id="fr_361"></span>[3](#fn_360) to the great sage
*G*ayaghôsha and to his (speech). (36)

Vi*g*ayaghôsha, pleased, folded his hands and spoke

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

as follows: 'You have well declared to me what true Brâhma*n*ahood
consists in. (37)

'You are a sacrificer of sacrifices, you are the most learned of those
who know the Vêdas, you know the *G*yôtishâṅga, you know perfectly the
Law. (38)

'You are able to save yourself and others; therefore do us the honour to
accept our alms, O best of monks.' (39)

"I do not want any alms; but, O Brâhma*n*a, enter the order at once,
lest you should be drifted about on the dreadful ocean of the Sa*m*sâra,
whose eddies are dangers. (40)

"There is glue (as it were) in pleasure: those who are not given to
pleasure, are not soiled by it; those who love pleasures, must wander
about in the Sa*m*sâra; those who do not, will be liberated. (41)

"If you take two clods of clay, one wet, the other dry, and fling them
against the wall, the wet one will stick to it. (42)

"Thus foolish men, who love pleasure, will be fastened (to Karman), but
the passionless will not, even as the dry clod of clay (does not stick
to the wall)." (43)

When Vi*g*ayaghôsha had learned the excellent Law from the houseless
*G*ayaghôsha, he entered the order. (44)

*G*ayaghôsha and Vi*g*ayaghôsha both annihilated their Karman by
self-control and penance, and reached the highest perfection. (45)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_349"></span>[136:1](sbe4527.htm#fr_350) Yama etymologically
means 'restraint;' here it denotes the great vows of the *G*ainas; cf.
XXIII, 12, p. 121 and note 2.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[137:1](sbe4527.htm#fr_351) It is worthy of
note that, according to the opinion of our author, the knowledge of
astronomy, as taught in the *G*yôtisha, was one Of the principal
accomplishments of a priest. This quality of a priest must therefore
have been more conspicuous to an outsider than Brâhmanical books would
make us believe.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[137:2](sbe4527.htm#fr_352) To render muha =
mukha.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[137:3](sbe4527.htm#fr_353) Nakshatra.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[137:4](sbe4527.htm#fr_354) Dharma.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[138:1](sbe4527.htm#fr_355) *G*anna*tth*î
vêyasâ muham = ya*gñ*ârthî vedasâm mukham. According to the Dîpikâ
sacrifice here means the ten virtues: truth, penance, content, patience,
right conduct, simplicity, faith, constancy, not injuring anything, and
Sa*m*vara.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[138:2](sbe4527.htm#fr_356) According to the
commentators we should translate: He who does not embrace (his people)
on meeting them, and is not sorry on leaving them.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[139:1](sbe4527.htm#fr_357)
Niddhantamalapâvaga*m*. The commentator assumes a transposition of the
members in this compound. Such irregular compounds are not unfrequent in
our Prâk*ri*t. If, however, pâvaga stands for pâpaka, the compound would
be regular, and would refer not to 'gold,' but to the person described.
In that case we must translate: whose impurities and sins had been
annihilated.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[139:2](sbe4527.htm#fr_358) I.e. by thoughts,
words, and acts.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[140:1](sbe4527.htm#fr_359) Snâtaka denotes a
Brahman who has finished his studies; it here means as much as 'a
perfect sage.'

<span id="fn_359"></span>[140:2](sbe4527.htm#fr_360) A various reading
in one MS. adds, '*G*inas and Brâhma*n*as' before dvi*g*as.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[140:3](sbe4527.htm#fr_361) Samudâya taya*m*
ta*m* tu. The text is evidently corrupted. Samudâya stands, according to
the commentators, for samâdâya, but there is no finite verb with which
to construe the absolute participle, either expressed or easily
supplies'. Perhaps we must read samuvâya vaya*m* = samuvâ*k*a va*k*as;
for the perfect is retained in some cases. However, if this conjecture
be right, the next line would be superfluous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twenty-Sixth Lecture. The Correct Behaviour](sbe4528)
