[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4558)  [Next](sbe4560) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ELEVENTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### THE PATH.

What is the Path that has been preached by the wise Brâhma*n*a <span
id="fr_919"></span>[2](#fn_912) (i.e. Mahâvîra), having correctly
entered upon which path a man crosses the flood (of Sa*m*sâra) which is
difficult to pass? (1)

O monk and great sage, tell us this best path which leads to liberation
from all misery, as you know it! (2)

Tell us how we should describe that path, if somebody, a god or a man,
should ask us about it! (3)

If somebody, a god or a man, ask you about it, tell them the truth about
the path. Listen to me! (4)

The very difficult (path) explained by the Kâ*s*yapa, following which
some men from this earth

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

have formerly passed over. (the Sa*m*sâra) like traders over the
ocean <span id="fr_920"></span>[1](#fn_913), pass over it (even now),
and will pass over it in future; (this path which) I have learned, I
shall explain in due order; men, listen to me! (5, 6)

Earth-lives are individual beings, so are water-lives, fire-lives, and
wind-lives; grass, trees, corn; (7)

And the remaining, (viz.) the movable beings; thus are enumerated the
six classes of living beings; these are all the living beings, there are
no more besides. (8)

A wise man should study them with all means of philosophical research.
All beings hate pains; therefore one should not kill them. (9)

This is the quintessence of wisdom: not to kill anything. Know this to
be the legitimate conclusion from the principle of the reciprocity with
regard to non-killing <span id="fr_921"></span>[2](#fn_914). (10)

He should cease to injure living beings whether they move or not, on
high, below, and on earth. For this has been called the Nirvâ*n*a, which
consists in peace <span id="fr_922"></span>[3](#fn_915). (11)

Master (of his senses) and avoiding wrong, he should do no harm to
anybody, neither by thoughts, nor words, nor acts. (12)

A wise man who restrains his senses and possesses great knowledge,
should accept such things as are freely given him, being always
circumspect with regard to the accepting of alms, and abstaining from
what he is forbidden to accept. (13)

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

A true monk should not accept such food and drink as has been especially
prepared for him along with slaughter of living beings. (14)

He should not partake of a meal which contains but a particle of
forbidden food <span id="fr_923"></span>[1](#fn_916): this is the Law of
him who is rich in control. Whatever (food a monk) suspects (to be
impure), he may not eat. (15)

A man who guards his soul and subdues his senses, should never assent to
anybody killing beings.--In towns and villages cases (will occur, which
place) the faithful (in a dilemma) <span
id="fr_924"></span>[2](#fn_917). (16)

Hearing the talk of people, one should not say, 'this is a good action,'
nor 'this is a bad action.' For there is an objection (to either
answer). (17)

He should not say that it is meritorious, because he ought to save those
beings, whether they move or not, which are killed there for the sake of
making a gift. (18)

Nor should he say that it is not meritorious, because he would then
prevent those for whose sake the food and drink in question is prepared,
to get their due. (19)

Those who praise the gift, are accessory <span
id="fr_925"></span>[3](#fn_918) to the killing of beings; those who
forbid it, deprive (others) of the means of subsistence. (20)

Those, however, who give neither answer, viz.

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

that it is meritorious, or is not so, do not expose themselves to guilt,
and will reach Beatitude <span id="fr_926"></span>[1](#fn_919). (21)

Knowing that Beatitude is the best thing as the moon is among the stars,
a sage always restrained and subduing his senses brings about Beatitude.
(22)

A pious man <span id="fr_927"></span>[2](#fn_920) shows an island to the
beings which are carried away (by the flood of the Sa*m*sâra) and suffer
for their deeds. This place of safety has been proclaimed (by the
Tîrthakaras). (23)

He who guards his soul, subdues his senses, puts a stop to the current
(of the Sa*m*sâra), and is free from Âsravas <span
id="fr_928"></span>[3](#fn_921), is (entitled to) expound the pure,
complete, unparalleled Law. (24)

Those who do not know this (Law), are not awakened, though they fancy
themselves awakened; believing themselves awakened, they are beyond the
boundary of right faith <span id="fr_929"></span>[4](#fn_922). (25)

Eating seeds and drinking cold water <span
id="fr_930"></span>[5](#fn_923) and what

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

has been especially prepared for them, they enter upon meditation <span
id="fr_931"></span>[1](#fn_924), but are ignorant of the truth, and do
not possess carefulness. (26)

As *dh*aṅkas, herons, ospreys, cormorants, and pheasants meditate upon
capturing fish, (which is) a sinful and very low meditation, so some
heretical, unworthy *S*rama*n*as contemplate the pursuit of pleasures;
(they are) sinful and very low like herons. (27, 28)

Here some weak-minded persons, abusing the pure path, enter upon a wrong
path. They thereby will go to misery and destruction. (29)

As a blind-born man getting into a leaky boat wants to reach the shore,
but is drowned during the passage <span id="fr_932"></span>[2](#fn_925);
so some unworthy, heretical *S*rama*n*as, having got into the full
current (of the *S*a*m*sâra), will incur great danger. (30, 31)

But knowing this Law which has been proclaimed by the Kâ*s*yapa, (a
monk) crosses the dreadful current (of the Sa*m*sâra), and wanders about
intent on the benefit of his soul. (32)

Indifferent to worldly objects, a man should wander about treating all
creatures in the world so as he himself would be treated. (33)

A wise man knowing (and renouncing) excessive pride and deceit, (in
short) giving up all (causes of worldly existence), brings about his
Liberation <span id="fr_933"></span>[3](#fn_926). (34)

He acquires good qualities, and leaves off bad qualities; a monk, who
vigorously practises austerities, avoids anger and pride. (35)

The Buddhas <span id="fr_934"></span>[4](#fn_927) that were, and the
Buddhas that

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

will be, they (as it were) have Peace as their foundation, even as all
things have the earth for their foundation. (36)

And if any accidents whatever befall him who has gained that
(foundation), he will not be overpowered by them as a mountain by the
storm <span id="fr_935"></span>[1](#fn_928). (37)

A restrained, very learned, and wise (monk) should accept such alms as
are freely given him, being free from passions and waiting for his end.
This is the doctrine of the Kêvalin. (38)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_912"></span>[310:2](sbe4559.htm#fr_919) See note on IX, 1.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[311:1](sbe4559.htm#fr_920) The same simile
occurs also in I, 3, 4, 18, above [p. 271](sbe4549.htm#page_271).

<span id="fn_914"></span>[311:2](sbe4559.htm#fr_921) The same verse
occurred above, I, 1, 4, 10, [p. 247](sbe4542.htm#page_247).

<span id="fn_915"></span>[311:3](sbe4559.htm#fr_922) We have had the
same verse above, I, 3, 4, 20, [p. 271](sbe4549.htm#page_271).

<span id="fn_916"></span>[312:1](sbe4559.htm#fr_923) This is the meaning
of the phrase pûtikarma na sêvêta.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[312:2](sbe4559.htm#fr_924) When well-meaning
people sink a well, offer a sacrifice, or feed persons, &c.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[312:3](sbe4559.htm#fr_925) Literally, wish.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[313:1](sbe4559.htm#fr_926) *S*îlâṅka quotes
the following Sanskrit verse to show the application of the maxim to the
digging of a well: satya*m* vaprêshu *s*îta*m* *s*a*s*ikaradhavala*m*
vâri pîtvâ prakâma*m* vyu*kkh*innâ*s*êshat*ri*sh*n*â*h*
pramuditamanasa*h* prâ*n*isârthâ bhavanti \| *s*ôsha*m* nîtê *g*alaughê
dinakarakira*n*air yânty anantâ vinâ*s*a*m*
tênô<sup>ऽ</sup>dâsînabhâva*m* vra*g*ati muniga*n*a*h* kûpavaprâdikârvê
\|\| 'Forsooth, when living beings drink to their hearts' content the
cool water of ditches, which is white like the moon, their thirst is
completely allayed and their heart is gladdened; but when all the water
is dried up by the rays of the sun, numberless creatures must die;
therefore the sages decline every interest in the construction of wells
and ditches.'

<span id="fn_920"></span>[313:2](sbe4559.htm#fr_927) The commentators
connect sâhu as adjective with dîvam, and supply Tîrthakara, &c. as
subject.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[313:3](sbe4559.htm#fr_928) See above, [p.
55](sbe4514.htm#page_55), note [1](sbe4514.htm#fn_165).

<span id="fn_922"></span>[313:4](sbe4559.htm#fr_929) Samâdhi.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[313:5](sbe4559.htm#fr_930) Vîôdaga =
bî*g*ôdaka.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[314:1](sbe4559.htm#fr_931) Comp. I, 3, 3, 12.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[314:2](sbe4559.htm#fr_932) Verses 30, 31 *a* =
I, 1, 2, 31, 32 *a*.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[314:3](sbe4559.htm#fr_933) The first line of
this verse occurred in I, 9, 36.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[314:4](sbe4559.htm#fr_934) Here Buddha is a
synonym for Tîrthakara.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[315:1](sbe4559.htm#fr_935) *S*îlâṅka says that
by exercise the power of resistance will be increased, and in
confirmation of this he relates the well-known story of the herdsman who
daily carried a calf from its birth till it was two years old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 1, Lecture 12: The Creed](sbe4560)
