[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4504)  [Next](sbe4506.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THIRD LECTURE.

###### THE FOUR REQUISITES.

Four things of paramount value are difficult to obtain here by a living
being: human birth, instruction in the Law, belief in it, and energy in
self-control. (1)

I. The universe is peopled by manifold creatures, who are, in this
Sa*m*sâra, born in different families and castes for having done various
actions. (2)

Sometimes they go to the world of the gods, sometimes to the hells,
sometimes they become Asuras in accordance with their actions. (3)

Sometimes they become Kshattriyas, or *K*a*nd*âlas and Bukkasas, or
worms and moths, or (insects called) Kunthu <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_87) and ants. (4.md)

Thus living beings of sinful actions, who are born again and again in
ever-recurring births, are not disgusted with the Sa*m*sâra, but they
are like warriors (never tired of the battle of life). (5)

Living beings bewildered through the influence of their actions,
distressed and suffering pains, undergo misery in non-human births. (6)

But by the cessation of Karman, perchance, living

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

beings will reach in due time a pure state and be born as men. (7)

II\. And though they be born with a human body, it will be difficult for
them to hear the Law, having heard which they will do penances, combat
their passions and abstain from killing living beings. (8)

III\. And though, by chance, they may hear the Law, it will be difficult
for them to believe in it; many who are shown the right way, stray from
it. (9)

IV\. And though they have heard the Law and believe in it, it is
difficult for them to fulfill it strenuously; many who approve of the
religion, do not adopt it. (10)

Having been born as a man, having heard the Law, believing in it, and
fulfilling it strenuously, an ascetic should restrain himself and shake
off sinfulness. (11)

The pious obtain purity, and the pure stand firmly in the Law: (the soul
afterwards) reaches the highest Nirvâ*n*a, being like unto a fire fed
with ghee. (12)

Leave off the causes of sin, acquire fame through patience! (A man who
acts up to this) will rise to the upper regions after having left this
body of clay. (13)

The Yakshas who are gifted with various virtues, (live in the heavenly
regions, situated) one above the other, shining forth like the great
luminaries, and hoping never to descend thence. (14)

Intent on enjoying divine pleasures and changing their form at will,
they live in the upper Kalpa heavens many centuries of former <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_88) years. (15.md)

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

The Yakshas, having remained there according to their merit, descend
thence at the expiration of their life and are born as men.

Men are of ten kinds. (16)

Fields and houses, gold, cattle, slaves and servants: where these four
goods, the causes of pleasure, are present, in such families he is
born <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_89). (17.md)

He will have friends and relations, be of good family, of fine
complexion, healthy, wise, noble, famous, and powerful. (18)

After having enjoyed, at their proper time, the unrivalled pleasures of
human life, he will obtain true knowledge by his pure religious merit
acquired in a former life. (19)

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

Perceiving that the four requisites are difficult to obtain, he will
apply himself to self-control, and when by penances he has shaken off
the remnant of Karman, he will become an eternal Siddha. (20)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[15:1](sbe4505.htm#fr_88.md) About the Kunthu see
below, Thirty-sixth Lecture, v. 138 and note.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[16:1](sbe4505.htm#fr_89) One 'former' (pûrva.md)
year consists of 7,560 millions of common years. The idea that years
were longer when the world was still young, is apparently suggested by
the experience which everybody will have made, that a year seemed to us
an enormously long time when we were young, and the same space of time
<span id="page_17">p. 17</span> appears to us shorter and shorter as we
advance in life. A similar analogy with our life has probably caused the
belief in the four ages of the world, shared by the Hindus and the
ancients. For does not childhood to most of us appear the happiest
period of our life, and youth better still than the time of full-grown
manhood? As in retrospect our life appears to us, so primitive man
imagines the life of the world to have been: the first age was the best
and the longest, and the following ages grew worse and worse, and became
shorter at the same time. This primitive conceit was by the ancients
combined with the conceit of the year, so that the four ages were
compared with the four seasons of the year. Something similar seems to
have happened in India, where, however, there are three or six seasons.
For the *G*ainas seem to have originally divided one Eon into six minor
periods. Now the year was frequently compared to a wheel, and this
second metaphor was worked out by the *G*ainas. They named the six minor
periods aras, literally spokes of a wheel, and divided the whole Eon
into one descending part (of the wheel), avasarpi*n*î, and one rising
part, utsarpi*n*î. These Avasarpi*n*îs and Utsarpi*n*îs are probably a
later improvement, and the Eon originally contained but six Aras. But if
there were indeed twelve Aras from the beginning, they must have been
suggested by the twelve months of the year.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[17:1](sbe4505.htm#fr_90.md) This is the first of
the ten kinds of men mentioned above; the remaining nine are enumerated
in the following verse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fourth Lecture. Impurity](sbe4506.md)
