[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4514)  [Next](sbe4516) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THIRTEENTH LECTURE.

###### KITRA AND SAMBHÛTA <span id="fr_170"></span>[3](#fn_169).

Being contemptuously treated for the sake of his birth (as a
*K*â*nd*âla) Sambhûta took, in Hastinâpura,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

the sinful resolution (to become a universal monarch in some later
birth); descending from the heavenly region Padmagulma, he was born of
*K*ulanî in Kâmpilya as Brahmadatta; *K*itra, however, was born in the
town Purimatâla in the great family of a merchant; when he had heard the
Law, he entered the order. (1, 2)

In the town Kâmpilya, both Sambhûta and *K*itra (as they were called in
a former birth) met again and told each other the reward they had
realised for their good and bad actions. (3)

The universal monarch Brahmadatta, the powerful and glorious king,
respectfully addressed the following words to him (who had been) his
brother (in a former birth): (4)

We were brothers once, kind to each other, loving each other, wishing
well to each other. (5)

'We were slaves in the country of the Da*s*âr*n*as, then antelopes on
mount Kâla*ñg*ara, then geese on the shore of M*ri*tagaṅgâ, and
*S*vapâkas in the land of Kâ*s*i. (6)

'And we were gods having great power, in the regions of the gods. This
is our sixth birth, in which we are separated from each other.' (7)

"Karman is produced by sinful thoughts, and you have entertained them, O
king; it is by the influence of this Karman that we were separated." (8)

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

'I had done actions derived from truth and purity, and now I enjoy their
effect; is this also true in your case, *K*itra?' (9)

"Every good deed will bear its fruit to men; there is no escape from the
effect of one's actions. Through riches and the highest pleasures my
soul has got the reward for its virtues. (10)

"Know, Sambhûta, that you have got the reward of your virtues in the
shape of great wealth and prosperity; but know, O king, that is just so
with *K*itra; he also obtained prosperity and splendour. (11)

"A song of deep meaning condensed in words has been repeated in the
midst of a crowd of men, (having heard) which monks of piety and virtues
exert themselves in this (religion): I have become a *S*rama*n*a." (12)

'Renowned are my beautiful palaces U*kk*a, Udaya, Madhu, Karka, and
Brahman: this house, full of treasures and containing the finest
products of the Pa*ñk*âlas, O *K*itra <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_170), regard it as your own! (13)

'Surround yourself with women who dance, and sing, and make music; enjoy
these pleasures, O monk; I deem renunciation a hard thing.' (14)

As the virtuous *K*itra, for old friendship's sake, loved the king who
was attached to sensual pleasures, and as he had at heart his welfare,
he spoke to him the following words: (is)

"All singing is but prattle, all dancing is but

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

mocking, all ornaments are but a burden, all pleasures produce but
pains. (16)

"O king, pleasures which the ignorant like, but which produce pains, do
not delight pious monks who care not for pleasure, but are intent on the
virtues of right conduct. (17)

"Excellent king, the lowest caste of men is that of the *S*vapâkas, to
which we twice belonged; as such we were loathed by all people, and we
lived in the hamlets of *S*vapâkas. (18)

"In that miserable birth we lived in the hamlets of *S*vapâkas, detested
by all people; then we acquired the Karman (the fruit of which we now
enjoy). (19)

"You are now a king of great power and prosperity, enjoying the reward
of your good actions; put from you the transitory pleasures, and enter
the order for the sake of the highest good <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_171)! (20)

"He who in this life has done no good actions and has not practised the
Law, repents of it in the next world when he has become a prey to Death.
(21)

"As a lion takes hold of an antelope, so Death leads off a man in his
last hour; neither mother, nor father, nor brother will, at that time,
save a particle (of his life). (22)

"Neither his kinsmen, nor his friends, nor his sons, nor his relations
will share his suffering, he alone has to bear it; for the Karman
follows the doer. (23)

"Leaving behind bipeds and quadrupeds, his fields, his house, his
wealth, his corn, and everything;

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

against his will, and accompanied only by his Karman <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_172), he enters a new existence, either a
good or a bad one. (24)

"When they have burned with fire on the funeral pile his forlorn,
helpless corpse, his wife and sons and kinsfolk will choose another man
to provide for them. (25)

"Life drags on (towards death) continuously <span
id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_173); old age carries off the vigour of man.
King of the Pa*ñk*âlas, mark my words: do no fearful actions." (26)

'I, too, know just as well as you, O saint, what you have told me in
your speech: pleasures will get a hold on men and are not easily
abandoned by such as we are, sir. (27)

'O *K*itra, in Hastinâpura <span id="fr_175"></span>[3](#fn_174) I saw
the powerful king (Sanatkumâra), and I took that sinful resolution in my
desire for sensual pleasures. (28)

And since I did not repent of it, this has come of it, that I still long
for sensual pleasures, though I know the Law. (29)

'As an elephant, sinking down in a quagmire,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

sees the raised ground but does not get to the shore, so do we who long
for sensual pleasures, not follow the path of monks. (30)

'Time elapses and quickly pass the days; the pleasures of men are not
permanent; they come to a man and leave him just as a bird leaves a tree
void of fruit.' (31)

"If you are unable to abandon pleasure, then do noble actions, O king;
following the Law, have compassion on all creatures: then you will
become a god on entering a new existence. (32)

"If you have no intention of abandoning pleasure, and still long for
undertakings and property, my long talk has been to no purpose. I go,
king, farewell." (33)

And Brahmadatta, king of the Pa*ñk*âlas, did not act on the counsel of
the saint; he enjoyed the highest pleasure, and (afterwards) sank into
the deepest hell. (34)

But *K*itra the great sage, of excellent conduct and penance, was
indifferent to pleasure; after he had practised the highest
self-control, he reached the highest place of perfection. (35)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[56:3](sbe4515.htm#fr_170) The stories about
*K*itra and Sambhûta and the fate they <span id="page_57">p. 57</span>
underwent in many births are common to Brahmans, *G*ainas, and
Buddhists. The whole subject has been exhaustively dealt with by Prof.
Leumann in two learned papers in the Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde
des Morgenlandes, vol. v, pp. 1 ff., 111 ff., where an analysis of the
various documents which relate this legend is given, and the Prâk*ri*t
text of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Lectures together with a German
translation is published. For all details, therefore, the reader is
referred to Prof. Leumann's papers.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[58:1](sbe4515.htm#fr_171) The commentator
constructs *K*itra with dha*n*appabhûya: full of manifold treasures; but
Prof. Leumann is probably right in taking it as a vocative.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[59:1](sbe4515.htm#fr_172) Âdâna, explained
*k*aritradharma.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[60:1](sbe4515.htm#fr_173) This might be
translated, as Professor Leumann suggests: possessing Karman as the germ
(of his future destiny); still I prefer the meaning vouched for by the
commentators, because karmabî*g*a generally means the germ, i.e. cause
of Karman, see below, Thirty-second Lecture, verse 7.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[60:2](sbe4515.htm#fr_174) See Professor
Leumann's remarks on this verse, l.c., p. 137 f.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[60:3](sbe4515.htm#fr_175) When Sunandâ, wife
of Sanatkumâra, paid homage to Sambhûta, then a *G*aina monk, and
touched his feet with the curls of her soft hair, he was possessed by
the desire to become a universal monarch in reward for his penances.
This is the nidâna of which the text speaks, and what I render in this
connection by 'taking a resolution.' For the story itself, see my
Ausgewählte Erzählungen in Mâhârâsh*t*rî, p. 5 f.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fourteenth Lecture. Ishukâra](sbe4516)
