[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4557)  [Next](sbe4559) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## TENTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### CAREFULNESS <span id="fr_910"></span>[1](#fn_903).

The wise (Arhat) having pondered on the Law proclaimed it; learn from me
correctly what is carefulness. A monk who forms no resolutions and is
possessed of carefulness, should wander about, giving no offence to any
creature; (1)

To no living beings, whether they move or not, whether above or below or
on earth, by putting a strain upon them by his hands or feet <span
id="fr_911"></span>[2](#fn_904). Nor should he take from householders
anything that is not freely given. (2)

Having mastered the Law and got rid of carelessness, he should live on
allowed food <span id="fr_912"></span>[3](#fn_905), and treat

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

all beings as he himself would be treated; he should not expose himself
to guilt by his desire for life; a monk who performs austerities should
not keep any store. (3)

Restraining his senses from women, a sage should wander about free from
all worldly ties. See, every creature and every being suffers pain and
is afflicted. (4)

Doing harm to these beings, an ignorant man becomes involved in sins.
Sin is committed by injuring (beings), and one sins also by employing
others (in such acts). (5)

He too who leads a miserable life, commits sin. Therefore (the *G*inas)
have enjoined thorough carefulness. One should know the truth, delight
in control and sound judgment, cease from injuring beings, and be of a
settled mind. (6)

Looking at all people with an impartial mind, one should not do anything
to please or to harm them. After a virtuous beginning some become
miserable and lose heart, (since) they desire honour and fame. (7)

Desiring unallowed <span id="fr_913"></span>[1](#fn_906) food and
accepting such, the sinner, careless in his conduct, is attached to
women, and tries to acquire property. (8)

Given to violent deeds he accumulates (Karman); on his decease he (meets
with) really distressing misery. Therefore a wise man considers well the
Law; a sage wanders about free from all worldly ties. (9)

He should not expose himself to guilt by his desire for life, but he
should wander about without any attachment. Speaking after due
consideration,

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

and combating his worldly desires, he should say nothing that involves
slaughter of living beings. (10)

He should not desire unallowed food, and he should not mix with people
who desire such; he should mortify his flesh, thinking (of his duty),
and giving up his sorrows without regard (to worldly interests). (11)

Try to realise that you are single and alone; thereby you will obtain
Liberation; mind, this is no false assertion! This Liberation is not
anything unreal, but the best thing. An ascetic is free from anger, and
delights in the truth. (12)

Abstain from sexual intercourse with women, do not acquire property; a
man possessed of carefulness will, beyond doubt, be a saviour (to
others) in all circumstances. (13)

A monk having conquered aversion to control and delight in sensual
objects <span id="fr_914"></span>[1](#fn_907), should bear all troubles
caused by (pricking) grass, cold, heat, and insects; he should endure
pleasant and unpleasant smells. (14)

Guarding his speech and possessed of carefulness, acquiring (pure)
Lê*s*yâ <span id="fr_915"></span>[2](#fn_908), he should wander about;
he should not thatch a house for himself or for others, nor behave
towards other people like a householder. (15)

Questioned by somebody who maintains the unchangeable character of the
soul <span id="fr_916"></span>[3](#fn_909), he should expound the true
(doctrine); those who engage in works and

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

are held in worldly bondage, do not know the Law which leads to
Liberation. (16)

Men here have various opinions; (they adhere) to the doctrine of the
Kriyâvâdins and Akriyâvâdins. The iniquity of an unrestrained sinner,
who after having been born injures the body (of beings to procure his
own happiness), goes on increasing. (17)

Forgetting that his life will have an end, a rash and foolish man is
full of selfishness; he toils day and night, greedy of wealth, as if he
never should grow old or die. (18)

Leave wealth and cattle, all relations and dear friends! (A man) always
talks (about these things), and he is infatuated with them; but other
people will take away his wealth. (19)

As smaller beasts keep at a distance from a lion, being afraid of him,
so a wise man keeps aloof from sin, well considering the Law. (20)

A wise man who has become awakened should turn away from sin, when he
considers the evils arising from slaughter and the great dangers
entailed by his cruel disposition. (21)

A sage setting out for the real good <span
id="fr_917"></span>[1](#fn_910) (viz. Liberation), should not speak
untruth; this (rule, they say,) comprises Nirvâ*n*a and the whole of
carefulness. He should not do works, nor cause others to do them, nor
assent to others doing them. (22)

When he gets pure (food), he should not be affected (by love or hate),
and he should not be too

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

fond (of such food) nor long for it. A pious monk, free from bonds,
should wander about desiring neither honours nor fame. (23)

A monk who has left the house and is free from desires should abandon
his body, annihilating his sins; he should not desire life nor death,
and walk about, having got beyond the Circle (of Births) <span
id="fr_918"></span>[1](#fn_911). (24)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_903"></span>[306:1](sbe4558.htm#fr_910) Samâhi = samâdhi.
This word has not only the meaning 'meditation,' but also a much wider
one. Here it is explained as 'the means of obtaining Môksha.' I have
chosen 'carefulness,' because it is less technical than 'control,' which
I have used in other places.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[306:2](sbe4558.htm#fr_911) The first part of
verse 2 to be construed with the last part of the preceding verse.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[306:3](sbe4558.htm#fr_912) Lâ*dh*e.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[307:1](sbe4558.htm#fr_913) Ahâga*d*a =
yathâk*ri*ta; cf. [p. 131](sbe4526.htm#page_131), note
[7](sbe4526.htm#fn_337), 1.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[308:1](sbe4558.htm#fr_914) This is, according
to *S*îlâṅka, the meaning of the words arai*m* rai*m* vâ, see, however,
above, [p. 111](sbe4523.htm#page_111), note [1](sbe4523.htm#fn_287).

<span id="fn_908"></span>[308:2](sbe4558.htm#fr_915) See Uttarâdhyayana,
Lecture XXXIV.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[308:3](sbe4558.htm#fr_916) Akiriyaâyâ =
akriyâtman.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[309:1](sbe4558.htm#fr_917) Attagâmî =
âptagâmin. Âpta is either Môksha as assumed in my translation, or it
denotes the 'highest authority;' in the latter case we can translate:
who proceeds on the right path.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[310:1](sbe4558.htm#fr_918) Or, the fetter of
sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 1, Lecture 11: The Path](sbe4559)
