[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4521)  [Next](sbe4523) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

### TWENTIETH LECTURE.

###### THE GREAT DUTY OF THE NIRGRANTHAS.

Piously adoring the perfected and the restrained saints, listen to my
true instruction which (teaches the real) profit (of men), religion, and
liberation <span id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_261). (1)

King *S*rê*n*ika <span id="fr_263"></span>[2](#fn_262), the ruler of
Magadha, who possessed many precious things, once made a
pleasure-excursion to the Ma*nd*ikukshi *K*aitya <span
id="fr_264"></span>[3](#fn_263). (2)

It was a park like Nandana <span id="fr_265"></span>[4](#fn_264), with
trees and creepers of many kinds, peopled by various birds, and full of
various flowers. (3)

There he saw a restrained and concentrated saint sitting below a tree,
who looked delicate and accustomed to comfort. (4)

When the king saw his figure, his astonishment at that ascetic's figure
was very great and unequalled. (5)

'O his colour, O his figure, O the loveliness of the noble man, O his
tranquillity, O his perfection, O his disregard for pleasures!' (6)

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Adoring his feet and keeping him on his right side (he sat down),
neither too far off nor too close by, and asked him with his hands
clasped: (7)

'Though a young nobleman, you have entered the order; in an age fit for
pleasure you exert yourself as a *S*rama*n*a, O ascetic; I want to hear
you explain this.' (8)

"I am without a protector, O great king; there is nobody to protect me,
I know no friend nor any one to have sympathy with me." (9)

Then king *S*rê*n*ika, the ruler of Magadha, laughed: 'How should there
be nobody to protect one so accomplished as you?' (to)

'I am the protector of religious men <span
id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_265); O monk; enjoy pleasures together with
your friends and relations; for it is a rare chance to be born as a
human being.' (11)

"You yourself are without a protector, *S*rê*n*ika, ruler of Magadha;
and as you are without a protector, how can you protect anybody else?"
(12)

When the saint had addressed this unprecedented speech to the king, who
was greatly moved and astonished, and struck with astonishment, (he
answered) <span id="fr_267"></span>[2](#fn_266): (13)

'I have horses, elephants, and subjects, a town and a seraglio, power
and command: enjoy human pleasures. (14)

'In possession of so great means, which permit the owner to enjoy all
pleasures, how could he be

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

without protection? Reverend sir, you speak untruth.' (15)

"O king, you do not know the meaning and origin <span
id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_267) of (the word) 'without protection,' nor
how one comes to be without protection or with protection, O ruler of
men. (16)

"Hear, O great king, with an undistracted mind in what way a man can be
said to be 'without protection,' and with what purpose I have said all
this. (17)

"There is a town Kau*s*âmbî by name, which is among towns what
Indra <span id="fr_269"></span>[2](#fn_268) is (among the gods); there
lived my father, who possessed great wealth. (18)

"In my childhood, O great king, I caught a very bad eye-disease and a
severe burning fever in all my limbs, O ruler of men. (19)

"My eyes ached as if a cruel enemy thrust a sharp tool in the hollow of
my body. (20)

"In the back, the heart <span id="fr_270"></span>[3](#fn_269), and the
head, I suffered

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

dreadful and very keen pains equal to a stroke of lightning. (21)

"Then the best physicians came to my help, who cure by their medical art
and by spells, who were versed in their science, and well knew spells
and roots. (22)

"They tried to cure me according to the fourfold science <span
id="fr_271"></span>[1](#fn_270) which they had been taught; but they
could not rid me of my pains: hence I say that I am without protection.
(23)

"My father would have spent all he possessed, for my sake; but he could
not rid me of my pains, hence I say that I am without protection. (24)

"My mother, O great king, was agonized with grief about her son; but she
could not, &c. (25)

"O great king, my own brothers, the elder and younger ones, could not
rid me of my pains, &c. (26)

"O great king, my own sisters, the elder and younger ones, could not,
&c. (27)

"O great king, my loving and faithful wife moistened my breast with the
tears of her eyes. (28)

"The poor lady did not eat, nor drink, nor bathe, nor use perfumes,
wreaths, and anointment, with my knowledge or without it. (29)

"O great king, she did not leave <span id="fr_272"></span>[2](#fn_271)
my side even for a moment; but she could not rid me of my pains, hence I
say that I am without protection. (30)

"Then I said: It is very hard to bear pains again and again in the
endless Circle of Births. (31)

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

"If I, for once, shall get rid of these great pains, I shall become a
houseless monk, calm, restrained, and ceasing to act. (32)

"While I thought so, I fell asleep, O ruler of men; and after that night
my pains had vanished. (33)

"Then in the morning of the next day I took leave of my relations and
became a houseless monk, calm, restrained, and ceasing to act. (34)

"Thus I became the protector of myself and of others besides, of all
living beings, whether they move or not. (35)

"My own Self is the river Vaitara*n*î, my own Self the *S*âlmalî
tree <span id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_272); my own Self is the
miraculous cow Kâmaduh, my own Self the park Nandana. (36)

"My own Self is the doer and undoer of misery and happiness; my own
Self, friend and foe, according as I act well or badly. (37)

"But there is still another want of protection, O king; hear, therefore,
O king, attentively with concentrated thoughts, how some easily
discouraged men go astray after having adopted the Law of the
Nirgranthas <span id="fr_274"></span>[2](#fn_273). (38)

"If an ordained monk, through carelessness, does not strictly keep the
great vows, if he does not restrain himself, but desires pleasure, then
his fetters will not be completely cut off. (39)

"One who does not pay constant attention to his walking, his speaking,
his begging, his receiving and keeping (of things necessary for a monk),
and his

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

easing nature <span id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_274), does not follow the
road trod by the Lord. (40)

"One who for a long time wears a shaven crown and mortifies himself, but
who is careless with regard to the vows, and neglects penance and
self-control, will not be a winner in the battle (of life). (4t)

"He is empty like a clenched <span id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_275) fist,
(of no value) like an uncoined <span id="fr_277"></span>[3](#fn_276)
false Kârshâpa*n*a or like a piece of glass resembling turquoise, he is
held lightly by men of discernment. (42)

"He who has the character of a sinner, though he lays great stress on
the outward signs of his calling <span id="fr_278"></span>[4](#fn_277)
as a means of living; he who does not control himself, though he
pretends to do so; will come to grief for a long time. (43)

"As the poison Kâlakû*t*a kills him who drinks it; as a weapon cuts him
who awkwardly handles it; as a Vêtâla kills him who does not lay him; so
the Law harms him who mixes it up with sensuality. (44)

"He who practises divination from bodily marks and dreams, who is well
versed in augury and superstitious rites, who gains a sinful living by
practising magic tricks <span id="fr_279"></span>[5](#fn_278), will have
no refuge at the time (of retribution). (45)

"The sinner, always wretched, goes from darkness

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

to darkness, to utter misery; the unholy man who breaks the rules of
monks, rushes, as it were, to hell, and to be born again as a brute.
(46)

"He who accepts forbidden alms, viz. such food as he himself asks for,
as has been bought for his sake, or as he gets regularly (as by right
and custom), who like fire devours everything, will go to hell from
here, after having sinned. (47)

"A cut-throat enemy will not do him such harm as his own perversity will
do him; the man without pity will feel repentance in the hour of death.
(48)

"In vain he adopts nakedness, who errs about matters of paramount
interest; neither this world nor the next will be his; he is a loser in
both respects in the world. (49)

"Thus the self-willed sinner who leaves the road of the highest *G*inas,
who with the appetite of an osprey is desirous of pleasure, will grieve
in useless sorrow. (50)

"A wise man who hears this discourse, an instruction full of precious
wisdom, and who deserts every path of the wicked, should walk the road
of the great Nirgranthas. (51)

"He who possesses virtuous conduct and life, who has practised the best
self-control, who keeps from sinful influences <span
id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_279), and who has destroyed his Karman, will
reach (in the end) the greatest, best, and permanent place (viz.
mukti)," (52)

Thus the austere and calm, great ascetic and great sage who kept great
vows and possessed great fame, preached at great length this great
sermon: the great duty of the Nirgranthas. (53)

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

And king *S*rê*n*ika, pleased, spoke thus: 'You have truly shown what it
is to be without protection. (54)

'You have made the best use of human birth, you have made a true gain, O
great sage, you are a protector (of mankind at large) and of your
relations, for you have entered the path of the best *G*inas. (55)

'You are the protector of all unprotected beings, O ascetic; I ask you
to forgive me: I desire you to put me right. (56)

'That by asking you I have disturbed your meditation, and that I invited
you to enjoy pleasures, all this you must forgive me.' (57)

When the lion of kings had thus, with the greatest devotion, praised the
lion of houseless monks, he, together with his wives, servants, and
relations, became a staunch believer in the Law, with a pure mind. (58)

The ruler of men, with the hair on his body joyfully erected, bowed his
head (to the monk), keeping him on his right side, and departed. (59)

And the other, rich in virtues, protected by the three Guptis, and
abstaining from injuring (living beings) in the three ways (viz. by
thought, words, and acts), travelled about on the earth, free like a
bird, and exempt from delusion. (60)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_261"></span>[100:1](sbe4522.htm#fr_262) Atthadhammagai*m* =
arthadharmagati. I think this equal to artha dharma môksha, though the
commentators offer a different explanation by making gati mean *gñ*âna.
The phrase is derived from the typical expression kâmârthadharmamôksha
by leaving out kâma, which of course could not be admitted by ascetics.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[100:2](sbe4522.htm#fr_263) He is identical
with Bimbisâra of the Buddhists; see my edition of the Kalpa Sûtra,
introduction, p. 2.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[100:3](sbe4522.htm#fr_264) The following
verses prove that *k*aitya denotes park here as the word is explained by
the scholiast in IX, 9.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[100:4](sbe4522.htm#fr_265) Nandana is Indra's
park.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[101:1](sbe4522.htm#fr_266) Bhadantâ*n*a*m*.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[101:2](sbe4522.htm#fr_267) The verb is wanting
in this verse, and there is an apparent tautology in the words as they
now stand. This is an obvious mark of a corruption in the text, which,
however, I do not know how to remove by a plausible conjecture.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[102:1](sbe4522.htm#fr_268) Pottha*m* or
po*kkh*a*m*. The commentators are at a loss to give an etymology of this
word, or rather have a choice of them to offer, which comes to the same
thing, and proves that nothing certain was known. If potthâ is the
correct form, it may be derived from pra + ut + sthâ, and mean 'origin;'
if po*kkh*â or pu*kk*a is the right spelling it is p*rikkh*â, and may
mean 'etymology.'

<span id="fn_268"></span>[102:2](sbe4522.htm#fr_269) Purâ*n*a
purabhêda*n*î. As usual the commentators give a purely etymological
explanation. But it is obvious that purabhêdana must have a similar
meaning as purandara = Indra, or purabhid *S*iva. The latter word occurs
in later literature only, and, besides, Siva does not yet seem to have
been generally acknowledged as the supreme god, when and where the
*G*aina Sûtras were composed. The Vedic word pûrbhid, 'destroyer of
castles,' also presents itself as an analogy; though it is not yet the
exclusive epithet of a god, it is frequently applied to Indra.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[102:3](sbe4522.htm#fr_270) To render
antari*kkh*a or antarittha. The Guzeratî translation renders it h*ri*day
a.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[103:1](sbe4522.htm#fr_271) *K*âuppâya =
*K*atu*h*pâda. Four branches of medical science are intended.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[103:2](sbe4522.htm#fr_272) Phi*tt*ai =
bhra*s*yati, Hêma*k*andra's Prâk*ri*t Grammar, iv, 177.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[104:1](sbe4522.htm#fr_273) See above, [p.
94](sbe4521.htm#page_94).

<span id="fn_273"></span>[104:2](sbe4522.htm#fr_274) The verses 38-53
are apparently a later addition because (1) the subject treated in them
is not connected with that of the foregoing part, and (2) they are
composed in a different metre.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[105:1](sbe4522.htm#fr_275) These are the five
Samitis, see above, p. 50.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[105:2](sbe4522.htm#fr_276) Pollâ or pullâ,
explained anta*h*-sushira 'hollow in the middle.'

<span id="fn_276"></span>[105:3](sbe4522.htm#fr_277) Ayantita =
ayantrita. My translation is but conjectural. Perhaps the regular coins
are not meant, but stamped lumps of metal, which were current long
before coins were introduced.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[105:4](sbe4522.htm#fr_278) Literally, 'the
flag of the seers;' the broom &c. are meant.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[105:5](sbe4522.htm#fr_279) Kuhê*d*avig*g*â.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[106:1](sbe4522.htm#fr_280) Nirâsava =
nirâsrava. For the âsravas, see [p. 55](sbe4514.htm#page_55), note
[1](sbe4514.htm#fn_165).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twenty-First Lecture. Samudrapâla](sbe4523)
