[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4509)  [Next](sbe4511) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EIGHTH LECTURE.

###### KAPILA'S VERSES <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_125).

By what acts can I escape a sorrowful lot in this unstable ineternal
Sa*m*sâra, which is full of misery? (1)

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Quitting your former connections place your affection on nothing; a monk
who loves not even those who love him, will be freed from sin and
hatred. (2)

Then the best of sages, who is exempt from

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

delusion and possesses perfect knowledge and faith, speaks for the
benefit and eternal welfare, and for the final liberation of all beings.
(3)

All fetters (of the soul), and all hatred, everything of this kind,
should a monk cast aside; he should not be attached to any pleasures,
examining them well and taking care of himself. (4)

A stupid, ignorant sinner who never fixes his thoughts on the soul's
benefit and eternal welfare, but sinks down through hatred and the
temptation of lust, will be ensnared as a fly is caught on glue. (5)

It is difficult to cast aside the pleasures of life, weak men will not
easily give them up; but there are pious ascetics (sâdhu) who get over
the impassable (Sa*m*sâra) as merchants cross the sea. (6)

Some there are who call themselves *S*rama*n*as, though they are like
the beasts ignorant of (the prohibition of) killing living beings; the
stupid sinners go to hell through their superstitious beliefs <span
id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_126). (7)

One should not permit (or consent to) the killing of living beings; then
he will perhaps be delivered from all misery; thus have spoken the
preceptors who have proclaimed the Law of ascetics. (8)

A careful man who does not injure living beings, is called 'circumspect'
(samita). The sinful Karman will quit him as water quits raised ground.
(9)

In thoughts, words, and acts he should do

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

nothing injurious to beings who people the world, whether they move or
not. (10)

He should know what alms may be accepted, and should strictly keep these
rules; a monk should beg food only for the sustenance of life, and
should not be dainty. (11)

He should eat what tastes badly, cold food, old beans, Vakkasa Pulâga,
and for the sustenance of his life he should eat Manghu (ground badara).
(12)

Those who interpret the marks of the body, and dreams, and who know the
foreboding changes in the body (aṅgavidyâ) <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_127), are not to be called *S*rama*n*as; thus
the preceptors have declared. (13)

Those who do not take their life under discipline, who cease from
meditation and ascetic practices <span id="fr_129"></span>[2](#fn_128),
and who are desirous of pleasures, amusements, and good fare, will be
born again as Asuras. (14)

And when they rise (in another birth) from the world of the Asuras, they
err about, for a long time, in the Sa*m*sâra; those whose souls are
sullied by many sins, will hardly ever attain Bôdhi. (15)

And if somebody should give the whole earth to one man, he would not
have enough; so difficult is it to satisfy anybody. (16)

The more you get, the more you want; your desires increase with your
means. Though two mâshas would do to supply your want, still you would
scarcely think ten millions sufficient. (17)

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

Do not desire (women), those female demons <span
id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_129), on whose breasts grow two lumps of
flesh, who continually change their mind, who entice men, and then make
a sport of them as of slaves. (18)

A houseless (monk) should not desire women, he should turn away from
females; learning thoroughly the Law, a monk should strictly keep its
rules. (19)

This Law has been taught by Kapila of pure knowledge; those who follow
it, will be saved and will gain both worlds. (20)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_125"></span>[31:1](sbe4510.htm#fr_126) This lecture is
ascribed to Kapila. According to an old story, told in the commentary,
he was the son of Kâ*s*yapa, a Brahman <span id="page_32">p. 32</span>
of Kau*s*âmbî, and his wife Ya*s*â. When Kâ*s*yapa died, his place was
given to another man. His wife then sent her boy to *S*râvastî to study
under Indradatta, a friend of his father's. That man was willing to
instruct the boy, and procured him board and lodging in a rich
merchant's house. Kapila, however, soon fell in love with the
servant-girl who was appointed to his service. Once, at a festival kept
by her caste, the girl in tears told him that she could not take part in
the festivity as she had no money to buy ornaments. To get some she
asked him to go to Dhana, a merchant, who used to give two pieces of
gold to the man who saluted him first in the morning. Accordingly Kapila
set out in the night, but was taken up by the police and brought before
the king, Prasêna*g*it. The student made a clear breast before the king,
who was so pleased with him that he promised to give him whatever he
should ask. Kapila went in the garden to consider what he should ask;
and the more he thought about it, the more he raised the sum which he
believed he wanted, till it came to be ten thousand millions. But then,
all of a sudden, the light came upon him; he began to repent of the
sinful life he had led up to that time, and tearing out his hair he
became a Svaya*m*sa*m*buddha. Returning to the king, he pronounced verse
17: The more you get, &c., and giving him the Dharmalâbha, he went his
way. He practised austerities and acquired superior knowledge, by dint
of which he came to know that in a wood, eighteen leagues from
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, lived a gang of five hundred robbers, under a chief
Balabhadra. These men, he knew, would become converts to the right
faith; accordingly he went to the wood where they lived. He was made
prisoner, and brought before the leader of the robbers. To have some fun
out of him they ordered him to dance, and on his objecting that there
was none to play up, they all clapped their hands to beat the time. He
then sang the first stanza of this lecture, by which some robbers were
converted, and he continued to sing, repeating this stanza after each
following verse (as dhruva), till at last all the robbers were
converted.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[33:1](sbe4510.htm#fr_127) The commentator
quotes the following words: brahma*n*ê brâhma*n*am âlabhêta, indrâya
kshattram, marudbhyô vai*s*ya*m*, tapasê *s*ûdram, and explains them: he
who kills a Brâhma*n*a will acquire Brahma knowledge.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[34:1](sbe4510.htm#fr_128) See the note on
verse 17 of the Fifteenth Lecture.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[34:2](sbe4510.htm#fr_129) Samâdhiyôgâ*h*.
Samâdhi is concentration of the mind, and the yôgâs are, in this
connection, the operations (vyâpâra) of mind, speech, and body conducive
to it.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[35:1](sbe4510.htm#fr_130) Râkshasîs in the
original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ninth Lecture. The Pravra*g*yâ of King Nami](sbe4511)
