[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4570)  [Next](sbe4572) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SEVENTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### NÂLANDÂ.

At that time, at that period, there was a town of the name
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha: it was rich, happy, thriving, &c. <span
id="fr_1232"></span>[2](#fn_1222) Outside of Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, in a
north-eastern

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

direction, there was the suburb Nâlandâ; it contained many hundreds of
buildings, &c. <span id="fr_1233"></span>[1](#fn_1223) (1)

In that suburb Nâlandâ there was a householder called Lêpa; he was
prosperous, famous; rich in high and large houses, beds, seats,
vehicles, and chariots; abounding in riches, gold, and silver; possessed
of useful and necessary things; wasting plenty of food and drink; owning
many male and female slaves, cows, buffaloes, and sheep; and inferior to
nobody. (2)

This householder Lêpa, a follower of the *S*rama*n*as, comprehended (the
doctrine of) living beings and things without life, (&c., all as in II,
2, 76, p. 382, down to the end of the paragraph). (3)

This householder Lêpa possessed, in a northeastern direction from the
suburb Nâlandâ, a bathing-hall, called *S*êshadravyâ <span
id="fr_1234"></span>[2](#fn_1224); it contained many hundreds of
pillars, was beautiful, &c. In a northeastern direction from this
bathing-hall *S*êshadravyâ, there was a park called Hastiyâma.
(Description of the park <span id="fr_1235"></span>[3](#fn_1225).) (4)

And there in some house the Venerable Gautama was staying. The venerable
(man) was in the garden, and so was Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, a
Nirgrantha and follower of Pâr*s*va <span
id="fr_1236"></span>[4](#fn_1226), of the Mêdârya Gôtra. He went there
where the Venerable Gautama was, and said: 'O long-lived Gautama, I want
to ask you about a point (of faith); O long-lived one,

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

please explain it to me so as it has been taught (by the Tîrthakara).'
And the Venerable Gautama spoke thus to Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla:
"Well, long-lived one, I shall see about it, when I have heard and
understood (your question)." And Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, spoke thus
to the Venerable Gautama: (5)

'O long-lived Gautama, there are Nirgrantha *S*rama*n*as, called
Kumâraputras, who profess your creed; they make a zealous <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[1](#fn_1227) householder, a follower of the
*S*rama*n*as, renounce injury to movable beings except on the order
(from an established authority), as the householder caused one of the
captured thieves to be set free <span id="fr_1238"></span>[2](#fn_1228).
Those who make this renunciation, make a bad renunciation; those who
cause this renunciation to be made, cause a bad renunciation to be made;
in causing another to make this renunciation, they annul their own
allegation <span id="fr_1239"></span>[3](#fn_1229). Why do I say this?
Beings belong to the Circle of Births; though they be (now) immovable
beings, they will (some time) become movable ones, or though they be
(now) movable beings, they will become immovable ones; when they leave
the bodies

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

of immovable beings, they will be born in bodies of movable ones, and
when they leave the bodies of movable beings, they will be born in
bodies of immovable ones. When they are born in bodies of immovable
beings, it is no sin to kill them. (6)

'(But if they make him renounce) injury to creatures which are, for the
time being, movable beings, except on the order (from an established
authority)--as the householder caused one of the captured thieves to be
set free--(if they take this vow), those who make this renunciation,
make a good renunciation; those who cause this renunciation to be made,
cause a good renunciation to be made; in causing another to make this
renunciation, they do not annul their own allegation. Though in this
way <span id="fr_1240"></span>[1](#fn_1230) a correct expression is
found, some (monks) from anger or greed cause the householder to make
the renunciation (without the necessary restriction). Is not this our
interpretation right? O long-lived Gautama, do you approve of it?' (7)

And Gautama spoke thus to Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla: "O long-lived
Udaka, we certainly do not approve of it. The *S*rama*n*as or
Brâhma*n*as who say thus, speak thus, declare thus, and explain thus, do
not speak as *S*rama*n*as or Nirgranthas, they speak noxious speech.
They mislead laymen. They make void all vows undertaken for sparing
particular living beings <span id="fr_1241"></span>[2](#fn_1231). Why do
I say this? Beings belong

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

to the Circle of Births; though they be (now) immovable beings, they
will (some time) become movable ones, (&c., all as in § 6, down to) when
they leave the bodies of movable beings, they will be born in the bodies
of immovable ones. When they are born in the bodies of movable beings,
it is a sin to kill them." (8)

And Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, spoke thus: 'Which beings do you call
movable beings? movable ones or others? '

And Gautama spoke thus to Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla: "O long-lived
Udaka, what you call beings which are, for the time being, movable ones,
we call movable beings; and what we call movable beings, you call beings
which are, for the time being, movable ones. Both expressions are equal,
and mean the same thing. O long-lived one, why do you think it more
correct to say: beings which are, for the time being, movable ones; and
why do you think it incorrect to say: movable beings, that you censure
the one expression, and applaud the other? This your interpretation is
not right. (9)

"And the Venerable One has spoken thus: Some men there are who say: we
cannot, submitting to the tonsure, renounce the life of a householder
and enter the monastic state, but we shall gradually conform to the
Gôtra (i.e. community of the monks). Accordingly they make known the
limits <span id="fr_1242"></span>[1](#fn_1232), fix the limits,
determine the limits (beyond which they will not go in the enjoyment of
worldly goods); and

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

renounce injury to movable beings, except on the order <span
id="fr_1243"></span>[1](#fn_1233) (of an established authority)--as the
householder caused one of the captured thieves to be set free. And this
turns out to their benefit. (10)

"Movable beings are called so, when they get this character <span
id="fr_1244"></span>[2](#fn_1234) through the taking effect of the
Karman relating to movable beings. But when their duration of life as
movable beings comes to its close, the (soul), embodied in a movable
being, leaves its life as such and becomes embodied in an immovable
being. Immovable beings are called so, when they get this character
through the taking effect of the Karman relating to immovable beings.
But when their duration of life as an immovable being comes to its
close, the (soul), embodied in an immovable being, leaves its life as
such and takes again a new form of existence; they are (then)
called <span id="fr_1245"></span>[3](#fn_1235) animated beings,
(animals) of large bodies, or of long life." (11)

And Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, spoke thus to the Venerable Gautama:
'Is there not a chance, that a follower of the *S*rama*n*as, though he
has renounced slaughter of but one class of living beings, ceases
altogether to injure any <span id="fr_1246"></span>[4](#fn_1236)? Why do

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I say this? Beings
belong to the Circle of Births, though they be (now) immovable beings,
they will (some time) become movable ones, and though they be movable
beings, they will become immovable ones. When they leave the bodies of
immovable beings, all are born in bodies of movable ones, and when they
leave the bodies of movable beings, all will be born in bodies of
immovable ones. When they are born in bodies of immovable beings, they
may be killed <span id="fr_1247"></span>[1](#fn_1237).' (12)

And the Venerable Gautama spoke thus to Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla: "O
long-lived one, we <span id="fr_1248"></span>[2](#fn_1238) do not admit
what you say; viz. that there is a chance that a follower of the
*S*rama*n*as should cease to do injury to any kind of living beings. Why
do we say this? Beings belong to the Circle of Births, (&c., all as
above, down to) when they are born in bodies of movable beings, it is a
sin to kill them. They are called animated beings, (animals) of large
bodies, or of long life. There are always a great many animate beings,
(the slaughter of) which a follower of the *S*rama*n*as must renounce,
there are none, (the slaughter of) which he need not renounce. If he
ceases, or has done with, or has given up (injuring) the large class of
movable beings, his renunciation is

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

good. What you or somebody else says, that there is a chance of a
layman's ceasing to do an injury altogether, by renouncing slaughter of
one kind of beings; this interpretation of yours is not right." (13)

The Venerable One <span id="fr_1249"></span>[1](#fn_1239) gave an
illustration: "I put a question to the Nirgranthas: O long-lived ones,
(suppose) there be some men who have made the following declaration: 'I
shall not inflict punishment on those who, submitting to the tonsure,
renounce the life of a householder and enter the monastic state; but I
shall inflict punishment on those who lead a domestic life.' Some
*S*rama*n*a, who for four or five years, or for six or ten years--the
period may be shorter or longer--has wandered about in the land, returns
to domestic life. Now answer me: does the man break his word when he
puts to death this (renegade) householder?" 'Certainly not!' "It is just
the same with a follower of the *S*rama*n*as, who has renounced injury
to movable beings, but not to immovable ones. If he kills immovable
beings, he does not transgress his vow. This you acknowledge, O
Nirgranthas, this you must acknowledge!" (14)

The Venerable One gave another illustration: "I put a question to the
Nirgranthas. O long-lived Nirgranthas, (suppose) there be householders
or sons of householders, born in respectable families, who come to you
for instruction in the Law. Ought they to be instructed in the Law?"
'Yes, they should.' "When they have learned and understood this Law,
will they say: this creed of the

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nirgranthas is
true, supreme, excellent, full of virtues, right, pure, it removes
doubts, it is the road to perfection, liberation, Nirvâ*n*a; it is free
from error and doubts, it is the road of those who are free from all
misery; those who adopt it will reach perfection, (&c., all down to) put
an end to all misery; exerting ourselves we shall control ourselves with
regard to all kinds of living beings.--Will they speak thus?" 'Yes.'
"Should such men be admitted to the order?" 'Yes, they should.' "Should
such men be instructed in the discipline and kept to attend to religious
instruction?" 'Yes, they should.' "Do they renounce injury to every
living being?" 'Yes, they do.' "Now (suppose) one of these men who lead
such a life, after wandering about in the land for four or five years,
or for six or ten years--the period may be shorter or longer--returns to
domestic life. Will this man (still) abstain from doing injury to every
living being?" 'No.' "The same man <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[1](#fn_1240) who at first (as a householder) had
not renounced injury to every living being, who afterwards has
renounced, and who now does not renounce injury to every living being,
did at first not control himself, did so afterwards, and does not so
now. As long as he does not control himself, he does not renounce injury
to every living being <span id="fr_1251"></span>[2](#fn_1241). This you
acknowledge, O Nirgranthas, this you must acknowledge!" (15)

The Venerable One gave (another) illustration: "I put a question to the
Nirgranthas. O long-lived

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nirgranthas,
(suppose) there be monks or nuns of other sects, who come to you for
instruction in the Law, (all as before, down to) attend to religious
instruction." 'Yes, they should.' "Is it lawful to eat with such men?"
'Yes, it is.' "Now (suppose) some of these people who lead such a life,
(&c., all as before, down to) return to domestic life. Is it lawful to
eat with them then?" 'No, it is not <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[1](#fn_1242).' "The same man with whom to eat was
not lawful at first, was lawful afterwards, and is not lawful now, was
no *S*rama*n*a at first, was a *S*rama*n*a afterwards, and is no
*S*rama*n*a now. It is not lawful for Nirgrantha *S*rama*n*as to eat
together with him. This you acknowledge, O Nirgranthas; this you must
acknowledge!" (16)

And the Venerable One spoke thus: "There are some followers of the
*S*rama*n*as, who have made this declaration: we cannot, submitting to
the tonsure, renounce the life of a householder and enter the monastic
state, but we shall strictly observe the Pôsaha on the fourteenth and
the eighth days of each fortnight, (on the new-moon, and) full-moon
days, we renounce gross ill-usage of living beings, grossly lying
speech, gross taking of things not given, (unlawful) sexual intercourse,
(unlimited) appropriation of property; we shall set limits to our
desires in the two forms and in the three ways <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[2](#fn_1243). They will also make the following
renunciation: 'neither do nor cause anything (sinful) to be done for my
sake.'

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Having (on
Pôsaha-days) abstained from eating, drinking, bathing, and using beds or
chairs, may they, on their decease, be said to make a (righteous) end of
their life?" 'Certainly, they do make such an end of their life.' "They
are called animated beings, (&c., all as in § 13, down to) this
interpretation of yours is not right." (17)

The Venerable One spoke thus: "There are some followers of the
*S*rama*n*as, who have made this declaration: we cannot, submitting to
the tonsure, renounce the life of a householder and enter the monastic
state; we also cannot strictly observe the Pôsaha on the fourteenth and
the eighth days of each fortnight, (on the days of new-moon) and
full-moon; but while we are preparing ourselves for death by
fasting <span id="fr_1254"></span>[1](#fn_1244), we shall abstain from
food and drink without longing for the end; we shall renounce all
ill-usage of living beings, all lying speech, all taking of things not
given, all sexual intercourse, all property, (saying): 'neither do nor
cause anything (sinful) to be done for my sake.' (All the rest as in the
preceding paragraph)" (18)

And the Venerable One spoke thus: "There are some men of great desires,
great undertakings, &c. <span id="fr_1255"></span>[2](#fn_1245), who do
not abstain from all ill-usage of living beings, (&c., down to) from all
property. During the whole time, from their taking the vows of a
follower of the *S*rama*n*as till their death, they abstain from injury
to living beings. Then they die; in their next existence they experience
their Karman, and receive an evil lot. (The rest as before)" (19)

And the Venerable One spoke thus: "There are

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

some men of no desires, no undertakings, who abstain from all ill-usage
of living beings, (&c., down to) from all property. During the whole
time, from their taking the vows of a follower of the *S*rama*n*as till
their death, they abstain from injury to living beings. Then they die;
in their next existence they experience their Karman, and receive a
happy lot. (The rest as before)" (20)

And the Venerable One spoke thus: "There are some men of few desires,
few undertakings, who abstain from ill-usage of one sort of living
beings, (&c., down to) from one sort of property. During the whole time,
(&c., the rest as in the last paragraph)." (21)

And the Venerable One spoke thus: "There are some men who live in woods,
in huts, near villages, or practise some secret rites, who are not well
controlled, do not well abstain (from slaying) all sorts of living
beings. They employ speech that is true and untrue at the same time: do
not beat me, beat others, (&c., all as in II, 2, 21, down to) having
died at their allotted time, they are born in some places inhabited by
Asuras <span id="fr_1256"></span>[1](#fn_1246) and evil-doers. And when
they are released therefrom, they will be born deaf and dumb or blind.
They are called animated beings, (&c., the rest as in § 13)." (22)

And the Venerable One spoke thus: "There are some beings of a long life,
which a follower of the *S*rama*n*as abstains from injuring through
life. They die after him. They are called animated beings, (&c., the
rest as in § 13)." (23)

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

(The two next paragraphs treat in exactly the same way of beings of an
equally long life, which die simultaneously with him, and of beings of a
short life, which die before him.) (24, 25)

And the Venerable One spoke thus: "There are some followers of the
*S*rama*n*as, who have made this declaration: we are not able to
strictly observe the Pôsaha-days, but we are able, when preparing
ourselves for death by fasting, to abstain from food and drink without
longing for the end. The vow of such a man is the Sâmâyika
Dê*s*âvakâ*s*ika <span id="fr_1257"></span>[1](#fn_1247): (he declares)
in the morning: (I shall travel) only thus or thus far in an eastern,
western, southern, northern direction. He renounces injury to all
beings: I shall cause peace and security to all sorts of living beings.

"Within those (limits) the movable living beings, which the follower of
the *S*rama*n*as abstains from injuring till his death, will leave their
life, and will then be born, within the same limits, as movable living
beings, which the follower of the *S*rama*n*as abstains from injuring
till his death. With regard to them the follower of the *S*rama*n*as has
made a good renunciation. They are called animated beings, (&c., the
rest as before). (26)

"The movable beings within those limits, &c, <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[2](#fn_1248), will,

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

after their death, be born within the same limits as immovable beings,
from injuring which without a purpose the follower of the *S*rama*n*as
abstains till death, but not with a purpose <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1](#fn_1249), (&c., the rest as before). (27)

"The movable beings within those limits, &c., will, after their death,
be born, beyond those limits, as movable or immovable beings, (&c., the
rest as before). (28)

"The immovable beings within those limits, &c., will, after their death,
be born, within the same limits, as movable beings, (&c., the rest as
before). (29)

"The immovable beings within those limits, &c., will, after their death,
be born, within the same limits, as immovable beings, (&c., the rest as
before). (30)

"The immovable beings within those limits, &c., will, after their death,
be born, beyond those limits, as immovable beings, (&c., the rest as
before). (31)

"The movable and immovable beings beyond those limits, &c., will, after
their death, be born, within those limits, as movable beings, (&c., the
rest as before). (32)

"The movable and immovable beings beyond those limits, &c., will, after
their death, be born, within those limits, as immovable beings, (&c.,
the rest as before). (33)

"The movable and immovable beings beyond those limits, &c., will, after
their death, be born, beyond

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

those limits, as movable and immovable beings, (&c. the rest as
before)." (34)

The Venerable One spoke thus: "It has never happened, it does not
happen, nor will it ever happen, that all movable beings will die out
and become immovable ones, nor that all immovable beings die out and
become movable ones. Since movable and immovable beings never die out,
there is no chance, as you or somebody else say, that a layman ceases to
do injury altogether by renouncing slaughter of one kind of beings; this
interpretation of yours is not right." (15)

And the Venerable One spoke thus: "If (a man) who has been instructed in
right knowledge, faith, and conduct for the avoidance of sins, blames a
(righteous) *S*rama*n*a or Brâhma*n*a though he is well disposed towards
them, he effects the loss of his merit for another world; but if he does
not blame them, he heightens the purity of his merit for another world."

On this Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, took no further notice of the
Venerable Gautama and was about to return in the direction in which he
had come. (36)

And the Venerable One spoke thus: "O long-lived Udaka, he who has
learned from a *S*rama*n*a or Brâhma*n*a whomsoever even one noble
religious truth, and considers himself thereby furthered with regard to
his peace and happiness, will respect, acknowledge, praise, salute,
honour, reverence, and worship him even as a blessed and holy deity or
sacred shrine." (37)

Then Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, spoke thus to the Venerable Gautama:
'As I had not before

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

known, heard, understood, and comprehended these words, I did not
believe in the meaning (of your words), which I had never perceived nor
heard nor understood nor appreciated, and which were never explained nor
defined nor delivered nor made clear to me, nor pondered over by me. But
now, Reverend Sir, as I do know, &c., these words which I have
perceived, heard, &c., I believe, accept, and approve of their meaning.
It is just as you say!' (38)

Then the Venerable Gautama spoke thus to Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla:
"Believe it, sir; accept it, sir; approve of it, sir; it is just as we
have said." Then Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, spoke thus to the
Venerable Gautama: 'I desire, Reverend Sir, in your presence to pass
from the creed which enjoins four vows <span
id="fr_1260"></span>[1](#fn_1250), to the creed which enjoins the five
great vows and the Pratikrama*n*a <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[2](#fn_1251).' (39)

Then the Venerable Gautama went with Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, to the
Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra. Then Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, solemnly
circumambulated the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra three times from the left
to the right, and having done so he praised and worshipped him, and then
he spoke thus: 'I desire, Reverend Sir, in your presence to pass from
the creed which enjoins four vows, to the creed which enjoins the five
great vows and the Pratikrama*n*a. May it so please you, beloved of the

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

gods, do not deny me!' Then, in the presence of the Venerable Ascetic
Mahâvîra, Udaka, the son of Pê*dh*âla, passed from the creed which
enjoins four vows, to the creed which enjoins the five great vows and
the Pratikrama*n*a. (40)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[419:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1232) This '&c.' refers
to the typical description of towns. Our text contains only the first
words of the description, but the Aupapâtika Sûtra, § 1, gives it at
length.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[420:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1233) I cannot tell
where the full description occurs.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[420:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1234) The name denotes:
the rest of materials, i.e. the hall which was built with the materials
not used (in building the house), the well-known 'few remaining bricks.'

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[420:3](sbe4571.htm#fr_1235) The text is given
in the Aupapâtika Sûtra, § 3.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[420:4](sbe4571.htm#fr_1236) Compare the
Twenty-second Lecture of the Uttarâdhyayana.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[421:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1237) Uvasampanna.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[421:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1238) These words seem
to refer to an apologue told by the commentator: King Ratna*s*êkhara of
Ratnapura, once making a pleasure trip, issued an order that nobody
should remain in the town. Six brothers disobeyed, were brought before
the king, and sentenced to death. Their father in vain implored the king
to spare them, or to spare five, four, three, two of his sons. At last
the king consented to pardon the eldest son, at which the old father
rejoiced.--The six sons are likened to the six classes of living beings.
As a householder cannot altogether abstain from injuring them, as monks
do, he is content to abstain from injuring movable beings or animals.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[421:3](sbe4571.htm#fr_1239) Viz. that by
abstaining from slaughter of living beings they kill no living beings.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[422:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1240) I.e. by
specifying the movable beings as beings which are movable ones for the
time being.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[422:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1241) E.g. if a man
vows to kill no Brâhma*n*a (and does not add the restriction 'for the
time being'), he may kill no man or animal whatever; for the soul of
that man or animal may, in the past, have been embodied in a Brâhma*n*a.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[423:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1242) Literally, the
number. A sample of such vows is given in the beginning of the Uvâsaga
Dasâo, see Hoernle's edition, § 16 ff.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[424:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1243) Abhiyôga.
*S*îlâṅka enumerates four kinds of abhiyôga: ga*n*a-, bala-,
devatâ-abhiyôga, and gurunigraha.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[424:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1244) Nâma, literally,
name.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[424:3](sbe4571.htm#fr_1245) They are called
(vu*kk*anti = u*k*yantê) is apparently equivalent with: they get the
name (nâma); 'name,' however, means in *G*aina and Bauddha terminology
as much as 'the nature of the thing.' The words of the text, therefore,
come to mean: 'they become or are animated beings,' &c.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[424:4](sbe4571.htm#fr_1246) The question
discussed in the following paragraphs is whether, at some future time,
all movable beings in the Sa*m*sâra might not die out, and none but
immovable beings be left. This idea is combated at great length by
Gautama.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[425:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1247) The meaning is,
that at some future time movable beings may have ceased to exist, since
they are all born as immovable beings, and vice versâ. If the latter is
the case, a layman, who abstains from killing animals, practically does
injury to no being whatever; if the former is the case, he cannot
transgress his vow even if he would.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[425:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1248) The text has the
Sanskrit word asmâkam, of which the commentator alleges that it was thus
pronounced by all people in Magadha, compare note
[2](sbe4566.htm#fn_1035), [p. 358](sbe4566.htm#page_358).

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[426:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1249) Gautama.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[427:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1250) Sê *g*ê sê
*g*ivê, literally, his soul.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[427:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1251) Here the last
sentence but one of the preceding paragraph ought to be repeated. But
there is no trace of it in my MSS. or the commentary.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[428:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1252) Nô
i*n*<sup>ऽ</sup>a*tth*ê sama*tth*ê; I think the Sanskrit of this phrase,
which is not explained by the commentator, is nô ayam artha*h*
samartha*h*.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[428:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1253) Viz. 'I will not
do it, nor cause it to be done, either in thought or in word or in
deed.' Compare Uvâsaga Dasâo, Hoernle's edition, §13 ff.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[429:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1254)
Sa*m*lêha*n*a*gh*ûsa*n*â*gh*ûsiyâ.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[429:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1255) See II, 2, 61.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[430:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1256) Âsuriya.
*S*îlâṅka here offers a second explanation of this word, viz. asûrya,
where no sun ever shines.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[431:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1257) The
Dê*s*âvakâ*s*ika 'consists in drawing closer or contracting every day
the limits already laid down (in accordance with the Gu*n*avratas) to
the range of one's travels,' &c. The Gu*n*avrata referred to is the
Digvirati, i.e. 'to lay down a limit beyond which one shall not travel
in the different directions, or a limit as to the countries one shall
visit for the acquisition of wealth.' From Bhandarkar Report, p. 214 f.
The explanation in the commentary materially agrees with the above.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[431:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1258) The original
repeats the phrases of the preceding paragraph. <span id="page_432">p.
432</span> I abridge them as far as possible, and give the full text
only where it differs from that of § 26.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[432:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1259) This clause comes
always after the words 'immovable beings' down to § 34.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[434:1](sbe4571.htm#fr_1260) See above, [p.
121](sbe4525.htm#page_121), note [2](sbe4525.htm#fn_316). In this way
the creed of Pâr*s*va is characterised in contradistinction to that of
Mahâvîra.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[434:2](sbe4571.htm#fr_1261) 'Pratikrama*n*a
is the expiation of sins . . . by means of Nindana Garha*n*a, Âlô*k*anâ,
and other processes. Nindana is condemning the sinful act or repenting
of it to oneself; Garha*n*a is doing the same before a Guru; and
Âlô*k*anâ is making a confession of it to the Guru.' Bhandarkar, Report,
p. 9, note ‡.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Names and Subjects](sbe4572)
