[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4508)  [Next](sbe4510) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEVENTH LECTURE.

###### THE PARABLE OF THE RAM, ETC.

As somebody, to provide for (the arrival of) a guest, brings up a young
ram, gives it rice and gram <span id="fr_115"></span>[3](#fn_114), and
brings it up in his yard; (1)

Then when it is grown up and big, fat and of a large belly, fattened and
of a plump body, it is ready for the guest. (2)

As long as no guest comes, the poor (animal) lives; but as soon as a
guest arrives, its head is cut off, and it is eaten. (3)

As this ram is well treated for the sake of

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

a guest, even so an ignorant, great sinner longs (as it were) for life
in hell. (4)

An ignorant man kills, tells lies, robs on the highway, steals foreign
goods, deceives, (always thinking of some one) whom he could plunder,
the villain. (5)

He is desirous of women and pleasures, he enters on undertakings and
business, drinks liquor, eats meat, becomes strong, a subduer of foes.
(6)

He eats crisp goats’ meat, his belly grows, and his veins swell with
blood--but he gains nothing but life in hell, just as the ram is only
fed to be killed for the sake of a guest. (7)

After having enjoyed pleasant seats, beds, carriages, riches, and
pleasures, after having squandered his wealth which he had so much
trouble in gaining, and after having committed many sins, he will, under
the burden of his Karman, and believing only in the visible world, be
grieved in the hour of death like the ram <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_115) at the arrival of a guest. (8, 9)

Then the sinner who has been killing living beings, at the end of his
life falls from his state <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_116), and
against his will he goes to the world of the Asuras, to the dark place.
(10)

As a man for the sake of one Kâkinî <span
id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_117) (risks and) loses a thousand
(Kârshâpa*n*as), or as the king lost his kingdom (and life) by eating a
mango-fruit which he was strictly forbidden (by his physician) <span
id="fr_119"></span>[4](#fn_118): (11)

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Even so are human pleasures compared with the pleasures of the gods:
divine life and pleasures surpass (the former) a thousand times and
more. (12)

Those endowed with excellent knowledge live many nayutas <span
id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_119) of years; so great a loss suffer the
fools in a life of less than a hundred years! (13)

Three merchants set out on their travels, each with his capital; one of
them gained there much, the second returned with his capital, and the
third merchant came home after having lost his capital. This
parable <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_120) is taken from common life;
learn (to apply it) to the Law. (14, 15)

The capital is human life, the gain is heaven; through the loss of that
capital man must be born as a denizen of hell or a brute animal. (16)

These are the two courses open to the sinner; they consist in misery, as
corporal punishment, &c.; for the slave to his lusts <span
id="fr_122"></span>[3](#fn_121) has forfeited human life and divine
life. (17)

Having once forfeited them, he will have to endure these two states of
misery; it will be

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

difficult for him to attain an upward course <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_122) for a long time to come. (18)

Considering what is at stake, one should weigh (the chances of) the
sinner and of the virtuous man (in one's mind).

He who brings back his capital, is (to be compared to) one who is born
again as a man. (19)

Those men who through the exercise of various virtues <span
id="fr_124"></span>[2](#fn_123) become pious householders, will be born
again as men; for all beings will reap the fruit of their actions. (20)

But he who increases his capital, is (to be compared to) one who
practises eminent virtues; the virtuous, excellent man cheerfully
attains the state of gods <span id="fr_125"></span>[3](#fn_124). (21)

When one thus knows that a (virtuous) monk or householder will be
gladdened (by his gain), how, then, should a man, whilst he is losing
(his chance), not be conscious of his losing it? (22)

As a drop of water at the top of a blade of Ku*s*a-grass dwindles down
to naught when compared with the ocean, so do human pleasures when
compared with divine pleasures. (23)

The pleasures in this very limited life of men are like (the water at)
the top of a blade of Ku*s*a-grass; for the sake of what will a man not
care to gain and

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

to keep (so precious a good which he risks to lose)? (24)

He who has not renounced pleasure, will miss his aim (i.e. the true end
of his soul); for though he has been taught the right way, he will go
astray again and again. (25)

But he who has renounced pleasure, will not miss his aim; (he will
think): I have learned that, by getting rid of this vile body, I shall
become a god. (26)

He will be born among men where there is wealth, beauty, glory, fame,
long life, and eminent happiness. (27)

See the folly of the sinner who practises unrighteousness: turning away
from the Law, the great sinner will be born in hell. (28)

See the wisdom of the wise man who follows the true Law: turning away
from unrighteousness, the virtuous man will be born as a god. (29)

A wise man weighs in his mind the state of the sinner and that of the
virtuous man; quitting the state of the sinner, a sage realises that of
the virtuous. (30)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[27:3](sbe4509.htm#fr_115) Yavasa, explained by
mudgamâshâdi. Mutton of gram-fed sheep is greatly appreciated in India.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[28:1](sbe4509.htm#fr_116) Aya = a*g*a,
literally goat.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[28:2](sbe4509.htm#fr_117) *K*uya = kyuta is
said of one who is born after his death in a lower sphere than that in
which he lived before.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[28:3](sbe4509.htm#fr_118) According to the
commentators the eightieth part of a rupee.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[28:4](sbe4509.htm#fr_119) The commentators
relate 'old stories' to explain allusions in the text; they will,
however, be intelligible without further comment, though I do not
contend that those stories were not really old and known to the author
of the Sûtra.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[29:1](sbe4509.htm#fr_120) A nayuta or niyuta
is equal to

49,786,136,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000.

It is derived in the following way:

1 pûrvâṅga = 8.400,000

1 pûrva = 8,400,000 pûrvâṅgas.

1 nayutânga = 8,400,000 pûrvas.

1 nayuta = 8,400,000 nayutâṅgas.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[29:2](sbe4509.htm#fr_121) This parable closely
corresponds to Matth. xxv. 14, Luke xix. 11. I need not here discuss the
problems raised by this coincidence since they will, as I hear, be fully
treated by Herr Hüttemann, a pupil of Professor Leumann of Strassburg.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[29:3](sbe4509.htm#fr_122) Lôlayâsa*dh*ê =
lôlatâ*s*a*th*a. The commentator takes lôlatâ for lôla and makes the
word a karmadhâraya. I think that the word *s*a*th*a which originally
means 'one who deceives others' is used here in the sense one who
deceives himself.'

<span id="fn_122"></span>[30:1](sbe4509.htm#fr_123) I.e. birth as a man
or a god.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[30:2](sbe4509.htm#fr_124) *S*ikshâ. The
commentator quotes the following passage in Prâk*ri*t: Souls gain human
birth through four causes: (1)a kind disposition (prak*ri*tibhadratâ),
(2) love of discipline (prak*ri*tivinîtatâ), (3) compassion
(sânukro*s*anatâ), and (4) want of envy (amatsaritâ).

<span id="fn_124"></span>[30:3](sbe4509.htm#fr_125) For a higher rank
than that of a god, e.g. that of a Kêvalin, cannot, in the present state
of the world, be attained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eighth Lecture. Kapila's Verses](sbe4510)
