[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4561)  [Next](sbe4563) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

## FOURTEENTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### THE NIRGRANTHA.

He who has given up all worldly ties and is instructed in our creed,
should practise chastity, exerting himself; obeying the commands (of his
teacher) he should make himself well acquainted with the conduct; a
clever (monk) should avoid carelessness. (1)

As (birds of prey), e.g. *Dh*aṅkas, carry off a fluttering young bird
whose wings are not yet grown, when it attempts to fly from the nest,
but is not able to do so, because it is too young and its wings are not
yet grown; (2)

Just as they carry off a young bird whose wings are not yet grown, so
many unprincipled men will seduce a novice who has not yet mastered the
Law, thinking that they can get him in their power, when they have made
him leave (the Gak*kh*a) <span id="fr_959"></span>[1](#fn_952). (3)

A good man should long to live with his teacher in order to perform his
duties <span id="fr_960"></span>[2](#fn_953), knowing that he who does
not live with his teacher will not put an end to his mundane existence.
Making manifest

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

the conduct of the virtuous, an intelligent (monk) should not leave the
(company of his teacher). (4)

(A monk) who complies with the rules for Yatis <span
id="fr_961"></span>[1](#fn_954) as regards postures, lying down,
sitting, and exertions, who is thoroughly acquainted with the Samitis
and Guptis, should in teaching others explain each single (point of
conduct). (5)

Whether he hears (pleasant) sounds or dreadful ones, he should not allow
himself to be influenced by them, and persevere in control; nor should a
monk be sleepy or careless, but by every means he should get rid of
doubts. (6)

If admonished by a young or an old monk, by one above him or one of
equal age, he should not retort against him <span
id="fr_962"></span>[2](#fn_955), being perfectly free from passion; for
one who is (as it were) carried away (by the stream of the Sa*m*sâra),
will not get to its opposite shore. (7)

(He should not become angry) if (doing anything wrong) his own creed is
quoted against him by a heretic, or if he is corrected by (somebody
else) be he young or old, or by a female slave engaged in low work or
carrying a jar, or by some householder. (8)

He should not be angry with them nor do them any harm, nor say a single
hard word to them, but he should promise not to commit the same sin
again; for this is better than to do wrong. (9)

As to one who has lost his way in the wood, others who have not, (show
it, thus some) teach the

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

path which is salutary to men. Therefore (he should think): this is for
my good that those who know put me right. (10)

Now he who has lost his way should treat with all honour him who has
not. This simile has been explained by the Prophet. Having learned what
is right one should practise it. (11)

As a guide in a dark night does not find the way since he cannot see it,
but recognises the way when it has become light by the rising of the
sun; (12)

So a novice who has not mastered the Law, does not know the Law, not
being awakened; but afterwards he knows it well through the words of the
*G*inas, as with his eye (the wanderer sees the way) after sunrise. (13)

Always restrained with regard to movable and immovable beings which are
on high, below, and on earth, (a monk) should wander about entertaining
no hostile thoughts (towards them) and being steadfast (in control).
(14)

At the right time he may put a question about living beings to a
well-conducted (monk), who will explain the conduct of the virtuous; and
what he hears he should follow and treasure up in his heart, thinking
that it is the doctrine of the Kêvalins. (15)

Living in this (company of the teacher) and protecting (himself or other
beings) in the three ways (viz. in thoughts, words, and acts), he (gets)
peace and the annihilation (of sins) as they say. Thus speak those who
know the three worlds, and they do not again commit faults! (16)

A monk by hearing the desired Truth gets bright ideas and becomes a
clever (teacher); desiring the highest good and practising austerities
and silence,

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

he will obtain final Liberation (living on) pure (food). (17)

Those who having investigated the Law expound it, are awakened and put
an end to mundane existence; able to liberate both (themselves and
others), they answer the well-deliberated questions. (18)

He does not conceal (the truth) nor falsify it; he should not indulge
his pride and (desire for) fame; being wise he should not joke, nor
pronounce benedictions. (19)

Averse to injury of living beings, he does not disgrace his
calling <span id="fr_963"></span>[1](#fn_956) by the use of spells; a
good man does not desire anything from other people, and he does not
give utterance to heretical doctrines. (20)

A monk living single should not ridicule heretical doctrines, and should
avoid hard words though they be true; he should not be vain, nor brag,
but he should without embarrassment and passion (preach the Law). (21)

A monk should be modest <span id="fr_964"></span>[2](#fn_957) though he
be of a fearless mind; he should expound the Syâdvâda <span
id="fr_965"></span>[3](#fn_958); he should use the two (permitted) kinds
of speech <span id="fr_966"></span>[4](#fn_959), living among virtuous
men, impartial and wise. (22)

He who follows (the instruction) may believe something untrue; (one
should) kindly (tell him) 'It is thus or thus.' One should never hurt
him by

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

outrageous language, nor give long-winded explanations of difficult
passages. (23)

(If the pupil does not understand his short explanation), he should
explain at greater length. When the pupil has heard it, he will
correctly understand the Truth. A monk should utter pure speech, which
is in accordance with the creed (of the *G*inas), and should declare the
distinction of sin. (24)

He should well learn the (sacred texts) as they have been revealed; he
should endeavour (to teach the creed), but he should not speak unduly
long. A faithful man who is able to explain the entire creed <span
id="fr_967"></span>[1](#fn_960) will not corrupt the faith. (25)

He should not pervert nor render obscure (the truth); he should
fabricate neither text nor meaning, being a saviour; being devoted to
the Teacher and considering well his words, he delivers faithfully what
he has learned. (26)

He who correctly knows the sacred texts, who practises austerities, who
understands all details of the Law, who is an authentic interpreter,
clever, and learned--such a man is competent to explain the entire
creed. (27)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_952"></span>[324:1](sbe4562.htm#fr_959) Nissâriya*m* =
ni*h*sâritam. I follow in the text the interpretation of the
commentators. But I think that instead of mannamâ*n*â we must read, as
in the preceding verse, mannamâ*n*a*m*; and translate: believing himself
rich in control (vâsima*m*) though he be still wanting in strength
(nissâriya*m*).

<span id="fn_953"></span>[324:2](sbe4562.htm#fr_960) Samâhi*m*.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[325:1](sbe4562.htm#fr_961) Susâdhuyukta.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[325:2](sbe4562.htm#fr_962) Samma*m* taya*m*
thiratô nâ<sup>ऽ</sup>bhiga*kkh*ê. I translate according to the
commentators, as I am unable to understand the words in the text.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[327:1](sbe4562.htm#fr_963) Gôtra, explained by
mauna.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[327:2](sbe4562.htm#fr_964) Saṅki*gg*iyâ =
*s*aṅkyêta.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[327:3](sbe4562.htm#fr_965) Vibha*g*yavâda. The
saptabhaṅgînaya or seven modes of assertion are intended by the
expression in the text. See Bhandarkar, Report, 1883-84, p. 95.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[327:4](sbe4562.htm#fr_966) See above, [p.
304](sbe4557.htm#page_304), note [4](sbe4557.htm#fn_900). The first and
fourth kinds of speech are here intended.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[328:1](sbe4562.htm#fr_967) Samâhi = samâdhi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 1, Lecture 15, The Yamakas](sbe4563)
