[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4533)  [Next](sbe4535) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THIRTY-SECOND LECTURE.

###### THE CAUSES OF CARELESSNESS.

With attentive mind hear me explain for your benefit the deliverance
from the beginningless time, together with its causes <span
id="fr_522"></span>[3](#fn_519), and from all misery: a truly wholesome
subject. (1)

By the teaching of true <span id="fr_523"></span>[4](#fn_520) knowledge,
by the avoidance of ignorance and delusion, and by the destruction of
love and hatred, one arrives at final deliverance which is nothing but
bliss. (2)

This is the road to it: to serve the Gurus and the old (teachers), to
avoid throughout foolish people, to

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

apply oneself earnestly to study, and to ponder zealously on the meaning
of the Sûtras. (3)

A *S*rama*n*a engaged in austerities, who longs for righteousness <span
id="fr_524"></span>[1](#fn_521), should eat the proper quantity of
allowed food, should select a companion of right understanding, and
should live in a place suited to seclusion. (4)

If he does not meet with a clever companion who surpasses or equals him
in virtue, he should live by himself, abstaining from sins and not
devoted to pleasures. (5)

As the crane <span id="fr_525"></span>[2](#fn_522) is produced from an
egg, and the egg is produced from a crane, so they call desire <span
id="fr_526"></span>[3](#fn_523) the origin of delusion, and delusion the
origin of desire. (6)

Love and hatred are caused by Karman, and they say that Karman has its
origin in delusion; Karman is the root of birth and death, and birth and
death they call misery. (7)

Misery ceases on the absence of delusion, delusion ceases on the absence
of desire, desire ceases on the absence of greed, greed ceases on the
absence of property. (8)

I shall explain in due order the means which must be adopted by him who
wants to thoroughly uproot love, hatred, and delusion. (9)

Pleasant food <span id="fr_527"></span>[4](#fn_524) should not be
enjoyed with preference, for it generally makes men over-strong <span
id="fr_528"></span>[5](#fn_525); and desires rush upon the strong, like
birds upon a tree with sweet fruits. (10)

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

As in a forest, full of fuel, a fire fanned by the wind cannot be
extinguished, so the fire (as it were) of the senses of him who eats as
he lists; it does not benefit any chaste man. (11)

The mind of those who always live in unfrequented lodgings, who eat low
food, and who subdue their senses, will not be attacked by the foe,
Love, who is vanquished as disease is by medicine. (12)

As it is not safe for mice to live near the dwelling of a cat, so a
chaste (monk) cannot stay in a house inhabited by women. (13)

A *S*rama*n*a, engaged in penance, should not allow himself to watch the
shape, beauty, coquetry, laughter, prattle, gestures, and glances of
women, nor retain a recollection of them in his mind. (14)

Not to look at, nor to long for, not to think of, nor to praise,
womankind: this is becoming the meditation of the noble ones, and it is
always wholesome to those who delight in chastity. (15)

Though those who possess the three Guptis, cannot be disturbed even by
well-adorned goddesses, still it is recommended to monks to live by
themselves, as this is wholesome in every way. (16)

To a man who longs for liberation, who is afraid of the Sa*m*sâra, and
lives according to the Law, nothing in the world offers so many
difficulties <span id="fr_529"></span>[1](#fn_526) as women who delight
the mind of the ignorant. (17)

To those who have overcome the attachment (to women), all others will
offer no difficulties <span id="fr_530"></span>[2](#fn_527); even as to
those who have crossed the great ocean, no river, though big like the
Ganges, (will offer any difficulty). (18)

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

From desire of pleasure arises the misery of the whole world, the gods
included; whatever misery of body and mind there is, the dispassionate
will put an end to it. (19)

As the fruit of the Kimpâka <span id="fr_531"></span>[1](#fn_528) is
beautiful in taste and colour, when eaten; but destroys the life when
digested, (being) poison; similar in their effect are pleasures. (20)

A *S*rama*n*a, engaged in austerities, who longs for righteousness <span
id="fr_532"></span>[2](#fn_529), should not fix his thoughts on the
pleasant objects of the senses, nor turn his mind from them, if they be
unpleasant. (21)

'Colour' attracts the eye; it is the pleasant cause of Love, but the
unpleasant cause of Hatred <span id="fr_533"></span>[3](#fn_530); he who
is indifferent to them (viz. colours), is called dispassionate. (22)

The eye perceives 'colour,' and 'colour' attracts the eye; the cause of
Love is pleasant, and the cause of Hatred is unpleasant. (23)

He who is passionately fond of 'colours,' will come to untimely ruin;
just as an impassioned moth which is attracted by the light rushes into
death. (24)

He who passionately hates (a colour), will at the same moment suffer
pain. It is the fault of an undisciplined man that he is annoyed (by a
colour); it is not the 'colour' itself that annoys him. (25)

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

He who is very fond of a lovely 'colour,' hates all others; hence a fool
will suffer misery, but a dispassionate sage is not affected by it. (26)

He who has a passion for 'colours <span
id="fr_534"></span>[1](#fn_531),' will kill many movable and immovable
beings; a passionate fool, intent on his personal interest, pains and
torments those beings in many ways. (27)

How can a man who passionately desires 'colours <span
id="fr_535"></span>[2](#fn_532),' be happy while he gets, keeps, uses,
loses, and misses (those things). Even when he enjoys them, he is never
satisfied. (28)

When he is not satisfied with those 'colours,' and his craving for them
grows stronger and stronger, he will become discontented, and unhappy by
dint of his discontent; misled by greed he will take another's property.
(29)

When he is overcome by violent desire, takes another's property, and is
not satisfied with those 'colours' and their possession, then his deceit
and falsehood increase on account of his greed; yet he will not get rid
of his misery. (30)

After and before he has lied <span id="fr_536"></span>[3](#fn_533), and
when he is on the point of lying, he feels infinitely unhappy. Thus when
he takes another's property, and is (after all) not satisfied by the
'colours' (he has

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

obtained), he becomes unhappy, and nobody will protect him <span
id="fr_537"></span>[1](#fn_534). (31)

How, then, can a man who is devoted to 'colours,' ever derive any
happiness from anything? He suffers pain at the time of their enjoyment
to procure which he had suffered misery. (32)

In the same way he who hates 'colours,' incurs a long succession of
pains; when his mind is filled with hatred, he accumulates Karman which
in the end again produces misery. (33)

But a man who is indifferent to 'colours,' is free from sorrows; though
still in the Sa*m*sâra, he is not affected by that long succession of
pains, just as the leaf of the Lotus (is not moistened) by water. (34)

\[The whole set of verses 22-34 is, with few alterations, five times
repeated in the original in order to apply to the other organs of sense.

Verses 35-47 treat of sounds; 'sound' is to be substituted for 'colour,'
'ear' for 'eye.'

The last line of verse 37, which corresponds to verse 24, runs thus:

As an impassioned deer allured (by a song) rushes into death, without
being satisfied with the sound.

In the same way verses 48-60 apply to smells'; substitute 'smell' and
'organ of smell.'

Verses 61-73 apply to tastes; substitute 'tastes' and 'tongue.'

Verses 74-86 apply to touches; substitute touches' and 'body.'

Verses 87-99 apply to feelings; substitute 'feelings' and 'mind.'

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

The lines corresponding to the comparison in verse 24, run as follows:

Just as an impassioned snake which is allured by the smell of a drug,
when it comes out of its hole. (50)

Just as an impassioned fish which is eager to swallow the bait, has its
body transfixed by a hook. (63)

Just as an impassioned buffalo who dives in cold water, is taken hold of
by a crocodile and dies. (76)

Just as an impassioned elephant who is inflamed by carnal desires, is
turned from his way by a female elephant (and is captured and at last
killed in battle). (89)\]

Thus the objects of the senses and of the mind cause pain to passionate
men, but they never in the least cause any pain to the dispassionate.
(100)

Pleasant things (by themselves) do not cause indifference nor emotions
(as anger, &c.); but by either hating or loving them, a man undergoes
such a change through delusion. (101)

Anger, pride, deceit, greed; disgust, aversion to self-control and
delight in sensual things <span id="fr_538"></span>[1](#fn_535); mirth,
fear, sorrow, carnal desire for women, men, or both; all these manifold
passions arise in him who is attached to pleasures; and so do other
emotions produced by those (before mentioned) arise in him who is to be
pitied, who (ought to be) ashamed of himself, and who is hateful. (102,
103)

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

A monk should not desire a companion, not (even) one who is able to
perform his religious duties; nor, if he regrets having taken the vows,
(should he desire for) a worldly reward of his austerities <span
id="fr_539"></span>[1](#fn_536). Such emotions of an infinite variety
arise in one who is the slave of his senses. (104)

Desiring happiness and being submerged in the ocean of delusion, he
forms many plans for warding off misery; and for their sake an
impassioned man exerts himself. (105)

But all kinds of objects of the senses, sounds, &c., will cause to the
indifferent neither a pleasant nor an unpleasant feeling. (106)

He who endeavours to recognise the vanity of all desires <span
id="fr_540"></span>[2](#fn_537), will arrive at perfect indifference.
When he ceases to desire the objects (of the senses), his desire for
pleasures will become extinct. (107)

The dispassionate man who has performed all duties will quickly remove
the obstructions to right knowledge and to right faith, and whatever
Karman produces obstruction (to righteousness). (108)

Then he knows and sees all things, he is free from delusion and
hindrances, his Âsravas have gone,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

and he is proficient in meditation and concentration of thoughts, and
being pure he will arrive at beatitude when his life is spent. (109)

He will get rid of all misery which always afflicts mankind; recovered
from the long illness, as it were, and glorious, he becomes infinitely
happy, and obtains the (final) aim. (110)

We have taught the way how to become exempt from all misery which arises
since time without beginning; those beings who follow it will in their
time become infinitely happy. (111)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_519"></span>[184:3](sbe4534.htm#fr_522) By beginningless
time the Sa*m*sâra is meant; its causes are the kashâyas or cardinal
passions, and avirati.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[184:4](sbe4534.htm#fr_523) Sa*kk*assa =
satyasya. This is a various reading; the received text has savvassa. The
commentators give the following explanation: by the property of
knowledge to make everything known--this indicates that knowledge is the
cause of môksha.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[185:1](sbe4534.htm#fr_524) Samâdhi; the Dîpikâ
explains it by *gñ*ânadar*s*ana*k*âritralâbha.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[185:2](sbe4534.htm#fr_525) Balâka.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[185:3](sbe4534.htm#fr_526) T*ri*sh*n*â.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[185:4](sbe4534.htm#fr_527) Rasâ.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[185:5](sbe4534.htm#fr_528) D*ri*ptikara.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[186:1](sbe4534.htm#fr_529) Duttara.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[186:2](sbe4534.htm#fr_530) Suuttara.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[187:1](sbe4534.htm#fr_531) Trichosanthes
Palmata, or Cucumis Colocynthus.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[187:2](sbe4534.htm#fr_532) Compare verse 4.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[187:3](sbe4534.htm#fr_533) Love and Hatred
must of course be understood in their widest meaning. The same remark
applies to the term 'colour,' which according to Hindu terminology
denotes everything that is perceived by the eye. The first three
sentences are, in the original, dependent on verbs as vadanti, âhus. I
have, here and elsewhere, dropped them in the translation.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[188:1](sbe4534.htm#fr_534) Rûvâ*n*ugâsâ*n*uga
= rûpa-anuga-â*s*â-anuga. This division of the compound looks
artificial; I should prefer to divide rûva-a*n*ugâsa-a*n*uga =
rûpa-anukarsha-anuga; literally, possessed of attraction by colours.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[188:2](sbe4534.htm#fr_535) Rûva*n*uvâê*n*a
pariggahê*n*a. Parigraha is explained as the desire to possess them.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[188:3](sbe4534.htm#fr_536) Instead of 'lying,'
we can also adopt the rendering 'stealing,' as the word in the original
môsa may stand either for m*ri*shâ, or for môsha.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[189:1](sbe4534.htm#fr_537) A*n*issa =
ani*s*ra. Ni*s*râ does not occur in common Sanskrit; it is rendered
avash*t*ambha by the commentators.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[190:1](sbe4534.htm#fr_538) Arati and rati.
Compare note on XXI, 21, where I have adopted another translation suited
to the context. The first four numbers contain the cardinal passions;
the rest the emotions which are called nô-kashâya.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[191:1](sbe4534.htm#fr_539) My translation
follows the interpretation of the commentators. The original runs thus:
Kappa*m* na i*kkh*i*gg*a sahâyali*kkh*û pa*kkh*â*n*utâvê*n*a
tavappabhâva*m*. The meaning they have made out is very unsatisfactory.
There is a remarkable various reading in MS. C not noticed by the
scholiasts: sahâyala*kkh*i*m* = svabhâvalakshmî*m*. If this was the
original reading, the meaning of the line, in which however I must leave
the word kappam untranslated, would come to this: a monk who regrets
having taken the vows should not desire personal power as the reward for
his penance. Kalpa, according to the commentators, is one who is able to
perform his religious duties; a kalpa is contrasted with a *s*ishya,
novice.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[191:2](sbe4534.htm#fr_540)
Sa*m*kalpavikalpanâsu upasthitasya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thirty-Third Lecture. The Nature of Karman](sbe4535)
