[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4567)  [Next](sbe4569) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU4K6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FOURTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### RENUNCIATION OF ACTIVITY.

O long-lived (*G*ambûsvâmin)! I (Sudharman) have heard the following
Discourse from the Venerable (Mahâvîra). We now come to the Lecture
called 'Renunciation of Activity.' The contents of it are as follows:

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

It is the Self that may <span id="fr_1181"></span>[1](#fn_1171) not
renounce (activity),that may be accustomed to act, that may adhere to
errors, that may be prone to sin, that may be thoroughly ignorant, that
may be thoroughly stolid <span id="fr_1182"></span>[2](#fn_1172), that
may not consider the operations <span id="fr_1183"></span>[3](#fn_1173)
of mind, speech, and body, that may not avoid and renounce sins.

The Venerable One has said, 'He (i.e. the Self) is uncontrolled,
unresigned, does not avoid and renounce sins, is active, careless, prone
to sin, thoroughly ignorant, thoroughly stolid. Though a fool does not
consider <span id="fr_1184"></span>[4](#fn_1174) the operations of his
mind, speech, and body, nor does see even a dream <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[5](#fn_1175); still he commits sins <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[6](#fn_1176). (1)

The opponent says to the teacher: 'There can be no sin, if (the
perpetrator of an action) does not possess sinful thoughts, speech, and
functions of the body, if he does not kill, if he has no internal organ,
if he does not consider the operations of mind, speech, and body, if he
does not see even a dream.'

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What is the
meaning of the opponent in making this statement? 'When there is a
sinful mind, there is sin of the mind; when there is sinful speech,
there is sin of the speech; when there is a sinful body, there is sin of
the body. When one kills, possesses an internal organ, and considers the
operations of mind, speech, and body, when one sees even a dream, then
there is sin. Only he who has these qualities can commit sin.' The
opponent goes on to say, 'Those who say: There is sin, though (the
perpetrator of an action) does not possess sinful thoughts, speeches,
and functions of the body, though he does not kill, though he does not
possess an internal organ, though he does not consider the operations of
mind, speech, and body, and though he does not see even a dream,--those
who say this, are wrong.' (2)

Here the teacher says to the opponent: 'It is true what I have just
said: there is sin, though (the perpetrator of the action) do not
possess sinful thoughts, (&c., all as above, down to) though he do not
see even a dream.' 'What is the reason thereof?' (The Â*k*ârya
says) <span id="fr_1187"></span>[1](#fn_1177): 'The Venerable One has
assigned the six classes of living beings as the reason: the
earth-lives, (&c., all down to) movable beings. With regard to these six
classes of living beings, the Self does not avoid and renounce sins, he
is wicked and does harm through cruelty: (this holds good with regard to
the five cardinal sins ) killing of living beings, &c. (and the
passions): anger, &c. (down to) the sin of wrong belief.' (3)

(The Â*k*ârya says): 'The Venerable One has illustrated this by the
example of a murderer:

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

a murderer (who hates) a householder or his son or the king or his
servant, resolves, on an occasion offering, to enter (the victim's
house) and to kill him when he finds an opportunity <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1](#fn_1178). Is not this murderer who has formed
this resolution <span id="fr_1189"></span>[2](#fn_1179), (a man) who,
day and night, whether sleeping or waking, is full of hostility and
wrong; who is wicked and does harm through cruelty? An unbiassed
opponent before whom this is laid, will answer: Indeed, he is!' (4)

(The Â*k*ârya says): 'As this murderer who has formed the above
resolution is a man who (&c., all as in § 4, down to) does harm through
cruelty--(and this holds good with regard to the five cardinal sins:)
killing of living beings, &c. (and the passions:) anger, &c., (down to)
the sin of wrong belief--so it has been said of him by the Venerable
One: he <span id="fr_1190"></span>[3](#fn_1180) is uncontrolled,
unresigned, he does not avoid and renounce sins, he is active, careless,
prone to sins thoroughly ignorant, thoroughly stolid. Though a fool does
not consider the operations of his mind, speech, and body, nor does see
even a dream, still he commits sins. (5)

As a murderer who entertains (murderous) intentions towards a
householder, &c., is a man who (&c., all as in § 4, down to) does harm
through cruelty; so an ignorant man who entertains (cruel) intentions
towards all sorts of living beings, is a man

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

who (&c., all as in § 4, down to) does harm through cruelty. (6)

(An opponent might object): This is no good reasoning. (For) there are
many living beings which one, during one's whole life, never saw, nor
heard of, nor cared for, nor took notice of. Towards these beings,
therefore, one cannot (be said to) entertain (murderous) intentions, nor
to be one who, day and night, whether sleeping or waking, is full of
hostility and wrong, (&c., the rest as in § 4). (7) <span
id="fr_1191"></span>[1](#fn_1181)

(The Â*k*ârya says): The Venerable One has refuted this by two
illustrations, one of a sentient being, the other of a senseless being.
The first is as follows: A sentient being, possessing five organs of
sense and a developed internal organ, may with regard to the six classes
of living beings, viz. earth-bodies, (all down to) movable beings,
impose some restriction upon himself; (e.g.) that he will meet his
wants, or have them met by others, by means of earth-bodies only. His
intention is: I shall meet my wants, or have them met by others, by
means of earth-bodies only. His intention is not (to make use of) this
or that (particular earth-body): he meets his wants, or has them met by
others, by means of earth-bodies in general. With regard to them,

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

therefore, he is uncontrolled, unrestrained, does not avoid and renounce
sins. The same applies to the remaining five classes of living
beings.--Some one may meet his wants, or have them met by others, by
means of the six classes of living beings. His intention is: I shall
meet my wants, or have them met by others, by means of the six classes
of living beings; it is not: by means of some particular beings. He
meets his wants, (&c.) by means of living beings in general. With regard
to them, therefore, he is uncontrolled, &c. (This holds good with the
five cardinal sins): killing of living beings, &c., (and with the
passions): anger, (&c., all down to) the sin of wrong belief. The
Venerable One has said that such a creature, (&c., all as in § 1, down
to) commits sins. (8)

The illustration of senseless beings is as follows: Senseless beings,
viz. earth-bodies, (&c., all down to) plants, to which must be added, as
a sixth item, some movable beings, which have no reason nor
consciousness, nor intellect, nor mind, nor speech, in order to do
something, or to have it done by others, or to consent to others’ doing
it; these benighted creatures (are to be considered as murderers), are
full of hostility and wrong (all as in § 4) <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[1](#fn_1182) against all

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

sorts of living beings. (This holds good with the five cardinal sins:)
killing of living beings, &c., (and with the passions, all down to) the
sin of wrong belief. Know this: though these beings have neither mind
nor speech, yet as they cause pain, grief, damages, harm, and injury,
they must be regarded as not abstaining from causing pain, &c. (9)

Thus even senseless beings are reckoned instrumental in bringing about
slaughter of living beings, (&c., all down to) the sin of wrong belief.
Beings, whatever their origin, who were sentient (in one existence) will
become senseless ones (in another) and vice versâ. Not getting rid of,
nor shaking off, nor annihilating, nor destroying their Karman, the
thoroughly wicked and ignorant wander from the body of a senseless being
into that of sentient ones, or from the body of a sentient being into
that of senseless ones, or from the body of a sentient being into that
of another, or from the body of a senseless being into that of another.
The sentient beings and the senseless ones, both are wrong in their
conduct and commit sins through cruelty. The Venerable One has said that
such a (creature) is uncontrolled, (&c., all as in I, down to) commits
sins. (10)

(The opponent asks): 'What must one do or cause to be done, in order to
become controlled and restrained, to avoid and renounce sins?' (The
Â*k*ârya answers): The Venerable One has declared that the cause (of
sins) are the six classes of living beings, earth-lives, &c. As I feel
pain, so they do. Therefore they should not be injured or killed <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[1](#fn_1183).

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

This constant, permanent, eternal, true Law has been taught by wise men
who comprehend all things. Thus a monk abstains from (the five cardinal
sins): slaughter of living beings, &c., (and of vices, all down to) the
sin of wrong belief. He does not clean his teeth with a tooth-brush, he
does not accept collyrium, emetics, and perfumes. Such a monk does not
act nor kill, he is free from wrath, pride, deceit, and greed, he is
calm and happy. The Venerable One says that such a (monk) is well
controlled and restrained, does avoid and renounce sins, is not active,
but careful and thoroughly wise. (11)

Thus I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[399:1](sbe4568.htm#fr_1181) 'May' is to
render yâvi = *k*âpi. This word is used here to indicate that the
reverse is true in other cases. This paragraph emphasises the *G*aina
doctrine that the Self or âtman is the direct cause of all actions of an
individual being, in opposition to the Sâṅkhya philosophers who maintain
the absolute inactivity of the purusha, and to the Bauddhas who deny the
existence of a separate âtman altogether.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[399:2](sbe4568.htm#fr_1182) Literally,
sleeping (sutta = supta).

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[399:3](sbe4568.htm#fr_1183) Literally,
speeches (vakka = vâkya).

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[399:4](sbe4568.htm#fr_1184) We ought,
perhaps, to translate: if he is not conscious of, &c.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[399:5](sbe4568.htm#fr_1185) I.e. when
consciousness is fainter than in a dream.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[399:6](sbe4568.htm#fr_1186) The doctrine of
the *G*ainas is that Karman is the result of the action of every being,
even of those whose intellect or consciousness is not developed, as with
the êkêndriyas or beings who possess but one organ of sense. The
opponent, however, maintains that only conscious actions of intelligent
beings bring about Karman. This question is discussed in the following
paragraphs.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[400:1](sbe4568.htm#fr_1187) These words here
and in the sequel are in Sanskrit; they probably are a gloss.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[401:1](sbe4568.htm#fr_1188) The
Nâgâr*g*unîyas have another reading (where, is not stated by *S*îlâṅka):
If he sees no opportunity, or his proposed victim is always on his
guard, he does not kill him, but he resolves in his mind: If I get an
opportunity, or I find that man off his guard, I shall certainly kill
him.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[401:2](sbe4568.htm#fr_1189) The original
repeats the preceding passage in full. I abridge it here and in the
sequel.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[401:3](sbe4568.htm#fr_1190) I.e. every soul,
even that of a being with but one organ of sense.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[402:1](sbe4568.htm#fr_1191) *S*îlâṅka here
makes it clear that the discussion, in the preceding paragraphs, is
carried on in the form of a syllogism of five parts established in Hindu
logics. § 1 contains the proposition, prati*gñ*â, § 3 the cause, hêtu, §
4 the exemplification, udâhara*n*a or d*ri*sh*t*ânta, § 5 the upanaya or
that part which shows that the hêtu is in the subject of the syllogism,
and § 6 the conclusion, nigamana. We thus see how deeply rooted in, and
how genial to, the mind of the Hindus was the pa*ñk*âvayavam anumânam or
syllogism of five parts; for the author conforms to it, I dare say,
unintentionally.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[403:1](sbe4568.htm#fr_1192) If the passage
were printed in full, the most glaring contradictions would stare the
reader in the face. The cause hereof is not that the passage cannot
correctly be rendered, but that the authors of the Sûtras always make
use of set phrases whether all parts of them suit the case in hand or
not. Sometimes we can avoid downright nonsense by selecting a somewhat
different rendering from what was given in another part of the book; and
so I do in the last sentence of this paragraph. But this is only a
makeshift.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[404:1](sbe4568.htm#fr_1193) I here abridge
the text which is identical with II, 1, 48 ff., [p.
351](sbe4565.htm#page_351).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 2, Lecture 5: Freedom from Error](sbe4569)
