[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aec01)  [Next](aec03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*An Eternal Career*, by Frank and Lydia Hammer, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span> <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### PREFACE

The purpose of this book is to acquaint readers with the fact that they
are immortal souls embarked upon an eternal career. Also, to impress
upon them that they are every day, yes, every moment, fashioning the
bodies and creating the conditions of their future existence.

Unfortunately most people incorrectly suppose life to be only that brief
interlude between birth and death; consequently they live as if this
world were all and devote themselves to mundane affairs and material
pursuits. Indeed, the appalling futility and the purposelessness of the
lives of the vast majority can be traced to this delusion—that life is
but a temporary affair ending forever at death.

If this were true, that earthly existence is all—there would be little
purpose in learning to live; in fact there would be no sense at all to
being born. If this fallacy prevailed justice would be a huge farce and
life a hollow mockery; as for some the earthly sojourn is very brief,
while others abide here for many years. Nature however, never suffers a
wasteful arrangement; for unlike temporal careers life cannot be ended
if one makes a failure of it, or because he is "tired of it all." This
being

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

the case, preparation for life should be the first concern of every man.

Inasmuch that mankind in general is still in bondage to the idea that it
is exempt, and not subject like the rest of the universe to natural
laws, it is not surprising that so many try to relinquish life in
despair and desperation. Since men will never have surcease from their
afflictions until they do understand and harmonize themselves with God's
ever present laws, it is of paramount importance that everyone be
educated to this end. Our hope is that this book will prove a help in
this direction.

F. L. H.            
L. H.             

San Francisco, California  
101 Parnassus Avenue;  
January 1947.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](aec03)
