[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aec07)  [Next](aec09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*An Eternal Career*, by Frank and Lydia Hammer, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### V

### THE MYSTERY OF SUFFERING

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>"<em>Earth hath no sorrows that<br />
 Heaven cannot heal</em>."</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

All over the world people are asking, "Why is there so much suffering?"
Sorrow and pain are excellent awakeners, conducive to thought; and when
people have had abundant afflictive experiences they seek the cause, and
for a means of future prevention.

Why there should be pain at all is a paradox for undoubtedly Omnipotent
God could have created man differently; but for wise purposes beyond our
present range of knowledge created him with the capacity to suffer. God
also gave man free will, and it is by the exercise of this, that man
settles his own destiny and makes his happiness or unhappiness.

Searching for causes of suffering leads to the inevitable conclusion
that the responsibility of it rests with man, and not with God. Although
the primitive view of suffering was that it was made by God, and that
therefore it should be removed by Him without any effort on the part of
man. Backward

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

people have always imagined that God is cruel and capricious and
delighted in torturing His children. Enlightened men, however, do not
subscribe to this theory and hold that God is goodness, mercy and
justice with a profound love for His creations.

Since men can choose good or evil, why do they often elect the latter?
Why do they inflict injuries upon their fellowmen when they can confer
benefits? The answer is ignorance. As all men are ignorant to some
degree, all men suffer.

The only antidote for ignorance is knowledge. Not academic or
intellectual attainments for they will never solve the problem; but the
understanding and the application of spiritual laws and principles.
Tragically, most men are unaware of them. They do not understand their
true nature; they have no knowledge of the relation of the soul to the
body; of the continuity of life, and that immutable and irrevocable laws
govern their thinking and conduct. Humanity's prevailing unawarenes of
these truths is reflected in the misery of the world.

Unquestionably physical suffering is the most common. While everyone
admits that good health is one of the greatest of blessings, yet few are
they who can boast of all around good health. Despite the advance of
science and the discovery of drugs, hospitals and sanitariums are more
crowded than ever. Why? Because people violate the laws of health and
hygiene. True, they do it mostly in ignorance, but ignorance does not
change or suspend the laws of nature. Many people delude themselves

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

that they are "getting by with it" because the effects of the violation
are often slow and subtle, only in later years to pay the penalty in
pain and suffering.

Another source of suffering is the flouting of the civil laws. Like
hospitals, reports from every section of the country indicate that the
jails, prisons and penitentiaries are badly over-crowded. With
statistics disclosing that more than one-half a million people are
incarcerated, one would suppose that men would see the folly of such
conduct and become law-abiding. Such however is not the case.
Peculiarly, men remain unteachable save through bitter experience, and
persist in trying to do what never has been done—outwit the law of cause
and effect.

The fact that only about one-tenth of the criminals are apprehended
leads many people to believe they can get by with it if sufficiently
clever. Circumventing earthly laws is only postponement for the episode
does not end when the judge and jury pronounce them "not guilty."
Eventually all violators are overtaken by the law of retribution which
operates with a geometrical rigor penalizing all wrong-doers.

A prolific source of suffering arises from the violation of the mental
laws. Few people have the slightest conception that their thinking has a
corresponding effect upon themselves and the external world. Yet it is
in his creative capacity that man most closely resembles his Creator.
THOUGHT IS THE CREATIVE POWER! BEWARE HOW YOU USE IT! Harboring thoughts
of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

hate, envy, malice, ill-will, jealousy and the rest of their breed is
inviting certain disaster. It is the nature of thoughts to become
objective and man then finds himself surrounded by his mental creations.

Wrong thinking has filled the world with injurious and malevolent
productions, and the worst of these is war. Thoughts are highly
contagious and quickly infect the minds of the multitude with the
epidemic of violence. The masses unfamiliar with the nature and power of
thought, supinely allow their minds to be manipulated by a morally
corrupt and spiritually bankrupt minority. Governments spend billions of
the people's money for propagandizing them to hate and kill one another,
much in the same manner as thugs are primed with dope. Yet much less
money would be needed to indoctrinate people with peace, because peace
is natural, while war is unnatural.

Profanation of the law of brotherhood has caused more sorrow and
suffering than any other single factor. It should be, but unfortunately
it is not even apparent that the individual man is but an infinitesimal
part of the whole, and that he is indissolubly linked with the rest of
the race. The will, thoughts and actions of other men influence his
life, affect his destiny and contribute towards his happiness and
unhappiness. We cannot rise above humanity, nor isolate ourselves from
them, or escape their ignorance, degradations and other diseases.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What we do to one
man, we do to all men; so long as one man suffers, we shall all suffer.

The poor suppose that money can eliminate all troubles. But poverty is
only one affliction of the human race and by no means the worst. If
money could cure trouble, the rich would be care-free. But the slaves of
poverty are no worse off than the slaves of wealth, whose poverty is
often worse than that of purse. Both are miserable. Suffering has
nothing to do with a man's station in life or his assets. Afflictions
that money can cure are not really afflictions. Those who have
experienced tragedy, frustrations, separations, disappointments and
despair, know how little material things avail at times like these.

Some men seem to lead an untroubled existence, but we do not know what
they may be carrying around in their hearts. And we may be sure that if
life has not already dealt with them, it will. On the highway of life
all men carry a load, and if one could see beneath the surface he would
be amazed at the even-handed justice with which burdens are distributed,
and appalled at the weight of these burdens.

Many believe that when children are born physically, morally or mentally
defective, that they are being punished by God, or for the sins of their
parents. Firstly, God never punishes anyone, innocent or guilty. Men
punish themselves by violating God's laws. The theory that because a
father committed crimes before the birth of his child, therefore the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

child is punished, is not substantiated by knowledge or record. The
truth is, that the soul is ancient and has behind it at birth a past
replete with every manner of experience. When it is born with
deformities he is discharging his own, and not an-other's Karmic debts.
Every soul has created its own fate, and when he does not like what he
has created blames chance, relatives, God, everybody but himself.
Whenever we suffer we are responsible for it, and not innocent victims
of another's iniquities.

Not a few suppose that one is rewarded in the next world because he has
suffered in this. There are, however, no premiums or vicarious rewards
attached to suffering. Life bestows neither rewards nor punishments,
only consequences; these are correspondingly pleasant or unpleasant as
their initiating cause was good or bad.

Sins can be forgiven but their consequences cannot be remitted, which
continue to exist in Cosmic Mind wherein all things of earth have their
imperishable record. No cause can be severed from its effect. Nor are
prayers, penitence, tears of any avail when they encounter the operation
of the spiritual laws. Neither can a sum of money be paid another for
remission of sins, a fallacy which many have learned to their sorrow
after passing over.

Only physical suffering ends with death; all other forms continue in
more or less active form. Emotional and mental distress is intensified
when one has lived an unethical or selfish life, the suffering of

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

which lasts as long as the consequences. No agony is comparable to that
of a condemning conscience, remorse and regret which constitute the
fires of Hell.

There is no greater illusion than that death liquidates sins. It was
Plato who said: "If death had only been the end of all, the wicked would
have a good bargain in dying, for they would have happily quit not only
of their body, but of their own evil together with their souls."

The contemptible practise of "getting even" takes a terrific toll in
suffering. It is natural when we are wronged to seek to retaliate, but
this is the worst course to pursue. Revenge does not obliterate the
injury, but only puts into operation another set of causes with
resultant suffering to the operator. All history declares that revenge
is a costly business. Revenge has no place in civilized conduct for it
harks back to the primitive promptings of the savage whose concept of
justice was the iron fist.

Pearl Harbor was avenged by the annihilation of two cities and their
125,000 helpless inhabitants. "We settled the score," said many with
sadistic glee. We settled nothing. What we did was set into motion
innumerable other evils which will culminate in dreadful disasters for
us. The people of this country have good reason to fear the atomic
bomb—their fear is coupled with guilt. War never decides who is right;
it only determines who is left.

Reaction is sure to follow for those who sow the wind shall reap the
whirlwind. Men who go abroad

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

to rape, murder, and rob have no suspicion that the consequences of
their deeds will at length come home to them, and they will bow the neck
in turn.

Mankind still awaits the realization and fulfillment of the law of
non-resistance, the only method that will ever overcome evil and abolish
suffering. Returning good for evil is stressed by all wise men. Plato
says: "If thou wouldst punish thine enemy, allow him to go unpunished;
that is true retaliation." The Hindu sages also teach the law of
non-resistance and forbid their followers to commit acts of aggression
against their oppressors.

Non-resistance was not only taught but demonstrated by Christ for when
he was nailed to the cross by his enemies he did not say: "Crucify those
who have crucified me." No, he said: "Father forgive them for they know
not what they do." And in forgiving them he gained his greatest triumph.

Selfishness contributes its quota of suffering. In fact selfishness is
about the most wretched of vices with innumerable manifestations called
diseases. A selfish individual is always miserable; while those who live
for others are impervious to the things which vex and irritate those
whose every thought is, "What will I get out of it?" Or "how will this
affect ME?" A God-centered life is free from the cares and worries of a
self-centered life.

All great teachers, including Jesus, insisted upon the extinguishment of
the self. "For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever
will lose his life shall find it."

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

Inasmuch as man is responsible for his suffering, it will cease when he
ceases doing the things which cause him to suffer. It is only a question
of how long will man persist in doing them. Christ invariably admonished
those men he had healed "to go and sin no more;" implying that sinning
had caused their suffering, and if they violated the law again, the
result would be the same.

The capacity for suffering depends on the nervous system which is the
instrument of emotion, and there is a wide range of differences in the
development of the nervous organizations. Some people's nerves are like
taut strings and vibrate to every shade of thought and feeling; they
suffer excruciatingly at things that the dull and gross laugh off with a
shrug. On the other hand they derive far greater enjoyment from life for
they have an acute awareness of it; they are responsive to spiritual
vibrations and in tune with the higher forces. It is to the sensitive
souls the world is indebted for its artistic treasures; for its
literature, music, poetry and religion.

Some people think life intolerable because they suffer; yet without pain
little progress would be made. Few people listen to spiritual truths
before they have been through the purifying process of loss, disaster,
calamity or death. Sorrow and suffering are builders, and millions of
people but for these would not have made the progress they have. In the
crucible of pain great souls are fashioned; the strong sturdy ones,
those whose characters shine, are well acquainted with grief.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

The higher the unfoldment of the soul the more impregnable it becomes to
suffering; for after having been dealt many blows, instead of sharp
anguish feels only a dull ache. It is the tears and heartaches of
friends and loved ones that now cause him to suffer. No one lives unto
himself alone, but each soul is a link weak or strong in an endless
chain.

Suffering that emanates from love and the affections is ennobling and
worthwhile, even though it may sear the mind and scar the soul. We
cannot love and not suffer. We cannot have children or a companion
without experiencing deep anguish. We cannot have a friend and not
grieve. Suffering is the price we pay for these blessings, and we should
count ourselves fortunate if we have been worthy of them.

Pain, in its manifold aspects is the supreme cure for the imperfections
of the soul, and is like a bitter medicine in our onward march towards
the goal of liberation from ignorance. People resent painful experiences
and rejoice at pleasant ones; yet from happiness we learn but little. We
should rather hold closely to the things that have been painful;
investigate their action upon our inner self, and endeavor to ascertain
whether we have learned the lessons contained therein. Later, when we
survey the events of our life we behold only mercy from the hand of God;
the crosses, afflictions, misfortunes and calamities when judged by
their visible effects were in reality blessings in disguise.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Suffering teaches us the universal language of the heart; we learn to
understand our fellowmen and help our struggling brothers upwards
towards the light. It develops patience and inculcates kindness and
makes us tolerant and compassionate. Those who are indifferent to the
distress of others have yet to learn this language, and their turn will
surely come when they too will walk the treadmill of pain.

Do not feel sorry for one who has suffered tremendously. Feel sorry for
one who has had a smooth, soft and easy life. Do not pity one who has
been frustrated; who has tasted bitter defeat and has had frequent
disappointments; and has been crushed to earth time and time again. Pity
the one who has never known anything but wealth, ease, comfort and
achievement. Do not weep for one whose heart has been broken innumerable
times. Weep for the one who hasn't a heart to be broken.

Who are the individuals who have the most vitality, energy and
endurance? They are those who have suffered the most; who have had
bitter experiences, and thus gained wisdom, sympathy, tolerance and
understanding. Who are the individuals that attract us the most? They
are those who have found an answer to life's problems, and in their
deep, hard-won serenity have found peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Love](aec09)
