[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aec11)  [Next](aec13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*An Eternal Career*, by Frank and Lydia Hammer, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

### IX

### ACCIDENTS

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>"<em>Nothing with God is accidental</em>."<br />
                —LONGFELLOW.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

We recently read that accidents in this country alone claim the lives of
4,000,000 people a year. According to this report automobile accidents
account for the greatest number of fatalities; then come deaths due to
accidents in homes.

It is not the statistics, however, that amaze us. It is the fact that
mature people, well educated and intelligent, should believe in
accidents. For the general idea seems to be that all those who do not
die in bed of old age are victims of accidents.

Such a phenomenon as an accident has never happened, and can never
happen because the universe is governed by laws that are immutable. Its
equilibrium is more delicately balanced and more accurately adjusted
than a chronometer and regulated by the Master Hand. If accidents were
possible, the most trivial, imaginable and unpredicted one which
interfered with the established order of things would result in
universal chaos and destruction.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

If automobiles can accidentally collide, then suns might inadvertently
crash, as both are subject to the same laws. There are major and minor
injuries, but not major and minor accidents. Accidents so-called are the
consequences of the person's thoughts and acts, conscious or
unconscious, premeditated or spontaneous, produce the effect. For
neither natural laws nor natural forces can exercise volition or display
purpose, but can be manipulated only by living, conscious and
intelligent beings. Whenever the cause of an event is obscure, as is
often the case, people see the effect as coincident or accident. As in
the darkness of night all animals appear black, so in the darkness of
ignorance all causes are obscure.

Natural laws have a strength and precision which no man can disturb, and
not even major catastrophes vary their operation by a hair's-breadth.
These laws are not to be confounded with mere human decrees which are
arbitrary, changeable, local and, as well, ineffective and partial.
Natural laws are definite, inexorable, immutable, perfect and beyond the
interference of men. They have been from the beginning in exactly the
same form as they are today. They have not been added to, nor
diminished. They have not been communicates by God to emissaries; but
man has discovered them as his mind unfolded sufficiently to comprehend
certain phenomena. No man has ever succeeded breaking them; but on the
other hand they have broken many a man.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

Consider how different are the laws of men! In reality no man has ever
made a law. What men term laws are only temporary makeshifts which are
as imperfect and changeable as men themselves. Indeed, many human
ordinances are a travesty of justice. Take for example the iniquitous
law of [bankruptcy](errata.htm#4) which permits a man to declare himself
insolvent in order to evade payment of his debts. Then later permits the
use of his concealed assets to resume business under a different name,
or moves in another community.

But ah! What a difference when the moral law is encountered! There is no
such thing as spiritual bankruptcy; this, the moral law exacts payment
in full for all debts whether contracted on earth or elsewhere. All
obligations must be fulfilled, all debts paid, all liabilities
discharged before the soul can progress and have any happiness or peace.

It is because natural laws are intrinsically and organically perfect
that astronomers can predict the position of suns and planets many years
hence. They know that there never has been, and never will be any
intervention in the operation of these laws. They dismiss all ideas of
chance or accident and rely solely on the fixed and constant operation
of law; thus they can make unerring calculations.

Students of natural laws have observed that nature never excuses any
particle of matter or spirit from obedience to her laws. They know that
every cause is followed by its invariable effect, which is first
registered in the mental world, later materializing

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

on the objective plane in visible events. Only the unthinking and the
unobservant assume that they are exempt from these laws.

Since the issues of life and death have not been entrusted to men, they
do not always die when or how they would wish. Some are removed through
disasters such as war, pestilence, famine, drowning, fire, disease, etc.
One hears particularly in times of war of many miraculous escapes and
peculiar deaths; but these merely appear miraculous and peculiar because
they are not understood.

In no species do all attain old age, and the human variety is no
exception. The time of departure is fixed, and from this law there is no
repeal. Moreover, not all souls require a long physical embodiment, and
no scientific skill can alter the decreed length of their life.

Sometimes individuals have a premonition of the manner in which they
will meet their death and take elaborate precautions to prevent it, but
to no avail. For instance, we knew of a man who had a foreboding that
automobiles would prove fatal and under no circumstances would he ride
in them. Nevertheless, he was killed by one when crossing a street.

Birth, like death, is also governed by immutable law and no child
regardless of circumstances is ever an "accident." Children often are
unwanted and unplanned for, but never "accidents." "Man proposes but God
disposes," and when a soul is destined for earth it gets there, human
will notwithstanding.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

"It is all a matter of accident whether a child will be a boy or a
girl," declares a scientist. He further adds, "that there might be a law
of 'caprice' which governs sex." But, because scientists and parents
have no jurisdiction over sex, it does not follow that its determination
is an accident. The soul of course is sexless; but the sex of the body
it will inhabit is determined long before the advent of physical birth.
Nor are parents, environment and circumstances accidental, but the
result of the soul's karma.

Who cannot recall the accidental meetings with strangers which turned
the tide of destiny? Who does not remember the peculiar times and places
they have met people who were instrumental in altering their course? In
this way some met their life partner; others met those who promoted
their material success; or brought them into a different understanding
of Truth. Such meetings appear accidental, but they are in complete
accordance with law. For whenever one life touches another, it is always
for a definite purpose, a part of the universal plan.

"Chaos, complete and utter chaos has engulfed the world," lament the
apostles of gloom. Chaos is impossible in a world of universal law and
order, and what man calls chaos is but harmony misunderstood.

Many believe that war is discord, but it is no more discord than the
clashing cymbals in an orchestra which are as much a part of the score
as the violins and the wood-winds. Life is governed by immutable law and
order even in war; it has a purpose

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

although unknown to man. Man's insanity and stupidity do not alter or
jeopardise God's ultimate plan and eternal harmony. Man makes war and
God's law knowing neither wrath nor mercy leave every cause to work out
to its inevitable conclusion.

Singularly, the law of Karma though of ancient origin, seems unknown to
all but a few religions. Even when they do, they fail to include it in
their Articles of Faith, or acquaint their followers with it. This is
most unfortunate, as human conduct would undergo revolutionary change if
people knew that as they deal with men, so men will deal with them. Men
will never become civilized or cultured until they do understand and
live this law; for so long as men do not see any relationship between
causation and effect, they will continue to inflict cruelties and
barbarities upon others.

Some faddists make the claim that life could be prolonged indefinitely
if men lived in certain climates and ate only specified foods. In fact,
they see no reason why men cannot become immortal! As if they were not
already immortal! Like all materialists, they cannot conceive of life
apart from the form, so they would preserve the body forever —if they
could!

But scientists will never be able to chain a race of immortals to earth.
With infinity to explore and to be condemned to this plane, would appeal
only to the crass materialist. A philosopher would deem it the worst of
all possible fates. Moreover, the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

soul wears out many bodies in this life, so why should it not outlive
the last and most decrepit?

"It was just his luck," say people when a man falls from a ladder and
breaks his neck. If he falls heir to a fortune, "It's just his luck
again." "Luck," good or bad, is the operation of the law of cause and
effect. Everyone is the creator of his luck; everyone is the arbiter of
his destiny, happiness, misery, success or failure. Nothing ever happens
to anyone for which he is not either directly or indirectly responsible.

Many individuals wail and whine that they never had a "break." They say
that lack of education, opportunity or influence prevented them from
getting ahead. Yet nearly always their only real lack has been that of
character. With the same materials different individuals construct
totally different destinies. It is no "accident" that handicaps often
are a spur to achievement and success rather than deterrents. History
and literature afford innumerable illustrations of those who triumphed
over seemingly insurmountable obstacles. Life is not a calamity to be
endured, but a challenge to be met.

Some allege that the existence of immutable laws eliminates all exercise
of free will. They argue that men are helpless pawns in the clutch of
cosmic forces and are controlled by invisible laws that compel them to
act contrary to their will. God's laws always work with men, and never
against them. Without these laws men would have no volition at all. Men
are free without being free from these

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

laws, and are free only because of them. Men are not at the mercy of
chance and caprice, but are protected, enfolded, sustained and guided by
Nature's great protective and [beneficent](errata.htm#5) laws.

Life is no puppet show. Life is an eternal drama enacted by immortal
actors who are free not only to choose their roles, but also free to
interpret them. In our eternal career we are scheduled to appear in many
parts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. Unfinished Business](aec13)
