[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](esc04)  [Next](esc06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Evidence from Scripture and History of the Second Coming of Christ*, by
William Miller, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LECTURE III.

##### DANIEL viii. 13, 14.

##### "Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto that certain saint which spake, How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?  And he said unto me, Unto two thousand three hundred days: then shall the sanctuary be cleansed;" or justified, as it might have been translated.

 

            THE hearer will, at the first view of our text, perceive
that there is something very important communicated in the question and
answer given; or why are saints commissioned (as we may reasonably
suppose) from the courts of heaven, to ask and answer the question
contained in the text, in presence of the prophet?  And that it
concerned Daniel, and us for whom the prophet wrote his prophecy, to
understand, is evident from the answer being given to Daniel--"and he
said unto me"--instead of being given to the "saint," who made the
inquiry.  Then we are not treading on forbidden ground, my dear hearer,
to search to understand the meaning and truth of our subject.

            I shall then treat our subject in the following manner:

            I. Explain some of the figures and expressions used in the
text.

            II. Show what the "daily sacrifice vision" is, and,

            III. The time or length of the vision "unto two thousand
three hundred days: then shall the sanctuary be cleansed."

            I. I am to explain some of the figures used in the text;
and,

            1st, the *"daily sacrifice."*  This may be understood, by
some, to mean the Jewish rites and ceremonies; and by others, the Pagan
rites and sacrifices.  As both Jews and Pagans had their rites and
sacrifices both morning and evening, and their altars were kept smoking
with their victims of beasts, and their holy fire was preserved in their
national altars and temples devoted to their several deities or gods, we
might be at a loss to know which of these to apply this figurative
expression to, did not our text and context explain the meaning.  It is
very evident, when we carefully examine our text, that it is to be
understood as referring to Pagan and Papal rites, for it stands coupled
with "the abomination of desolation," and performs the same acts, such
as are ascribed to the Papal abomination, "to give both the sanctuary
and host to be trodden under foot."  See, also, Rev. xi. 2, "But the
court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it not; for it
is given unto the Gentiles; and the holy city shall they tread under
foot forty and two months."  This last text only has reference to the
Papal beast, which was the image of the Pagan; but the text in
consideration has reference to both Pagan and Papal.  That is, How long
shall the Pagan transgression and the Papal transgression tread under
foot the sanctuary and host?  This must be the true and literal meaning
of our text; it could not mean the anti-Christian abomination alone, for
they never desolated the Jewish church; neither could it mean Antiochus,
the Syrian king; for he and his kingdom were made desolate and destroyed
before Christ; and it is evident that Christ had an allusion to this
very power, when he told his disciples, Matt. xxiv. 15, "When ye
therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel
the prophet, stand in the holy place."  I believe all commentators agree
that Christ meant the Roman power--if so, then Daniel has the same
meaning; for this is the very passage to which Christ alluded.  Then the
"daily sacrifice" means Pagan rites and sacrifices, and the
transgression of desolation, the Papal; and both together shall tread
under foot the "sanctuary and host," which brings me to show what may be
understood by "sanctuary and host."  By *sanctuary,* we must understand
the temple at Jerusalem, and those who worship therein, which was
trodden under foot by the Pagan kingdoms of the world, since the days of
Daniel, the writer of our text; then by the Chaldeans; afterwards by the
Medes and Persians; next by the Grecians; and lastly by the Romans, who
destroyed the city and sanctuary, levelled the temple with the ground,
and caused the plough to pass over the place.  The people of the Jews,
too, were led into captivity and persecuted by all these kingdoms
successively, and finally by the Romans were taken away and destroyed as
a nation.  And as the prophet Isaiah, lxiii. 18, says, "The people of
thy holiness have possessed it but a little while: our adversaries have
trodden down thy sanctuary."  Jeremiah, also, in Lam. i. 10, "The
adversary hath spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things; for she
hath seen that the heathen entered into her sanctuary, whom thou didst
command that they should not enter into thy congregation."  The word
*host* is applied to the people who worship in the outer court, and
fitly represents the Christian church, who are said to be strangers and
pilgrims on the earth, having no continuing places, but looking for a
city whose builder and maker is God.  Jeremiah, speaking of the gospel
church, says, iii. 19, "But I said, How shall I put thee among the
children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the *host*
of nations?" evidently meaning the church from the Gentiles.  "Then
shall the sanctuary be cleansed or justified," means the true sanctuary
which God has built of lively stones to his own acceptance, through
Christ, of which the temple at Jerusalem was but a type, the shadows
having long since fled away, and that temple and people now destroyed,
and all included in unbelief.  So whosoever looks for the worldly
sanctuary to be built again, will find themselves as much mistaken as
the unbelieving Jews were, when they looked for a temporal prince in the
Messiah.  For there is not a word in the prophets or apostles, after
Zerubbabel built the second temple, that a third one would ever be
built; except the one which cometh down from heaven, which is a
spiritual one, and which is the mother of us all, (Jew and Gentile,) and
which is free, and when that New Jerusalem is perfected, then shall we
be cleansed and justified; for Paul says to the Phillippians, iii. 20,
21, "For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself;" that is, "they that
are his at his coming."  We see by these texts--and many more might be
quoted--that the spiritual sanctuary will not be cleansed until Christ's
second coming; and then all Israel shall be raised, judged, and
justified in his sight.

            II. We shall now try to understand what is meant by the
*"vision,"* in the text.

            *The vision,* spoken of in the text, alludes to three
separate times in which God revealed unto Daniel all that may be
considered a prophecy in the book of Daniel, which vision was explained
to Daniel by a heavenly messenger, called Gabriel, at three separate
times, the last of which closes the book of Daniel; which last
instruction will be the subject of a future lecture.

            Daniel's first vision was the dream which Nebuchadnezzar
had, and which troubled him; but when he awoke, the dream was gone from
him.  He then called for the magicians, astrologers, sorcerers, and wise
men of Chaldea, to show him his dream, and the interpretation thereof;
but they could not.  The king, being angry, commanded that all the wise
men of Babylon should be destroyed.  Then Arioch, the captain of the
king's guard, went forth to execute the king's decree; and among the
rest he sought for Daniel and his three friends, young captive Jews, to
execute the purpose of king Nebuchadnezzar upon them also.  Daniel then,
for the first time, being made acquainted with the decree, went in unto
the king, and desired time, and promised that he would make known the
dream, and the interpretation thereof.  Time being granted, he and his
three Hebrew friends held a prayer-meeting, (not a cold and formal one,
as we may reasonably suppose,) for their lives and the lives of their
fellow-creatures were in danger.  They cried for mercies from the God of
heaven.  God heard and answered their prayers, and revealed to Daniel
the dream and interpretation.  After rendering suitable thanksgiving,
Daniel went in unto the king and told the dream and visions of the
king.  "As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy
bed, what should come to pass hereafter; and he that revealeth secrets
maketh known to thee what should come to pass; but as for me, this
secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any
living, but for the intent that the interpretation may be made known to
the king, and that thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.  Thou,
O king, sawest, and behold, a great image.  This great image, whose
brightness was excellent, stood before thee, and the form thereof was
terrible.  This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms
of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, his legs of iron, his feet
part of iron and part of clay.  Thou sawest till that a stone was cut
out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron
and clay, and brake them to pieces.  Then was the iron, the clay, the
brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became
like the chaff of the summer threshing-floors, and the wind carried them
away, that no place was found for them; and the stone that smote the
image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth," Daniel ii.
29-35.

            This was the dream, and the interpretation was clear as
given by Daniel; and the history of the world proves it to be true, a
large share having already been fulfilled.  All that remains to be
accomplished is for the stone to smite the image upon his feet, and to
become a great mountain, and fill the whole earth.  "The head of gold"
represented the Chaldean kingdom; "the breast and arms of silver"
represented the Medes and Persians; "the belly and thighs of brass,
which were to bear rule over all the earth," the Grecian.  Alexander, a
Grecian king, conquered the world; the legs of iron, and the feet part
of iron and part of clay," fitly represent the Roman kingdom, which
still exists, although in a broken state, like iron and clay.  This
kingdom has been divided between pagan Rome, the head wounded to death,
and Papal Rome, the deadly wound healed, both "mixing themselves with
the seed of men," that is, uniting church and state, ecclesiastical and
civil, in the government.  The stone denotes Christ, the God of heaven;
and the mountain the kingdom of God.  His breaking the image to pieces,
shows that all the kingdoms of this world are to be utterly destroyed
and carried away, so that no place can be found for them.  And the
kingdom of God filling the whole earth teaches us that the beloved city,
the New Jerusalem, will fill the world, and God will dwell with his
people on the earth.  Read Dan. ii. 37-45.  This dream was in the second
year of Nebuchadnezzar's reign, 603 B.C.  Forty-eight years afterwards,
in the first year of Belshazzar's reign and 555 B.C., Daniel had another
dream, yet the same in substance.  "Daniel spake and said, I saw in my
vision by night, and behold, the four winds of heaven strove upon the
great sea, and four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from
another.  The first was like a lion, and had eagles' wings; I beheld
till the wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up from the
earth, and made to stand upon the feet as a man, and a man's heart was
given to it.  And behold, another beast, a second, like unto a bear, and
it raised up itself on one side, and it had three ribs in the mouth of
it between the teeth of it; and they said thus unto it, Arise, devour
much flesh.  After this I beheld, and lo, another like a leopard, which
had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four
heads, and dominion was given to it.  After this I saw in the night
visions, and behold, a fourth beast, dreadful, and terrible, and strong
exceedingly, and it had great iron teeth: it devoured and brake in
pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it; and it was diverse
from all the beasts that were before it, and it had ten horns.  I
considered the horns, and behold, there came up among them another
little horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked up
by the roots; and behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of man,
and a mouth speaking great things.  I beheld till the thrones were cast
down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow,
and the hair of his head like the pure wool; his throne was like the
fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire.  A fiery stream issued and
came forth from before him; thousand thousands ministered unto him, and
ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set,
and the books were opened.  I beheld, then, because of the voice of the
great words which the horn spake.  I beheld, even till the beast was
slain, and his body destroyed and given to the burning flame.  As
concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away,
yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time.  I saw in the
night visions, and behold, one like the Son of Man came with the clouds
of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near
before him.  And there was given him dominion and glory, and a kingdom,
that all people, nations, and languages should serve him; his dominion
is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed," Daniel vii. 1-14.  This ends
Daniel's night vision, except the instruction he received from some one
standing by.  "So he told me, and made me know 'the truth of all this,'
or the interpretation of the things.  These great beasts, which are
four, are four kings which shall arise out of the earth.  But the saints
of the most high shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom
forever, even forever and ever."  We see in this instruction that this
vision and Nebuchadnezzar's dream agree in the most prominent parts; the
four beasts representing the four kingdoms, and the saints possessing
the kingdom, the same as the stone becoming a great mountain and filling
the whole earth; "forever and ever" shows us that it is an immortal
state in everlasting life; "the saints" evidently includes all saints,
"for they shall live and reign with him on the earth," Revelation v. 10,
20. iv. 6.  "Then," Daniel says, vii. 19, 20, "I would know the truth of
the fourth beast, which was diverse from all the others, exceeding
dreadful, whose teeth were of iron, and his nails of brass, which
devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet; and of
the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other which came up, and
before whom three fell, even of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth
that spake very great things, whose look was more stout than his
fellows."

            In these verses we learn that the fourth beast would be
diverse from the others.  This was true with Rome; that kingdom first
rose from a small colony of adventurers settled in Italy.  Rome, also,
had seven different forms of government, while the others had but one. 
We learn that this kingdom would devour, break in pieces, harass and
perplex the people of God, whether Jew of Gentile; that it would be
divided into ten kingdoms, and afterwards there would arise another
power which would swallow up three of the ten kingdoms.  This was all
true with the Roman government.  In A.D. 476, the Western Empire fell,
and was divided into ten kingdoms by the Goths, Huns, and
Vandals,--"France, Britain, Spain, Portugal, Naples, Tuscany, Austria,
Lombardy, Rome, and Ravenna.  The three last were absorbed in the
territory of Rome," (E. Irwin,) and became the States of the Church,
governed by the Papal chair, the little horn that had eyes and a mouth
that spake very great things, whose look was more stout than his
fellows.  This description cannot apply to any other power but the
church of Rome.  "Had eyes," showing that they made pretence at least to
be the household of faith; "eyes" meaning faith, and "mouth that spake
very great things," showing that the church would claim infallibility;
"whose look would be more stout than his fellows," showing that he would
claim authority over all other churches, or even the kings, the other
horns.  See Rev. xvii. 18: "And the woman which thou sawest is that
great city which reigneth over the kings of the earth."  That the little
horn is a part of the fourth kingdom is evident, for it was to come up
among the ten horns which were upon the head of the beast; and there
cannot be a shadow of a doubt, even in Scripture itself, but that Rome
is meant by this fourth beast; for what power but the Roman will answer
the description here and elsewhere given in Daniel?  "I beheld, and the
same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them, until
the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the
Most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom."
Daniel vii. 21, 22.  In these verses we are taught clearly that
anti-Christ will prevail over the church of Christ until the first
resurrection and the first judgment, when the saints are raised and
judged, which utterly destroys the modern idea of a temporal millennium,
a thousand years before the dead are raised and judged.  This also
agrees with the whole tenor of Scripture; as, "judgment must first begin
at the house of God," and "whom he shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming;" when the Ancient of days shall come in the clouds of heaven
with power and great glory, "to give reward to his servants, the
prophets, and them that fear his name, small and great, and destroy them
who destroy the earth," described next verse, 23.  "Thus he said, The
fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be
diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall
tread it down and break it in pieces.  And the ten horns out of this
kingdom are ten kings that shall arise; and another shall arise after
them, and he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three
kings.  And he shall speak great words against the Most High, and shall
wear out the saints of the Most High, and think to change times and
laws; and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times, and
the dividing of time.  But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take
away his dominion to consume and to destroy it unto the end," 24-26.  In
these verses we have the history of the fourth beast, or Roman power,
during 1260 years of the close of this kingdom, which I shall, in some
future lecture, show is the meaning of time, times, and a half.  We have
also another clear description of the Papal power: "He shall speak great
words," &c.--the blasphemies against God, in the pretensions of the
Roman clergy to divine power, working of miracles, canonizing departed
votaries, changing ordinances and laws of God's house, worshipping
saints and images, and performing rites and ceremonies too foolish and
ridiculous to be for a moment indulged in, and which any unprejudiced
mind cannot for a moment believe to be warranted by divine rule, or
example of Christ or his apostles.  And we are again brought down to the
time when the judgment shall sit: "And the kingdom, and the dominion,
and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given
to the people of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
(not temporal, as some say, or a thousand years, but an immortal and
eternal,) and all dominions shall serve and obey him."  It is very
evident that this verse brings us down to the time when the kingdom of
Christ will be complete "in the greatness of the kingdom."  Every word
in Scripture has a meaning, and its own proper meaning, unless used
figuratively, and then explained by Scripture itself.  "Hitherto is the
end of the matter.  As for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me,
and my countenance changed in me; but I kept the matter in my heart."

            This ends Daniel's night vision.  Two years afterwards, in
the year 553 before Christ, Daniel vii., he had another vision in the
day-time, at the palace of Shushan, like the one which we have just
described, and Nebuchadnezzar's dream.

            "Then I lifted up mine eyes and saw, and behold, there stood
before the river a ram which had two horns, and the two horns were high;
but  one was higher than the other, and the higher came up last.  I saw
the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward, so that no beast
might stand before him, neither was there any that could deliver out of
his hand; but he did according to his will, and became great."  In the
20th verse, the angel Gabriel explains to Daniel what kingdom was
represented by the "ram with two horns," and says, "The ram which thou
sawest, having two horns, are the kings of Media and Persia."  We see by
this that the Chaldean kingdom is left out, for the reason that that
kingdom was then crumbling to ruin, and the glory of the Babylonish
kingdom had faded; therefore he now begins his vision with the Mede and
Persian kingdom, and that, too, when at the height of their power and
conquests.  The higher horn denoted the Persian line of kings, under and
following the reign of Cyrus, the Persian, son-in-law to Darius the
Mede.  "And as I was considering, behold, a he-goat came from the west,
on the face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground; and the goat
had a notable horn between his eyes."  In the 21st verse the angel says,
"And the rough goat is the king of Grecia: and the great horn that is
between his eyes is the first king."  This king was Alexander, that
conquered the Persians.  He was not the first king of Macedonia, but the
first that had all Grecia under his control, and that conquered the
world.  "And he came to the ram that had two horns, which I had seen
standing before the river, and ran unto him in the fury of his power. 
And I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler
against him, and smote the ram, and brake his two horns; and there was
no power in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down to the
ground, and stamped upon him, and there was none that could deliver the
ram out of his hand.  Therefore the he-goat waxed very great; and when
he was strong, the great horn was broken, and for it came up four
notable ones, towards the four winds of heaven."  We have in these
verses a plain description of Alexander's life, conquests, death, and
division of his kingdom into four parts, towards the four points of
heaven--Persia in the east, Syria in the north, Macedon and Europe in
the west, Egypt and Africa in the south.  And the angel, when he gives
Daniel instruction, says, 22d verse, "Now that being broken, whereas
four stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation,
but not in his power."  Then the vision seems to slide down to the
little horn.  "And out of one of them (that is, out of Europe) came
forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the south, and
toward the east, and toward the pleasant land.  And it waxed great even
to the host of heaven; and it cast down some of the host and of the
stars to the ground, and stamped upon them.  Yea, he magnified himself
even to the prince of the host, and by him the daily sacrifice was taken
away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down, and a host was given
him against the daily sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast
down the truth to the ground, and it practised and prospered."  Two or
three things in the above description clearly show that, by the little
horn, in this passage, we are to understand the Roman power, viz., Its
conquering to the south, and east, and pleasant lands, stamping on the
host, magnifying himself against Christ, and destroying Jerusalem, the
place of his sanctuary, and his practising and prospering.  All this
description agrees with the history of Rome, and cannot apply to
Antiochus, as some writers have supposed.  But let us see what Gabriel
says, 23: "And in the latter time of their kingdom, (that is, the four
kingdoms,) when the transgressors are come to the full, a king of fierce
countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up, and his
power shall be mighty, but not by his own power; and he shall destroy
wonderfully, and shall prosper and practise, and shall destroy the
mighty and the holy people.  And through his policy, also, he shall
cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify himself in his
heart, and by peace shall destroy many; he shall also stand up against
the Prince of princes; but he shall be broken without hand.  And the
vision of the evening (in the first year of Belshazzar, Daniel vii.) and
the morning (in the third year of Belshazzar, Daniel viii.) which was
told, is true; wherefore shut thou up the vision, for it shall be for
many days."  How many days?  Our text answers, "Unto two thousand three
hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.  And it came to
pass, when I, even I, Daniel, had seen the vision, and sought for the
meaning, then, behold, there stood before me as the appearance of a
man.  And I heard a man's voice between the banks of Ulai, which called
and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.  So he came
near where I stood, and when he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my
face; but he said unto me, Understand, O son of man, for at the time of
the end shall be the vision.  Now, as he was speaking with me, I was in
a deep sleep on my face toward the ground; but he touched me, and set me
upright.  And he said, behold, I will make thee know what shall be in
the last end of the indignation; for at the time appointed the end shall
be."

            Then comes the instruction of Gabriel, which we have before
given.

            III. *The time or length of the vision*--the 2,300 days.

            What must we understand by *days?*  In the prophecy of
Daniel it is invariably to be reckoned years; for God hath so ordered
the prophets to reckon days.  Numb. xiv. 34, "After the number of days
in which ye searched the land, even forty days, each day for a year,
shall you bear your iniquities, even forty years."  Ezek. iv. 5, 6, "For
I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according to the
number of the days, three hundred and ninety days; so shalt thou bear
the iniquity of the house of Israel.  And when thou hast accomplished
them, lie again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity of
the house of Judah forty days; I have appointed thee each day for a
year."  In these passages we prove the command of God.  We will also
show that it was so called in the days of Jacob, when he served for
Rachel, Gen. xxix. 27: "Fulfil her week (seven days) and we will give
thee this also, for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet other
seven years."

            Nothing now remains to make it certain that our vision is to
be so understood, but to prove that Daniel has followed this rule.  This
we will do, if your patience will hold out, and God permit.

            Now turn your attention to the ninth chapter of Daniel, and
you will there learn that fifteen years after Daniel had his last
vision, and sixty-five years after Daniel explained Nebuchadnezzar's
dream, and 538 years B.C., Daniel set his face unto the Lord God by
supplication and prayer; and by confession of his own sins, and the sins
of the people of Israel, he sought God for mercy, for himself and all
Israel.  And while he was speaking and praying, as he tells us, Daniel
ix. 21, "Yea, while I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom
I had seen in *the vision* at the beginning, Daniel viii. 16,17, being
caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening
oblation.  And he informed me and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I
am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.  At the
beginning of thy supplication the commandment came forth, and I am come
to show thee; for thou art greatly beloved; therefore understand the
matter, and consider *the vision.*  Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to
make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to
bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up *the vision* and
prophecy, and to anoint the Most Holy.  Know, therefore, and understand,
that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and build
Jerusalem unto the Messiah, the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and
threescore and two weeks; the street shall be built again, and the wall,
even in troublous times.  And after threescore and two weeks shall
Messiah be cut off, but not for himself; and the people of the Prince
that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the end
thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the war desolations
are determined.  And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one
week; and in the midst of the week, (or last half, as it might have been
rendered,) he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and
for the overspreading of abomination, he shall make it desolate, even
until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the
desolate."

            What do we learn from the above passage?  We learn our duty
in prayer, and God's goodness in answering.  We learn that the angel
Gabriel was sent to instruct Daniel, and make him understand *the
vision.*  You may inquire what vision?  I answer, The one Daniel had in
the beginning, for he has had no other.  We also learn that seventy
weeks, which is 490 days, (or years, as we shall show,) from the going
forth of a certain decree to build the streets and walls of Jerusalem in
troublous times, to the crucifixion of the Messiah should be
accomplished.  We also learn that this seventy weeks is divided into
three parts; seven weeks being employed in building the streets and
walls in troublous times, which is forty-nine years, sixty-two weeks, or
four hundred and thirty-four years to the preaching of John in the
wilderness, which two, put together, make sixty-nine weeks, or four
hundred and eighty-three years, and one week the gospel was preached;
John three and a half years, and Christ three and a half years, which
makes the seventy weeks, or four hundred and ninety years; which, when
accomplished, would seal up the vision, and make the prophecy true.  We
also learn that, after the crucifixion of Christ, the Romans would come
and destroy the city and sanctuary, and that wars will not cease until
the consummation or end of the world.  "All that may be true," says the
objector; "but where have you proved that the seventy weeks were four
hundred and ninety years?"  I agree I have not yet proved it, but will
now do it.

            We shall again turn your attention to the Bible.  Look at
Ezra vii. 11-13: "Now this is the copy of the letter that the king,
Artaxerxes, gave unto Ezra, the priest, the scribe, a scribe of the law
of God: perfect peace, and at such a time.  I make a decree that all
they of the people of Israel, and of his priests and Levites in my
realm, which are minded of their own free will to go up to Jerusalem, go
with thee."  This is the decree given when the walls of Jerusalem were
built in troublous times.  See, also, Neh. iv. 17-23.  Ezra and Nehemiah
being contemporary, see Neh. viii. 1.  The decree to Ezra was given in
the seventh year of Artaxerxes' reign, Ezra vii. 7, and that to Nehemiah
in the twentieth year, Neh. ii. 1.  Let any one examine the chronology,
as given by Rollin or Josephus, from the seventh year of Artaxerxes to
the twenty-second year of Tiberius Cæsar, which was the year our Lord
was crucified, and he will find it was four hundred and ninety years. 
The Bible chronology says that Ezra started to go up to Jerusalem on the
12th day of the first month, (see Ezra viii. 31,) 457 years before the
birth of Christ; he being 33 when he died, added to 457, will make 490
years.  Three of the evangelists tell us he was betrayed two days before
the feast of the passover, and of course was the same day crucified. 
The passover was always kept on the 14th day of the first month forever,
and Christ being crucified two days before, would make it on the 12th
day, 490 years from the time Ezra left the river Ahava to go unto
Jerusalem.

            If this calculation is correct,--and I think no one can
doubt it,--then the seventy weeks was fulfilled to a day when our Savior
suffered on the cross.  Is not the seventy weeks fairly proved to have
been fulfilled by years?  And does not this prove that our vision and
the 2300 days ought to be so reckoned?  Yes, if these seventy weeks are
a part of *the vision.*  Does not the angel say plainly, I have come to
show thee; therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision? 
Yes.  Well, what can a man ask for more than plain positive testimony,
and a cloud of circumstances agreeing with it?

            But one thing still remains to be proved.  When did the 2300
years begin?  Did it begin with Nebuchadnezzar's dream?  No.  For if it
had, it must have been fulfilled in the year A.D. 1697.  Well, then, did
it begin when the angel Gabriel came to instruct Daniel into the 70
weeks?  No, for if then, it would have been finished in the year A.D.
1762.  Let us begin it where the angel told us, from the going forth of
the decree to build the walls of Jerusalem in troublous times, 457 years
before Christ; take 457 from 2300, and it will leave A.D. 1843; or take
70 weeks of years, being 490 years, from 2300 years, and it will leave
1810 after Christ's death.  Add his life, (because we begin to reckon
our time at his birth,) which is 33 years, and we come to the same A.D.
1843.

            Now let us examine our subject, and see what we have learned
by it thus far.  And,

            I. We learn that there are two abominations spoken of by
Daniel.  The first is the Pagan mode of worship, which was performed by
the sacrificing of beasts upon altars, similar to the Jewish rites, and
by which means the nations around Jerusalem drew away many of the Jews
into idolatry, and brought down the heavy judgments of God upon
idolatrous Israel; and God permitted his people to be led into
captivity, and persecuted by the very nations that they, the Jews, had
been so fond of copying after in their mode of worship.  Therefore were
the sanctuary and place of worship at Jerusalem trodden down by pagan
worshippers; and the altars, erected by the command of God, and
according to the pattern and form which God had proscribed, were broken
down and more fashionable altars of the heathen erected in their room. 
Thus were the commands of God disobeyed, his laws perverted, his people
enslaved, the sanctuary trodden down, and the temple polluted, until at
last God took away the Jewish rites and ceremonies, instituted new
forms, new laws, and set up the gospel kingdom in the world.

            This, for a season, was kept pure from the worldly
sanctuaries and policy of Satan.  But Satan, an arch enemy, found his
Pagan abominations could have but little or no effect to draw the
followers of Christ into idolatry, for they believed the bloody rites
and sacrifices had their fulfilment in Christ.  Therefore, in order to
carry the war into the Christian camp, he suffers the daily sacrifice
abomination to be taken out of the way, and sets up Papacy, which is
more congenial to the Christian mode of worship in its outside forms and
ceremonies, but retaining all the hateful qualities of the former. He
persuades them to erect images to some or all of the dear apostles; and
even to Christ, and Mary, the "Mother of God."  He then flatters them
that the church is infallible.  (Here was a strong cord by which he
could punish all disputers.)  He likewise gives them the keys of heaven,
(or Peter, as they call it.)  This will secure all authority.  He then
clothes them with power to make laws, and to dispense with those which
God had made.  This capped the climax.  In this he would fasten many
thousands who might protest against some of his more vile abominations;
yet habit and custom might secure them to a willing obedience to his
laws, and to a total neglect of the laws of God.  This was Satan's
masterpiece; and, as Daniel says, "he would think to change times and
laws, and they should be given into his hand for a time, times, and a
half; but they shall take away his dominion to consume and destroy it
unto the end."  Therefore, when this last abomination of desolation
shall be taken away, then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.

            II. We learn that the vision which Daniel saw was revealed
at three separate times--1st. In Nebuchadnezzar's dream, which carried
us down through four great kingdoms, until they should all be swept away
like the chaff of the summer threshing-floor before the wind, and no
place found for them, and the glorious and everlasting kingdom of Christ
fill the whole earth.  The next vision Daniel saw was similar to this;
he saw four great beasts, representing four great kingdoms, as before,
and he saw the fourth beast to be diverse from all the others, dreadful
and terrible, and exceedingly strong; he had great iron teeth, and nails
of brass, which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the people of God
and the whole earth under foot.  This beast contained the two
abominations which we have before spoken of; the last, under the figure
of a little horn, he saw until all these thrones were cast down, till
the little horn was destroyed, and his body given to the burning flame. 
Daniel saw until the Ancient of days did sit.  The Son of Man came in
the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days.  He saw thousand
thousands ministering unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him; the judgment was set, and the books were opened.  He
saw the dominion, and glory, and kingdom given to the Son of Man, and to
the people of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom.  In the third vision, which Daniel has coupled with
the former, by saying that it was after (or like) the one which appeared
unto him at the first, he saw the three last kingdoms; gave a particular
description of the two first, even naming them--the Medes and Persians,
and the Grecian.  He then gives a short account of the little horn,
(having given a more general view of the fourth kingdom in the other
vision,) how he would cast down the host of heaven, and the stars, and
stamp upon them; also that he would magnify himself against the Prince
of the host, Jesus Christ, and cast down the place of his sanctuary, and
practise and prosper, but shall be broken without hands, showing that
the stone cut out without hand should break him to pieces.  Daniel,
then, in the 26th verse, couples the two visions, the one in the
evening, 7th chapter, and the one in the morning, 8th chapter, and says,
"The vision of the evening and morning, which was told, is true."

            III. We learn that this vision is two thousand three hundred
days long; that days are to be reckoned years--1st, By the command of
God; 2d, By the example of Jacob; and 3d, By the fulfilment of the
seventy weeks of this vision, at the crucifixion of the Messiah.  We
learn by the instruction of Gabriel that the seventy weeks were a part
of *the vision,* and that Daniel was commanded to begin the seventy
weeks at the going forth of the decree, to build the streets and walls
of Jerusalem in troublous times; that this decree, given to Ezra, was
exactly 490 years, to a day, before the crucifixion of Christ; and that
there is no account, by Bible or any historian, that there was ever any
other decree to build the streets or walls of Jerusalem.  We think the
proof is strong, that *the vision* of Daniel begins 457 years before
Christ; take which from 2300, leaves 1843, after Christ, when *the
vision* must be finished.  But the objector may say, "Perhaps your
vision does not begin with the seventy weeks."  Let me ask two or three
questions.  Does not the angel say to Daniel, ix. 23, "Therefore
understand the matter, and consider *the vision*"?  "Yes."  Does not the
angel then go on and give his instruction concerning the seventy weeks? 
"Yes."  Do you believe the Bible is true?  "We do."  Then if the Bible
is true, Daniel's 70 weeks are a part of *the vision,* and 490 years
were accomplished when the Mesiah was cut off, and not for himself. 
Then 1810 years afterwards *the vision* is completed; and we now live
about 1803 years after; of course it must have begun within seven years
of that date.  But it is very reasonable to suppose it began with the
seventy weeks; for the angel said it would establish *the vision,* that
is, make it sure; for if the 70 weeks were exactly fulfilled at the
death of Christ, then would the remainder be in 1810 years after, which
would be fulfilled A.D. 1843, as we have before shown.

            And now, my dear hearer, are you prepared for this great and
important event?  Are you ready for the judgment to set, and the books
to be opened?  Let this subject sink deep into your hearts; let if
follow you to your bed-chambers, to your fields, or your shops.  Not one
jot or tittle of the word of God shall fail.  If he has spoken, it will
come, however inconsistent it may look to us.  Be admonished, then, and
see to it that you are prepared.  Compare *the vision* with the history
of the kingdom, and where can you find a failure?  Not one.  Then,
surely, here is evidence strong that the remainder will be accomplished
in its time, and that time but seven years.  Think, sinner, how good God
is to give you notice, and prove it a thousand fold.  Remember the old
world; they thought Noah was a maniac; but the flood came, and they were
reserved in chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great day. 
Remember the cities of the plain.  Lot was unto them like one that
mocked; but the same day God rained fire and brimstone upon them, and
they are suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.  Be warned, then; fly
to the ark, Christ Jesus, before the door is shut; escape to the
mountain of the house of the Lord before the Lord shall rise up to the
prey, and you be driven away in your wickedness.  *Amen.*

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture IV. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people...](esc06.md)
