[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](esc03)  [Next](esc05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Evidence from Scripture and History of the Second Coming of Christ*, by
William Miller, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LECTURE II.

##### REV. xx. 6.

##### Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection; on such the second death hath no power; but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

 

            THE term "blessed and holy" is often used in scripture, and
in many places is applied to man; but in no place without giving some
characteristic mark of his being born of God, or inheriting the fruits
of the divine Spirit; and very often the word *blessed* is used standing
in immediate connection with the resurrection and coming of Christ,
either expressed or implied, as in Isa. lxii. 11, 12, "Behold, the Lord
hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, Say ye to the daughter of
Zion, Behold, they salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and
his work before him.  And they shall call them The *holy* people, The
redeemed of the Lord; and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not
forsaken."  Isa. xxx. 18, "And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may
be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have
mercy upon you; for the Lord is a God of judgment.  *Blessed* are all
they that wait for him."  Daniel says, xii. 12, "*Blessed* is he that
waiteth, and cometh to the 1335 days."  John says, Rev. xiv. 13,
"*Blessed* are the dead which die in the Lord."  "Write, *Blessed* are
they which are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb."  "Behold, I
come quickly; *blessed* is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy
of this book."  "*Blessed* are they that do his commandments, that they
may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates
into the city."  By these passages I show you that all the children of
God are included in this blessing, and not the martyrs only, as some
will have it.  The next thing which will claim our attention will be to
explain the resurrection spoken of in our text, called the first
resurrection.  The word *resurrection* signifies to revive, or
resuscitate, or bring to life *again,* one now dead, who was once
alive.  It nowhere in the word of God conveys an idea of a new creation,
and the word is nowhere used in the Bible expressing any thing less or
more than a union of soul and body, and deliverance from natural death. 
The word *resurrection* is nowhere used in a figurative sense; it in all
places has its own simple meaning, unless our text is an exception.  And
without the objector can show some rule of interpretation by which we
shall be warranted to understand the word in a different sense, we must
beg leave to attach to it the simple meaning, *coming to life from the
grave.*  I know some have supposed that regeneration is resurrection;
but I cannot believe this unless they show some rule.  I know some
pretend to show us, in John v. 25, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live," as a rule; but in order to
make this a rule, they must prove that Christ meant regeneration; until
this is shown, we cannot admit it as any proof.

            We shall, therefore, consider the word *resurrection* as
*coming up out of the grave,* and pass to the word *first.*  "The first
resurrection."  The resurrection of the saints is first as it respects
order and time.  Wherever the word *resurrection* is used in connection
with *life* or *damnation,* the one unto life always comes first; as in
Daniel xii. 2, "Some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt;" John v. 29, "They that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation."  Here are two samples as it respects order. 
One or two as it respects time: 1 Cor. xv. 23, "Christ the first fruits,
then afterward they that are Christ's at his coming.  Then cometh the
end."  And again, 1 Thess. iv. 16, "For the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel and the trump
of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first."  And then our context
and text shows that the blessed and holy are raised a thousand years
before the rest of the dead.  If we are correct, then, Christ will come
before the millennium instead of afterwards, as some believe; and the
millennium is a state of personal, and glorious, and immortal reign on
the new earth, or this earth cleansed by fire, as it was once by water;
and it will be a new dispensation, new heavens, and new earth.  This
will be our next proposition to prove.  And, first, we will examine the
20th chapter of Revelation, 1st verse: *"And I saw an angel come down
from heaven;"*--this angel I consider no less a being than the Lord
Jesus Christ; for it only can be said of him;--*"having the key of the
bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand."*  See Rev. i. 18: "I am
he that liveth and was dead; and behold, I am alive for evermore, amen,
and have the keys of hell and of death."  And Christ only has power to
bind Satan.  "That he might destroy him that had the power of death,
that is, the devil." Heb. ii. 14.  2d verse: *"And he laid hold on the
dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil, and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years."*  I suppose this verse needs no explanation.  It can
only be understood in a literal sense, for it explains itself in the
figures used; as *dragon* and *serpent,* often used as figures, are
explained to mean the *devil* and *Satan.*  If the thousand years had
been used, in this chapter, or any where else in the word of God, in a
mystical or figurative sense, it would have been somewhere explained;
but, as it is not, I consider we are to place upon it the most simple
construction, and I shall therefore understand it literally.  3d verse:
*"And cast him into the bottomless pit;"*--by bottomless pit, I have
shown, by the proof on our first verse, that it is hell; see Rev. i.
18;--*"and shut him up and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive
the nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled; and
after that he must be loosed a little season."*  This passage must be
understood in its simple, plain meaning; no mystery in this.  4th verse:
*"And I saw thrones, and they sat on them, and judgment was given unto
them;"*--here we have a prophecy of the fulfilment of a promise that
Christ made to his disciples, in Matt. xix. 28: "And Jesus said unto
them, Verily, I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the
regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the throne of his glory,
ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel;"--*"and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped
the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their
foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years."*  In this description we have the whole family of the
redeemed; for all that had not worshipped the beast or his image, or
received a mark, and, in one word, all that were not the servants of
Satan or sin, lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.  5th
verse: *"But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand
years were finished.  This is the first resurrection."*  The *rest of
the dead* means the wicked dead, who do not have part in the first
resurrection; *lived not again,* showing conclusively that it is a
natural life and death spoken of.  The *first resurrection* is the
resurrection of the saints at his coming.  Then comes in our text, which
has and will be explained in the lecture.  7th verse: *"And when the
thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison."* 
We may reasonably expect that, when Satan is let loose, all the damned
spirits are let loose with him; and it has been strongly implied they
were to live again in the body, at the end of the thousand years.  8th
verse: *"And shall go out"*--that is, Satan--*"to deceive the nations
which are in the four quarters of the earth"*--"ashes under the feet of
the saints," as Malachi tells us: "And ye shall tread down the wicked;
for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I
shall do this, saith the Lord of hosts"--*"Gog and Magog"*--the armies
of the wicked that were slain at the commencing of the thousand years,
or coming of Christ, at the supper of the great God, and battle of
Armageddon; see Ezekiel xxxviii., xxxix.--*"to gather them together to
battle;"--*this is their design, but there is no battle, for God himself
is with his people to defend them; and he destroys the wicked host,
*"the number of whom is as the sand of the sea;"* evidently including
the whole number of the wicked; for the figure, *sand of the sea,* is
never used, only to express the whole class of the people named; as, the
children of Israel, the whole host of Jacob.  9th verse: *"And they went
up on the breadth of the earth;"*--that is, this army of Gog and Magog
were raised up out of the surface of the earth, that only being the
breadth of a globular body;--*"and compassed the camp of the saints
about, and the beloved city;"*--plainly showing that the New Jerusalem,
the beloved city, is on the earth during the thousand years, or how
could this wicked host encompass it about? they have not climbed the
celestial walls of heaven--no; for it says, *"and fire came down from
God out of heaven and devoured them."*  This is the second death,
represented under the figure of fire coming down from God out of heaven;
not the conflagration of the world,--for that was in the commencing of
the thousand years, when Christ came and cleansed the world from all the
wicked, and the works of wicked men,--but the justice of God, under the
figure of fire; "for our God is a consuming fire." Heb. xii. 29.  10th
verse: *"And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, where the beast and false prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night forever and ever."*  In this verse, the final
condemnation of the wicked, soul and body, is given; and the last that
God has seen fit to reveal concerning them to us is, that they are cast
into everlasting torment.  In the next verse, John has another vision of
the same things which he had before told us, only in a different point
of view, or some circumstance not before clearly described.  *And I saw*
always implies a new view, or another vision.  11th verse: *"And I saw a
great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the heavens
and earth fled away; and there was no place found for them."*  This is
the same throne that Daniel saw, vii. 9-14: "I beheld till the thrones
were cast down and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white
as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was
like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire."  12th verse:
*"And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books
were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of life; and
the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the
books, according to their works."*  This is the same as Daniel saw, vii.
10: "A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him; thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood
before him.  The judgment was set, and the books were opened."  It is
very evident that this is the beginning of the judgment, when Christ
comes in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory, to raise and
judge his saints, and to reward every man as his work shall be.  1st,
because it is when the judgment first sets; 2d, because the book of life
is there, and open; and, 3d, because it was at the time or before
antichrist was destroyed; and no one can believe that the antichristian
beast can be on the earth during or in the millennium.  13th verse:
*"And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them."*  I conclude the apostle,
after he had seen the righteous dead raised, small and great, and stand 
before God, and saw the book of life open to justify them, and saw them
judged and rewarded, he then glides down to the end of the thousand
years, and beheld the wicked dead given up by those elements and places
wherein they had been confined during the millennial period, to be
judged in the flesh, every man according to his works.

            This only can reconcile some of those conflicting passages
(or seemingly so to us) concerning the resurrection; and I cannot see
any impropriety in thus understanding these prophecies; for it is the
common manner of the prophets, a little here and a little there.  In all
the descriptions of the resurrection of the righteous dead, they are
represented as being gathered by the angels of God, from the four winds
of heaven, when the seventh or last trump shall sound; and it is equally
as evident that their works are brought into judgment.  Although they
may not be justified by their works, but out of the book of life, yet
the apostle Paul says, speaking of his brethren, "We must all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ." Rom. xiv. 10.  And again, 2 Cor. v.
10, "For we must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ; that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
hath done, whether it be good or bad."  And, 1 Cor. iii. 13-15, "Every
man's work shall be made manifest; for the day shall declare it, because
it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work,
of what sort it is.  If any man's work abide which he hath built
thereupon, he shall receive a reward.  If any man's work shall be
burned, he shall suffer loss: yet he himself shall be saved, so as by
fire."  We see, by these texts, that the books of every man's works will
be open, as well as the book of life, in the first resurrection; but, in
the second resurrection, there is no book of life open in that part of
the judgment, neither are they gathered by the angels of God; but the
sea, death, and hell, delivered up the dead which were in them, and they
were judged every man according to their works; and Satan is the means
of gathering them around the beloved city, where they are judged in the
flesh.  By the *sea, death,* and *hell,* I understand the sea, grave,
and place of punishment.  The sea and the grave would give up the
dissolved particles of the body, and hell (or Hades) would give up their
departed spirits; this would constitute the second resurrection.  *"And
they were judged every man according to their works."*  They had chosen,
in this life, to stand on their works; they had refused to believe in a
Mediator; they had not followed his commands, neither had they professed
his name before men, or suffered persecution for the sake of his
testimony.  They had treated his word with total neglect, or called his
grace tyranny.  They had said he was a hard master, and buried their
talent in the earth.  They had placed their supreme affections on the
world, and made fine gold their trust.  They had persecuted the children
of God in this world, and showed that they were the children of that
wicked one who slew his brother.  They had prostituted their bodies to
whoredom, and sacrificed to Bacchus and Venus their first-fruits.  They
had professed damnable heresies, and filled the world with their
delusive schemes and sects.  They had worshipped the creature, and
neglected prayer to the Creator.  They had filled the world with their
lies and abominations, and gloried in their shame.  14th verse: *"And
death and hell were cast into the lake of fire.  This is the second
death."*  By *death* and *hell* I understand the body and spirit.  15th
verse: *"And whosoever was not found written in the Lamb's book of life,
was cast into the lake of fire."*  "But the fearful and unbelieving, and
the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which
burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death." Rev. xxi.
8.  "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right
to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. 
For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers,
and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie," Rev. xxii. 14,
15.  Then our text says, *"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the
first resurrection."*  This we have proved is the resurrection of the
righteous dead, who died in faith in Jesus Christ, and who should live
with him at his coming; on them the second death should have no power,
*"but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with
him a thousand years."*

            To be priests unto God and unto Christ, is to be holy; to be
a kingdom of priests of a peculiar people, that should show forth his
praises by declaring to the universe that out of nature's darkness they
had been redeemed by his blood, called by his grace unto his glorious,
happy, and holy kingdom, and that they should dwell on the earth.  See
Rev. v. 9, 10, "And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to
take the book and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and
hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue,
and people, and nation; and hast made us unto our God kings and priests,
and we shall reign on the earth."  See, also, Rev. i. 6, "And hath made
us kings and priests unto God, and his Father."  Again, 1 Pet. ii. 5, 9,
"Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, a holy
priesthood."  "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a
holy nation, a peculiar people."  The passages to which I have cited
your minds, prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the thousand years
spoken of in the text is between the two resurrections in a state of
happiness, of glory, of holiness, and that it shall be on the earth.  It
is a state of immortality, as abundant scriptures evidently prove. 
Where, then, you may inquire, is the spiritual millennium which our
theorists, in the present age, are teaching us to expect?  I answer,
There is not a thousand years spoken of in Scripture, except in 2 Pet.,
3d chapter, and in which the judgment day is the subject of discussion,
and in the chapter of which our text is a part; and in neither of these
places is any thing said about spiritual reign; neither can we find any
thing in the word of God by which we could fairly draw the conclusion of
such a reign; and as it is not proper for me to show the negative, I
call on all of you to show where we may find the evidence, that is, all
of you who believe in a spiritual reign.  If there is such a reign, it
must be before the second coming of Christ; for when he comes, he will
receive us to himself, that where he is there we may be also; no more
away from his people, for he says he will be with them, and make his
abode with them, and he will be their light, and will dwell with them,
and make his abode with them, and they shall dwell on the *earth.* 
Where, when, or how the idea of a spiritual reign of a thousand years
should or could obtain a place in our faith, having the word of God as
our evidence, I cannot tell.  Some say that the prophets speak often of
times or things which have not been fulfilled in our day, or under the
present dispensation, and which would be too gross to be admitted into a
state of immortality.  There may be such--yet I find no difficulty in
understanding all those passages which have been presented, or come
under my consideration, to refer to the gospel day.  But how long do the
prophets say that time shall be?  Do they designate any time?  No;
neither one, ten, one hundred, or one thousand years are mentioned in
any of those passages.  Why then call it a millennium?  Because Peter
and John have mentioned a thousand years.  This cannot be admitted to
mean any state this side of the state of immortality; for Peter says
plainly, "Yet, nevertheless, we look for a new heaven and a new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness."  This would be a new state,
surely--nothing gross or vile in this kingdom, whoever may be king; and
John expressly says, "They lived and reigned with Christ a thousand
years," and says, "This is the first resurrection."  Now, admit there is
such a time, how or by what rule shall we call it a thousand years?

            Again, where, in all the prophecies, can any one show me
that the church will be blessed and holy, or happy and righteous, as it
may be rendered, until he comes, that is, at Christ's second
appearance?  And where in the word are we to learn that the kingdoms of
this world are to be destroyed before the coming of the Ancient of
days?  Do we believe that the anti-Christian beast, or mystical Babylon,
will be on the earth during this millennial reign?  No, it cannot be;
yet all must acknowledge that she is only destroyed by the brightness of
his coming.  Who can read the 19th chapter of Revelation, without being
convinced that the marriage supper of the Lamb, the treading of the
wine-press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, and the supper
of the great God, are events which must take place before the
millennium?  And if so, who can believe that after the marriage of the
Lamb to the bride; after she is arrayed in linen clean and white, which
is the righteousness of the saints; after they have received a crown of
righteousness, which the righteous Judge shall give to all them who love
his appearing in that day,--Christ will not be with her in person? 
None.  But our text tells us he will live and reign with them, and they
shall be priests to God.

            Again: while in this state of mortality and trial, we are
called the servants and ministers of Christ; but then, in the millennial
blessedness, we shall be called priests of God and of Christ.  You may
ask, "Why this distinction in the language?"  I answer, There is a great
difference between the kingdom of Christ, as it was established when
Christ was here on earth, and the kingdom given up to God, even the
Father.  The subjects of Christ's kingdom, in this state of things, may
be, and in fact are, imperfect.  Hypocrites and false professors may and
do obtain an entrance into it; for an enemy hath sown tares.  But the
kingdom of God, no man, says Christ, can see, or enter, without being
born of God.  Here they may deceive the sentinels which guard the
kingdom of Christ; but in the kingdom of God "there shall in no wise
enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh
abomination or maketh a lie; but they which are written in the Lamb's
book of life."  Here the children of the kingdom are persecuted,
tormented, perplexed, cast down; but in the kingdom of God their enemies
are all slain; they are comforted, glorified, justified, exalted; and
not a dog to move his tongue.  Here they weep, but there will rejoice:
here they sin and repent; they there will be holy without fault before
his throne.  "Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first
resurrection."  *Amen.*

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture III. The Two Thousand Three Hundred Days](esc05.md)
