[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](esc07)  [Next](esc09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Evidence from Scripture and History of the Second Coming of Christ*, by
William Miller, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LECTURE VI.

##### DANIEL x. 14.

##### Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the latter days; for yet the vision is for many days.

 

            THIS is the third time the angel Gabriel came to instruct
Daniel.  The first time was when Daniel had the vision of the he-goat,
Daniel viii. 16.  This was 553 years before Christ.  The second time he
came was when Daniel was praying for the deliverance of his people from
their Babylonish captivity, fifteen years after the first visit, when he
instructed him into the seventy weeks, and the crucifixion of the
Messiah.  Now he has come in the third year of Cyrus the Persian, in the
534 B.C., 21 years after Daniel had his vision of the four beasts,
nineteen after the he-goat, and four years after the seventy weeks'
instruction.

            After informing Daniel his purpose, as in our text, and
making some preliminary observations concerning *the vision* in the
remainder of the tenth chapter, he begins his teachings to Daniel, and
through him to us, with the first of the 11th chapter.  1st verse, he
tells who he, the heavenly messenger, is--the same who confirmed Daniel
in the seventy weeks.  See Daniel ix. 1, 21.  And in the second verse he
begins with the fifth king of Persia, the very same king who issued the
decree to Ezra to go up and build the walls of Jerusalem, which began
our seventy weeks, Daniel ix. 25; Ezra vii. 1-14.  For the first Persian
king was then on the throne, Daniel x. 1, which was the third year of
the reign of Cyrus, king of Persia.  This was the same Cyrus who was
general and son-in-law to Darius the Mede, that conquered Babylon. 
Besides whom "there should be yet three kings," which three kings were
Artaxerxes, Darius, and Ahasuerus, as they are named in Scripture.  See
Ezra, iv. v. and vi. chapters.  I am aware that history has named four
where Scripture has only named three.  History names, 1, Cambyses; 2,
Smerdis, same as Artaxerxes above named in Scripture; 3, Darius, son of
Hystaspes, same as above; 4, Xerxes, same as Scripture calls Ahasuerus. 
Why the Scripture did not name Cambyses, if there was such a king, I am
not able to tell, unless his reign was so short (which all historians
agree in) that he had no hand in building or hindering the building of
the temple at Jerusalem, as the other three kings had, which Ezra has
named.  But as Gabriel did not come to tell Daniel any thing which was
not "noted in the Scripture of truth," (see Daniel x. 21, "But I will
show thee that which is noted in the Scripture of truth,") therefore the
language of our text now under examination will be this--"There shall
stand up yet three kings in Persia, (noted in the Scripture of truth,)
and the fourth shall be far richer than they all," &c.  This fourth king
was Artaxerxes Longimanus, and is the same king noted in Ezra vii., and
the first and only king of Persia "noted in the Scriptures," who ever
gave a decree to rebuild the walls and streets of Jerusalem, especially
in troublous times.  We may therefore reasonably and conclusively
determine that the messenger Gabriel begins his instruction with this
king's reign, the 5th king noted in Scripture.  And if so, we have
another strong and forcible evidence that Daniel's vision of the ram and
he-goat began with the seventy weeks, 457 years before the birth of
Christ, and 490 years, or 70 prophetic weeks, before his death, Dan. xi.
3, 4.  We have the plain history of Alexander, the conqueror of the
world, his death, and division of the kingdom into four great empires. 
Hear what Gabriel says of him more than 200 years before the event
happened, and learn, ye skeptics, the evidence that this prophecy is of
divine origin.  "And a mighty king shall stand up that shall rule with
great dominion, and do according to his will.  And when he shall stand
up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four
winds of heaven, and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion
which he ruled; for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others
besides those," (that is, his posterity.)

            Need I, then, tell my hearers that history tells us that
Alexander conquered the then known world in about six years, and that he
died 323 B.C. at Babylon; that his kingdom was divided among his
greatest generals, from which division arose four great kingdoms, Egypt
in the south, Persia in the east, Syria in the north, and Macedonia in
the west, which kingdoms lasted until conquered by the Romans?  Between
the years 190 and 30 B.C. nearly all these kingdoms became Roman
provinces.  From Daniel xi. 5, 13, inclusive, we have a prophecy of the
two principal kingdoms out of these four--Egypt and Syria; and any one
who may have the curiosity to see the exact agreement between the
prophecy and history, can read Rollin's Ancient History, where he has
not only given us the history, but applied this prophecy.  And as I see
no reason to disagree from him in his application of these texts, I
shall, therefore, for brevity's sake, pass over these texts, and examine
the text, Dan. xi. 14, "And in those times there shall many stand up
against the king of the south; also, the robbers of thy people shall
exalt themselves to establish the vision; but they shall fall."  The
king of the south, in this verse, without any doubt, means king of
Egypt; but what the *robbers of thy people* means remains yet a doubt
perhaps to some.  That it cannot Antiochus, or any king of Syria, it is
plain; for the angel had been talking about that nation for a number of
verses previous, and now says, "also the robbers of thy people," &c.,
evidently implying some other nation.  I will admit that Antiochus did
perhaps rob the Jews; but how could this "establish the vision,"
performing any act of that kind; for he belonged to what is called the
Grecian kingdom in *the vision.*  Again, *"to establish the vision,"*
must mean to make sure, complete, or fulfil the same.  And if it cannot
be shown that the Grecian kingdom was to rob the people of God, I think
it must mean some other nation which would do these acts, to which every
word will apply.  And to this we need not be at a loss; for at this very
time of which the angel is speaking, Rome, the least kingdom in Daniel's
vision, did exalt itself, and this kingdom did have the very marks in
the *vision,* and in the events following.  This kingdom was to have
great iron teeth; it was to break in pieces, and stamp the residue with
the feet of it.  The vision also says, "He shall destroy wonderfully,
and shall prosper and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and holy
people, and that he should magnify himself," &c., the same as exalt
himself, Daniel vii. 7, 23; viii. 10-12, 24, 25 verses.  And it cannot
be denied but that the Jews have been robbed of their city and sanctuary
by the Romans, and the Christian church has been persecuted and robbed
by this dreadful beast, the Roman kingdom.  It is evident too that when
this kingdom falls, *the vision* will be completed, fulfilled,
established: "but they shall fall," says the angel in the verse under
our present examination; "they shall fall;" that is, the ten horns in
this fourth kingdom, when the vision is fulfilled or established, and
when the stone cut out of the mountain without hands shall grind them to
powder.  We will take the 15th, "So the king of the north" (Rome is now
the king of the north, because they had conquered the Macedonian
kingdom, and had become masters of the countries north and east before
they attacked Egypt) "shall come and cast up a mount, and take the most
fenced cities; and the arms of the south shall not withstand, neither
his chosen people, neither shall there be any strength to withstand." 
This was about fifty years before Christ, when Pompey, a Roman general,
conquered Egypt, and made that kingdom tributary to the Romans, and
afterwards entered Jerusalem, and made them subjects of the Roman
government.  See verses 16 and 17, "But he that cometh against him"
(Pompey coming against Egypt) "shall do according to his own will, and
none shall stand before him, and he shall stand in the glorious land
which by his hand shall be consumed.  He shall also set his face to
enter with the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with
him," (or men of equal conditions, as it might have been rendered.)  The
Roman army, of which Pompey had the command, when he went into Egypt and
Palestine, were composed of the sons of all the principal citizens of
Rome, who were, according to the laws of the republic, to serve ten
years in the service of their country before they were admitted to
receive the high offices which they might afterwards be candidates for. 
This accounts for the language just read in the text--"upright ones with
him."  And "thus shall he do: he shall give him the daughter of woman,
corrupting her; but she shall not stand on his side nor be for him." 
When Pompey went into Egypt, he found that country divided between
Ptolemy and Cleopatra.  Pompey, after he had made them tributary to the
Romans, compelled them to settle their differences by marriage. 
Afterwards, when Julius Cæsar came against Pompey with his western
veterans, with whom he had conquered the west part of Europe, and in the
battle fought between these two contending rivals, Pompey and Julius
Cæsar, Cleopatra had the command of the Egyptian fleet on the side of
Pompey; but in the midst of the action she deserted over to Cæsar with
her whole fleet, which turned the fortune of the day in favor of Julius
Cæsar.  Pompey then fled into the Grecian isles, where he compelled many
of them to declare in his favor.  But Cæsar soon followed him, and at
the battle of Pharsalia completely defeated Pompey, who was slain by a
band of pirates or robbers.  This part we have in the 18th verse, "After
this shall he (Pompey) turn his face unto the isles, and shall take
many; but a prince (Cæsar) for his own behalf shall cause the reproach
offered by him (Pompey) to cease; without his own (Cæsar) reproach he
shall cause it to turn upon him, (Pompey:) 19th verse, "Then he (Cæsar)
shall turn his face towards the fort of his own land; but he shall
stumble and fall, and not be found."  This history of Cæsar's death is
familiar to every school-boy.  After he had conquered Pompey, he
returned to Rome, entered the city in triumph, and a few days after,
when he was about to be crowned Emperor, he was slain in the
senate-house, before Pompey's pillar, by his own friends; "he stumbled
and fell, and was not found."  20th verse, "Then shall stand up in his
estate a raiser of taxes, in the glory of the kingdom; but within a few
days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger nor in battle."  This verse
describes Octavius Cæsar, who first taxed the Roman provinces, Judea
being taxed (see Luke ii. 1, 5) when our Savior was born; but Octavius
Cæsar, afterwards called Augustus Cæsar, was not slain like his uncle
Julius, nor like his successors; but died peaceably in his bed.  21st
and 22d verses, "And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom
they shall not give the honor of the kingdom; but he shall come in
peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.  And with the arms of a
flood shall they be overthrown from before him, and shall be broken;
yea, also, the prince of the covenant."  In these two verses we have the
history of Tiberius Cæsar, who was the successor of Octavius Cæsar in
the Roman empire; and was one of the most vile, profligate, bloody
tyrants that ever sat upon the Roman throne.  History gives us the same
account, that he obtained by flatteries the kingdom, and afterwards
ruled it by tyranny.  He also assumed the name of Augustus.  In his
reign Christ was crucified, "the Prince of the covenant was broken." 
Here ends the history of the seventy weeks.  This prophetic history
being divided into four divisions, the first part is the history of the
seventy weeks, to which we have been attending, which began in the
seventh year of Artaxerxes' reign, and ended in the 22d year of Tiberius
Cæsar's, being four hundred and ninety years; the second part will be
the history of Pagan Rome, which begins with the first league made
between the Romans and the Jews, and will carry us down six hundred and
sixty-six years.  You will likewise observe that the angel goes back and
begins this history with the league.  22d verse, "And after the league
made with him he shall work deceitfully: he shall come up, and shall
become strong with a small people."

            Let us in the first place inquire, Between whom is this
league made?  The Romans must be one of the contracting parties, from
the fact that the angel is talking about that government before and
afterwards, and that the fourth or Roman kingdom was to work
deceitfully, "and through his policy also he shall cause craft to
prosper in his hand."  See Daniel viii. 25.  And also from the
circumstance of their being a small republican people at first, Rome,
too, was small in territory at this time, although many nations and
kingdoms were tributary unto them; but who was the other contracting
party in this league?  I answer, It must have been some people whom the
angel had in view; and he, Daniel, had the same in view, or he would
have given some mark by which Daniel or the reader could have come to a
just conclusion.  Yes, this was the case; for he had told Daniel in the
very outset, "Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall
*thy people* in the latter days."  See our text.  This, then, is the key
that unlocks the whole subject, and explains two important points in the
vision.  First, it teaches who are the subjects of this *vision;* and,
secondly, when and how the Roman kingdom became connected with *the
vision.*  If I am thus far correct, then the angel has reference to the
league made with the Romans 158 years B.C., when the Grecian general
Bachides withdrew his army from before Jerusalem, and never returned to
vex the Jews any more, as says 1 Maccabees ix. 72.  For the history of
this league, you can read 1 Maccabees viii. and Josephus B. XII. chap.
x. sec. 6.  This league was the first ever made between the Romans and
the Jews, according to Josephus.  It took effect 158 years B.C., when
the Grecian kingdom, at the command of the Romans, ceased to trouble the
Jews, and the Romans began to work deceitfully.  Then began the Pagan
beast to exercise his influence over the people of God.  And now let us
pursue his history as given by the angel Gabriel, 24th verse, "He shall
enter peaceably, even upon the fattest places of the province; and he
shall do that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers' fathers;
he shall scatter among them the prey, and spoil, and riches; yea, he
shall forecast his devices against the strong holds even for a time." 
This verse is a true history of the rise of the Roman power; they did
scatter the prey and spoil among the provinces, and conquered more
nations by their munificence and benevolence in the outset, than by
their arms of battles.  Rome bought more nations by riches and intrigue
than she conquered in war; and she compelled the Jews to submit for
about two centuries to that which no nation before had been able ever to
do, viz., to be ruled by kings, governors, and high priests, appointed
by the Romans, and not chosen by themselves.  25th verse, "And he shall
stir up his power and his courage against the king of the south with a
great army; and the king of the south shall be stirred up to battle with
a very great and mighty army; but he shall not stand; for they shall
forecast devices against him."  This is a description of the war in
Egypt, under the government of Mark Antony and Octavius Cæsar.  "Yea,
they that feed of the portion of his meat shall destroy him, and his
army shall overflow, and many shall fall down slain."  When Antony went
into Egypt with a great army, Cleopatra, then queen of Egypt, deserted
her husband's standard, as she had before Pompey's, and went over to
Mark Antony with all the forces she could command, by which means Egypt
became an easy prey to the Romans; so that a part of the Egyptian army,
that fed of the portion of the king's meat, were the means of destroying
the kingdom.  "And both of these kings' hearts shall be to do mischief,
and they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper; for
yet the end shall be at the time appointed."  These two kings are Antony
and Octavius, their characters agreeing with the description given in
this passage; history agreeing that they ruled over the Romans for a
season jointly, and that they were both of them great deceivers and
liars.  History also informs us that after Antony had conquered Egypt,
he and Octavius quarrelled; Octavius Cæsar declared war against Antony,
marched an army towards Egypt, and at the battle of Actium defeated
Antony and Cleopatra's forces, afterwards took Alexandria in Egypt, and
Antony and Cleopatra put themselves to death, and Egypt becomes a Roman
province.  This was thirty years before the birth of Christ.  28, "Then
shall he return into his land with great riches; and his heart shall be
against the holy covenant; and he shall do exploits and return to his
own land."  Then Octavius returned to Rome.  And the next exploit that
this fourth kingdom would do would be against the holy covenant.  They,
by their authority, crucified our Savior, persecuted the saints, and
destroyed Jerusalem; and this fills up the acts of this Pagan history
until towards the close of the reign of the Pagan beast.  29, "At the
time appointed, he shall return, and come toward the south; but it shall
not be as the former, or as the latter."  The time appointed must mean
the length of the reign of this beast, whose history the angel is now
giving, which I have shown, in a former lecture, is 666 years.  "He
shall return, and come towards the south," not as the former or latter. 
Not as the Romans going into Egypt, the latter; not the Syrians going
into Egypt, as the former; but Italy must now take her turn to be
overrun by the northern barbarians.  Therefore the angel says, in the
next verse, see 30. ("For the ships of Chittim shall come against him;")
the meaning of which is, that the Huns, which lived on the north of the
Adriatic Sea, the place where it was anciently called Chittim, under
their leader Attila, (surnamed the Scourge of God,) should ravage the
Roman empire.  This was fulfilled 447 years after Christ.  "Therefore he
shall be grieved and return, and have indignation against the holy
covenant; so shall he do; he shall return, and have intelligence with
them that forsake the holy covenant."

            About the time that Attila ravaged the Roman empire,
Christians conceived it to be a judgment of God upon the Romans for
their idolatry and wickedness, refused to bear arms in favor of the
Roman emperors, which led to a bloody persecution of Christians, and a
renewal of Pagan rites and sacrifices, which had been partially
suspended during the reign of Constantine and succeeding emperors,
except in the case of Julian the Apostate.  "And arms shall stand on his
part," that is, the force of the empire would be on the side of
Paganism.  "And they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength."  *They,*
in this passage, mean the governments or kings, established on the fall
of the Roman empire in the west, by the Huns, Goths and Vandals of the
north.  "By the sanctuary of strength," is meant Rome.  And it is said
that at the time that Rome was taken, men, women, and children were
sacrificed to their Pagan deities.  "And shall take away the daily
sacrifice."  The angel is giving us a history of what these kings would
do, when Rome should be divided into its ten toes, or when the ten horns
should arise, which the angel has heretofore explained to mean ten
kings, Daniel vii. 24.  This is evident by his using the plural pronoun
instead of the singular, as before, or as he will following, when the
little horn obtains the power.  To "take away the daily sacrifice,"
means to destroy Paganism out of the kingdom.  This was done by those
ten kings who now ruled the Roman empire, and would for a little season,
until they should give their power to the image beast.  "And they shall
place the abomination that maketh desolate."  *They,* meaning the ten
kings, *shall place,* shall put in the room or *place* of the *daily
sacrifice* or Pagan beast which would now receive its death wound by the
sword, that is, by the civil power of this fourth kingdom, under the
reigning power of these ten kings; for John tells us, Rev. xvii. 12, 13,
"And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have received
no kingdom as yet; but *shall* receive power as kings one hour with the
beast; these have one mind, (being all Pagans,) and shall give their
power and strength unto the beast;" that is, to support Paganism.  Now,
this was evidently fulfilled; for after the fall of the Western Empire,
A.D. 476, and before A.D. 490, ten kings had risen upon the ruins, and
formed ten separate kingdoms, the names of which I have before given;
they all being Pagans, or course they supported that form of worship,
until they were converted to the Christian faith, which happened within
the space of twenty years, Clovis, the king of France, having been
converted and baptized in the year A.D. 496.  By the year A.D. 508, the
remainder of the kings were brought over and embraced the Christian
religion, which closes the history of the Pagan beast, whose number was
666; which, beginning 158 years B.C., would end the beast's reign A.D.
508, having reigned but a short time, (*one hour,* says John,) with the
ten kings.  We have now gone through with the angel Gabriel's second
part of the history, as we promised.

            I shall now go on with the illustration of the third part of
his prophetic history, which is the history of the image beast, the
deadly wound healed, or what Daniel calls "the abomination that maketh
desolate."  This beast would rule over the kings of the earth, and tread
the church of God under foot forty-two months, or time, times, and a
half, which is twelve hundred and sixty years, in common time, or, as
the angel tells us in Daniel xii. 11, from the taking away the daily
abomination to set up the abomination that maketh desolate, should be a
thousand two hundred and ninety days, showing a difference of thirty
years from the statement of the actual reign of the image beast and the
other, which includes all the time from taking away down through the
setting up or reign of the image beast.  Therefore, to reconcile these
two statements, we must conclude there were 30 years from A.D. 508, when
Paganism ceased, before the image beast, or Papal Rome, would begin her
reign.  If this is correct, then the 1290 began 508, and would end us in
1798.  But the reign of Papacy would not be set up until A.D. 538, and
would end us in the same year, A.D. 1798, being 1260.  This, then, is
the history the angel will give us next.  32, "And such as do wickedly
against the covenant shall be corrupted by flatterers; but the people
that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits."  The
ecclesiastical historians tell us that in the beginning of the sixth
century, about A.D. 538, a number of writers in that day undertook to
prove that the Papal chair, together with councils of his approval, were
infallible, and their laws were binding on the whole church.  These
writers were highly honored and flattered with promotion by the reigning
power; while on the other hand there were many who opposed this power of
the Pope and clergy, who were denounced as schismatics and Arians, and
driven out of the kingdoms under the control of the Romish church.  33,
"And they that understand among the people shall instruct many; yet they
shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil many
days."  Those who instructed the common people, and opposed the
worshipping of images, the infallibility of the Pope and councils, the
canonizing of departed saints, were persecuted by the civil power, (the
sword,) were burned by order of the ecclesiastical courts established by
the laws of Justinian, emperor of Constantinople, whose code of laws,
published about A.D. 534, gave unto the bishop of Rome power to
establish courts for this purpose, and many in the sixth century and
subsequent down to a late period, *"many days,"* suffered death,
imprisonment, and confiscation of goods, in consequence of a difference
of opinion in matters of religion, by the tyranny of this abomination,
"the bloody city which has reigned over the kings of the earth."  34,
"Now, when they shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help; but
many shall cleave to them with flatteries."  This text agrees with one
in Revelation xii. 16, "And the earth helped the woman."  "But many
shall cleave to them;" that is, many men of the world would cleave to
them, and professedly would flatter the true people of God that they
were friendly at least to them, and by these means Satan carried on his
wars against the children of God.  35, "And some of them of
understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purge and to make them
white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for a time
appointed."  This verse shows us that even Christians would be led into
some of the errors of Papacy, and would be tried and purged, even to the
end of this image beast's reign, which time is appointed, as I have
already shown, to be "time, times, and a half," 1260 years, ending A.D.
1798.  36, "And the king shall do according to his will; and he shall
exalt himself and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak
marvellous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the
indignation be accomplished, for that that is determined shall be
done."  *The king* here spoken of is the same as Daniel's little horn,
which came up among the ten horns.  It it the same that blasphemed the
God of heaven.  It is mystical Babylon.  Isa. xiv. 12-15; Rev. xiii. 5,
6.  The same Paul has described in his Epistle, 2 Thess. ii. 1-9; the
same image beast which we have been examining the history of; and one
thing is evident, that this beast will continue until the day that God
pours out his indignation upon a guilty world in some form or other. 
37, "Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire of
women, nor regard any god; for he shall magnify himself above all."  In
this passage we have a plain description of Papacy; they do not worship
the same gods the Pagans did--*"their fathers."*  And their clergy are
forbidden to marry; the Pope calls himself the vicegerent of God, or God
on earth, having the keys of heaven, &c.  38, "But in his estate shall
he honor the god of forces; and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he
honor with gold, and silver, and precious stones, and pleasant things." 
It is true that the Pope, for ages past, has had large armies at his
command, and always a body-guard to attend him in his capital; also,
that they adorn their pictures with gold, and silver, and precious
stones, and pleasant things, and that the gods they worship, such as the
images of Christ, apostles, and Virgin Mary, and canonized saints, were
not known to Pagan worshippers.  39, "Thus shall he do in the most
strong holds with a strange god whom he shall acknowledge and increase
with glory; and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide
the land for gain."

            These patron saints, which the Pope divided among the
several nations of the earth, and in almost every family, each one
having their patron saint to rule over them, by the appointment of the
Pope, were strange gods indeed; and rational beings might truly wonder
when they beheld the power of this last abomination over the minds and
judgments of mankind.  And then, again, to see the number of kingdoms,
provinces, states, and territories, which the Pope has sold to enrich
his coffers, without any more right or title to them than we have to the
land in the moon, must convince every one that the description given
must apply to the church of Rome or the Pope, who claims to exercise
this great authority by his crazy title to St. Peter's chair.

            We have now arrived to the end of the third division of the
angel's history; for the next verse tells us, *"and at the time of the
end,"* meaning the end of his power, to tread on the church by his civil
authority, or reign over the kings of the earth, and to dispose of lands
for gain I have brought you down, my kind hearer, through a long
prophetic history of more than 2200 years, and landed you to the year
A.D. 1798, when the Pope of Rome lost his civil power.  In the beginning
of the year 1798, on the 15th of February, a French general, Berthier,
entered Rome with a French army without resistance, deposed the Pope,
abolished the Papal government, and erected the republic of Italy.  The
Pope, being taken prisoner, was carried a prisoner by them first to
Sienna in Tuscany, from thence to Florence, afterwards to Grenoble, and
then to Valence, in France, where he died on the 19th of August, 1799,
since which time the Pope of Rome has exercised no more of his former
power over any of the kings in Europe, or the Protestant church.  We
shall now close our lecture on this history for the present, reserving
the remainder of Gabriel's interesting history for another lecture.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture VII. Daniel's 1260, 1290, and 1335 Days Explained](esc09.md)
