[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](esc11)  [Next](esc13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Evidence from Scripture and History of the Second Coming of Christ*, by
William Miller, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LECTURE X.

##### REV. i. 20.

##### The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks.  The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches; and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches.

 

            IN my former lectures I have given my views of four of the
churches spoken of in the text.  Three more remain, which will complete
the prophetic history of the church through all the ages of the New
Testament times until the state of trial shall be fulfilled, and the
church shall enter her glorified kingdom in triumph.  You have
undoubtedly been led, by the comparison of the churches with the history
thus far, to admire the agreement of the prophecy of the four churches
with the history of the times; and truly this is one of the greatest
evidences we have of the truth of the divine inspiration of revelation,
and this evidence fixes the authenticity of the Scriptures beyond a
reasonable doubt.  I shall now claim a few moments' indulgence while I
attempt to show where and when the other three churches have been or
will be fulfilled.  See Rev. iii.

            1, "And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write."  Song
of joy, or that which remains, is the signification of *Sardis.*  The
last signification is the one which the heavenly Instructor has affixed
himself to this church in the second verse, "Be watchful, and strengthen
the things which remain."  The church preceding this had passed a long,
dark, and benighted age of the world, and every writer of these times
calls them the dark ages; and truly it was an age of superstition,
bigotry, and ignorance; therefore we must reasonably suppose that but
few were the true worshippers of God, and those few enjoying but a faint
knowledge of divine things.  But we will pursue our course.  "These
things saith he that hath the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars,
I know thy works, that thou hast a name, that thou livest, and art
dead."  The same character that has addressed the other churches, still
gives himself a quality by which we may know that it is he who is called
God man, having the spirit of God, and as man governing his church as
the star of Bethlehem.  This church began about the tenth century, and
lasted until the Reformation under Luther, Calvin, and others.  They had
a name, were called Waldenses, Valdenses, &c., "and art dead;" that is,
she was or would be of little use to the rest of the world, hiding her
influence within her own sphere, and of course did not manifest her
light to the world, was inactive, idle, not performing the work which
God had commanded them to perform, to set their light on the
candlestand, that it might give light to all.  This was the case with
the church in the valleys of Piedmont during the time of the crusades to
the Holy Land; and while the Pope had the command of all the armies of
Europe, the church lived in these valleys of the Pyrenees, nearly in the
centre of Europe, unknowing and unknown.

            2d verse, "Be watchful, and strengthen the things which
remain, that are ready to die; for I have not found thy works perfect
before God."  Although the church in this age retained some of the
leading principles of the gospel, the ordinances were in part retained
among them, yet towards the close of this Sardis age, the Papal monks
and priests were sent in among them, and many of the Waldenses became
corrupted by the Papal beast and her doctrine.  Therefore the
admonition, "Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain."

            3d verse, "Remember how thou hast received and heard, and
hold fast and repent.  If, therefore, thou shalt not watch, I will come
on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon
thee."  The judgment threatened in this verse, "I will come upon thee,"
is undoubtedly a prophecy of the persecution of the Waldenses and
Lollards, by the Papal authority, and through the inquisition, as an
instrument, about the close of the fourteenth century, when, for their
departure from the true doctrine of the gospel, and the commands of God,
they were persecuted and scattered among all nations, so that by the
judgments of God, for their transgressions, they were made instruments
in the hands of God of spreading the knowledge of the gospel among the
nations, which they ought to have done in obedience to his word, and for
the love of souls.  And these judgments served the double purpose of
punishment for sin, and opening a door for a more general display of
salvation.

            4th verse, "Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have
not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for
they are worthy."  There were a few even in this age of moral darkness
who followed Christ in his laws and ordinances, and they receive the
promise of justification before God, "walk with me in white."

            5th verse, "He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in
white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life;
but I will confess his name before my Father and before his angels." 
Whenever the phrase, "he that overcometh," is used, it always implies, I
think, in the Scriptures, that the persons addressed are, or will pass
through a time of persecution; and in this text the church in this age
is shown that those only who can endure tribulation and persecution will
be acknowledged at the bar of God as the children of faith.  And then
this church is again warned to hear and believe what the Spirit saith to
the churches.

            6th verse, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith to the churches."

            I shall now attempt to show to what age we may calculate the
Philadelphia church should answer, and when this prophecy was fulfilled.

            7th verse, "And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia
write, These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath
the key of David, he that openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and
no man openeth."  This verse is a description of the character
addressing the church and gives an account of his holiness, his
veracity, authority, and power, and leaves us without a doubt that it is
Jesus the son of David, the Holy One of Israel, the faithful and true
witness, he that hath all power in heaven and in earth.  And he thus
addresses them, 8th verse, "I know thy works: behold, I have set before
thee an open door, and no man can shut it, for thou hast a little
strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name."  The
signification of the name of this church, *Philadelphia,* is *brotherly
love,* and this age began about the time of the Reformation; for then
God opened an effectual door for the gospel to be spread which no man or
set of men has been able to shut.  And the early reformers displayed a
zeal and fearlessness in their cause which astonished their friends and
confounded their enemies.  At this time, too, Christian love and
fellowship was evidently one of the strongest marks of the day and
manifested that the work was of God.

            9th verse, "Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of
Satan which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie."  The characters
here spoken of are the same as those who sit in Satan's seat, who
profess to be Christians, but are anti-Christians; they are worshippers
of the Papal beast, professing to be the *mother church,* but are only
that part which are fallen away, as Paul has told us, "there should come
a falling away first, and then the man of sin should be revealed, who
opposeth, (or is anti,) and exalteth himself (calling themselves Jews, a
figurative expression, or name for Christian) above all that is called
God."  "Behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet,
and to know that I have loved thee."  This sentence shows that
anti-Christ would be humbled in this age of the church and brought to
take the back ground, or in some measure lose her civil power over the
Protestant church and be humbled at her feet.  Has not this prophecy
been accomplished strictly according to the letter?  Witness Great
Britain, Germany, and other nations.  And to this day she has not been
able to bring into subjection any of the Protestant states, and is only
permitted to dwell among them by toleration.  And although within a few
years past she seems to be making an effort to regain her lost power and
authority, yet it is but a last struggle, a dying gasp; for soon she
must and will fall, to rise in civil power no more forever.

            10th verse, "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience,
I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall come upon
all the world to try them that dwell upon the earth."  This part of the
prophecy was fulfilled on or before the French revolution, when Atheism
and Deism made such rapid progress through Europe or the Roman
government, which in prophecy is called the earth.  See Rev. xii. 9. 
And it is a fact, that through this age of profligacy and corruption,
the church retained her principles as pure and with as little defection
as any age in modern times; although men of the world were led away by
the plausible writings of Voltaire, Hume, Tom Paine, and others, yet it
had no effect on the Christian church: and the promise, "I will keep
thee from the hour of temptation," was fully and faithfully
accomplished; and the very means that Satan used to destroy the religion
of Jesus Christ, or "the twelve fishermen," was the means of bringing
the church out of the wilderness.  And those governments of the world
which had for more than twelve centuries persecuted the children of God,
now granted free toleration for all men to worship God according to the
dictates of their own conscience.  And from this period we may see the
"angel flying through the midst of heaven having the everlasting gospel
to preach to them that dwell on the earth."  Now the church began to
awake to the subject of missions; and while the world was tempted and
tried, the kingdoms of the earth shaken to their centre, (yet not
destroyed;) while the civil power of the mother of harlots, the
inquisition of Spain, and the horrible means of torture, persecution,
slavery, and cruelty, were all swept away in one revolution,--the
church, by the power of Him who had promised to "keep them," passed
through the fiery ordeal without the smell of fire on her garments.

            11th verse, "Behold, I come quickly; hold that fast which
thou hast, that no man take thy crown."  In this verse we have notice of
his second coming, and that it would be quickly; by which I understand
that the age of the seventh church, which was yet to come, would be
short, and the second coming of him, who will overcome and subdue all
things, would be quickly.  He likewise admonishes us to hold fast that
which we have, giving us, as I understand, warning that the next age of
the church would be an age of invention; of lo heres, of departure from
the true faith, of denying the crown of the church, the twelve stars,
the apostles' doctrine.  And amidst the confusion of the doctrines and
revelations of the present day, if any one should inquire of me what
sentiment it would be best for them to embrace, I would first point them
to the Bible, and second, back to the fathers and teachers of the last
century, and say, Hold fast that they held; let no man take thy crown. 
Let us then, my brethren, be watchful, and remember "him that overcometh
will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more
out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the
city of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven
from my God; and I will write upon him my new name."  The blessings
promised in this text are to be realized when the New Jerusalem comes
down from God out of heaven; then shall the spiritual born child of
heaven be a pillar in the temple of God, in that building made without
hands; then, too, will he receive that rich inheritance that is laid up
in heaven for those that love God, and there obtain that eternal crown,
that immortal life which is now hid with Christ in God, and then and
there realize that "blessed hope at the glorious appearing of the great
God and our Savior Jesus Christ."  "And he shall go no more out" of that
glorious temple; no tempting devil there, for he will be chained; no
persecuting kingdom, for they will "all be destroyed and carried away
like the chaff of the summer threshing-floor."  Then will he receive the
new name, "The Lord our righteousness," for the Lord is there.  Then,
too, a citizen of the glorified kingdom, the New Jerusalem, married to
the Lamb, and shall live and reign with him forever and forever.  "He
that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches."  This closes the prophecy to the sixth church; and now let us
see to it that we do not lose the blessings promised by refusing to hear
what the Spirit saith to the churches.  Hear, and your souls shall live;
disobey, turn a deaf ear, refuse the offered grace, and you will die;
for the soul that sinneth shall die.

            It now remains for me to show the age of the seventh or
Laodicean church, and the characteristic marks of that church or age. 
And if I am right in considering these churches in a mystical sense, as
our text more than implies, and our arguments and references strongly
prove, in my humble opinion, then, this part of our subject becomes
doubly interesting to us, who live in the very age of the fulfilment of
this prophecy.  Yes, my brethren, we live at the very time when the
great head of the church says,

            14th verse, "And unto the angel of the church in Laodicea
write, These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the
beginning of the creation of God."  *Laodicea* signifies the judging of
the people, and may have reference to the church in its last stage, when
God would pour out his justice and judgment upon a guilty world, and
upon a haughty, proud, and self-exalted church, and spue them out of his
mouth.  This idea may be warranted from the subject in connection.  The
address to this church begins by showing that it is the closing up of
this dispensation, by saying, "These things saith the Amen."  It also
teaches us that it commences the judgment, or prepares for a judgment,
by bringing forward "the faithful and true witness."  It also shows the
universality of this judgment by the knowledge of the witness being "the
beginning of the creation of God."

            15th verse, "I know thy works, that thou art neither cold
nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot."  To be neither cold nor hot in
religious things implies a profession of religion without a spiritual
life, or the middle way between the world and Christ; taking much pains
after worldly things, to the neglect of spiritual things; endeavoring to
move between the doctrine of Christ and the doctrine of men; taking the
middle ground, as I have often heard it expressed.

            16th verse, "So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither
cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth."  For this cause, that
is, because they are engaged more for show, honors, or profits of this
world than for God, he would spue them out of his mouth.  The word
*spue* is used in three places in Scripture, besides the one under
consideration; in Levit. xviii. 28, xx. 22, Jer. xxv. 27; and in all
these places stands connected with the judgments of God upon Israel, or
the nations spoken of, and implies a shaking out or driving from their
present standing, either among nations or in the kingdom of Christ, as
the case may be.  And this passage, I suppose, alludes to the time when
God hath promised, saying, "Yet once more I shake not the earth only,
but also heaven," Heb. xii. 26.  So we may expect a shaking of the
church of Christ, if this is the age spoken of, that those things which
cannot be shaken may remain.  This, too, is the age when the wise and
foolish virgins are sleeping and slumbering together.

            17th verse, "Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased
with goods, and have need of nothing, and knowest not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked."  Our heavenly
Instructor has given us in this verse the reason why they are lukewarm;
"because thou sayest, I am rich."  The church in this Laodicean state,
like the rich man, will be laying up goods, or making great calculations
for the outward or worldly concerns of the church for many years to
come, building places for worship, establishing colleges, high schools,
academies, theological institutions, to raise up a popular ministry,
that the world may be pleased, the ministry well supported, and they
become the most popular sect of the day, "increased with goods."  This,
too, is the church.  What shall be called the goods of the church?  It
is those contributions which are deposited for charitable and pious
uses, such as Paul informed his brethren to lay by them in store on the
first day of the week.  These will be increased to a great and
astonishing degree in this age of the church.  Theological writings and
publications, too, are the goods of the church: there will be a great
increase of these.  "Come, see what great things we are doing," will be
the general language of the church, and the names of donors and the sums
they contribute will be published through the world.  "And knowest not
that thou art wretched."  The corruptions of the church will be kept out
of sight; and pride, popularity, self-righteousness, depravity, will be
the besetting sins of the members and great body of public professors,
and few, very few of the ministers of the churches will be valiant or
bold enough to tell them the truth.  "And miserable."  Real piety will
be very little enjoyed; the hopes of a large body of professors will be
but the hope of a hypocrite.  "And poor."  Without a tried faith,
suffering but little or no persecution, the church will lack those
riches which are more precious than fine gold, the trial of their
faith.  "And blind," without faith, living by things seen more than on
the promises of God.  "And naked," having on their own righteousness. 
"I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire."  That is, the
Amen, the faithful and true witness, counsels the Laodicean church to
buy the gold tried in the fire, which may mean either that faith which
will stand the fiery trial of temptation and persecution, or that truth
which is like "apples of gold in pictures of silver;" *"that thou mayest
be rich;"* rich in faith or in the knowledge of the truth; *"and white
raiment that thou mayest be clothed,"* that raiment which John saw the
saints in heaven clothed with, which is the righteousness of the saints,
the imputed righteousness of Christ, *"the Lord our righteousness."*  If
it is not so, why counsel the church to buy of him?  Yes, my brethren,
we are counselled to buy a raiment without spot or wrinkle, "and that
the shame of thy nakedness do not appear."  Truly, when Christ comes,
and we find we have been trusting in self, although we have called
ourselves by his name, we have worn our own clothing, and eat our own
bread, and instead of being clothed upon, we shall find ourselves
naked.  Shall we not be ashamed before him at his coming, if we are in
this situation when he comes?  O, what an awful thought!  Therefore let
us now receive the further admonition, "And anoint thine eyes with
eye-salve, that thou mayest see."  To anoint the eyes, in a figurative
sense, is to examine the truth and evidences of Scripture, that we may
see clearly our state and standing as it respects our character towards
God and our hope in his future aid, promises, and blessings.  It is to
see our sins, and feel the need of help, to know our weakness, and trust
in his strength--in one word, it is to repent and believe in the gospel
of Jesus Christ.  For he says, "As many as I love I rebuke and chasten:
be zealous therefore and repent."  Here, then, is one comfortable
promise to this lukewarm church.  If there is any tried, chastened,
penitent soul in this church, this Laodicean state or age of the church,
they have the promise of his love, his everlasting love, his
unchangeable love; his loving kindness he will not take from him,
although he should "visit their transgressions with a rod, and their
iniquity with stripes."  Be zealous, therefore, brethren, and repent.

            20th verse, "Behold, I stand at the door and knock."  He
that is the *"Amen"* is now at the door.  In this Laodicean age of the
church he comes; he knocks by his judgments, by the fulfilment of the
signs, by his word, by all the means of grace that God has ever used to
alarm the sleepy, slumbering virgins of his approach.  He gives the
cautionary word, "Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear
my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with
him, and he with me."  In this passage of prophecy we are brought down
to the marriage supper of the Lamb--another and a strong testimony that
the churches are to be considered in a mystical sense, and the language
or subject prophetical.  For this is certainly the saying of Jesus, the
faithful and true witness; "for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
prophecy."  Rev. xix. 7-9, "Let us rejoice and be glad, and give honor
to him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made
herself ready.  And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in
fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of
saints.  And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called
to the marriage supper of the Lamb.  And he saith unto me, These are the
true sayings of God."  We see, my friends, by the similarity of the
sentiments given in the marriage supper, and those admonitions and
prophecies to the Laodicean church, that they must mean one and the same
event.  To hear the voice of the bridegroom, and to open the door, and
go out to meet him, is the way which the bride makes herself ready; and
his supping with them and they with him, shows that it is when Christ
shall come, and live, and reign with them.

            "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my
throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
throne."  Here is another expression which proves we are brought down to
the end of time, *"to him that overcometh."*  What can the faithful and
true witness mean by this expression?  He explains himself, *"even as I
also overcame."*  How did Christ overcome when he sat down with his
Father?  I answer, By bursting the bands of death, by conquering the
grave, he arose a glorious conqueror, and was seated at the right hand
of God.  Then this is the true meaning of the text, to him, that hath
part in the first resurrection, will I grant to sit with me in my
throne.  "Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first
resurrection; on such the second death hath no power; but they shall be
kings and priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him." 
What light may we not receive from the word of God, when taken together,
when explained by its own language, when kept unbroken!  "He that hath
an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches."  This
closes what I call, and what Christ, I think, calls, a prophecy. 
"Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein; for the time
is at hand."

            This Laodicean church began about A.D. 1798, and will last
the forty-five years.  When this dispensation will close, the judgment
will set, and the books will be opened; the hypocrites will be spued out
of the church, and the sanctuary cleansed.

            Will the situation of the church, the character of
Christians, the doctrines taught, and the signs of the times warrant us
to believe that we live in the Laodicean age of the church?  Let us for
a moment examine the evidence and see.

            1st. The situation of the church, enjoying peace in and
among the kingdoms of the earth, enjoying all the privileges of citizens
without persecution, making great and many improvements in her worldly
concerns, rich in this world's goods, having at her command many
millions of funds, and almost swaying the destinies of the world; great,
learned and rich men enlisting under her banners, controlling the
fashions, customs, and laws of the day, swaying a mighty influence over
the education of our youth, and giving a general tone to the literature
of the world, increasing her demands for power, establishing bishoprics,
presbyteries, national and state conventions, conferences, councils,
associations, consociations, societies innumerable; and all these
controlled almost exclusively by her clergy.  May we not say truly, "She
is rich and increased in goods?"  But is this all?  No.  Look at her
colleges, theological schools, academies, depositories, public edifices,
presses, theological writings and publications, in almost every nation,
kingdom, state, and territory, and in this country in almost every
county and town; and all this by contributions.  Well may it be said,
she has need of nothing.  These things, too, among all sects and
denominations, one cannot outdo another apparently, yet each is striving
for the mastery.

            2d. *The characters of Christians generally.*  In speaking
of the character of our brethren, it becomes the speaker to be very
careful and unassuming, for God has not made him a judge over his
brethren.  Therefore, to judge this one is right, and that one wrong, we
shall leave for the judgment seat of Christ.  But on a general scale
surely we may be allowed to examine and compare ourselves with the
prophecies.  In all ages back, Christians, when living godly, have been
a poor, despised, persecuted people, pilgrims and strangers in the
world, plainly showing that this is not their continuing city, but that
they are seeking one to come.  But is it so now?  Have not professors
generally, for more than thirty years, been seeking for the riches of
this life, for the honors of the world, and following the fashions of
the times as greedily as men of the world?  Yes.  And can we distinguish
a professor of religion in our public assemblies from a man of the
world, except we are informed?  No.  Where, then, do Christians plainly
show they seek a better country?  Nowhere.  May we not live in the same
neighborhood with professors for years, and not hear them recommend the
religion they profess?  Yes.  But do we not hear the same persons talk
freely, flippantly, and zealously about the world, the politics and the
fashions of the day?  Yes.  Is it not a general complaint with all of
our churches, of coldness, of a want of spiritual life, and a great
failure in active spiritual duties?  Yes.  Has not a spirit of sloth and
supineness seized upon professors generally?  Do not many think, if they
have a hired servant to talk religion, and visit the widow and
fatherless, and keep themselves unspotted from the world, for them it is
enough?  Yes.  And does not all this, and much more which might with
truth be said on this point, declare loudly that the professors of
Christianity, generally, are in a lukewarm state?  Yes.  We must
respond, Yes.

            *The doctrine taught.*  Here again your speaker feels a
diffidence in speaking on this subject, knowing that many great,
learned, and good men differ on this point; but we must all stand or
fall to our own Master, and I must answer how I speak or shun to declare
the whole counsel of God.  Your speaker believes that the depravity of
the human heart, our dependence on God, and indebtedness to grace, are
abundantly taught in the Scriptures.  See Eph. ii. 4-13.  But how stands
this doctrine with our public proclaimers at the present day?  Some few
may preach it, but there is more than ten to one who do not preach it,
or, if they do, they so cover it up by their plausible and specious
reasoning, that the force of the doctrine and the object of the inspired
writers are wholly lost.  We are now taught that man can make himself a
Christian as easily as he can turn about in the highway; that obedience
or baptism is regeneration; that works are the medium of acceptance with
God, and that the righteousness of Christ is not imputed.  How can such
doctrine be more clearly pointed out than it is by the "faithful and
true witness" to the Laodicean church?  "And knowest not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked."  That is, they
know not their depravity.  "I counsel thee to buy of me (see here their
dependence on God) gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and
white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye-salve, that thou
mayest see."  Grace, grace, from the foundation to the top stone. 
Surely, my dear friends, no candid observer of the doctrine taught at
the present day, but what must in his heart acknowledge that the
doctrine taught by many, among the different sects, is the same
described by our divine Master in the prophecy to the Laodicean church.

            *The signs of the times.*  In the close of Christ's
instructions to the church under consideration, he says, "Behold, I
stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice," &c.  Daniel
says, "At that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince that
standeth up for the children of thy people."  And Christ says, "For many
shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many." 
These were particular signs given by Christ and the prophets.  And how
have these come to pass?  Witness the great and many reformations which
for thirty years have progressed in our land, in Europe, and the islands
of the seas.  See also the word of God published, in whole or in part,
among all nations.  See the missionaries of the gospel running to and
fro through the whole earth.  Do not these indicate that Christ stands
at the door, and that his voice has gone out even unto the ends of the
world, and that Michael has stood up for the children of thy people? 
Yes.  Again: how many new sects have arisen, how many false Christs have
come in this blaze of gospel light, and are drawing away their hundreds
and thousands after them!  It is almost incredible, when we take into
view the light and knowledge under which we live; but all go to prove
that Christ is nigh, even at the door.

            In reviewing our subject, we learn by the events of the
Sardis church, and by the admonitions given, our duty to guard against
the introduction of errors into the church, and to strengthen ourselves
in the truth; and likewise of being active in all the duties of
religion, that we may not only have a name to live, but have the life
and power of the gospel, that we may resist all the temptations and
fiery darts of the enemies of the church.

            By the church of Philadelphia, we learn that if we keep the
word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ, he will keep us from
those trials and judgments which he sends on an ungodly and rebellious
people, and that God has opened a door for the spread of the gospel,
which no power on earth will be able to shut, until the angel standing
on the sea and on the land, shall swear that time shall be no longer. 
We also learn the importance of having brotherly love and perseverance
in holy things, that no man take from us the crown which is laid up for
those that love God, and which will be given to them who remain
steadfast in Christ Jesus at his coming, which is promised quickly to
this church.

            By the Laodicean church, we learn the important lesson that
we cannot serve two masters; we cannot love the present evil world, and
at the same time be the servants of God; that to be lukewarm in religion
is to be cast out of his presence, and call down the vengeance of God's
final judgment upon our heads, and, while we may flatter ourselves that
we are righteous, find to our everlasting shame, that we are wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, and naked.

            Think, O think, my dear friends, you that are trusting in
your own goodness, when that day of justice shall come, and the faithful
and true witness shall stand against you, when your goodness shall pass
away like the morning cloud, and the righteous Judge shall pronounce the
dreadful sentence, *Depart*--what must be your feelings!  The world,
which you here worshipped, is burning up; the friends with whom you here
associated are gone to meet the Lord in the air, or are sinking with you
into endless and hopeless misery.  The Savior, whose name you are now
ashamed to own, or whose righteousness you think you need not, is now
your Judge, seated on a great white throne, from whose face the heavens
and the earth shall flee away.  Think, O sinner! where wilt thou be
found!

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture XI. The New Song](esc13)
