[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](esc20)  [Next](esc22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Evidence from Scripture and History of the Second Coming of Christ*, by
William Miller, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LECTURE XIX.

##### MATT. xvii. 3.

##### But can ye not discern the signs of the times?

 

            OUR text is a question proposed by Christ to the Pharisees
and Sadducees, at a time when they came to him, tempting him for a sign
from heaven; and is a reproof upon them for their unbelief in the signs
already given by the Old Testament writers, which they professed to
believe, and which were actually fulfilling before their eyes, yet
disregarded.  The Pharisees and Sadducees were two of the most learned
and popular sects among the Jews; many of them were scribes, lawyers,
doctors, and teachers of the law; yet so perfectly blinded, that they
could not or would not apply the most simple rules of interpretation to
the law or prophets.  They would apply the rules of common observation
and common sense to the weather, but neither the one nor the other were
used in understanding the Scriptures.  They were well versed in the
skill to tell the weather for the morrow, but had no skill in the
promises, prophecies, and word of God.  "When it is evening, ye say it
will be fair weather, for the sky is red; and in the morning, it will be
foul weather to-day, for the sky is red and lowering.  O ye hypocrites!
ye can discern the face of the sky, *but can ye not* (by the same simple
rule) *discern the signs of the times?"*

            All the signs given in the word of God, concerning the first
coming and person of the Messiah, were fulfilling before their eyes; yet
they were demanding more and greater signs from heaven.  Christ had, and
was then performing miracles which no man on earth could perform, and
they ascribed it to the power of Beelzebub.  No evidence had or could be
presented, which they were not ready to evade or deny; and yet they
claimed all the learning, all the wisdom, and all the piety of that
day.  This was the character of those whom Christ calls hypocrites, and
to whom he addresses the question, "But can ye not discern the signs of
the times?"  And happy would it have been for us, who live in this day
of gospel light, when the gospel shines with greater effulgence than at
any other period of time since the world began, if hypocrisy had died
with the Pharisees and Sadducees; but it was not so.  Any man, of common
capacity of mind, who can divest himself of prejudice, or who will try
to see the character of man as developed at the present day in matters
of faith, will discover the same unbelief, the same disregard, the same
taunting, tempting spirit, concerning the second coming of the Messiah,
as the Pharisees and Sadducees manifested in their conduct and
conversation with our blessed Redeemer.  And the question may with equal
propriety, and I fear with tenfold force, be put to us at this day, if
Christ was here, as then.  And I have much reason to fear, that many may
be found among our great, learned, and teachers of divine things, who
would receive from our divine Master the same reproof, were he as then a
teacher among us.  "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed, lest he
fall."  I shall, then, in treating on this subject, use my text as a
reproof to us.

            I. I shall show a number of signs which the Jews had in that
day, as evidences of Jesus being the true Messiah.

            II. Show the signs that Jesus Christ, the prophets, and
apostles have given us of his second coming, now fulfilling in this day
in which we live.

            Under my first head, the signs of Jesus being the true
Messiah, were,

            1. The universal peace at his birth.  Of this Isaiah ii. 3,
4, had prophesied 760 years before, "And many people shall go and say,
Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of
the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in
his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem.  And he shall judge among the nations, and shall
rebuke many people; and they shall beat their swords into plough-shares,
and their spears into pruning-hooks.  Nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more."  This prophecy
was accomplished at his birth.  For the temple of Janus was shut the
very year our Savior was born, which denoted universal peace; and this
must have been known to the Jewish rulers.  Also the doctrines of Jesus
Christ taught that they should forgive and pray for their enemies, and
learn war no more.  "Peace on earth and good will to men," was sung by
the heavenly band when they announced the birth of the Savior in the
city of David.

            2. The star that appeared and guided the wise men to the
place of his nativity, prophesied of by Balaam, Num. xxiv. 17.  "There
shall come a star out of Jacob," &c.

            3. A root out of Jesse.  Isa. xi. 10, "In that day there
shall be a root out of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the
people; to it shall the Gentiles seek," &c.  That he was a descendant of
David was well known to the Jews, for they were very scrupulous in their
genealogies, and from the fact that he was born in the city of David
when his parents went up to be taxed where their names were enrolled.

            4. Born of a virgin.  Isa. vii. 14, "Therefore the Lord
himself shall give you a sign.  Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear
a son, and shall call his name Immanuel."  This was evidently fulfilled.

            5. At Bethlehem.  Micah v. 2, "But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah,
though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee
shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel, whose goings
forth have been from of old, from everlasting."  This was fulfilled,
according to their own showing, to the wise men from the east.

            6. Herod slaying all the children in Bethlehem, from two
years old and under, prophesied of by Jeremiah, xxxi. 15, "A voice was
heard in Ramah, lamentation and bitter weeping, Rachael weeping for her
children," &c.  This must have been known in all Judea.

            7. Land forsaken of both of her kings.  Isa. vii. 16, "For
before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, the
land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings."  Herod
and his successor both died before Jesus was of the common age to refuse
the evil and choose the good.

            8. Called out of Egypt.  Hosea xi. 1, "And called my son out
of Egypt."

            9. His forerunner John.  Isa. xl. 3, "The voice of him that
crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight
in the desert a highway for our God."  All Judea and Jerusalem went into
the wilderness to John, and of course must have seen this sign.

            10. Coming suddenly to his temple.  Mal. iii. 1, "And the
Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple."  For the
fulfilment of this prophecy, read John vii. 11-14, "Then the Jews sought
him at the feast, and said, Where is he?  Now about the midst of the
feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught."

            11. The gospel preached.  Isa. lxi. 1, "The spirit of the
Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek, he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captive, and the opening of the prison to them
that are bound."

            12. The covenant confirmed one week or seven years.  Daniel
ix. 27, "And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week." 
John preached three years and a half, and Christ three and a half.

            13. The blind see.  Isa. xlii. 7, "To open the blind eyes,
to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in
darkness out of the prison-house."

            14. The lame walk.  Isaiah. xxxv. 6, "Then shall the lame
man leap as a hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing."

            15. The deaf hear.  Isaiah xxxv. 5, "Then the eyes of the
blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped."

            16. The dead are raised.  Isaiah xxvi. 19, "And the earth
shall cast out the dead."

            17. His humility when on trial.  Isaiah liii. 7, "He was
oppressed, and he was afflicted; yet he opened not his mouth.  He is
brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers
is dumb, so he opened not his mouth."

            18. The manner and circumstances of his death.  Psalm xxii.
13-18, "They gaped upon me with their mouths as a ravening and a roaring
lion.  I am poured out as water and all my bones are out of joint: my
heart is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels.  My strength
is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws, and thou
hast brought me into the dust of death.  For dogs have compassed me; the
assembly of the wicked have enclosed me: they pierced my hands and my
feet; I may tell all my bones; they look and stare upon me.  They part
my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture."  This Psalm was
indited more than 1000 years before Christ's crucifixion, and yet every
word had an exact and literal accomplishment in that transaction, and
the Jews saw it.

            19. His resurrection.  Psalm xvi. 10, "For thou wilt not
leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see
corruption."

            20. The pouring out of the Holy Spirit on the day of
pentecost.  Joel ii. 28, "And it shall come to pass afterward that I
will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy; your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall
see visions."  The apostle told them that this scripture was fulfilled
at the day of pentecost, and this transaction was well known to the
Jews.

            21. The fulfilment of the seventy weeks spoken of by Daniel,
ix. 24-27, which I have shown in a former lecture, was accomplished to a
day.  And the Jews well understood it; for Caiaphas, being high priest
that year, said to the Jews, "Ye know nothing at all, nor consider that
it is expedient for us that one man should die for the people, and that
the whole nation perish not.  And this spake he not of himself, but
being high priest that year he prophesied (or taught the prophecy in
Daniel) that Jesus should die for that nation, and not for that nation
only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God
that were scattered abroad."  John xi. 49-52.

            This evidence was well understood among the rulers of the
Jews; yet notwithstanding all this scripture was fulfilled before their
faces, and all these signs were actually accomplished in the short space
of thirty-five years, and a cloud of witnesses testifying to all these
facts, and they themselves had to consent that notable miracles had been
done, they believed not.  Well may you say, dear hearer, that they
deserved wrath, and God was just in destroying their nation and place. 
But how is it with us?  Do we believe in that word which we blame them
for rejecting?  Are we clear of the sin of unbelief?  The Jews were
looking for a temporal king and kingdom.  And are not we looking for a
temporal millennium--one in which the Christians will have the rule of
the world?  Let us see to it that we do not stumble at the same
stumbling-stone; possibly we may have carnal notions as well as they. 
Therefore, let us inquire,

            II. What signs are now fulfilling, which are given us by
Christ, the prophets, or apostles, of his second coming and glorious
reign?  And,

            1, Christ tells us, Matt. xxiv. 14, "This gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached in all the world as a witness, and then shall
the end come."  Is not this sign already accomplished?  Bible translated
into more than 200 different languages; missionaries sent among all the
nations known to us on the globe, and reformation succeeding reformation
in every town, nook or corner in this land.  The gospel has now spread
over the four quarters of the globe.  It began in Asia.  In the
apostles' days, that quarter was full of light.  From thence it went
into Africa; and, for a number of centuries, Africa stretched out her
hands unto God.  Europe, too, has had a long visitation of gospel
blessings; and now America, the last quarter of the globe, is reaping a
harvest of souls for the last day.  The gospel, like the sun, arose in
the east, and will set in the west.

            2. The pouring out of the Holy Spirit, and last reign of
grace.  Daniel tells us, after Bonaparte should come to his end, and
none should help him, xii. 1, "And at that time shall Michael stand up,
the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people."  This I
have shown, in a former lecture, is the same angel that stood upon the
waters of the river, clothed in linen, Daniel xii. 6; also the same
angel that John saw, Rev. x. 1-6, standing, his right foot upon the sea,
and his left upon the earth, and in his hand a little book open.  This
angel told John that he must "prophesy again before many people, and
nations, and tongues, and kings;" meaning that the gospel must again be
published, as it had been in the apostolic days.  And then would this
angel lift his hand to heaven, and swear by him that liveth forever and
ever, that time should be no longer.  Again, James says, v. 7, 8, "Be
patient, therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord.  Behold, the
husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long
patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain.  Be ye also
patient; establish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draweth
nigh."  And now, can any man, who has any knowledge of the present
times, deny that God has poured out his spirit, in a remarkable manner,
for twenty years past?  Has not the gospel been spread in as rapid and
extensive a manner, as in the apostolic day?  Has not opposition and
persecution of the kings of the earth, of the woman that sitteth on many
waters, the sea, been in a great measure kept in check and powerless, by
some invisible power, some mighty arm, until the servants of God should
be sealed, the latter rain of grace descend, and God's purposes
completed concerning this latter day?  Here, then, we have a clear and
visible sign, that the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.

            3. "Many running to and fro."  This is another important and
evident sign of the end.  Daniel xii. 4, "But thou, O Daniel, shut up
the words and seal the book, even to the time of the end.  Many shall
run to and fro."  Whether the prophet means to be understood, "many
shall run to and fro" in a religious sense, or in a civil or temporal
sense, or whether he means in both, is perfectly immaterial for my
purpose.  All must acknowledge, that this text is remarkably fulfilled
in this day, in either point of view.  If it means missionaries of the
cross, no man can dispute the fulfilment.  See the heralds of salvation
crossing and re-crossing on every part of the habitable globe.  If it
means common travellers, or the rapid means of travel, still our text
holds good, and the fulfilment obvious.  No man, unless he is wilfully
ignorant, can deny that this sign is not actually and literally
fulfilled.

            4. The great increase of knowledge given in the same text as
above.  "Even to the time of the end many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased."  View this in any point you please,
whether theological or scientifical, it is literally true; in this day
of invention and improvement, knowledge increases.  What of the fifty
different moral societies, which have become general in the Christian
world?  Is there no increase of knowledge in our Bible societies,
Sabbath schools, tract societies, temperance societies, and a catalogue
of others for moral reform?  What can we say of all the inventions in
the arts?  What of all the improvements in science?  In all this, is it
not very evident that this sign is now fulfilling to the very letter?

            5. The great increase of riches, and desire for laying up
worldly treasures, as described by James v. 1-3, "Go to, now, ye rich
men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you; your
riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten; your gold and
your silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against
you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire.  Ye have heaped treasure
together for the last days."  When, since the writer of this epistle was
on our earth, has there been such an increase of gold and silver, and
treasures of this life, as at this day?  Our rich men are laying up
their gold, silver, and treasures in abundance.  But, as though this
individual exertion for riches would not completely fulfil our text,
they have entered into all manner of companies and monopolies, to "heap
treasure together."  When, in the history of the world, can there be
shown so many banking institutions as now?  When so much insurance
capital as is heaped together at this day?  Are not our rich men
perfectly infatuated with stocks of all kinds?  And monopoly is the
order of the day; to grind down the poor, and heap treasure together for
the last days.  Can any man, who has any knowledge of these things, deny
that this sign of the last days is not evidently accomplished?  Go to,
ye rich men, weep and howl, for your miseries are come upon you.

            6. The unwillingness of men to hear sound doctrine, taught
us by Paul, 2 Tim. iv. 1-4, "I charge thee, therefore, before God and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing and his kingdom.  For the time will come, when they will not
endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their
ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables."  My brethren,
need I say one word on this passage?  There is none of you so blind, but
you see that this passage does actually describe the most fashionable
preaching at the present day.  How many thousand do run after that kind
of preaching which is only relating fables, and that doctrine which
gives all power to man?

            7. Scoffers, saying, "Where is the promise of his coming?"
as Peter informs us in his 2 Epistle, iii. 3, 4, "Knowing this first,
that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming?  For, since the
fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning
of the creation."  A right understanding of this text would show us, at
once, that many of us, who fancy we are in the highway to heaven, are
belonging to this class of scoffers.  First, they walk after their own
lusts; that is, after their own carnal notions concerning the coming of
Christ.  They say all things will continue as they were from the
creation; they must have a temporal millennium; man must be married and
given in marriage; the world will not be burnt, and, My Lord delayeth
his coming, some say a thousand years, and some say 365,000 years, and
all the moral change that takes place on our earth, will be performed by
the agency of man.  Therefore, many scoff and ridicule the idea, that
Scripture tells us of the second coming of Christ, the manner, object,
and time.  And many are willingly ignorant will not hear or read on this
subject.

            8. "Perilous times," as described in 2 Tim. iii. 1-7, "This
know, also, that, in the last days, perilous times shall come; for men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers
of pleasure more than lovers of God, having the form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof; from such turn away.  For of this sort are
they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with
sins, led away with divers lusts, ever learning, and never able to come
to the knowledge of the truth."

            What better description of domestic and public society could
we expect from the most close observer of private characters, domestic
circles, and public societies of our times, than is here given?  One
would conclude, had he found this in any other book but the Bible, that
it was a modern writer, well acquainted with the human heart, and the
generations now on the earth.

            9. "Departing from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits, and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy; having
their conscience seared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats."  Thus Paul tells Timothy, 1 Epistle,
iv. 1-3, "Now the spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times
some shall depart from the faith," &c.  This, we must acknowledge, has
been, and is now fulfilling.  The whole, almost, of the Christian world
have departed, or changed their faith within fifteen years; seducing
spirits are evidently at work; hypocrites are multiplying among us;
Roman Catholics, Shakers, Pilgrims, Fanny Wright, Owen, and others
forbid to marry.  Roman Catholics, and many others among us, are
teaching to abstain from meats and drinks, which God hath created to be
received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth.

            10. False teachers, making merchandise of the gospel.  See 2
Peter ii. 1-3, "But there were false prophets, also, among the people;
even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring
in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction; and many shall follow their
pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken
of; and through covetousness shall they, with feigned words, make
merchandise of you, whose judgment of a long time lingereth not, and
their damnation slumbereth not."  The apostle then goes on to show,
that, as it was in the days of Noah and Lot, so it would be in the days
of these false teachers; one generation would not pass off before the
judgment would overtake them, who make merchandise of the gospel, and
like Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness.

            11. Jude gives us a sign, 4 to 19 verses, inclusive, "How
they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk
after their own ungodly lusts; these be they who separate themselves,
sensual, having not the Spirit."  Some preachers deny the agency of the
Spirit in regeneration.

            12. Christ gives a sign in Luke xxi. 25-28, "And there shall
be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and, upon the
earth, distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves
roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking for those
things which are coming on the earth; for the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken; and then shall they see the Son of Man coming in a
cloud with power and great glory.  And when these things begin to come
to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption
draweth nigh.

            13. Christ gives another sign in Matt. xxiv. 23, 24, "Then,
if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it
not; for there shall arise false Christs and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, insomuch that, if it were possible, they
shall deceive the very elect."  There can be no doubt of this sign being
fulfilled.

            14. The fulfilment of the parable of the ten virgins--the
midnight cry has gone forth from every quarter of God's moral vineyard,
"Behold, the bridegroom cometh."  The world has been, and are now,
"trimming their lamps;" witness the Bible translated into all languages;
the Bible societies sending Bibles to every nation and family on the
earth, the Sabbath schools and Bible classes studying its sacred
precepts.

            15. The scattering of the holy people and division of sects,
as prophesied of by Daniel, xii. 7, "And when he shall have accomplished
to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things shall be
finished."  This prophecy is now fulfilling in a remarkable manner.  Not
one sect, who profess holiness, but are divided and subdivided into
contending schisms, and that, too, within twenty years.

            16. The division of the political world, as prophesied of by
John, Rev. xvi. 12-16, "And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs,
come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast,
and out of the mouth of the false prophet, for they are the spirits of
devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and
of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of the great day of God
Almighty"--and 19th verse, "And the great city was divided into three
parts, and the cities of the nations fell."  That these spirits are
political, is evident, from the fact that they come out of the mouth of
the dragon, (kings,) and beast, (Catholic,) false prophet, (Mahometan,)
and unclean, signifying they are not holy things.  This prophecy is now
accomplishing.  What nation, within our knowledge, is not already
divided into three political parties?  None, which is in any way known
to your speaker.

            17. The church has fulfilled her 1260 years in the
wilderness, spoken of in Rev. xii. 6. 14, "And the woman fled into the
wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should
feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days."  These days
were evidently accomplished in 1798, since which time the Protestant
church has enjoyed privileges even in the city of nations, the Roman
empire; and, according to Daniel, forty-five years will complete the
whole plan of redemption.

            18. The two witnesses prove that the 1260 years are ended;
for it is evident that the Old and New Testament are not now hid nor
kept from the common people, but have arisen from their dead state, and
are now performing the office God designed they should, conveying light
to the world.  They are not clothed in sackcloth, but, through the
missionaries of the cross, and Bible societies, are testifying to the
world of Christ and his second coming.

            19. The civil power of anti-Christ is destroyed, and the
1260 years, in which she was to rule over kings, and tread the church
under foot, was completed in 1798, when the French army took the Pope a
prisoner, and erected Italy into a republic; since which time the Pope
has exercised but little or no power over kings, or the Protestant
church, and she is evidently sinking by the weight of her own
corruptions.

            20. It is very evident that the sixth trumpet has sounded,
and the 391 years will be completed in 1839, when the seventh trumpet
will begin to sound, and the mystery of God will be finished, all that
he hath declared to his servants the prophets.  If the fall of the
Eastern Empire at Constantinople was included in the sixth trumpet,
which all the principal commentators, whom I have consulted, agree in,
and that trumpet was prepared to sound an hour, a day, a month, and a
year, which makes, according to the reckoning of time in John's
prophecy, 391 years and 15 days, then the sixth trumpet is almost
finished.  The whole appearance strengthens this exposition of the text;
for the power of the Turks has diminished more rapidly within fifteen
years, than any politician, however anxious he could have been for the
event, could have anticipated.

            21. The opening of the sixth seal, revealed in the 6th and
7th chapters of Revelation, was opened in the French revolution, and
carries us through a sealing time unto the opening of the seventh seal,
which ushers us before the judgment seat of God.  No one can deny but
that, since the revolution in France, a sealing time has passed; many
have been born into the spiritual kingdom of Christ, more than has ever
been known, in the same period of time, since the apostles' days.  This
seal, then, is evidently opened, and is a strong evidence that the book
of life will soon be opened, and the dead will be judged out of the
things written in the books.

            22. The sixth vial was poured out about the year 1822, when
the Ottoman power began to be dried up.  This is an important sign that
we are on the brink of the judgment day.  Rev. xvii. 12, "And the sixth
angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the waters
thereof were dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be
prepared."  This preparation is for the last great battle, which will
take place at the pouring out of the seventh vial, in the year 1839 or
40.  At the pouring out of the seventh vial, a voice from the throne
will pronounce the word, *It is done.*  The kingdoms of the earth and
governments of the world will be carried away, and their places not
found.  Every writer, of any note, will and have applied this vial to
the Turkish government, and of course must acknowledge that this vial is
poured out, for the power of the Turkish government is but little more
than a name, and the strength of the Ottoman power dried up.

            23. Another evidence is Daniel's resurrection at the end of
the 1335 days.  This evidence is very plain and evident, for Daniel
says, xii. 11-13, "And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be
taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall
be a thousand two hundred and ninety days."  This cannot be the Jewish
sacrifice; for if so, then it must have been fulfilled about five
hundred years past; and as no event took place then which would warrant
us in so understanding it, I can see no rational objection to understand
this daily sacrifice to mean Pagan rites and sacrifices, which was the
original beast of which the abomination of desolation was only an image,
and, as I have shown in a former lecture, was to continue six hundred
and sixty-six years; and as Paul tells us, that when he was taken out of
the way, the man of sin would be revealed, agreeing in language with
Daniel.  I think the proof is strong that from the taking away of Pagan
worship, A.D. 508, to the end of the Papal civil power, would be 1290
years, which would end in the year 1798, and thus agree with all of
John's numbers in Revelation.  And then Daniel says, or the angel to
Daniel, "Blessed is he that waiteth and cometh to the thousand three
hundred and five and thirty days."  Thus add 1335 to 508, will bring us
down to the year A.D. 1843.  "But go thou thy way till the end be, for
thou shalt rest and stand in thy lot at the end of the days."  And
"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection."  Then
Daniel will stand in his lot, and Job will stand on the earth in the
latter day.

            24. Daniel's vision of 2300 days long.  I have in some
former lectures shown clearly that Daniel's vision concerning the four
great monarchies which were or were to come, included the whole history
of the world, so far as God saw fit to reveal it, down to the judgment
day, and the coming of the Son of Man in the clouds.  I then showed that
the question was asked, how long should be this vision.  The answer was
given--2300 days.  I then proved that days were to be counted years, by
the command of God, by the example of Jacob, and by the fulfilment of a
part of the vision.  I then showed you when this vision began by the
angel Gabriel's own declaration, who was commanded to instruct Daniel
into the vision.  According to this instruction I showed you that 490
years were accomplished of this vision, to a day, at the crucifixion of
Christ, both events happening on the 12th day of the first month, 490
years apart.  And then I inquired, that if 490 years of 2300 was
fulfilled when our Savior was crucified, how much of the vision remained
after his death.  I answered, 1810 years.  I then inquired, what year
after his birth that would be; and the answer was, in the year 1843.  I
then begged the privilege, and do now, for any person to show me any
failure of proof on this point, or where, possibly, according to
Scripture, there may be a failure in the calculation I have made on this
vision.  I have not yet, by seventeen years study, been able to discover
where I might fail.

            *Lastly.*  Another sign of the last day you will find given
by Paul, 1 Thess. v. 2, 3, "For yourselves know perfectly, that the day
of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.  For when they shall say,
peace and safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail
upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape."  Compare 2 Pet. ii.
17-22.

            The doctrine of peace and safety, and that there is no
punishment in the future state, had but few or no advocates until very
recently.  I am not certain but the first preacher of this
soul-destroying doctrine is now living; and they now boast of their
multitudes of followers and advocates.  There have been, in past ages, a
few who preached the doctrine of the restoration of all men, after a
suitable punishment in hell; but to *modern Universalists* belongs the
invention of preaching "peace and safety when sudden destruction
cometh."  If this sign is not fulfilled in the preachers of this order
at this time, I ask, How can it be fulfilled? and what must the doctrine
of those be who preach "peace and safety"?  Surely, no human being can
invent a doctrine so full of (promised) "peace and safety" to the wicked
as this; and no other denomination on our globe ever have opposed the
doctrine of the coming of Christ, the judgment day, and future
punishments, but the modern Universalists; and if this is the doctrine
that Paul had reference to in our text, as, I am fully satisfied, every
candid and religious mind must and will allow, then we may reasonably
suppose "*sudden* destruction cometh upon them, and they shall not
escape."

            Therefore, my dear reader, I shall now, with a few closing
remarks, leave you to your own reflections.

            The Jews had twenty-one signs in the Scriptures given them
of the first coming and person of Jesus Christ; yet many rejected him as
an impostor.  You say, if you had lived in that day, you would have
believed; and you in your hearts condemn them as a hardened race of
unbelievers; and notwithstanding their great pretence to piety, you say
they were justly denounced by our Savior as a generation of vipers and a
band of hypocrites.  But, my hearers, be careful your own hearts do not
condemn you for your unbelief in the signs which the prophets, Christ,
and the apostles have given you as tokens of his second coming and the
judgment day.  I have brought from the word of God twenty-five signs of
his second coming, end of the world, and judgment day, and all
apparently fulfilled within the age of many present, or fulfilling now
before your eyes.  And do you believe?  Many of you profess to be pious;
many of you say, Lord, Lord!  But do you believe his word?  Are you
willing to risk your life, your character, your all, on his word? or are
you fearful and unbelieving?  Now is the time to try men's souls.  Now,
if you wish to be sure, examine closely, and see whether your faith will
stand in the day of trial which is coming; yes, has already come, in a
thousand ways, to draw you from the gospel of Christ to another *new*
gospel, which is not the gospel of God.  "Can ye not discern the signs
of the times?"  Let me give you one rule by which you may know a false
doctrine.  They may have many good things in their creeds, they may be
very plausible in their arguments, and after all deceive you.  But
examine them closely, and you will find they will deny, ridicule, or try
to do away some prominent doctrine of the Bible, such as the divinity of
Christ, his second coming, office of the Holy Spirit, eternal
punishment, doctrine of grace, election, conviction for sin,
regeneration, repentance, or faith.  And when you hear or see them make
light or scoff at any thing of this kind in the word of God, go not
after them, nor bid them God speed.  "Can ye not discern the signs of
the times?"

            And to you, impenitent friend, God has at all times given
you warning of his approaching judgments.  If you repent, believe his
word, and break off your sins by righteousness, he is faithful and just
to forgive you your sins.  Why not take warning by the past?  Is there
no example for you?  Look at the antediluvian world, Sodom and Gomorrah,
Nineveh, Babylon, Jerusalem, and the once enlightened Asia, now worse
than in heathenish darkness.  Will God punish nations, and not
individuals?  This cannot be, for nations are composed of individuals;
and God is just, for he hath appointed a day in which he will judge the
world in righteousness.  "Can ye not discern the signs of the times?" 
Will God's word fail of being accomplished?  Can you show a single
instance?  Why not listen, then, to the warnings and admonitions, to the
calls and invitations, to the examples and precepts contained therein? 
"Can ye not discern the signs of the times?"  Will God cut off the
unbelieving Pharisee for not discerning the signs of the times, and let
you, with twofold more light, go free?  No: how can ye escape, if you
neglect this great salvation?  Watch, then, "the signs of the times."  I
say, Watch.

 

 

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

 

 

NOTE.

 

            The author wishes to state that Lecture VIII. in this work
was written twelve years since; and that the authorities he then
consulted fixed the rise of the Turkish empire at 1298.  He is now
satisfied, by the examination of other authorities on the subject, that
the foundation of that empire was laid in 1299.  Hence the things
mentioned in Lecture VII. (p. 109,) relative to persecutions, &c., and
to the coming of the third woe, as mentioned in Lecture XIII. (p. 202,)
which he supposed would take place in 1839, according to the first
computation, will not be realized until the year 1840.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Supplement](esc22)
