[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Euripides](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eaha01) 
[Next](eaha03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Euripides and His Age*, by Gilbert Murray, \[1913\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE

### CHAPTER I

#### INTRODUCTORY

<span class="smallcaps">Most</span> of the volumes of this series are
occupied with large subjects and subjects commonly recognized as
important to great masses of people at the present day. In devoting the
present volume to the study of a single writer, remote from us in time
and civilization and scarcely known by more than name to many readers of
the Library, I am moved by the belief that, quite apart from his
disputed greatness as a poet and thinker, apart from his amazing and
perhaps unparalleled success as a practical playwright, Euripides is a
figure of high significance in the history of humanity and of special
interest to our own generation.

Born, according to the legend, in exile and fated to die in exile,
Euripides, in whatever light one regards him, is a man of curious and
ironic history. As a poet he has lived through the ages in an atmosphere
of controversy,

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

generally—though by no means always—loved by poets and despised by
critics. As a thinker he is even to this day treated almost as a
personal enemy by scholars of orthodox and conformist minds; defended,
idealized and sometimes transformed beyond recognition by various
champions of rebellion and the free intellect. The greatest difficulty
that I feel in writing about him is to keep in mind without loss of
proportion anything like the whole activity of the many-sided man.
Recent writers have tended to emphasize chiefly his work as a
destructive thinker. Dr. Verrall, the most brilliant of all modern
critics of Euripides, to whose pioneer work my own debt is greater than
I can well express, entitled one of his books "Euripides the
Rationalist" and followed to its extreme limit the path indicated by
this particular clue. His vivid and interesting disciple Professor
Norwood has followed him. In Germany Dr. Nestlé, in a sober and learned
book, treating of Euripides as a thinker, says that "all mysticism was
fundamentally repugnant to him"; a view which is certainly wrong, since
some of the finest expressions of Greek mysticism known to us are taken
from-the works of Euripides. Another good writer, Steiger, draws an
elaborate

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

parallel between Euripides and Ibsen and finds the one key to Euripides
in his realism and his absolute devotion to truth. Yet an older
generation of Euripides-lovers felt these things quite differently. When
Macaulay proclaimed that there was absolutely nothing in literature to
equal The Bacchae, he was certainly not thinking about rationalism or
realism. He felt the romance, the magic, the sheer poetry. So did Milton
and Shelley and Browning. And so did the older English scholars like
Porson and Elmsley. Porson, while admitting that the critics have many
things to say against Euripides as compared, for instance, with
Sophocles, answers in his inarticulate way "*ilium admiramur, hunc
legimus*"—"we admire the one, but we read the other." Elmsley, so far
from regarding Euripides as mainly a thinker, remarks in passing that he
was a poet singularly addicted to contradicting himself. To Porson and
Elmsley the poetry of Euripides might or might not be good on the
highest plane, it was at any rate delightful. Quite different again are
the momentous judgments pronounced upon him as a writer of tragedy by
two of the greatest judges. Aristotle, writing at a period when
Euripides was rather out of fashion, and

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

subjecting him to much serious and sometimes unintelligent criticism,
considers him still "the most tragic of the poets." And Goethe, after
expressing his surprise at the general belittling of Euripides by "the
aristocracy of philologists, led by the buffoon Aristophanes," asks
emphatically: "Have all the nations of the world since his time produced
one dramatist who was worthy to hand him his slippers?" (Tagebüchern,
November 22, 1831.) We must try, if we can, to bear duly in mind all
these different lines of approach.

 

As a playwright the fate of Euripides has been strange. All through a
long life he was almost invariably beaten in the State competitions. He
was steadily admired by some few philosophers, like Socrates; he enjoyed
immense fame throughout Greece; but the official judges of poetry were
against him, and his own people of Athens admired him reluctantly and
with a grudge.

After death, indeed, he seemed to come into his kingdom. He held the
stage as no other tragedian has ever held it, and we hear of his plays
being performed with popular success six hundred years after they were
written, and in countries far removed from

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Greece. He
influenced all the higher forms of Greek writing, both in prose and
poetry. He is more quoted by subsequent writers than any other Greek
tragedian; nay, if we leave out of count mere dictionary references to
rare words, he is more quoted than all the other tragedians together.
And nineteen of his plays have survived to our own day as against seven
each of Aeschylus and Sophocles. This seems enough glory for any man.
Yet the fate that grudged him prizes in his lifetime contrived
afterwards to spread a veneer of commonplaceness over the success which
it could not prevent. To a great extent Euripides was read because he
was, or seemed, easy; the older poets were neglected because they were
difficult. Attic Greek in his hands had begun to assume the form in
which it remained for a thousand years as the recognized literary
language of the east of Europe and the great instrument and symbol of
civilization. He was a treasure-house of Attic style and ancient maxims,
and eminently useful to orators who liked quotations. Meantime the
melody and meaning of his lyrics were lost, because men had forgotten
the pronunciation of fifth-century Greek and could no longer read lyrics
intelligently. The obviously exciting

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

quality of his plays kept its effect; but there was no one to understand
the subtlety of his craftsmanship, the intimate study of character, the
skilful forging of links and clashes between scenes, the mastery of that
most wonderful of Greek dramatic instruments, the Chorus. Plays had
practically ceased to be written. They were thought of either as
rhetorical exercises or as spectacles for the amphitheatre. Something
similar happened to the whole inward spirit in which he worked, call it
philosophy or call it religion. Its meaning became obscured. It had
indeed a powerful influence on the philosophers of the great fourth
century schools: they probably understood at least one side of him. But
the sayings of his that are quoted broadcast and repeated through author
after author of the decadence are mostly thoughts of quite the second
rank, which have lost half their value by being torn from their context,
often commonplace, often—as is natural in fragments of dramas—mutually
contradictory, though almost always simply and clearly expressed.

It was this clear expression which the late Greeks valued so highly.
"Clarity"—*saphèneia*—was the watchword of style in Euripides’ own day
and remained always the

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

foremost aim of Greek rhetoric. Indeed what a Greek called "rhetorikê"
often implied the very opposite of what we call "rhetoric." To think
clearly, to arrange your matter under formal heads, to have each
paragraph definitely articulated and each sentence simply and exactly
expressed: that was the main lesson of the Greek rhetor. The tendency
was already beginning in classical times and no classical writer carried
it further than Euripides. But here again Fate has been ironical with
him. The ages that were incapable of understanding him loved him for his
clearness: our own age, which might at last understand him, is
instinctively repelled by it. We do not much like a poet to be very
clear, and we hate him to be formal. We are clever readers, quick in the
up-take, apt to feel flattered and stimulated by a little obscurity;
mystical philosophy is all very well in a poet, but clear-cut
intellect—no. At any rate we are sharply offended by "firstlys,
secondlys and thirdlys," by divisions on the one hand and on the other
hand. And all this and more Euripides insists on giving us.

It is the great obstacle between him and us. Apart from it we have only
to exercise a little historical imagination and we shall find in him a
man, not indeed modern—half his

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

charm is that he is so remote and austere—but a man who has in his mind
the same problems as ourselves, the same doubts and largely the same
ideals; who has felt the same desires and indignations as a great number
of people at the present day, especially young people. Not because young
people are cleverer than old, nor yet because they are less wise; but
because the poet or philosopher or martyr who lives, half-articulate,
inside most human beings is apt to be smothered or starved to death in
the course of middle life. As long as he is still alive we have, most of
us, the key to understanding Euripides.

What, then, shall be our method in approaching him? It is fatal to fly
straight at him with modern ready-made analogies. We must see him in his
own atmosphere. Every man who possesses real vitality can be seen as the
resultant of two forces. He is first the child of a particular age,
society, convention; of what we may call in one word a tradition. He is
secondly, in one degree or another, a rebel against that tradition. And
the best traditions make the best rebels. Euripides is the child of a
strong and splendid tradition and is, together with Plato, the fiercest
of all rebels against it.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

There is nothing paradoxical in this. No tradition is perfect. The best
brings only a passing period of peace or triumph or stable equilibrium;
humanity rests for a moment, but knows that it must travel further; to
rest for ever would be to die. The most thorough conformists are
probably at their best when forced to fight for their ideal against
forces that would destroy it. And a tradition itself is generally at its
best, not when it is universally accepted, but when it is being attacked
and broken. It is then that it learns to search its own heart and live
up to its full meaning. And in a sense the greatest triumph that any
tradition can accomplish is to rear noble and worthy rebels. The Greek
tradition of the fifth century B.C., the great age of Athens, not only
achieved extraordinary advances in most departments of human life, but
it trained an extraordinary band of critical or rebellious children.
Many a reader of Plato's most splendid satires against democratic Athens
will feel within him the conclusive answer: "No place but Athens could
ever have reared such a man as this, and taught him to see these faults
or conceive these ideals."

We are in reaction now against another great age, an age whose
achievements in art

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

are memorable, in literature massive and splendid, in science and
invention absolutely unparalleled, but greatest of all perhaps in the
raising of all standards of public duty, the humanizing of law and
society, and the awakening of high ideals in social and international
politics. The Victorian Age had, amid enormous differences, a certain
similarity with the Periclean in its lack of self-examination, its rush
and chivalry and optimism, its unconscious hypocrisy, its failure to
think out its problems to the bitter end. And in most of the current
criticism on things Victorian, so far as it is not mere fashion or
folly, one seems to feel the Victorian spirit itself speaking. It
arraigns Victorian things by a Victorian standard; blames them not
because they have moved in a particular direction, but because they have
not moved far enough; because so many of the things they attempted are
still left undone, because the ideals they preached and the standards by
which they claimed to be acting were so much harder of satisfaction than
they knew. Euripides, like ourselves, comes in an age of criticism
following upon an age of movement and action. And for the most part,
like ourselves, he accepts the general standards on which the movement

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

and action were based. He accepts the Athenian ideals of free thought,
free speech, democracy, "virtue" and patriotism. He arraigns his country
because she is false to them.

 

We have spoken of the tradition as a homogeneous thing, but for any poet
or artist there are two quite different webs in it. There are the
accepted conventions of his art and the accepted beliefs of his
intellect, the one set aiming at the production of beauty, the others at
the attainment of truth.

Now for every artist who is also a critic or rebel there is a difference
of kind between these two sets of conventions. For the purposes of truth
the tradition is absolutely indifferent. If, as a matter of fact, the
earth goes round the sun, it does so not a whit the less because most
ages have believed the opposite. The seeker for truth can, as far as
truth is concerned, reject tradition without a qualm. But with art the
case is different. Art has to give a message from one man to another. As
you can only speak to a man in a language which you both know, so you
can only appeal to his artistic side by means of some common tradition.
His natural expectation,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

whether we try to satisfy or to surprise it, to surpass or to disappoint
it, is always an essential element in the artistic effect. Consequently
the tradition cannot be disregarded.

This distinction is often strongly marked in the practice of different
artists. One poet may be both a pioneer of new roads in thought and a
breaker of the laws of technique, like Walt Whitman—an enemy of the
tradition in both kinds. Another may be slack and anarchical in his
technique though quite conventional in his thought. I refrain from
suggesting instances. Still more clearly there are poets, such as
Shelley or Swinburne, whose works are full of intellectual rebellion
while their technique is exquisite and elaborate. The thoughts are bold
and strange. The form is the traditional form developed and made more
exquisite.

Now Euripides, except for some so-called licences in metre, belongs in
my judgment markedly to the last class. In speculation he is a critic
and a free lance; in artistic form he is intensely traditional. He seems
to have loved the very stiffnesses of the form in which he worked. He
developed its inherent powers in ways undreamed of, but he never broke
the mould or strayed away into shapelessness

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

or mere realism. His last, and in many respects his greatest, play, the
*Bacchae*, is, as far as our evidence goes, the most formal that he ever
wrote.

These, then, are the lights in which we propose to look at Euripides. In
attempting to reconstruct his life we must be conscious of two
backgrounds against which he will be found standing, according as we
regard him as Thinker or as pure Artist. We must first try to understand
something of the tradition of thought in which he was reared, that is
the general atmosphere of fifth century Athens, and watch how he
expressed it and how he reacted against it. Next, we must understand
what Greek tragedy was, what rituals and conventions held it firm, and
what inner fire kept it living, and so study the method in which
Euripides used it for his chosen mode of expression, obeying its laws
and at the same time liberating its spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](eaha03)
