[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mla05)  [Next](mla07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## The Great Fight.

The two men stood facing each other some distance apart; each held a
long spear poised for throwing in one hand, while in the other was held
a wooden shield which partly covered his body. At a given signal from
the younger brother the fight commenced. The spears flew through the air
like beams of light, and their long shafts quivered as they missed their
mark, and buried deep in the trees.

Both the men were very skilled spear-throwers, and the fight was a long
one. No sound was heard except the hissing of the spears in flight, the
heavy breathing of the men, who were tired through their great
exertions, and the dull thud of their feet on the grass as they leapt
forward. In a desperate effort to end the fight, Byama threw a spear at
his enemy's throat with all his strength. Thoorkook saw it coming, and
instantly raised his shield to guard himself. The spear was hurled with
such force, however, that it pierced the wooden shield, entered
Thoorkook's throat, and came out on the other side.

At the death of their enemy, the brothers rejoiced, and, before leaving
for their camp, they turned his body into a Mopoke, a dismal night bird
with a very harsh cry. When they returned to their camp the brothers
found that the mothers of the dead boys would not cease crying, and they
were so moved with pity at the women's grief that they turned them into
Curlews. When you hear the mournful cry of the Curlews in the bush, you
will know it is the mothers crying for their little boys they lost so
long ago.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Flying Chip](mla07)
