[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mla06)  [Next](mla08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## The Flying Chip.

One day the brothers were out hunting. The younger brother had climbed a
tree, and -was cutting out a white wood grub, when a chip from his axe
went whizzing through the air and fell near the elder brother, who was
standing at the foot of the tree. When Byama descended the tree, his
brother suggested that they should go hunting in different directions
for the remainder of the day. Byama agreed to the proposal and went his
way. The elder brother was then left alone. He carefully cut a thin
piece of wood like the chip, and tied a piece of bark string to one end
of it, and, when he swung it through the air, it made the same sound as
the flying chip.

He continued his hunting, and, when he returned to the camp at the close
of the day, he showed the piece of wood to his brother and said: "The
voices of our children dwell in the trees, and, though we cannot see
them, they will be with us for ever." The younger brother feared that he
had lost his reason, and said to him: "You have travelled far to-day,
and the fires of the sun burned brightly; you must be very tired. Sleep,
my brother, and when the new day dawns you will feel better, and then we
will talk." Seeing he could not convince his younger brother, Byama went
into the open and swung the piece of wood, and the low, soft sound that
rose and fell was like the voice of the little children.

The two brothers--who were headmen of their tribes--then decided that
this piece of wood, which is called the Bullroarer, should be shown to
all boys born in the future, in remembrance of the little boys who were
killed by the dogs. And even to the present day the Curlews cry
mournfully in the woods, and the Mopoke only ventures abroad at night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Why the Whale Spouts, the Starfish is Ragged, and the Native Bear
has Strong Arms](mla08)
