[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mla20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# How the Native Bear Lost His Tail

The native bear and the whip-tail kangaroo were very friendly. They
shared the same gunyah, and hunted together, and were very proud of
their long tails. At this time a drought was over the land. Water was
very scarce, and the two friends had camped by a shallow waterhole which
contained some stagnant water. It was very nauseating to have to drink
such water after the clear springs of the mountains. Nevertheless, it
saved them from dying of thirst. At sunset banks of dark clouds would
float low across the sky, and give promise of heavy rain, but at sunrise
the sky would be as bright and clear as before, At last even the supply
of stagnant water was exhausted, and the two friends were in a desperate
plight.

After some time the kangaroo spoke and said: "When my mother carried me
in her pouch I remember such a drought as this. The birds fell from the
trees, the animals died fighting around dry waterholes, and the trees
withered and died. My mother travelled far with me, over the mountains
and down by the river bed, but she travelled slowly, as hunger and
thirst had made her very weak, and I was heavy to carry. Then another
kangaroo spoke to her and said: 'Why do you carry such a heavy burden?
You will surely die. Throw him into the bush and come with me, for I
will travel fast and take you to water.' My mother would not leave me to
die, but struggled on, and the other kangaroo left her to die from
thirst. Wearied by her heavy burden, she struggled on until she again
came to a sandy river bed. She now dug a deep hole in the sand, which
slowly filled with cool, clear water. We camped by this waterhole until
the rain came. I shall go to the river and see if I can dig and find
water, for if we stay here we shall surely perish from thirst."

The native bear was delighted at the suggestion, and said: "Yes! Let us
both go down to the river bed. I have very strong arms, and will help
you." They made their way to the river, but, before reaching it,
stumbled across some of their friends who had died of thirst. This made
them very serious and determined. When they reached the river, the sun
was very hot and they were very tired. The native bear suggested that
the kangaroo should start digging, as he knew most about it. The
kangaroo went to work with a will, and dug a deep hole, but no signs of
water were visible. The kangaroo was exhausted with his work, and asked
the native bear to help him. The native bear was very cunning, and said:
"I would willingly help you, but I am feeling very ill; the sun is very
hot, and I am afraid I am going to die." The kangaroo was very sorry for
his friend, and set to work again without complaining.

At last his work was rewarded. A trickle of water appeared in the bottom
of the hole, and gradually increased until it filled it to overflowing.
The kangaroo went over to his friend, and, touching him gently on the
shoulder, said: "I have discovered water, and will bring some to you."
But the native bear was only shamming, and dashed straight to the
waterhole without even replying to the surprised kangaroo. When the
native bear bent down to drink the water his tail stuck out like a dry
stick. The kangaroo, who could now see the despicable cunning of his
friend, was very angry, and, seizing his boomerang, cut off the tail of
the drinker as it projected above the waterhole. To this day the native
bear has no tail as an evidence of his former laziness and cunning.
