[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1464)  [Next](sbe1466) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA II, ADHYÂYA 6, KA*ND*IKÂ 11.

1\. Now these five great sacrifices, which are also called the great
sacrificial sessions, are the sacrifice to be offered to the gods, the
sacrifice to be offered to the manes, the sacrifice to be offered to all
beings, the sacrifice to be offered to men, (and) the sacrifice to be
offered to Brahman, <span id="fr_1241"></span>[1](#fn_1241)

2\. Let him daily offer (something to the gods with the exclamation)
Svâhâ, be it only a piece of fuel. Thereby he performs that sacrifice to
the gods.

3\. Let him daily offer (something to the manes with the exclamation)
Svadhâ, be it only a vessel filled with water. Thereby he performs that
sacrifice to the manes.

4\. Let him daily pay reverence to (all beings) endowed with life.
Thereby he performs that sacrifice to the beings. <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[4](#fn_1242)

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

5\. Let him daily give food to Brâhma*n*as, be it only roots, fruit, or
vegetables. Thereby he performs that sacrifice to men.

6\. Let him daily recite the Veda privately, be it only the syllable Om
or the Vyâh*ri*tis. Thereby he performs that sacrifice to be offered to
Brahman.

7\. 'The private recitation of the Veda is, indeed, the sacrifice to
Brahman. At that sacrifice to Brahman speech, forsooth, (takes the place
of) the *G*uhû, the internal organ (that of) the Upabh*ri*t, the eye
(that of) the Dhruvâ, the understanding (that of) the Sruva, truth (that
of) the final bath, heaven (is) the conclusion of the sacrifice. He who,
knowing this, daily recites the Veda to himself, gains as much heavenly
bliss as, and more than, he who gives away this whole earth that is
filled with wealth, and imperishable (beatitude), and conquers death.
Therefore the Veda should be recited in private. Thus speaks the
Brâhma*n*a.' <span id="fr_1243"></span>[7](#fn_1243)

8\. Now they quote also (the following passage): 'If, well anointed,
well fed, and lying on a comfortable couch, one recites (the portion of
the Veda referring to) any sacrifice, one has offered it thereby.' <span
id="fr_1244"></span>[8](#fn_1244)

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

9\. Some (teachers) declare (that there is a text) which teaches a
fourfold division of these sacred duties. (But) as no (other meaning is)
perceptible, (the text) 'Four paths,' &c., refers to sacrificial
rites. <span id="fr_1245"></span>[9](#fn_1245)

10\. (Viz.) to Ish*t*is, animal sacrifices, Soma sacrifices, and
Darvîhomas.

11\. The following (Rik) declares that, 'Four paths, leading to the
world of. the gods, go severally from the earth to heaven. All ye gods,
place us on that among them which will gain us undecaying
prosperity.' <span id="fr_1246"></span>[11](#fn_1246)

12\. The student, the householder, the hermit in the woods, the ascetic
(constitute the four orders). <span id="fr_1247"></span>[12](#fn_1247)

13\. A student (shall) obey his teacher until death.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

14\. A hermit is he who regulates his conduct entirely according to the
Institutes proclaimed by Vikhanas.

15\. A Vaikhânasa (shall live) in the forest, subsisting on roots and
fruit, practising austerities and bathing at morn, noon, and eve; he
shall kindle a fire according to the *S*râma*n*aka (rule); he shall eat
wild-growing (vegetables and grain) only; he shall worship gods, manes,
Bhûtas, men, and *Ri*shis; he shall receive hospitably (men of) all
(castes) except those (with whom intercourse is) forbidden; he may even
use the flesh of animals killed by carnivorous beasts; he shall not step
on ploughed (land); and he shall not enter a village; he shall wear his
hair in braids, and dress in (garments made of) bark or skins; he shall
not eat anything that has been hoarded for more than a year. <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[15](#fn_1248)

16\. An ascetic shall leave his relatives and, not attended by any one
nor procuring any property, depart (from his house performing the
customary ceremony) according to the rule. <span
id="fr_1249"></span>[16](#fn_1249)

17\. He shall go into the forest (and live there).

18\. He shall shave his hair excepting the top-lock. <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[18](#fn_1250)

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

19\. He shall wear a cloth to cover his nakedness.

20\. He shall reside in one place during the rainy season. <span
id="fr_1251"></span>[20](#fn_1251)

21\. He shall wear a dress dyed yellowish-red.

22\. He shall go to beg when the pestle lies motionless, when the embers
have been extinguished, and when the cleaning of the dishes has been
finished.

23\. With the three means of punishment, (viz.) words, thoughts, and
acts, he shall not injure created beings.

24\. He shall carry a cloth for straining water for the sake of
purification. <span id="fr_1252"></span>[24](#fn_1252)

25\. He shall perform the necessary purifications with water which has
been taken out (of a well or tank) and has been strained. <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[25](#fn_1253)

26\. (Ascetics shall) say, 'Renouncing the works taught in the Veda, cut
off from both (worlds), we attach ourselves to the central sphere
(Brahman).' <span id="fr_1254"></span>[26](#fn_1254)

27\. But the venerable teacher (declares) that there is one order only,
because the others do not beget offspring. <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[27](#fn_1255)

28\. With reference to this matter they quote also (the following
passage): 'There was, forsooth, an Âsura, Kapila by name, the son of
Prahlâda.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

Striving with the gods, he made these divisions. A wise man should not
take heed of them.'

29\. Because no (other meaning is) perceptible, (the text) 'Four paths,'
&c., refers to sacrificial rites, (viz.) to Ish*t*is, animal sacrifices,
Soma sacrifices, Darvîhomas.

30\. With respect to this (question the following verse also) is quoted:
'That eternal greatness of the Brâhma*n*a is neither increased by works,
nor diminished. The soul knows the nature of that (greatness); knowing
that, he is not stained by evil deeds.' <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[30](#fn_1256)

31\. If he says that, (let him reflect on the following verse): 'He who
knows not the Veda, does not at death think of that great,
all-perceiving soul, through which the sun, resplendent with brilliancy,
gives warmth, and the father has a father through the son at his birth
from the womb.'

32\. (Moreover), 'Those who, being neither true Brâhma*n*as nor
performers of Soma sacrifices, work not for that which is near, nor for
that which is far, take hold of the word and with sinful (speech)
ignorantly perform the rites.' <span id="fr_1257"></span>[32](#fn_1257)

33\. There are innumerable (passages in the Veda) which refer to the
debts (to be paid by a Brâhma*n*a), such as, 'May I obtain, O Agni,
immortality <span id="fr_1258"></span>[33](#fn_1258)

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

through offspring;' 'A Brâhma*n*a on being born, (owes) a son to his
ancestors,' &c.

34\. 'Those dwell with us, who fulfil the following (duties), the study
of the three Vedas, the studentship, the procreation of offspring,
faith, austerity, sacrificing, and giving gifts; he who praises other
(duties) becomes dust and perishes.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[256:1](sbe1465.htm#fr_1241) **11**. This and
the next four Sûtras agree almost literally with *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a
XI, 5, 6, 1. See also Taitt. Âra*n*yaka II, 10; Âpastamba I, 4, 12,
15-13, 1.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[256:4](sbe1465.htm#fr_1242) Govinda says that
the Mantra is to be 'bhûtebhyo nama*h*, adoration to all beings,' and
adds that some consider the first three <span id="page_257">p.
257</span> Mahâya*gñ*as to be performed by the Vai*s*vadeva and the
Bali-offering, while others enjoin their separate performance.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[257:7](sbe1465.htm#fr_1243)
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a XI, 5, 6, z. See also Taitt. Âra*n*yaka II, 17.
K. reads dh*ri*tir dhruvâ, 'the firm resolve (takes the place of) the
Dhruvâ,' which is apparently a correction made according to the
Âra*n*yaka. According to the commentary the text of the last portion of
the quotation runs thus, 'yâvanta*m* ha vâ imâ*m* vittasya pur*n*â*m*
dadat svarga*m* loka*m* *g*ayati tâvanta*m* loka*m* *g*ayati
bhûyâ*m*sa*m* *k*âkshayya*m* *k*âpa m*ri*tyum *g*ayati ya eva*m*
vidvân,' &c. M. and K. do not give the whole passage. The published text
of the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a slightly differs from Govinda's version.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[257:8](sbe1465.htm#fr_1244)
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a XI, 5, 7, 3-4.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[258:9](sbe1465.htm#fr_1245) I read the text
as follows, 'tasya ha vâ etasya dharmasya *k*aturdhâ bhedam eka âhu*h*.'
M. has bhedakam, the I. O. copy of the commentary bheda*s*aṅkâm, and K.
tasya ha vâ etasya ya*gñ*asyâ*k*aturdhâ bhûtam eka âhu*h*. Below in the
commentary on Sûtra 27, Govinda repeats the latter part of this Sûtra in
the form which I have adopted. The discussion which begins here is the
same as that which occurs Âpastamba II, 9, 23, 3-24, 15.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[258:11](sbe1465.htm#fr_1246) Taittirîya
Sa*m*hitâ V, 7, 2, 3.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[258:12](sbe1465.htm#fr_1247) K. omits this
Sûtra. After it M. and K. have the following passage: 'brahma*k*âri*n*o
’tyantam âtmânam upasa*m*g*ri*hya ’*k*âryân bruvate vane *s*râmyantyeke
\[yâ*m*tyete, K.\] savaneshvapa upasp*ris*anto vanyenânnenaikâgni*m*
\[nyenânnena naikâgni*m*, K.; vânyenaikânañ, M.\] *g*uhvânâ*h*
\[*g*uhvâs, M.\] satyasyaike karmâ*n*i \[karma*n*i, M.\] anagnayo
’niketanâ*h* \[tvâ*h* ka*m*, K.\] kaupînâ*kkh*âdanâ varshâsv ekasthâ
uddh*ri*taparipûtâbhir adbhi*h* kârya*m* \[apakârya*m*, M.\] kurvânâ*h*
\[kurvâ*n*âs tatrodâharanti, K.\] sannamusale vyaṅgâre
niv*ri*ttasarâvasampâte bhikshanta*h* sarvata*h* parimoksham \[parimeke,
M.\] apavidhya vaidikâni karmâ*n*y abhayata*h* pari*kkh*innâ madhyamam
padam upa*s*lishyâmaha iti vadanto,' The commentary gives a few portions
of this passage further on. Irrespective of minor corruptions, it gives
no sense in the place where it stands, and it seems probable that we
have to deal with a confused and badly corrupted text, which Govinda
arranged either as seemed good to him, or on the authority of better
MSS.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[259:15](sbe1465.htm#fr_1248) This passage,
which Govinda gives as one Sûtra, agrees word for word with Gautama III,
26-35, except in the beginning, where Gautama omits 'bathing at morn,
noon, and eve.' The MSS. all read bhaiksham, 'begged food,' instead of
baishkam, 'the flesh of animals slain by carnivorous beasts.' But
Govinda's explanation leaves no doubt as to the correctness of the
latter reading. The Dekhan and Gu*g*arât MSS., including K., read
agrâmyabho*g*î \|\| agrâmyabho*g*î.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[259:16](sbe1465.htm#fr_1249) I adopt the
readings of the Dekhan MSS., aparigraha*h* (for apratigraha*h*) and
pravra*g*et (for parivra*g*et). The rule for the ceremony is given
below, II, 10, 17.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[259:18](sbe1465.htm#fr_1250) This is
Govinda's explanation of *s*ikhâmu*nd*a*h*, the reading of all MSS.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[260:20](sbe1465.htm#fr_1251) and 22. These
two Sûtras are omitted in K. and M., which give them in the passage
following Sûtra 12, as well as in the Dekhan and Gu*g*arât MSS.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[260:24](sbe1465.htm#fr_1252) See below, II,
10, 17, 11. Govinda explains pavitra, 'a cloth for straining water,' by
'a bunch of Ku*s*a grass for removing insects from the road.'

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[260:25](sbe1465.htm#fr_1253) According to
Govinda such water is to be used for washing off the stains of urine
&c., not for drinking.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[260:26](sbe1465.htm#fr_1254) This Sûtra is
again omitted in the MSS, of the text. M. and K. give it in the passage
following Sûtra 12.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[260:27](sbe1465.htm#fr_1255) Gautama III, 36.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[261:30](sbe1465.htm#fr_1256)-31. Taitt.
Brâhma*n*a III, 12, 9, 7.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[261:32](sbe1465.htm#fr_1257) Rig-veda X, 71,
9. My rendering of the difficult verse is merely tentative, and I have
left out the word sirî*h*, for which I am as little able as other
Sanskritists to offer a safe explanation, The general meaning of the
verse, I think, has been rightly understood by Sâya*n*a and Govinda, who
both say that it contains a reproach, addressed to those Brâhma*n*as
who, contented with the letter of the Veda, do not master its meaning.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[261:33](sbe1465.htm#fr_1258)-34. The
commentary omits these two Sûtras, which, however, seem necessary for
the completion of the discussion. The <span id="page_262">p. 262</span>
second occurs also Âpastamba II, 9, 24, 8. Though Baudhâyana does not
express himself as clearly as Âpastamba, he disapproves, as it would
seem, like the latter, of the opinion of those who gave an undue
preference to asceticism at the expense of married life, the order of
the householders.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na II, Adhyâya 7, Ka*nd*ikâ 12](sbe1466)
