[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1436)  [Next](sbe1438) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA I, ADHYÂYA 2, KA*ND*IKÂ 4.

1\. If merit and wealth are not (obtained by teaching), nor (at least)
the due obedience, one should die with one's learning; one should not
sow it on barren soil. <span id="fr_795"></span>[1](#fn_795)

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

2\. As fire consumes dry grass, even so the Veda, asked for, (but) not
honoured, (destroys the enquirer). Therefore let him not proclaim the
Veda to those who do not show him honour according to their
ability. <span id="fr_796"></span>[2](#fn_796)

3\. They proclaim to him a command to the following effect; <span
id="fr_797"></span>[3](#fn_797)

4\. 'Brahman, forsooth, made the created beings over to Death. The
student alone it did not make over to him.' He (Death) spake, 'Let me
have a share in him.' (Brahman answered), 'That night in which he may
neglect to offer a piece of sacred fuel (shall belong to thee),' <span
id="fr_798"></span>[4](#fn_798)

5\. 'Therefore a student who passes a night without offering a piece of
sacred fuel, cuts it off from the length of his life, Therefore let the
student offer a piece of sacred fuel, lest he spend a night, shortening
his life.'

6\. 'A long sacrificial session begins he who commences his studentship.
That (night) in which, after being initiated, he (first) offers a piece
of sacred fuel corresponds to the Prâya*n*îya (Atirâtra of a sacrificial
session); that night in which (he offers it last), intending to take the
final bath, corresponds to the Udayanîya (Atirâtra), Those nights which
(lie) between (these two terms correspond) just to the nights of his
sacrificial session.' <span id="fr_799"></span>[6](#fn_799)

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

7\. 'A Brâhma*n*a who becomes a student of the Veda, enters existent
beings in a fourfold manner, (viz.) with one quarter (he enters) Fire,
with one quarter Death, with one quarter the Teacher, the fourth quarter
remains in the Soul. When he offers to Fire a piece of sacred fuel, he
thereby buys back even that quarter which (resides) in Fire, hallowing
it, he places it in himself; that enters into him. Now when making
himself poor and, becoming shameless, he asks for alms (and) lives as a
student of the Veda, he thereby buys back the quarter which (resides) in
Death; hallowing it, he places it in himself; that enters into him. Now
when he obeys the orders of his Teacher, he thereby buys back that
quarter which (resides) in the Teacher; hallowing it, he places it in
himself; that enters into him. \[Now when he recites the Veda, he
thereby buys back the quarter which resides in the Soul. Hallowing it,
he places it in himself; that enters into him.\] Let him not go to beg,
after he has bathed (on finishing his studentship). . . . If he does not
find another woman whom he can ask for alms,, let him beg even from his
own teacher's wife or from his own mother. The seventh (night) shall not
pass without his asking for alms. \[(He commits) sin if he does not go
out to ask for alms and does not place fuel on the fire. If he neglects
that during seven (days and) nights, he must perform the <span
id="fr_800"></span>[7](#fn_800)

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

penance prescribed for one who has broken the vow of studentship.\] All
the Vedas come to him who knows that and acts thus.'

8\. 'As a blazing fire shines, even so shines he who, knowing this, thus
fulfils the duties of studentship, after he has bathed (on leaving his
teacher).' Thus speaks the Brâhma*n*a.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_795"></span>[155:1](sbe1437.htm#fr_795) **4**. Manu II,
112.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[156:2](sbe1437.htm#fr_796) Vasish*th*a II, 12.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[156:3](sbe1437.htm#fr_797) 'They, i.e. the
Vâ*g*asaneyins; to him, i.e. to the student'--Govinda.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[156:4](sbe1437.htm#fr_798) The quotation,
which begins here and ends with the end of the section, is taken from
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a XI, 2, 6. In the text the word Brahman is a
neuter.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[156:6](sbe1437.htm#fr_799) MSS. M. and K., as
well as the commentary, read dîrghasattram <span id="page_157">p.
157</span> ha vâ esha upaiti, while the MSS. from the Dekhan and
Gu*g*arât, like the printed edition of the Sat. Br., omit the particle
'ha.' Prâya*n*îya means, literally, 'initial,' and udayanîya, 'final.'
Each sattra or sacrificial session begins and ends with an Atirâtra
sacrifice.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[157:7](sbe1437.htm#fr_800) This portion of the
quotation shows, besides some minor deviations from the published text
of the Mâdhyandinas, several <span id="page_158">p. 158</span>
interpolations and corruptions. The minor discrepancies are, 'brâhma*n*o
vai brahma*k*aryam upayan' (upaya*kkh*an, C. I. and T.); padâtmanyeva
*k*aturtha*h* pâda*h*; yadagnaye samidham âdadhâti; atha yad âtmâna*m*
daridrîk*ri*tyâhrîr bhûtvâ bhikshate brahma*k*arya*m* *k*arati; atha yad
â*k*âryava*k*a*h* karoti ya evisyâ*k*ârye. In the second passage the
Dekhan MSS. read, however, like the printed text. The interpolations
are, 'Now when he recites the Veda,' &c., and the verse, 'He commits sin
if he neglects,' &c. The former passage entirely destroys the sense of
the whole and the connexion of the parts. Both have, however, been
retained, as they occur in all the MSS. and the two copies of the
commentary, and have been enclosed in brackets. The corrupt passage is
so had that it makes no sense at all. The best MSS. read as follows:
'api hi vai snâtvâ bhikshâ*m* *k*aratyavi*gñ*ânanâ*s*anâyayâ
pitrî*n*âmanyabhya*h* kriyâbhya*h*' sa yadanyâm, &c., D.; 'api ha vai
snâtvâ bhish*t*â*m* *k*arasapi *gñ*âni nâ*s*anâya yâ \[v3. sec. m.\]
pit*rîn*âm anyâbhya*h* kriyâbhya*h*,' K.; api ha vai snâtvâ bhikshâ*m*
*k*arati--pa*gñ*âti--nâ*m* *s*anâyâpi pit*rin*âm anyâbhya*h* kriyâsas,
M.; api ha vai snâtvâ bhikshâ*m* *k*aratyavi*gñ*âtinâma*s*anayâpi
pit*rin*âm anyâbhya kriyâbhya*h*, C. I. As it is by no means certain
that Baudhâyana's reading agreed with that of the printed text, I have
left the passage out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na I, Adhyâya 3, Ka*nd*ikâ 5](sbe1438)
