[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1416)  [Next](sbe1418) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIV.

1\. Now, therefore, we will declare what may be eaten and what may not
be eaten.

2\. Food given by a physician, a hunter, a woman of bad character, a
mace-bearer, a thief, an Abhi*s*asta, a eunuch, (or) an outcast must not
be eaten, <span id="fr_412"></span>[2](#fn_412)

3\. (Nor that given) by a miser, one who has performed the initiatory
ceremony of a *S*rauta-sacrifice, a prisoner, a sick person, a seller of
the Soma-plant, a carpenter, a washerman, a dealer in spirituous liquor,
a spy, a usurer, (or) a cobbler, <span id="fr_413"></span>[3](#fn_413)

4\. Nor (that given) by a *S*ûdra, <span id="fr_414"></span>[4](#fn_414)

5\. Nor (that given) by one who lives by his weapons, <span
id="fr_415"></span>[5](#fn_415)

6\. Nor (that given) by the (kept) paramour of a <span
id="fr_416"></span>[6](#fn_416)

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

married woman, or by a husband who allows a paramour (to his wife),

7\. Nor (that given) by an incendiary,

8\. Nor (that given) by (a ruler) who does not slay those worthy of
capital punishment,

9\. Nor (food) offered publicly with these words, 'Who is willing to
eat?' <span id="fr_417"></span>[9](#fn_417)

10\. Nor food given by a multitude of givers, or by harlots, and so
forth. <span id="fr_418"></span>[10](#fn_418)

11\. Now they quote also (the following verse): 'The gods do not eat
(the offerings) of a man who keeps dogs, nor of him whose (only) wife is
of the *S*ûdra caste, nor of him who lives in subjection to his wife,
nor of (a husband) who (permits) a paramour (of his wife to reside) in
his house.' <span id="fr_419"></span>[11](#fn_419)

12\. He may accept (the following presents even) from such (people,
viz.) firewood, water, fodder, Ku*s*a grass, parched grain, (food) given
without asking, a vehicle, (shelter in) the house, small fish, millet, a
garland, perfumes, honey, and meat. <span
id="fr_420"></span>[12](#fn_420)

13\. Now they quote also (the following verse): 'For the sake of a Guru,
when he desires to save his wife (and family from starvation), when he
wishes to honour the gods or guests, he may accept (presents) from
anybody; but let him not satisfy his (own hunger) with such
(gifts).' <span id="fr_421"></span>[13](#fn_421)

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

14\. Food given by a hunter who uses the bow must not be rejected.

15\. For it is declared in the Veda, 'At a sacrificial session (sattra),
which lasted one thousand years, Agastya went out to hunt. He had
sacrificial cakes prepared with the meat of beasts and fowls good (to
eat).' <span id="fr_422"></span>[15](#fn_422)

16\. With reference to this (subject) they quote also some verses
proclaimed by Pra*g*âpati, 'Pra*g*âpati (the Lord of created beings) has
declared that food freely offered and brought (by the giver himself) may
be eaten, though (the giver) be a sinful man, provided the gift has not
been asked for beforehand.' <span id="fr_423"></span>[16](#fn_423)

17\. Food offered by a man who has faith must certainly be eaten, even
though (the giver) be a thief, but not that given by (a Brâhma*n*a) who
sacrifices for many and who initiates many.'

18\. 'The manes do not eat during fifteen years (the food) of that man
who disdains a (freely offered gift), nor does the fire carry his
offerings (to the gods).' <span id="fr_424"></span>[18](#fn_424)

19\. 'But alms, though offered without asking, must not be accepted from
a physician, from a hunter, from a surgeon or a (very) wicked man, from
a eunuch, and from a faithless wife.' <span
id="fr_425"></span>[19](#fn_425)

20\. Fragments of food left by other persons than the teacher must not
be eaten, <span id="fr_426"></span>[20](#fn_426)

21\. Nor remnants of one's own (meal) and food touched by leavings,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

22\. Nor (food) defiled by contact with a garment, hair, or
insects. <span id="fr_427"></span>[22](#fn_427)

23\. But at pleasure he may use (such food) after taking out the hair
and the insects, sprinkling it with water, dropping ashes on it, and
(after it has been declared) fit for use by the word (of a
Brâhma*n*a). <span id="fr_428"></span>[23](#fn_428)

24\. With reference to this (subject) they quote also some verses
proclaimed by Pra*g*âpati, The gods created for Brâhma*n*as three means
of purifying (defiled substances), viz. ignorance (of defilement),
sprinkling (them) with water, and commending (them) by word of
mouth.' <span id="fr_429"></span>[24](#fn_429)

25\. Let him not throw away that food which, at a procession with images
of the gods, at weddings, and at sacrifices, is touched by crows or
dogs.'

26\. After the (defiled) portion has been removed, the remainder shall
be purified, liquids by straining them, but solid food by sprinkling it
with water.' <span id="fr_430"></span>[26](#fn_430)

27\. 'What has been touched by the mouth of a cat is even pure.'

28\. (Cooked food which has become) stale (by being kept), what is
naturally bad, what has been placed once only in the dish, what has been
cooked more than once, raw (food), and (food) insufficiently cooked
(must not be eaten). <span id="fr_431"></span>[28](#fn_431)

29\. But at pleasure he may use (such food) after pouring over it sour
milk or clarified butter. <span id="fr_432"></span>[29](#fn_432)

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

30\. With reference to this (subject) they quote also some verses
proclaimed by Pra*g*âpati, 'A Brâhma*n*a shall not eat clarified butter
or oil which drips from the nails (of the giver). Yama has declared such
(food to be) impure; (to eat it is as sinful) as to partake of cow's
flesh.'

31\. 'But fatty substances, salt, and condiments proffered with the hand
do not benefit the giver, and he who partakes of them will eat sin.'

32\. 'Let him give, therefore, such substances placed on a leaf or on
grass, but never with his hands or in an iron vessel.'

33\. For eating garlic, onions, mushrooms, turnips, *S*leshmântaka,
exudations from trees, the red sap flowing from incisions (in trees or
plants), food pecked at by crows or worried by dogs, or the leavings of
a *S*ûdra, an Atik*rikkh*ra (penance must be performed). <span
id="fr_433"></span>[33](#fn_433)

34\. (Let him not drink) the milk of a cow that is in heat, nor of one
whose calf has died, <span id="fr_434"></span>[34](#fn_434)

35\. Nor that which cows, buffalo-cows, and goats give during the first
ten days (after giving birth to young ones), <span
id="fr_435"></span>[35](#fn_435)

36\. Nor water collected at the bottom of a boat.

37\. Let him avoid wheat-cakes, (fried) grain, porridge, barley-meal,
pulse-cakes, oil, rice boiled in milk, and vegetables that have turned
sour (by standing), <span id="fr_436"></span>[37](#fn_436)

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

38\. Likewise other kinds of (sour) food prepared with milk and
barley-flour.

39\. Among five-toed animals, the porcupine, the hedgehog, the hare, the
tortoise, and the iguana may be eaten, <span
id="fr_437"></span>[39](#fn_437)

40\. Among (domestic) animals those having teeth in one jaw only,
excepting camels. <span id="fr_438"></span>[40](#fn_438)

41\. And among fishes, the long-nosed crocodile, the Gavaya, the
porpoise, the alligator, and the crab (must not be eaten), <span
id="fr_439"></span>[41](#fn_439)

42\. Nor those which are misshaped or have heads like snakes,

43\. Nor the bos Gaurus, the Gayal, and the *S*arabha, <span
id="fr_440"></span>[43](#fn_440)

44\. Nor those that have not been (specially mentioned (as fit for
food), <span id="fr_441"></span>[44](#fn_441)

45\. Nor milch-cows, draught-oxen, and animals whose milk teeth have not
dropped out. <span id="fr_442"></span>[45](#fn_442)

46\. It is declared in the Vâ*g*asaneyaka, that (the flesh of)
milch-cows and oxen is fit for offerings. <span
id="fr_443"></span>[46](#fn_443)

47\. But regarding the rhinoceros and the wild boar they make
conflicting statements.

48\. And among birds, those who seek their food by scratching with their
feet, the web-footed ones, the Kalaviṅka, the water-hen, the flamingo,
the <span id="fr_444"></span>[48](#fn_444)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Brahma*n*î duck, the Bhâsa, the crow, the blue
pigeon, the osprey, the *K*âtaka, the dove, the crane, the black
partridge, the grey heron, the vulture, the falcon, the white egret, the
ibis, the cormorant, the peewit, the flying-fox, those flying about at
night, the woodpecker, the sparrow, the Railâtaka, the green pigeon, the
wagtail, the village-cock, the parrot, the starling, the cuckoo, those
feeding on flesh, and those living about villages (must not be eaten).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_412"></span>[69:2](sbe1417.htm#fr_412) **XIV**. Vish*n*u
LI, 7, 10-11. Da*nd*ika, 'a mace-bearer,' may mean 'a police officer' or
'a messenger.' I read with MSS. Bh. and F. sha*ndh*a, 'a eunuch,'
instead of *s*a*th*a, 'a rogue,' the reading of the other MSS. and of
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[69:3](sbe1417.htm#fr_413) Vish*n*u LI, 8-9,
12, 19; Gautama XVII, 17. I write sû*k*aka, 'a spy,' instead of
sû*k*ika, 'a tailor,' according to the other Sm*ri*tis, e.g. Vish*n*u
LI, 12; Âpastamba I, 6, 18, 30

<span id="fn_414"></span>[69:4](sbe1417.htm#fr_414) Âpastamba I, 6, 18,
13.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[69:5](sbe1417.htm#fr_415) Âpastamba I, 6, 18,
19.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[69:6](sbe1417.htm#fr_416) Vish*n*u LI, 16;
Gautama XVII, 18. I read with the majority <span id="page_70">p.
70</span> of the MSS. ya*sk*opapati*m* \[patti*m* F.\] manyate, instead
of B.'s and K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita's ya*sk*opari manyate.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[70:9](sbe1417.htm#fr_417) Âpastamba I, 6, 18,
17.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[70:10](sbe1417.htm#fr_418) Vish*n*u LI, 7.
'And so forth (iti), i.e. by cruel men and the
like.'--K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[70:11](sbe1417.htm#fr_419) Vish*n*u LI, 15.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[70:12](sbe1417.htm#fr_420) Gautama XVII, 3;
Vish*n*u LVII, 10.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[70:13](sbe1417.htm#fr_421) Vish*n*u LVII, 13;
Manu IV, 251.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[71:15](sbe1417.htm#fr_422) Manu V, 22-23. I
connect vi*gñ*âyate with this Sûtra, instead of with the preceding one,
as K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita does.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[71:16](sbe1417.htm#fr_423) Vish*n*u LVII, 11;
Mann IV, 248; Âpastamba I, 6, 19, 14.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[71:18](sbe1417.htm#fr_424) Vish*n*u LVII, 12;
Manu IV, 249; Âpastamba I, 6, 19, 14.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[71:19](sbe1417.htm#fr_425) Âpastamba I. 6, 19,
15.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[71:20](sbe1417.htm#fr_426) Vish*n*u XXVIII.
11.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[72:22](sbe1417.htm#fr_427) Âpastamba I, 5, 16,
28; Gautama XVII, 9.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[72:23](sbe1417.htm#fr_428) Vish*n*u XXIII, 38;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 189.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[72:24](sbe1417.htm#fr_429) Yâ*gñ*avalkya I,
191.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[72:26](sbe1417.htm#fr_430) Vish*n*u XXIII, 30.
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita thinks that plâvanena, 'by straining them (through
a cloth),' may also mean 'by heating them on the fire.'

<span id="fn_431"></span>[72:28](sbe1417.htm#fr_431) Gautama XVII, 13,
and note, 15-16.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[72:29](sbe1417.htm#fr_432) Manu V, 24.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[73:33](sbe1417.htm#fr_433) Vish*n*u LI, 34,
36; Gautama XVII, 32-33. Regarding the Atik*rikkh*ra penance, see below,
XXIV, 1.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[73:34](sbe1417.htm#fr_434) Vish*n*u LI, 40.
For other explanations of the term sandhinî, 'a cow that is in heat,'
see Âpastamba I, 5, 17, 23; Vish*n*u LI, 40.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[73:35](sbe1417.htm#fr_435) Vish*n*u LI, 39.
The Sûtra implies that the milk of other animals must not be drunk under
any circumstances.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[73:37](sbe1417.htm#fr_436)-38. Vish*n*u LI,
35, 42.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[74:39](sbe1417.htm#fr_437) Gautama XVII, 27.
Haradatta on Âpastamba and Gautama explain *s*vâvidh, 'the porcupine,'
to be a kind of boar, and *s*alyaka, 'the hedgehog,' to be 'the
porcupine.'

<span id="fn_438"></span>[74:40](sbe1417.htm#fr_438) Vish*n*u LI, 30;
Manu V, 18.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[74:41](sbe1417.htm#fr_439)-42. Gautama XVII,
36; Âpastamba I, 5, 17, 38-39.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[74:43](sbe1417.htm#fr_440) Âpastamba I, 5, 17,
29.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[74:44](sbe1417.htm#fr_441) Manu V, 11, 17.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[74:45](sbe1417.htm#fr_442) Gautama XVII,
30-31.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[74:46](sbe1417.htm#fr_443) Âpastamba I, 5, 17,
31.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[74:48](sbe1417.htm#fr_444) Gautama XVII,
34-35; Vish*n*u LI, 28-31. I read mândhâla, 'the flying fox,' while
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita gives mâghâra, a <span id="page_75">p. 75</span>
reading which he cannot explain. The MSS. read as follows: B. E.
mâghâra, Bh. F. mâdhâ*m*, I. O. 913 (*t*i*tt*ibh)ândha (nakta*m*).
Haradatta on Âpastamba I, 5, 17, 33' explains plava, 'the water-hen,' to
be a kind of heron, called also *s*aka*t*abila.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](sbe1418)
