[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1418)  [Next](sbe1420) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVI.

1\. Now (follow the rules regarding) legal proceedings.

2\. Let the king (or) his minister transact the business on the
bench. <span id="fr_461"></span>[2](#fn_461)

3\. When two (parties) have a dispute, let him not be partial to one of
them. <span id="fr_462"></span>[3](#fn_462)

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

4\. Let him reason properly regarding an offence; finally the offence
(will become evident thereby). <span id="fr_463"></span>[4](#fn_463)

5\. He who properly reasons regarding an offence, in accordance with the
sum of the science of the first two castes, is equitable towards all
created beings. <span id="fr_464"></span>[5](#fn_464)

6\. And let him protect what has been gained; <span
id="fr_465"></span>[6](#fn_465)

7\. (Likewise) the property of infants (of the) royal (race). <span
id="fr_466"></span>[7](#fn_466)

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

8\. (Likewise the property) of persons unfit to transact legal business
(minors, widows, and so forth). <span id="fr_467"></span>[8](#fn_467)

9\. But if (a minor) comes of age, his property must be made over to
him.

10\. 'It is declared in the Sm*ri*ti that there are three kinds of proof
which give a title to (property, viz.) documents, witnesses, and
possession; (thereby) an owner may recover property which formerly
belonged to him (but was lost).' <span id="fr_468"></span>[10](#fn_468)

11\. From fields through which (there is a right of) road (a space
sufficient for the road) must be set apart, likewise a space for turning
(a cart). <span id="fr_469"></span>[11](#fn_469)

12\. Near new-built houses (and) other things (of the same description
there shall be) a passage three feet broad. <span
id="fr_470"></span>[12](#fn_470)

13\. In a dispute about a house or a field, reliance (may be placed on
the depositions of) neighbours. <span id="fr_471"></span>[13](#fn_471)

14\. If the statements of the neighbours disagree, documents (may be
taken as) proof.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

15\. If conflicting documents are produced, reliance (may be placed) on
(the statements of) aged (inhabitants) of the village or town, and on
(those of) guilds and corporations (of artisans or traders). <span
id="fr_472"></span>[15](#fn_472)

16\. Now they quote also (the following verse): 'Property inherited from
a father, a thing bought, a pledge, property given to a wife after
marriage by her husband's family, a gift, property obtained for
performing a sacrifice, the property of reunited coparceners, and wages
as the eighth.' <span id="fr_473"></span>[16](#fn_473)

17\. Whatever belonging to these (eight kinds of property) has been
enjoyed (by another person) for ten years continuously (is lost to the
owner). <span id="fr_474"></span>[17](#fn_474)

18\. They quote also (a verse) on the other side: 'A pledge, a boundary,
and the property of minor's, an (open) deposit, a sealed deposit, women,
the property of a king, (and) the wealth of a *S*rotriya are not lost by
being enjoyed (by others).' <span id="fr_475"></span>[18](#fn_475)

19\. Property entirely given up (by its owner) goes to the king. <span
id="fr_476"></span>[19](#fn_476)

20\. If it be otherwise, the king with his ministers and the citizens
shall administer it. <span id="fr_477"></span>[20](#fn_477)

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

21\. A king will be superior even to Brahman if he lives surrounded by
servants (who are keen-eyed) like vultures.

22\. But a king will not be exalted if he lives surrounded by servants
(who are greedy) like vultures.

23\. Let him live surrounded by servants (who are keen-eyed) like
vultures, let him not be a vulture surrounded by vultures.

24\. For through his servants blemishes become manifest (in his
kingdom),

25\. (Such as) theft, robbery, oppression, and (so forth).

26\. Therefore let him question his servants before-hand.

27\. Now (follow the rules regarding) witnesses:

28\. *S*rotriyas, men of unblemished form, of good character, men who
are holy and love truth (are fit to be) witnesses, <span
id="fr_478"></span>[28](#fn_478)

29\. Or (men of) any (caste may give evidence) regarding (men of) any
(other caste). <span id="fr_479"></span>[29](#fn_479)

30\. Let him make women witnesses regarding women; for twice-born men
twice-born men of the same caste (shall be witnesses), and good *S*ûdras
for *S*ûdras, and men of low birth for low-caste men. <span
id="fr_480"></span>[30](#fn_480)

31\. Now they quote also (the following verse): 'A son need not pay
money due by a surety, any-thing idly promised, money due for losses at
play or for spirituous liquor, nor what remains unpaid of a fine or a
toll.' <span id="fr_481"></span>[31](#fn_481)

32\. 'Depose, O witness, according to the truth; expecting thy answer,
thy ancestors hang in suspense;

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (in accordance with its truth or falsehood) they
will rise (to heaven) or fall (into hell).'

33\. 'Naked and shorn, tormented with hunger and thirst, and deprived of
sight shall the man who gives false evidence go with a potsherd to beg
food at the door of his enemy.' <span id="fr_482"></span>[33](#fn_482)

34\. 'He kills five by false testimony regarding a maiden; he kills ten
by false testimony regarding kine; he kills a hundred by false evidence
regarding a horse, and a thousand by false evidence regarding a
man.' <span id="fr_483"></span>[34](#fn_483)

35\. (Men) may speak an untruth at the time of marriage, during
dalliance, when their lives are in danger or the loss of their whole
property is imminent, and for the sake of a Brâhma*n*a; they declare
that an untruth spoken in these five cases does not make (the speaker)
an outcast. <span id="fr_484"></span>[35](#fn_484)

36\. Those who give partial evidence in a judicial proceeding for the
sake of a relative or for money, deprive the ancestors of their
spiritual family and those of their natural family of their place in
heaven. <span id="fr_485"></span>[36](#fn_485)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_461"></span>[78:2](sbe1419.htm#fr_461) **XVI**. Vish*n*u
III, 72-73. K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita gives a second explanation of the
Sûtra, which also appears admissible, 'Let the king transact the
business on the bench, taking counsel (with learned Brâhma*n*as as
assessors);' see Vish*n*u III, 72.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[78:3](sbe1419.htm#fr_462) Translated as above
the Sûtra is nearly equivalent to Gautama <span id="page_79">p.
79</span> XI, 5. But the phrase 'when two parties have a dispute' may
also indicate, as K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita suggests, that the king or judge
shall not promote litigation, see Gautama XIII, 27. As
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita states, the Sûtra may, however, mean also, 'when
one case is being argued, let him not begin another (without finishing
the first);' see Manu VIII, 43. Owing to the particular nature of the
Sûtra style and the inclination of the Brâhmanical mind to
double-entendres, I do not think it improbable that the author may have
intended, both in this and in the preceding Sûtras, that his words
should be interpreted in two ways.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[79:4](sbe1419.htm#fr_463) Gautama XI, 23-24. I
divide the words of the text, as follows, 'yathâsanam (i.e.
yathâ-âsanam) aparâdhohî; antena aparâdha*h*,' and interpolate syât at
the end of the first clause.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[79:5](sbe1419.htm#fr_464) K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita
wrongly divides this Sûtra into two, and wrongly adopts the reading of
MSS. B. and E., consequently he obtains a sense only by the most
astonishing tricks of interpretation. I read with MSS. Bh. and F.,
yathâsanam aparâdhohyâdyavar*n*ayor vidyântata*h*, to which the reading
of I. O. 913 âdyavar*n*ayor vidhânata*h* points also. The meaning of the
expression, 'according to the sum of the science of the first two
castes,' I take to be according to the rules of sacred learning and of
the mîmâ*m*sâ, which is peculiar to the Brâhma*n*as and of logic
(ânvîkshikî) and polity (da*nd*anîti), which are peculiar to or at least
recommended to the particular attention of the Kshatriyas.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[79:6](sbe1419.htm#fr_465) I read with MSS. Bh.
and F., sa*m*panna*m* *k*a rakshayet. I consider this Sûtra to contain
an admonition addressed to the king for himself; see Manu VII, 99.
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita and B. read sapattra*m* *k*a rakshayet, 'Let him
protect that which is attested by writings,' i, e. the donations of
former kings, attested by writings; see Vish*n*u III, 83.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[79:7](sbe1419.htm#fr_466) K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita
thinks that the rule refers to the property of <span id="page_80">p.
80</span> the infant children of a hostile king who has been conquered
and slain. It is, however, not improbable that it has a wider sense, and
exhorts the king to look after the property of the children of his
predecessor and of deceased feudal barons.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[80:8](sbe1419.htm#fr_467)-9. Gautama X, 48;
Vish*n*u III, 65.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[80:10](sbe1419.htm#fr_468) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
22.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[80:11](sbe1419.htm#fr_469)
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita quotes in illustration of this Sûtra the following
passage of *S*aṅkha and Likhita: 'In a field through which (there is a
right of) road, (space) for the road must be set apart, and on the
king's high-road a space sufficient for turning a chariot.'

<span id="fn_470"></span>[80:12](sbe1419.htm#fr_470) Arthântareshu,
'near other things (of the same description),' means, according to
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita, 'near pleasure-gardens and the like: No doubt,
buildings of all kinds, fenced or walled gardens, and so forth are
meant. I read tripâdamâtram.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[80:13](sbe1419.htm#fr_471) Manu VIII, 258,
262; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 150, 152, 154.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[81:15](sbe1419.htm#fr_472) Manu VIII, 259.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[81:16](sbe1419.htm#fr_473) In translating
anvâdheya by 'property given to a wife by her husband or his family
after marriage,' I have followed K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita's explanation. It
may, however, mean also 'a deposit to be delivered to a third person'
(anvâhita or anvâdhi). Pratigraha, 'a gift,' is elsewhere explained as
'property promised, but not actually given.'

<span id="fn_474"></span>[81:17](sbe1419.htm#fr_474) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
24; see also Vish*n*u V, 187; Manu VIII, 148.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[81:18](sbe1419.htm#fr_475) Identical with Manu
VIII, 149; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 25.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[81:19](sbe1419.htm#fr_476) Manu VIII, 30.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[81:20](sbe1419.htm#fr_477) 'If it be
otherwise,' i.e. if the owner gave his property up temporarily only,
e.g. went on a journey or a pilgrimage, leaving it without anybody to
take care of.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[82:28](sbe1419.htm#fr_478) Vish*n*u VIII, 8;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 68; Manu VIII, 62-63.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[82:29](sbe1419.htm#fr_479) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
69.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[82:30](sbe1419.htm#fr_480) Manu VIII, 68.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[82:31](sbe1419.htm#fr_481) Vish*n*u VI, 41;
Manu VIII, 159; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 47.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[83:33](sbe1419.htm#fr_482) Identical with Manu
VIII, 93.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[83:34](sbe1419.htm#fr_483) Identical with Manu
VIII, 98. Regarding the explanation of the words 'he kills,' see Manu
VIII, 97, and Haradatta on Gautama XIII, 14.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[83:35](sbe1419.htm#fr_484) Gautama XXIII, 29.
Between this and the preceding Sûtras the MSS. as well as
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita insert another one, which is so corrupt that I am
unable to translate it. K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita's explanation is opposed to
all rules of interpretation, and not worth giving.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[83:36](sbe1419.htm#fr_485) This verse, too, is
corrupt, though the general sense is not doubtful. I read
sva*g*anasyârthe yadi vârthaheto*h* pakshâ*s*raye*n*aiva vadanti
kâryam--te *s*abdava*ms*asya kulasya pûrvân svargasthitâ*m*stânapi
pâtayanti. 'The ancestors of their spiritual family,' i.e. the teacher,
the teacher's teacher, and so forth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](sbe1420)
