[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1423)  [Next](sbe1425) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXI.

1\. If a *S*ûdra approaches a female of the Brâhma*n*a caste, (the king)
shall cause the *S*ûdra to be tied up in Vîra*n*a grass and shall throw
him into a fire. He shall cause the head of the Brâhma*n*î to be shaved,
and her body to be anointed with butter; placing her naked on a black
donkey, he shall cause her to be conducted along the highroad. It is
declared that she becomes pure (thereby). <span
id="fr_615"></span>[1](#fn_615)

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

2\. If a Vai*s*ya approaches a female of the Brâhma*n*a caste, (the
king) shall cause the Vai*s*ya to be tied up in Lohita grass and shall
throw him into a fire. He shall cause the head of the Brâhma*n*î to be
shaved, and her body to be anointed with butter; placing her naked on a
yellowish donkey, he shall cause her to be conducted along the highroad.
It is declared in the Veda that she becomes pure (thereby).

3\. If a Kshatriya approaches a female of the Brâhma*n*a caste, (the
king) shall cause the Kshatriya to be tied up in leaves of Sara grass
and shall throw him into a fire. He shall cause the head of the
Brâhma*n*î to be shaved, and her body to be anointed with butter;
placing her naked on a white donkey, he shall cause her to be conducted
along the highroad. It is declared in the Veda that she becomes pure
(thereby).

4\. A Vai*s*ya who offends) with a female of the Kshatriya class (shall
be treated) in the same manner,

5\. And a *S*ûdra (who offends) with females of the Kshatriya or
Vai*s*ya castes.

6\. If (a wife) has been mentally unfaithful to her husband, she shall
live on barley or rice boiled in milk during three days, and sleep on
the bare ground. After the three days (have expired), the (husband)
shall offer eight hundred burnt-oblations, (reciting) the Sâvitrî (and
the Mantra called) *S*iras, while she is immersed in water. It is
declared in the Veda that she becomes pure (thereby). <span
id="fr_616"></span>[6](#fn_616)

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

7\. If (a wife) has held an (improper) conversation (with another man),
she must perform the same penance during a month. After (the expiration
of) the month, (the husband) shall offer four times eight hundred
burnt-oblations, (reciting) the Sâvitrî (and the Mantra called) *S*iras,
while she is immersed in water. It is declared in the Veda that she
becomes pure (thereby).

8\. But if (a wife) has actually committed adultery, she shall wear
during a year a garment smeared with clarified butter, and sleep on a
mat of Ku*s*a grass, or in a pit filled with cowdung. After (the
expiration of) the year, (the husband) shall offer eight hundred
burnt-oblations, (reciting) the Sâvitrî (and the Mantra called) *S*iras,
while she is immersed in water. It is declared in the Veda that she
becomes pure (thereby).

9\. But if she commits adultery with a Guru, she is forbidden (to assist
her husband) in (the fulfilment of) his sacred duties. <span
id="fr_617"></span>[9](#fn_617)

10\. But (these) four (wives) must be abandoned, (viz.) one who yields
herself to (her husband's) pupil or to (his) Guru, and especially one
who attempts <span id="fr_618"></span>[10](#fn_618)

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the life of her lord, or who commits adultery with a man of a degraded
caste.

11\. That woman of the Brâhma*n*a caste who drinks spirituous liquor,
the gods will not admit (after death) to the same abode with her
husband; losing all spiritual merit she wanders about in this world and
is born again as a leech or a pearl-oyster. <span
id="fr_619"></span>[11](#fn_619)

12\. The wives of Brâhma*n*as, Kshatriyas, and Vai*s*yas who commit
adultery with a *S*ûdra may be purified by a penance in case no child is
born (from their adulterous intercourse), not otherwise.

13\. (Those who have committed adultery) with a man of lower caste shall
perform a K*rikkh*ra penance, succeeded by one, two, or three
*K*ândrâya*n*a. <span id="fr_620"></span>[13](#fn_620)

14\. Faithful wives who are constantly pure and truthful (reside after
death) in the same abodes with their husbands; those who are unfaithful
are born as jackals. <span id="fr_621"></span>[14](#fn_621)

15\. Half the body of the husband falls if his wife <span
id="fr_622"></span>[15](#fn_622)

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

drinks spirituous liquor. No purification is prescribed for the half
which has fallen.

16\. If a Brâhma*n*a unintentionally commits adultery with the wife of a
Brâhma*n*a, (he shall perform) a K*rikkh*ra penance in case (the
husband) fulfils the religious duties (of his caste), and an
Atik*rikkh*ra penance in case (the husband) does not fulfil his
religious duties. <span id="fr_623"></span>[16](#fn_623)

17\. The same (penances are prescribed) for Kshatriyas and Vai*s*yas
(for adultery with women of their respective castes).

18\. If he kills a cow, let him perform, during six months, a K*rikkh*ra
or a Taptak*rikkh*ra, dressed in the raw hide of that (cow). <span
id="fr_624"></span>[18](#fn_624)

19\. The rule for these two (penances is as follows):

20\. 'During three days he eats in the day-time (only), and during the
(next) three days at night (only), he subsists during (another) period
of three days on food offered without asking, and (finally) he fasts
during three days.' That is a K*rikkh*ra penance. <span
id="fr_625"></span>[20](#fn_625)

21\. 'Let him drink hot water during three days; let him drink hot milk
during the (next) three days; after drinking during (another) period of
three days hot clarified butter, he shall subsist on air during the
(last) three days.' That is a Taptak*rikkh*ra penance. <span
id="fr_626"></span>[21](#fn_626)

22\. And he shall give (to a Brâhma*n*a) a bull and a cow.

23\. Now they quote also (the following verse): 'Through killing a
spotted deer, a he-goat, and <span id="fr_627"></span>[23](#fn_627)

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

a bird three maladies (befal men), viz. jealousy, hunger, and old age;
(therefore) let him (who is guilty of such an offence) perform (a
penance) during ninety-eight (days).'

24\. Having slain a dog, a cat, an ichneumon, a snake, a frog, or a rat,
let him perform a K*rikkh*ra penance of twelve days' duration, and give
something (to a Brâhma*n*a). <span id="fr_628"></span>[24](#fn_628)

25\. But having slain a quantity of boneless animals, equal to the
weight of a cow, let him perform a K*rikkh*ra penance of twelve days'
duration, and give something (to a Brâhma*n*a). <span
id="fr_629"></span>[25](#fn_629)

26\. But (the same penance must be performed) for each single (slain
animal) that possesses bones. <span id="fr_630"></span>[26](#fn_630)

27\. He who extinguishes the (sacred) fires shall perform a K*rikkh*ra
penance of twelve days, and cause them to be kindled again (by priests
engaged for the occasion). <span id="fr_631"></span>[27](#fn_631)

28\. He who falsely accuses a Guru shall bathe, dressed in his clothes,
and ask his Guru's pardon. It is declared in the Veda that he becomes
pure by the Guru's forgiving him. <span id="fr_632"></span>[28](#fn_632)

29\. An atheist shall perform a K*rikkh*ra penance of twelve days'
duration, and give up his infidelity. <span
id="fr_633"></span>[29](#fn_633)

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

30\. But he who receives subsistence from infidels (shall perform) an
Atik*rikkh*ra penance (and not repeat his offence).

31\. (The rule applicable to) a seller of Soma has been explained
hereby. <span id="fr_634"></span>[31](#fn_634)

32\. A hermit, on violating the rules of his order, shall perform a
K*rikkh*ra penance of twelve days' duration, and continue (the
observances obligatory on him) in a great forest.

33\. Ascetics, (offending in the same manner) as hermits, shall perform
for a protracted period (the vow of regulating the quantity of their
food according to) the growth of the moon, and shall again be initiated,
in accordance with (the rules of) the Institutes applicable to
them. <span id="fr_635"></span>[33](#fn_635)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_615"></span>[109:1](sbe1424.htm#fr_615)-5. **XXI**. Gautama
XXIII, 15. K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita reads, instead of prâsyet, 'he shall
throw,' prâ*s*yet, and explains it by dâhayet, he shall cause to be
burnt.' It must be understood that these <span id="page_110">p.
110</span> extreme punishments are to be inflicted in particularly bad
cases only.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[110:6](sbe1424.htm#fr_616) 'Afterwards in
order to purify her who is immersed in water, i.e. has plunged into
water, he shall offer eight hundred, i.e. (such) <span id="page_111">p.
111</span> a number of burnt-oblations with the *S*iras, i.e. (the
words) "Om, ye waters, who are splendour, juice, and ambrosia," &c.,
which are joined to the Gâyatrî.'--K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita. The *S*iras, or
'head,' is again mentioned below, XXV, 13; see also Vish*n*u LV, 9. This
and the following two rules refer to offences committed with males of
equal caste.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[111:9](sbe1424.htm#fr_617) Yâ*gñ*avalkya I,
70. Colebrooke IV, Dig. LXXVI, where a different reading,
vyavâyatîrthagamanadharmebhya*h*; has been adopted, and the Sûtra has
been combined with the neat. The first clause may also be translated,
'If she actually commits adultery, (and especially) if she converses
with a Guru.'

<span id="fn_618"></span>[111:10](sbe1424.htm#fr_618) Colebrooke loc.
cit.; Manu IX, 80; Yâ*gñ*avalkya 1, 72.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[112:11](sbe1424.htm#fr_619) Colebrooke IV,
Dig. CXIII, where *s*ûkarî, 'a sow,' is read instead of *s*uktikâ, 'a
pearl-oyster.'

<span id="fn_620"></span>[112:13](sbe1424.htm#fr_620) Manu XI, 178.
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita states correctly that *k*ândraya*n*ottaram,
'succeeded by one, two, or three *K*ândrâya*n*as,' may also mean
'following one, two, or three *K*ândrâya*n*as,' and that the number of
*K*ândrâya*n*as to be performed depends on the caste of the person with
whom the adultery was committed. Thus a Brahma*n*î must perform one
K*rikkh*ra and one *K*ândrâya*n*a for adultery with a Kshatriya, one
K*rikkh*ra and two *K*ândrâya*n*as for adultery with a Vai*s*ya, and one
K*rikkh*ra and three *K*ândrâya*n*as for adultery with a *S*ûdra. His
view that the rule refers to wives who commit the sin without intent or
against their will, is open to doubt. It is probably an alternative, to
be adopted in lighter cases, for the public punishment prescribed above,
XXI, 1-3. Regarding the *K*ândrâya*n*a, see below, XXIV, 44,

<span id="fn_621"></span>[112:14](sbe1424.htm#fr_621) Colebrooke IV,
Dig. CVIII; Manu V, 164-165.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[112:15](sbe1424.htm#fr_622) Manu IX, 80;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 73.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[113:16](sbe1424.htm#fr_623) 'Vish*n*u LIII, 2.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[113:18](sbe1424.htm#fr_624) Vish*n*u L, 16-24;
Gautama XXII, 18.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[113:20](sbe1424.htm#fr_625) Vish*n*u XLVI, 10.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[113:21](sbe1424.htm#fr_626) Vish*n*u XLVI, 11.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[113:23](sbe1424.htm#fr_627) The above
translation follows the commentary of K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita, <span
id="page_114">p. 114</span> who further states that the penance to be
performed shall consist of a diet of barley gruel. I feel by no means
certain that his interpretation, especially that of the last clause, is
correct. Possibly ash*t*ânavatim âharet may mean 'he shall offer
ninety-eight oblations.'

<span id="fn_628"></span>[114:24](sbe1424.htm#fr_628) Vish*n*u L, 30,
31.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[114:25](sbe1424.htm#fr_629) Gautama XXII, 21.
'Something' means eight handfuls of grain.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[114:26](sbe1424.htm#fr_630) Gautama XXII, 22.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[114:27](sbe1424.htm#fr_631) Vish*n*u LIV, 13;
Gautama XXII, 34.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[114:28](sbe1424.htm#fr_632) Vish*n*u LIV, 14;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya III, 283.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[114:29](sbe1424.htm#fr_633)-30. Vish*n*u LIV,
15.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[115:31](sbe1424.htm#fr_634) Vish*n*u LIV, 17.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[115:33](sbe1424.htm#fr_635) The penance
prescribed appears to be similar to the *K*ândrâya*n*a. The offender
must eat one mouthful on the first lunar day, two on the second, and so
forth. But it is not clear for how long a period the rule is to be
observed. The Sûtra is interesting as it furnishes corroborative
evidence for Pâ*n*ini's statement (IV, 3, 110) that Bhikshu-sûtras which
contained the, rules applicable to Bhikshus formerly existed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](sbe1425)
