[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1425)  [Next](sbe1427) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIII.

1\. If a student has approached a woman, he shall slay in the forest, in
a place where four roads meet <span id="fr_641"></span>[1](#fn_641)

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (kindling) a common fire, an ass for the Rakshas
(the goblins),

2\. Or he may offer an oblation of rice (*k*aru) to Nir*ri*ti (the
goddess of hell).

3\. Let him throw into the fire (four oblations consisting) of that
(sacrificial food, saying), To Lust svâhâ; to him who follows his lust
svâhâ; to Nir*ri*ti svâhâ; to the divine Rakshas svâhâ.'

4\. If, before returning home (from his teacher, a student) voluntarily
defiles himself, sleeps in the day-time, or practises any other vow
(than that of studentship), the same (penance must be performed). <span
id="fr_642"></span>[4](#fn_642)

5\. If he has committed a bestial crime, he shall give a white bull (to
a Brâhma*n*a). <span id="fr_643"></span>[5](#fn_643)

6\. The guilt incurred by a bestial crime with a cow, has been explained
by the (rule regarding) the killing of a female of the *S*ûdra
caste. <span id="fr_644"></span>[6](#fn_644)

7\. A student breaks his vow by performing funeral rites, <span
id="fr_645"></span>[7](#fn_645)

8\. Excepting those of his mother and his father. <span
id="fr_646"></span>[8](#fn_646)

9\. If a (student) is sick, he may eat, at his pleasure, all that is
left by his teacher as medicine. <span id="fr_647"></span>[9](#fn_647)

10\. If (a student) who is employed by his teacher (to perform some
duty), meets with his death, (the teacher) shall perform three
K*rikkh*ra penances. <span id="fr_648"></span>[10](#fn_648)

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

11\. If a student eats meat which has been given to him as leavings (by
his teacher), he shall perform a K*rikkh*ra penance of twelve days'
duration, and afterwards finish his vow. <span
id="fr_649"></span>[11](#fn_649)

12\. The same (penance must be performed) if he eats food given at a
*S*râddha or by a person who is impure on account of a recent death or
birth. <span id="fr_650"></span>[12](#fn_650)

13\. It is declared in the Veda, than honey given without asking does
not defile (a student) of the Vâ*g*asaneyi-*s*âkhâ. <span
id="fr_651"></span>[13](#fn_651)

14\. For him who committing suicide becomes An Abhi*s*asta, his
blood-relations (sapi*nd*a) shall not perform the funeral rites. <span
id="fr_652"></span>[14](#fn_652)

15\. He is called a suicide who destroys himself by means of wood,
water, clods of earth, stones, weapons, poison, or a rope.

16\. Now they quote also (the following verse): 'The twice-born man who
out of affection performs the last rites for a suicide, shall perform a
*K*ândrâya*n*a penance together with a Taptak*rikkh*ra.' <span
id="fr_653"></span>[16](#fn_653)

17\. We shall describe the *K*ândrâya*n*a below. <span
id="fr_654"></span>[17](#fn_654)

18\. A fast of three days (must be performed) for resolving to die by
one's own hand.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

19\. 'He who attempts suicide, but remains alive, shall perform a
K*rikkh*ra penance during twelve days. (Afterwards) he shall fast for
three (days and) nights, being dressed constantly in a garment smeared
(with clarified butter), and suppressing his breath, he shall thrice
recite the Aghamarsha*n*a;'

20\. Or, following the same rule, he may also frequently recite the
Gâyatrî;

21\. Or, having kindled a fire, he may offer clarified butter with the
Kûshmâ*nd*as.

22\. 'And the guilt (of) all (offences) excepting mortal sins is removed
thereby.' <span id="fr_655"></span>[22](#fn_655)

23\. Now he may also sip water in the morning, thinking of (the Mantra),
'May fire and wrath and the lords of wrath protect me,' &c., and
meditating on his sin; (then) he may mutter the Vyâh*ri*tis that end
with satya (truth), prefixing (the syllable) Om (to each), or he may
recite the Aghamarsha*n*a. <span id="fr_656"></span>[23](#fn_656)

24\. If he touches a human bone to which fat still adheres, he becomes
impure during three (days and) nights; <span
id="fr_657"></span>[24](#fn_657)

25\. But (on touching a bone) to which no fat adheres, a day and a
night,

26\. Likewise if he has followed a corpse (to the burial-ground). <span
id="fr_658"></span>[26](#fn_658)

27\. If he passes between men reciting the Veda, he shall fast during a
day and a night.

28\. (Those who recite the Veda) shall sprinkle each other with water
and stay away (from their houses) during three (days and) nights. <span
id="fr_659"></span>[28](#fn_659)

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

29\. (The same penance must be performed) for a day and night, if a dog,
a cat, or an ichneumon pass quickly (between those who recite the
Veda). <span id="fr_660"></span>[29](#fn_660)

30\. If he has swallowed the flesh of a dog, a cock, a village pig, a
grey heron, a vulture, a Bhâsa, a pigeon, a man, a crow or an owl, (he
must) fast during seven days, (and thus) empty his entrails (afterwards
he must) eat clarified butter, and be initiated again. <span
id="fr_661"></span>[30](#fn_661)

31\. 'But a Brâhma*n*a who has been bitten by a dog, becomes pure, if he
goes to a river that flows into the ocean, (bathes there), suppresses
his breath one hundred times, and eats clarified butter.' <span
id="fr_662"></span>[31](#fn_662)

32\. 'Time, fire, purity of mind, water, looking at the sun, and
ignorance (of defilement) are the six means by which created beings are
purified.' <span id="fr_663"></span>[32](#fn_663)

33\. It is declared in the Veda that, on touching a dog, a *K*â*nd*âla,
or an outcast, he becomes at once pure, if he bathes, dressed in his
clothes. <span id="fr_664"></span>[33](#fn_664)

34\. If (while reciting the Veda) they hear noises

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

made by outcasts or *K*â*nd*âlas, they shall sit silent and fasting
during three days;

35\. Or if they repeat that (text of the Gâyatrî) at least one thousand
times, they become pure; thus it is stated in the Veda.

36\. By this rule (the penance to be performed by) those who teach or
sacrifice for vile men has been explained. It is declared in the Veda
that they become pure by also relinquishing the fees (which they
received). <span id="fr_665"></span>[36](#fn_665)

37\. By this same (rule the penance prescribed for) an Abhi*s*asta, (one
accused of a heinous crime,) has been explained.

38\. (If he has been accused of) killing a learned Brâhma*n*a, let him
subsist during twelve days on water (only), and fast during (another)
twelve days. <span id="fr_666"></span>[38](#fn_666)

39\. If he has falsely accused a Brâhma*n*a of a crime which causes loss
of caste, or of a minor offence which does not cause loss of caste, he
shall subsist during a month on water (only), and constantly repeat the
(*Rik*as called) *S*uddhavatîs; <span id="fr_667"></span>[39](#fn_667)

40\. Or he may go to bathe (with the priests) at (the conclusion of) a
horse-sacrifice.

41\. By this (rule the penance for) intercourse with a female of the
*K*â*nd*âla caste has been declared. <span
id="fr_668"></span>[41](#fn_668)

42\. Now (follows the description of) another K*rikkh*ra penance,
applicable to all (men), where (the rule given above) has been altered.

43\. On one day (let him eat) in the morning (only), on the (following)
day at night (only), on the (next) day food given without asking, and on
the (fourth) day (let him) fast; the succeeding (three) periods of

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

four days (must be passed) in the same manner. Wishing to show favour to
the Brâhma*n*as, Manu, the chief among the pillars of the law, has thus
described the *S*isuk*rikkh*ra (the hard penance of children) for
infants, aged, and sick men.

44\. Now follows the rule for (the performance of) the *K*ândrâya*n*a
(lunar penance). <span id="fr_669"></span>[44](#fn_669)

45\. On the first day of the dark half (of the month) let him eat
fourteen (mouthfuls), let him diminish the (number of) mouthfuls (each
day by one), and continue in this manner until the end of the fortnight.
In like manner let him eat one mouthful on the first day of the bright
half, and (daily) increasing (the number 6f) mouthfuls, continue until
the end of the fortnight.

46\. Meanwhile let him sing Sâmans, or mutter the Vyâh*ri*tis.

47\. A month during which he thus performs a *K*ândrâya*n*a, the
*Ri*shis have called by way of laudation, 'a means of purification'
(pavitra). It is prescribed as an expiation of all (offences) for which
no (special penance) has been mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_641"></span>[117:1](sbe1426.htm#fr_641) **XXIII**. Gautama
XXIII, 17

<span id="fn_642"></span>[118:4](sbe1426.htm#fr_642) Manu XI, 121.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[118:5](sbe1426.htm#fr_643) Vish*n*u LIII, 7;
Gautama XXII, 36.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[118:6](sbe1426.htm#fr_644) Vish*n*u LIII, 3;
Gautama XXIII, 12.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[118:7](sbe1426.htm#fr_645) Manu V, 88.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[118:8](sbe1426.htm#fr_646) Mann V, 91.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[118:9](sbe1426.htm#fr_647) The object of the
Sûtra is to permit during sickness a relaxation of the rules regarding
forbidden food. Hence a sick student may eat honey, meat, &c.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[118:10](sbe1426.htm#fr_648) Yâ*gñ*avalkya III,
283. 'Meets with his death,' e.g. is killed by a wild animal or a snake,
while collecting fuel in the forest.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[119:11](sbe1426.htm#fr_649) Manu XI, 159;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya III, 282; see also Âpastamba's discussion on the subject,
I, 1, 4, 5.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[119:12](sbe1426.htm#fr_650) Manu XI, 158.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[119:13](sbe1426.htm#fr_651) This Sûtra may
also mean, 'It is declared that, according to the Vâ*g*asaneyaka, honey
given (to a student). without his asking for it does not defile him.'
But a parallel passage of Devala, which K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita quotes,
makes, I think, the version given above appear preferable. In either
case the passage is explained by the fact that, according to the
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a, *S*vetaketu, one of the great teachers of the
White Ya*g*ur-veda, strongly pleaded for the use of honey; see Weber,
Indische Studien X, 123 seq.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[119:14](sbe1426.htm#fr_652) Vish*n*u XXII, 56;
Gautama XIV, 12.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[119:16](sbe1426.htm#fr_653) Vish*n*u XXII,
58-59.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[119:17](sbe1426.htm#fr_654) See below, Sûtra
45.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[120:22](sbe1426.htm#fr_655) Regarding the
efficacy of the Kûshmâ*nd*a texts, see above, XXII, 9.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[120:23](sbe1426.htm#fr_656) The text occurs
Taitt. Âr. X, 24, I.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[120:24](sbe1426.htm#fr_657)-25. Manu V, 87;
Vish*n*u XXII, 75.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[120:26](sbe1426.htm#fr_658) Manu V, 101.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[120:28](sbe1426.htm#fr_659) Gautama I, 58.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[121:29](sbe1426.htm#fr_660) Gautama I, 59.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[121:30](sbe1426.htm#fr_661) Vish*n*u LI, 3-4;
Gautama XXIII, 4-5; Manu XI, 157. The Sûtra is badly corrupted in
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita's edition. I read kaṅka instead of vaṅka, leave out
vâyasa after bhâsa, and change kâkolûkânâ*m* sâdane to
kâkolûkamâ*m*sâdane. The latter change is absolutely necessary; firstly,
because the penances for killing dogs and men have been given above;
secondly, because the word mânusha requires a noun which it qualifies at
the end of the compound; thirdly, because the penance which is
prescribed, fasting until the entrails are empty, is absurd for murder,
but appropriate for eating forbidden food; and fourthly, because the
parallel passages of other Sm*ri*tis actually do prescribe it for eating
the flesh of excessively impure animals and for cannibalism. The change
of amâ to ânâ is a very common mistake in Devanâgarî MSS.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[121:31](sbe1426.htm#fr_662) Vish*n*u LIV, 12.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[121:32](sbe1426.htm#fr_663) Vish*n*u XXII, 88.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[121:33](sbe1426.htm#fr_664) Âpastamba I, 5,
15, 16.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[122:36](sbe1426.htm#fr_665) Vish*n*u LIV, 25,
28.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[122:38](sbe1426.htm#fr_666) Yâ*gñ*avalkya III,
287.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[122:39](sbe1426.htm#fr_667) Yâ*gñ*avalkya III,
286.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[122:41](sbe1426.htm#fr_668) Vish*n*u LIII, 5,
6.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[123:44](sbe1426.htm#fr_669)-47. Vish*n*u
XLVII. It must be understood that during the bright half of the month
the number of mouthfuls must be increased every day by one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](sbe1427)
