[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1470)  [Next](sbe1472) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA II, ADHYÂYA 10, KA*ND*IKÂ 17.

1\. Now we will explain the rule for entering the order of ascetics
(sa*m*nyâsa).

2\. Some (teachers say), 'He who has finished his studentship may become
an ascetic immediately on (the completion of) that.' <span
id="fr_1293"></span>[2](#fn_1293)

3\. But (according to others, asceticism is befitting) for Sâlînas and
Yâyâvaras who are childless; <span id="fr_1294"></span>[3](#fn_1294)

4\. Or a widower (may become an ascetic). <span
id="fr_1295"></span>[4](#fn_1295)

5\. (In general) they prescribe the profession of asceticism after the
completion of the seventieth year and after the children have been
firmly settled in (the performance of) their sacred duties.

6\. Or a hermit in the woods (may become an <span
id="fr_1296"></span>[6](#fn_1296)

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

ascetic) on finishing the (special) ceremonies (prescribed for him).

7\. 'That eternal greatness of the Brâhma*n*a is neither increased nor
diminished by works. The soul knows the nature of that (greatness). He
who knows that, is not stained by evil deeds.' <span
id="fr_1297"></span>[7](#fn_1297)

8\. 'It leads to the cessation of births.'

9\. 'The eternal one leads (him) to glory.' The greatness (of asceticism
is declared by these passages).

10\. After having caused the hair of his head, his beard, the hair on
his body, and his nails to be cut, he prepares

11\. Sticks, a rope, a cloth for straining water, a water vessel, and an
alms-bowl. <span id="fr_1298"></span>[11](#fn_1298)

12\. Taking these (implements, let him go) to the extremity of the
village, or to- the extremity of the boundary (of the village), or to
the house where the sacred fires are kept, partake of a threefold
(mixture of) clarified butter, milk, (and) sour milk, and (afterwards)
fast;

13\. Or (he may partake of) water.

14\. (Saying), 'Om, Bhû*h*, I enter the Sâvitrî, tat savitur vare*n*yam;
Om, Bhuva*h*, I enter the Sâvitrî, bhargo devasya dhîmahi; Om, I enter
the Sâvitrî, dhiyo yo na*h* pr.akodayât;' (he shall recite the Sâvitrî)
foot by foot, half-verse by half-verse, (and finish by repeating) the
whole or the parts (of the verse). <span
id="fr_1299"></span>[14](#fn_1299)

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

15\. It is declared in the Veda, 'Entering order after order, (man)
becomes (one with) Brahman.'

16\. Now they quote also (the following verse) 'He who has passed from
order to order, has offered burnt oblations and kept his organs in
subjection, becomes afterwards, tired with (giving) alms and (making)
offerings, an ascetic.' <span id="fr_1300"></span>[16](#fn_1300)

17\. Such an ascetic (becomes one with) the infinite (Brahman).

18\. Before the sun sets, he heaps fuel on the Gârhapatya fire, brings
the Anvâhâryapa*k*ana fire (to the spot), takes the flaming Âhavanîya.
fire out (of the Gârhapatya), melts butter on the Gârhapatya fire,
cleanses it (with Ku*s*a grass), takes four times (portions of it) in
the sacrificial spoon (called Sru*k*), and offers in the Âhavanîya fire
on which sacred fuel has been heaped, (four times) a full oblation,
(saying), 'Om, Svâhâ!' <span id="fr_1301"></span>[18](#fn_1301)

19\. It is declared in the Veda that this (offering is) the
Brahmânvâdhâna (putting fuel on the sacred fires for the sake of the
universal soul).

20\. Now in the evening, after the Agnihotra has been offered, he
scatters grass to the north of the Gârhapatya fire, places the
sacrificial vessels in pairs, the upper part turned downwards, on it,
strews Darbha grass to the south of the Âhavanîya fire on the seat
destined for the Brahman priest, covers

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

it with the skin of a black antelope, and remains awake during that
night.

21\. A Brâhma*n*a who, knowing this, dies after fasting during the night
of Brahman and repositing within himself the sacred fires, conquers all
guilt, even (that of) killing a Brâhma*n*a. <span
id="fr_1302"></span>[21](#fn_1302)

22\. Then he rises in the muhûrta sacred to Brahman, and offers the
early Agnihotra just at the (appointed) time.

23\. Next, after covering the (part of the altar called) P*ri*sh*th*yâ
and bringing water, he prepares (an offering) to (Agni) Vai*s*vânara
(which is cooked) in twelve potsherds. That (well-)known Ish*t*i is the
last (which he performs).

24\. Afterwards he throws the sacrificial vessels, which are neither
made of earth nor of stone, into the Âhavanîya fire,

25\. (And) throwing the two Ara*n*is into the Gârhapatya fire (with the
words), 'May ye be of one mind with us,' he reposits the sacred fires in
himself. <span id="fr_1303"></span>[25](#fn_1303)

26\. (Reciting the sacred text), 'O Fire, that body of thine, which is
fit for the sacrifice,' he inhales the smell of (the smoke of) each fire
thrice three times.

27\. Then, standing within the sacrificial enclosure, (he says) thrice
in a low voice and thrice aloud, 'Om, Bhû*h*, Bhuva*h*, Sva*h*, I have
entered the order of ascetics, I have entered the order of ascetics, I
have entered the order of ascetics,'

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

28\. It is declared in the Veda, 'The gods are trebly true.' <span
id="fr_1304"></span>[28](#fn_1304)

29\. (Finally) he pours out as much water as will fill his joined hands,
(saying), 'I promise not to injure any living being.' <span
id="fr_1305"></span>[29](#fn_1305)

30\. Now they quote also (the following verse) An ascetic who roams
about after having given a promise of safety to all living beings, is
not threatened with danger by any creature.' <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[30](#fn_1306)

31\. (Henceforth) he must restrain his speech. <span
id="fr_1307"></span>[31](#fn_1307)

32\. He grasps his staff, (saying), '(Thou art my) friend, protect me.'

33\. He takes the rope, (reciting the verse), 'The brilliant light,'
&c. <span id="fr_1308"></span>[33](#fn_1308)

34\. He takes the cloth for straining water, (reciting the text), 'With
which means of purification the gods,' &c.

35\. He takes the waterpot, (reciting the verse), Through that light, by
which the gods rose on high,' &c. <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[35](#fn_1309)

36\. He takes the alms-bowl, (reciting the Vyâh*ri*tis).

37\. Taking with him the staves, the rope, the <span
id="fr_1310"></span>[37](#fn_1310)

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

cloth for straining water, the waterpot, (and) the alms-bowl, he goes
where water (is to be obtained), bathes, sips water, (and) washes
himself, (reciting the verses called) Surabhimatî, Abliṅgâs, Vâru*n*îs,
Hira*n*yavar*n*âs, and Pâvamânîs. Entering the water, he performs
sixteen suppressions of the breath, (mentally repeating) the
Aghamarsha*n*a hymn, ascends the bank, wrings out his dress, puts on
another pure dress, sips water, takes the cloth for straining, (saying),
'Om, Bhû*h*, Bhuva*h*, Sva*h*,' and performs the Tarpa*n*a (with the
following texts), 'Om, Bhû*h*, I satiate,' 'Om, Bhuva*h* --, Om, Sva*h*
--, Om, Maha*h* --, Om, Gana*h* --, Om, Tapa*h* --, Om, Satyam --.'

38\. He takes up as much water as his joined hands will hold for the
manes, (and satiates them <span id="fr_1311"></span>[38](#fn_1311)

with it) exactly in the same manner as the gods, (saying), 'Om, Bhû*h*
Svadhâ, Om, Bhuva*h* Svadhâ,' &c.

39\. Then he worships the sun, (reciting) the two verses (which begin),
'Ud u tya*m* *k*itram,' &c. <span id="fr_1312"></span>[40](#fn_1312)

40\. (Saying), 'Om, this (syllable Om), forsooth, is Brahman; this
(syllable) which sheds warmth is light; this which gives warmth is the
Veda; this must be known as that which sheds warmth;' he thus satiates
the soul (and afterwards) worships the soul (with these texts), 'The
soul (is) Brahman, (is) light.'

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

41\. Let him repeat the Sâvitrî one thousand times, or one hundred
times, or an unlimited number of times.

42\. (Saying), 'Bhû*h*, Bhuva*h*, Suva*h*,' he takes up the cloth for
straining, (and) fetches water.

43\. Let him not, (at any period) after that (moment), sip water which
has not been drawn up (from a well and the like), which has not been
strained, and which has not been completely cleansed. <span
id="fr_1313"></span>[43](#fn_1313)

44\. Let him not wear any longer a white dress.

45\. (He may carry) one staff or three staves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[273:2](sbe1471.htm#fr_1293) **17**. Gautama
III, 1.

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[273:3](sbe1471.htm#fr_1294) Regarding the two
terms Sâlîna and Yâyâvara, see below, III, I, 3.4.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[273:4](sbe1471.htm#fr_1295) Vidhura,
translated, according to Govinda's explanation, by 'widower,' perhaps
includes all persons who have been separated from their families.

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[273:6](sbe1471.htm#fr_1296) Regarding the
ceremonies to be performed by hermits in the wood, see above, II, 6, 11,
15, and below, III, 3.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[274:7](sbe1471.htm#fr_1297) See above, II, 6,
11, 30.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[274:11](sbe1471.htm#fr_1298) Yâ*gñ*avalkya
III, 58-60.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[274:14](sbe1471.htm#fr_1299) This part of the
ceremony is called Sâvitrîprave*s*a, 'entering the Sâvitrî: According to
the Dharmasindhu, fol. 84 a, 1. 8, the last Mantra is 'Om, Bhû*h*,
Bhuva*h*, Sva*h*, I enter the Sâvitrî; we meditate on that adorable
light of divine Savit*ri*, who may impel our thoughts.'

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[275:16](sbe1471.htm#fr_1300) Manu VI, 34.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[275:18](sbe1471.htm#fr_1301)
Anvâhâryapa*k*ana is another name of the so-called Dakshi*n*âgni, in
which the sacrificial viands are cooked. The cleansing of the butter
(utpavana) is performed by taking hold of the ends of blades of Ku*s*a
grass and dipping the bent middle part into the melted butter and then
drawing it upwards. A full burnt oblation (pûr*n*âhuti) consists of a
whole spoonful. As four spoonfuls are to be taken out, it follows that
four oblations are to be offered.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[276:21](sbe1471.htm#fr_1302) The night during
which the ascetic keeps watch near the fires is called 'the night of
Brahman.'

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[276:25](sbe1471.htm#fr_1303) The Ara*n*is are
the two pieces of wood used for producing fire by friction, Taittirîya
Sa*m*hitâ I, 3, 7, 1-2.

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[277:28](sbe1471.htm#fr_1304) Taittirîya
Âra*n*yaka II, 18, 6.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[277:29](sbe1471.htm#fr_1305) All gifts must
be confirmed by a libation of water, which ii other cases is poured into
the hand of the recipient. The ceremony proves more clearly even than
the numerous other passages of the Sm*ri*tis, in which ascetic, are
exhorted to abstain from injuring living beings, that the so-called
ahi*m*sâ doctrine is not of Buddhistic, but of Brâhmanical origin.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[277:30](sbe1471.htm#fr_1306) Vasish*th*a X,
1-2.

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[277:31](sbe1471.htm#fr_1307) Gautama III, 27.

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[277:33](sbe1471.htm#fr_1308) Taittirîya
Brâhma*n*a III, 7, 8, 1.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[277:35](sbe1471.htm#fr_1309) Taittirîya
Sa*m*hitâ V, 7, 2, 2,

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[277:37](sbe1471.htm#fr_1310) The Surabhimatî
occurs Taittirîya Brâhma*n*a III, 9, 7, 5. For the other texts named,
see above, II, 4, 7, 2. The Tarpa*n*a has been fully described above,
II, 5, 9-20.

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[278:38](sbe1471.htm#fr_1311) 'In he same
manner as the gods,' i.e. without passing the sacred string over the
right shoulder.--Govinda.

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[278:40](sbe1471.htm#fr_1312) The Gu*g*arât
and Dekhan MSS., including K., place after the first Om two additional
Mantras, 'Brahman (is) Om; this universe (is) Om.' The object of the
Mantras given in the Madras MSS. is to identify the Pra*n*ava with the
Brahman, the sun, and the Veda.

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[279:43](sbe1471.htm#fr_1313) Manu VI, 46.
Aparipûtâbhi*h*, 'which has not been completely cleansed,' probably
refers to the so-called d*ri*sh*t*yâ paripavana, 'carefully looking at
it in order to see if any living being remains in it.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na II, Adhyâya 10, Ka*nd*ikâ 18](sbe1472)
