[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap05) 
[Next](bap07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5. ORIGINAL LANGUAGE.

5\. The ORIGINAL LANGUAGE of the book, its date, its form and its
purpose, must now be discussed.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Original Language.--The Latin version, in which alone we possess the
work, is quite obviously a translation from Greek. The forms of proper
names, the occurrence of Greek words which puzzled the translator,
*ometocea*, *pammixia*, *epomis*, etc., make this abundantly clear. It
is hardly less plain that the Greek was a translation from Hebrew. As
Dr. Cohn has pointed out, the whole complexion, and especially the
connecting links of the narrative, are strongly Hebraic, and there is a
marked absence of the Greek use of particles, or of any attempt to link
sentences together save by the bald "et," which occurs an incredible
number of times.

Some statistics may be given: *Et factum est* occurs at least 33 times;
*Et tum* (usually of the past) 37; *Tunc* 25; *Et nunc* (of present or
future) 85; *In tempore illo* 18; *In diebus illis* (and the like) 10;
*Et post haec*, or *postea* 30; *Ecce* 105; *Ecce nunc* 47; *Et ideo*
27; *Et erit cum*, or *si* 24. Other common links which I have not
counted are *Et u*t (*uidit*, etc.), *Et cum*, *His dictis*,
*Propterea*.

The leading Hebraisms are present: *adiicere*, or *apponere* with
another verb, meaning "he did so yet again," 9 times at least; the
intensive participle and verb (*Illuminans illuminaui*) 15 times. We
have *Si* introducing a question 4 times; *a uiro usque ad mulierem* and
the like (XXX. 4; XLVII. 10); ad uictoriam, in uictoria (= למנצח,
"Utterly"); IX. 3; XII. 6; XLIX. 6.

Hebraists, among whom I cannot reckon myself, may probably detect the
presence of plays upon words, passages written in poetical form (some of
which are indeed obvious), and mistranslations. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

From what has just been said it will be rightly gathered that the
literary style of *Philo* is not its strong point. Indeed, it is
exceedingly monotonous, full of repetitions and catchwords. The author's
one device for obtaining an "effect" is to string together a number of
high-sounding clauses, as he does, for example, in his repeated
descriptions of the giving of the Law. As a narrator, he has another
trick. An incident is often compared to another in the past (or future)
history of Israel, and many times is an episode from that history
related in a speech or prayer.

Some of the recurrent phrases are: *I spake of old saying* about 25
times; *in vain*, or *not in vain* 14; *it is better for us to do* this
*than* . . . 7; *not for our sakes, but for* . . . about 5 times; *who
knoweth whether* 4; *dost thou not remember* 3; *To thy seed will I give
this land* (or the like) 7-9; *the covenant which he made* 5-8; *I know
that the people will sin* 8-9; *God's anger will not endure for ever*
10; *The Gentiles will say* 4-8; *I call heaven and earth to witness*
4-5; *in the last days* 4; *make straight your ways* 5-6; *corrupt*
(your ways, etc.) 18; *remember or visit the world* 6; *be for a
testimony* 10. Of single words *accipere* occurs 88 times in the first
half of the text; *habitare*, *inhabitare* about 80 times in the whole
text; *iniquitas* 33; *disponere* 37; *testamentum* 47; *ambulare* 21;
*uia*, *uiae* 25; *adducere* 19; *seducere* 21; *saeculum* 27;
*sempiternus* 15; *constituere* 20; *expugnare* 27; *zelari* 14;
*illuminare* 12; *renunciare* 15.

Other lists are given in Appendix II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[27:1](bap05.htm#fr_9) Pitra thought that the
Latin versions of these were by the same hand: I cannot confirm this
idea, and indeed incline to question its correctness.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[28:1](bap06.htm#fr_10) Of mistranslations I can
only point to one. In VIII. 13 Visui appears as a proper name. It seems
clearly to be a mistake for "and Isui." The error implies a Hebrew
original: it is not found in the LXX. See the Appendix on Readings *in
loc*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. Date](bap07)
