[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap20) 
[Next](bap22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

V. <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) Then came the sons of Cham, and
made Nembroth a prince over themselves: but the sons of Japheth made
Phenech their chief: *and* the sons of Sem gathered together and set
over them Jectan to be their prince.

2\. And when these three had met together they took counsel that they
would look upon and take account of the people of their followers. And
this was done while Noe was yet alive, *even* that all men should be
gathered together: and they lived at one with each other, and the earth
was at peace.

3\. Now in the 340th year of the going forth of

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Noe out of the ark, after that God dried up the
flood, did the princes take account of their people.

4\. And *first* Phenech the son of Japheth looked upon them.

The sons of Gomer all of them passing by according to the sceptres of
their captaincies were in number 5,800.

But of the sons of Magog all of them passing by according to the
sceptres of their leading the number was 6,200.

And of the sons of Madai all of them passing by according to the
sceptres of their captaincies were in number 5,700.

And the sons of Tubal. all of them passing by according to the sceptres
of their captaincies were in number 9,400.

And the sons of Mesca all of them passing by according to the sceptres
of their captaincies were in number 5,600.

The sons of Thiras all of them passing by according to the sceptres of
their captaincies were in number 12,300.

And the sons of Ripha&lt;&lt;th&gt;&gt; passing by according to the
sceptres of their captaincies were in number l4,500.

And the sons of Thogorma passing by according to the sceptres of their
captaincy were in number 14,400.

But the sons of Elisa passing by according to the sceptres of their
captaincy were in number 14,900.

And the sons of Thersis all of them passing by according to the sceptres
of their captaincy were in number 12,100.

The sons of Cethin all of them passing by according to the sceptres of
their captaincy were in number 17,300.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

And the sons of Doin passing by according to the sceptres of their
captaincies were in number 17,700.

And the number of the camp of the sons of Japheth, all of them men of
might and all girt with their armour, which were set in the sight of
their captains was 140,202 besides women and children.

The account of Japheth in full was in number 142,000.

5\. And Nembroth passed by, he and the son(s) of Cham all of them
passing by according to the sceptres of their captaincies were found in
number 24,800.

The sons of Phua all of them passing by according to the sceptres of
their captaincies were in number 27,700.

And the sons of Canaan all of them passing by according to the sceptres
of their captaincies were found in number 32,800.

The sons of Soba all of them passing by according to the sceptres of
their captaincies were found in number 4,300.

The sons of Lebilla all of them passing by according to the sceptres of
their captaincies were found in number 22,300.

And the sons of Sata all of them passing by according to the sceptres of
their captaincies were found in number 25,300.

And the sons of Remma all of them passing by according to the sceptres
of their captaincies were found in number 30,600.

And the sons of Sabaca all of them passing by according to the sceptres
of their captaincies were found in number 46,400.

And the number of the camp of the sons of Cham, all of them mighty men,
and furnished with

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

armour, which were set in the sight of their captaincies was in number
244,900 besides women and children.

6\. And Jectan the son of Sem looked upon the sons of Elam, and they
were all of them passing by according to the number of the sceptres of
their captaincies in number 47,000.

And the sons of Assur all of them passing by according to the sceptres
of their captaincies were found in number 73,000.

And the sons of Aram all of them passing by according to the sceptres of
their captaincies were found in number 87,300.

The sons of Lud all of them passing by according to the sceptres of
their captaincies were found in number 30,600.

\[The number of the sons of Cham was 73,000.\]

But the sons of Arfaxat all of them passing by according to the sceptres
of their captaincies were in number 114,600.

And the whole number of them was 347,600. 7. The number of the camp of
the sons of Sem, all of them setting forth in valour and in the
commandment of war in the sight of their captaincies was † ix † besides
women and children.

8\.  <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) And these are the generations
of Noe set forth separately, whereof the whole number together was
914,000. And all these were counted while Noe was yet alive, and in the
presence of Noe 350 years after the flood. And all the days of Noe were
950 years, and he died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[86:2](bap21.htm#fr_28) V. The numbers in this
chapter are hopelessly incorrect. The separate items in the text add up
to 704,000; the totals in the text to 734,500, omitting the evidently
corrupt figure 9000 assigned to Shem and his descendants. The matter is
of no importance.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[89:1](bap21.htm#fr_29) 8. It is part of this
verse which is quoted (and that not accurately) by Petrus Comestor. See
Introduction, p. 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](bap22)
