[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap27) 
[Next](bap29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XII.

XII\.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) And Moses came down: and
whereas he was covered with invisible light--for he had gone down into
the place where is the light of the sun and moon,--the light of his face
overcame the brightness of the sun and moon, and he knew it

|                 |
|-----------------|
| Ex. 34:29, etc. |

not. And it was so, when he came down to the children of Israel, they
saw him and knew him not. But when he spake, then they knew him. And
this was like that which was done in Egypt

|           |
|-----------|
| Gen. 42:8 |

when *Joseph knew his brethren but they knew not him*. And it came to
pass after that, when Moses knew that his face was become glorious, he
made him a veil to cover his face.

|        |
|--------|
| Ex. 32 |

2\. But while he was in the mount, the heart of the people was
corrupted, and *they came together to Aaron saying: Make us gods* that
we may serve them, as the other nations also have. For this Moses by
whom the wonders were done before us,

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

is taken from us. And Aaron said unto them: Have patience, for Moses
will come and bring judgement near to us, and light up a law for us, and
set forth from his mouth the great excellency of God, and appoint
judgements unto our people. 3. And when he said this, they hearkened not
unto him, that the word might be fulfilled which was spoken in the day
when the people sinned in building the tower, when God said: And now if
I forbid them not, *they will adventure all that they*

|           |
|-----------|
| Gen. 11:6 |

*take in mind to do*, and worse. But Aaron feared, because the people
was greatly strengthened, and said to them: Bring us the earrings of
your wives.

|          |
|----------|
| Ex. 32:2 |

And the men sought every one his wife, and they gave them straightway,
and they put them in the fire and they were made into a figure, and
there came out a molten calf.

4. <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) And the Lord said to Moses: Make
haste

|          |
|----------|
| Ex. 32:7 |

hence, for the people is corrupted and hath dealt deceitfully with my
ways which I commanded them. What and if the promises are at an end
which I made to their fathers when I said: To your seed will I give this
land wherein ye dwell? For behold the people is not yet entered into the
land, even though they bear *my* judgements, *yet* have they forsaken
me. And therefore I know that if they enter the land they will do yet
greater iniquities. Now therefore I also will forsake them: and I will
turn again and make peace with them, that a house may be built for me
among them; and that house also shall be done away, because they will
sin against me, and the race of men shall be unto me as a drop of a
pitcher, and shall be counted as

|                 |
|-----------------|
| Isa. 40:1, etc. |

spittle. 5. And Moses hasted and came down and

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

saw the calf, and he looked upon the tables and saw that they were not
written: <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) and he hasted and brake
them; and his hands were opened and he became like a woman travailing of
her firstborn, which when she is taken in her pangs her hands are upon
her bosom, and she shall have no strength to help her to bring forth. 6.
And it came to pass after an hour he said within *himself*: Bitterness
prevaileth not for ever, neither hath evil the dominion alway. Now
therefore will I arise, and strengthen my loins: for albeit they have
sinned, *yet* shall not these things be in vain that were

|           |
|-----------|
| Ex. 32:20 |

declared unto me above. 7. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63) And he
arose and brake the calf and cast it into the water, and made the people
drink. And it was so, if any man's will in his mind were that the calf
should be made, his tongue was cut off, but if any had been constrained
thereto by fear, his face shone.

8\. And then Moses went up into the mount and prayed the Lord, saying:
Behold now, thou art God which hast planted this vineyard and set the
roots thereof in the deep, and stretched out the shoots of it unto thy
most high seat. Look upon it at this time, for the vineyard hath put
forth her fruit and hath not known him that tilled her. And now if thou
be wroth with thy vineyard and root it up out of the deep, and wither up
the shoots from thy most high eternal seat, the deep will come no more
to nourish it, neither thy throne to refresh that

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

thy vineyard which thou hast burned. 9. For thou art he that art all
light, and hast adorned thy house <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64)
with precious stones and gold and perfumes and spices (*or* and jasper),
and wood of balsam and cinnamon, and with roots of myrrh and
costum <span id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) hast thou strewed thine
house, and with divers meats and sweetness of many drinks hast thou
satisfied it. If therefore thou have not pity upon thy vineyard, all
these things are done in vain, Lord, and thou wilt have none to glorify
thee. For even if thou plant another vineyard, neither will that one
trust in thee, because thou didst destroy the former. For if verily thou
forsake the world, who will do for thee that that thou hast spoken as
God? And now let thy wrath be restrained from thy vineyard the more
&lt;&lt;because of&gt;&gt; that thou hast said and that which remaineth
to be spoken, and let not thy labour be in vain, neither let thine
heritage be torn asunder in humiliation. 10. And God said to him: Behold
I am become merciful according to thy words. Hew thee out therefore two
tables of stone from the place whence thou hewedst the former, and write
upon them again my judgements which were on the first.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[110:1](bap28.htm#fr_60) XII. 1. descended into
the place where is the light of the suit and moon. Compare with this the
Revelation vouchsafed to Moses which is related in Jerahmeel, c. 52, as
reported by R. Joshua ben Levi.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[111:1](bap28.htm#fr_61) 4. *even though they
bear my judgements: etiam portans iudicium*; i.e. even though they carry
with them the law I have given.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[112:1](bap28.htm#fr_62) 5. *the writing
vanishes from the tables*. Cf. XIX. 7. The *Pirke R. Eliezer*, c. 45
(tr. Friedlander), says, "the writing fled from off the tables," and
Cohn quotes the same story from other Midrashim.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[112:2](bap28.htm#fr_63) 7. The common story is
that the beards of those who had sinned appeared gilt (*Historia
Scholastica*). This detail was occasionally embodied in mediæval
pictures of the scene.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[113:1](bap28.htm#fr_64) 9. <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> The house, which is described in terms
somewhat resembling *Enoch* (see Introd., [p. 44](bap11.htm#page_44)),
is Paradise.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[113:2](bap28.htm#fr_65) 9. *costum*, for which
there is no English equivalent, occurs in *Jub*. 16:24, and fairly often
in Latin literature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](bap29)
