[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap31) 
[Next](bap33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVI.

|         |
|---------|
| Num. 16 |

XVI\.  <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) At that time did he give him
commandment concerning the fringes: and then did Choreb rebel and 200
men with him and spake saying: What if a law which we cannot bear is
ordained for us? 2. And God was wroth and said: I commanded the earth
and it gave me man, and unto him were born at the first two sons. And
the elder arose and slew the younger, and the earth hasted and swallowed
his blood. But I drove forth Cain, and cursed the earth and spake unto
Sion saying: Thou shalt not any more swallow up blood. And

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

now are the thoughts of men greatly polluted. 3. Lo, I will command the
earth, and it shall swallow up body and soul together, and their
dwelling shall be in darkness and in destruction, and they shall not die
but shall pine away until I remember the world and renew the earth. And
then shall they die and not live, and their life shall be taken away out
of the number of all men: neither shall Hell vomit them forth again, and
destruction shall not remember them, and their departure shall be as
that of the tribe of the nations of whom I said, "I will not remember
them," that is, the camp of the Egyptians, and the people whom I
destroyed with the water of the flood. And the earth shall swallow them,
and I will not do any more *unto them*. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76)

4\. And when Moses spake all these words unto the people, Choreb, and
his men were yet unbelieving. And Choreb sent to call his seven sons
which were not of counsel with him. 5. But they sent to him in answer
saying: As the painter showeth not forth an image made by his art unless
he be first instructed, so we also when we received the law of the Most
Mighty which teacheth us his ways, did not enter . therein save that we
might walk therein. Our father begat us \[not\], but the Most Mighty
formed us, and now if we walk in his ways we shall be his children. But
if thou believe not, go thine own way. And they came not up unto him.

6\. And it came to pass after this that the earth

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

opened before them, and his sons sent unto him saying: If thy madness be
still upon thee, who shall help thee in the day of thy destruction? and
he hearkened not unto them. And the earth opened her mouth and swallowed
them up, and their houses, and four times was the foundation of the
earth moved to swallow up the men, as it was commanded her. And
thereafter Choreb and his company groaned, until the firmament of the
earth should be delivered back. <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) 7.
But the assemblies of the people said unto Moses: We cannot abide round
about <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78) this place where Choreb and
his men have been swallowed up. And he said to them. Take up your tents
from round about them, neither be ye joined to their sins. And they did
so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[120:1](bap32.htm#fr_75) XVI. 1. In Num. 15:37
the ordinance of fringes immediately precedes the story of Korah; and
the two are brought into connexion by the Targum on, Numbers and by
others: *Jerahmeel* 55 connects them in this fashion: "and when God
commanded Moses to tell the children of Israel to make themselves
fringes, Korah arose in the night, and, weaving 400 garments of blue,
put them on 400 men. Then, standing before Moses, he said to him: "Do
these garments require fringes, as they are now made wholly of this
blue?" Moses replied: "Korah, does a house full of holy books require a
Mezuzah?" "Yes," said Korah. "So also do these garments require
fringes." This encounter of Korah with Moses is the last of several
which are told at some length in *Jerahmeel*.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[121:1](bap32.htm#fr_76) 3. it appears that
Korah and his company are to be annihilated at the final judgement. *The
people of whom I said: I will not remember them*. Compare *Pirke R.
Eliezer* 33. "All the dead will rise at the resurrection of the dead,
except the generation of the Flood." Christianity (1 Peter 3) did not
recognize this exception.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[122:1](bap32.htm#fr_77) 6. *until the
firmament* (AP) or *foundation* (VR) *of the earth should be restored:
quousque redderetur firmamentum terrae*. Probably to be understood in
the same sense as the words of 3: *ero innouans terram*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[122:2](bap32.htm#fr_78) The MSS. have: in Sina
of this place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](bap33)
