[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap35) 
[Next](bap37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XX.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

XX\. And at that time God made his covenant with Jesus the son of Naue
which remained of the men that spied out the land: for the lot had
fallen upon them that they should not see the land because they spake
evil of it, and for this cause that generation died. 2. Then said God
unto Jesus the son of Naue: Wherefore mournest thou, and wherefore
hopest thou in vain, thinking that Moses shall yet live? Now therefore
thou waitest to no purpose, for Moses is dead. Take the garments of his
wisdom and put them on thee, and gird thy loins with the girdle of his
knowledge, and thou shalt be changed and become another man. Did I not
speak for thee unto Moses my servant, saying: "He shall lead my people
after thee, and into his hand will I deliver the kings of the Amorites"?
3. And Jesus took the garments of wisdom and put them on, and girded his
loins with the girdle of understanding. And it came to pass when he put
it on, that his mind was kindled and his spirit stirred up, and he said
to the people: Lo, the former generation died in the wilderness because
they spake against their God. And, behold now, know, all ye captains,
this day that if ye go forth in the ways of your God, your paths shall
be made straight. 4. But if ye obey not his voice, and are like your
fathers, your works shall be spoiled, and ye yourselves broken, and your
name shall perish out of the land, and then where shall be the words
which God spake unto your fathers? For even if the heathen say: It may
be God hath failed, because he hath not delivered his people, yet
whereas they perceive that he hath chosen to himself other peoples,
working for them great wonders, they shall understand that the Most
Mighty accepteth not persons. But because ye sinned through vanity,
therefore he took his

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

power from you and subdued you. And now arise and set Your heart to walk
in the ways of your Lord and he shall direct you.

5\.  <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93) And the people said unto him:
Lo, this day see we that which Eldad and Modat prophesied in the days of
Moses, saying: After that Moses resteth, the captainship of Moses shall
be given unto Jesus the son of Naue. And Moses was not envious, but
rejoiced when he heard them; and thenceforth all the people believed
that thou shouldest lead them, and divide the land unto them in peace:
and now also if there be conflict, be strong and do valiantly, for thou
only shalt be

|        |
|--------|
| Jos. 2 |

leader in Israel. 6. And when he heard that, Jesus thought to send spies
into Jericho. And he called Cenez and Seenamias his brother, the two
sons of Caleph, and spake to them, saying: I and your father were sent
of Moses in the wilderness

|                  |
|------------------|
| Jos. 14:6 *sqq*. |

and went up with other ten men: and they returned and spake evil of the
lands and melted the heart of the people, and they were scattered and
the heart of the people with them. But I and your father only fulfilled
the word of the Lord, and lo, we are alive this day. And now will I send
you to spy out the land of Jericho. Do like unto your father and ye also
shall live. 7. And they went up and spied out the city. And when they
brought back word, the people went up and besieged the city and burned
it with fire.

|           |
|-----------|
| Jos. 5:12 |

8\. And after that Moses was dead, the manna ceased to come down for the
children of Israel, and then began they to eat the fruits of the land.
And these are the three things which God gave his people

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

for the sake of three persons, that is, the well of the water of Mara
for Maria's sake, and the pillar of cloud for Aaron's sake, and the
manna for the sake of Moses. And when these three came to an end, those
three gifts were taken away from them. <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94)

9\. Now the people and Jesus fought against the Amorites, and when the
battle waxed strong against their enemies throughout all the days of
Jesus, 30 and 9 kings which dwelt in the land were cut off. And Jesus
gave the land by lot to the people, to every tribe according to the
lots, according as he had received commandment. 10. Then

|                  |
|------------------|
| Jos. 14:6 *sqq*. |

came Caleph unto him and said: Thou knowest how that we two were sent by
lot by Moses to go with the spies, and because we fulfilled the word of
the Lord, behold we are alive at this day: and now if it be
well-pleasing in thy sight, let there be given unto my son Cenez for a
portion the territory of the three (*or* the tribe of the) towers. And
Jesus blessed him, and did so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_93"></span>[134:1](bap36.htm#fr_93) XX. 5. The Targum, and
a Midrash quoted by Cohn, p. 320, say that Eldad and Medad, according to
some, prophesied that Moses should die and Joshua should lead Israel
into the Promised Land.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[135:1](bap36.htm#fr_94) 8. In the same way Cohn
cites Midrashim (*Seder Olam Rabbah*, etc.) which agree exactly with
*Philo* as to the withdrawal of the three heavenly gifts. The Babylonian
Talmud (*Taanith* 1, Rodkinson, p. 22) has the same story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](bap37)
