[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap43) 
[Next](bap45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVIII.

XXVIII\. And when the days of Cenez drew

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

nigh that he should die, he sent and called all men (*or* all the
elders), and the two prophets Jabis and Phinees, and Phinees the son of
Eleazar the priest, <span id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117) and said to
them: Behold now, the Lord hath showed me all his marvellous works which
he hath prepared to do for his people in the last days.

2\. And now will I make my covenant with you this day, that ye forsake
not the Lord your God after my departing. For ye have seen all the
marvels *which came* upon them that sinned, and all that they declared,
confessing their sins of their own accord, and how the Lord our God made
an end of them for that they transgressed his covenant. Wherefore now
spare ye them of your house and your sons, and abide in the ways of the
Lord your God, that the Lord destroy not his inheritance.

3\. And Phinees, the son of Eleazar the priest, said: If Cenez the ruler
bid me, and the prophets and the people and the elders, I will speak a
word which I heard of my father when he was a-dying, and will not keep
silence concerning the commandment which he commanded me when his soul
was being received. And Cenez the ruler and the prophets said: Let
Phinees say on. Shall any other speak before the priest which keepeth
the commandments of the Lord our God, and that, seeing that truth
proceedeth out of his mouth, and out of his heart a shining light?

4\. Then said Phinees: My father, when he was a-dying, commanded me
saying: Thus shalt thou

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

say unto the children of Israel when they, are gathered together unto
the assembly: The Lord appeared unto me the third day before this in a
dream in the night, and said unto me: Behold, thou hast seen, and thy
father before thee, how greatly I have laboured for my people; and it
shall be after thy death that this people shall arise and corrupt their
ways, departing from my commandments, and I shall be exceeding wroth
with them. Yet will I remember the time which was before the ages,
*even* in the time when there was not a man, and therein was no
iniquity, when I said that the world should be, and they that should
come should praise me therein, and I will plant a great vineyard, and
out of it will I choose a plant, and order it and call it by my name,
and it shall be mine for ever. But when I have done all that I have
spoken, nevertheless my planting, which is called after me, will not
know me, the planter thereof, but will corrupt his fruit, and will not
yield me his fruit. These are the things which my father commanded me to
speak unto this people.

5\. And Cenez lifted up his voice, and the elders, and all the people
with one accord, and wept with a great lamentation until the evening and
said: Shall the shepherd destroy his flock to no purpose, except it
continue in sin against him? And shall it not be he that shall spare
according to the abundance of his mercy, seeing he hath spent great
labour upon us?

6\.  <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118) Now while they were set, the
holy spirit that

|           |
|-----------|
| Ezek. 8:1 |

dwelt in Cenez leapt upon him and took away from

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

him his *bodily* sense, and he began to prophesy, saying: Behold now I
see that which I looked not for, and perceive that I knew not. Hearken
now, ye that dwell on the earth, even as they that sojourned therein
prophesied before me, when they saw this hour, *even* before the earth
was corrupted, that ye may know the prophecies appointed aforetime, all
ye that dwell therein. 7. Behold now I see flames that burn not, and I
hear springs of water awaked out of sleep, and they have no foundation,
neither do I behold the tops of the mountains, nor the canopy of the
firmament, but all things unappearing and invisible, which have no place
whatsoever, and although mine eye knoweth not what it seeth, mine heart
shall discover that which it may learn (or say). 8. Now out of the flame
which I saw, and it burned not, I beheld, and lo a spark came up and as
it were builded for itself a floor under heaven, and the likeness of the
floor thereof was as a spider spinneth, in the fashion of a shield. And
when the foundation was laid, I beheld, and from that spring there was
stirred up as it were a boiling froth, and behold, it changed itself as
it were into another foundation; and between the two foundations, even
the upper and the lower, there drew near out of the light of the
invisible place as it were forms of men, and they walked to and fro: and
behold, a voice saying: These shall be for a foundation unto men and
they shall dwell therein 7000 years. 9. And the lower foundation was a
pavement and the upper was of froth, and they that came forth out of the
light of the invisible place, they are those that shall dwell
therein, <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119) and

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the name of that man is &lt;Adam&gt;. And it shall be, when he hath
(*or* they have) sinned against me and the time is fulfilled, that the
spark shall be

quenched and the spring shall cease, and so they shall be changed.

10\. And it came to pass after Cenez had spoken these words that he
awaked and his sense returned unto him: but he knew not that which he
had spoken neither that which he had seen, but this only he said to the
people: If the rest of the

|                |
|----------------|
| Cf. Num. 23:10 |

righteous be such after they are dead, it is better for them to die to
the corruptible world, that they see not sin. And when Cenez had so
said, he died and slept with his fathers, and the people mourned for him
30 days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[164:1](bap44.htm#fr_117) XXVIII. 1. The "*two
prophets Jabis and Phinees, and Phinees the son of Eleazar*" are
suspicious. I should not wonder if originally there had been but one
prophet, Jabis, and Phinees the son of Eleazar. The plural *prophetae*,
which occurs again in 3, might be a consequential change.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[165:1](bap44.htm#fr_118) 6 *seq*. There are
several resemblances in this section to the diction of Ezekiel. The
Spirit comes upon Kenaz as he sits among the elders: so in Ezek. 8:1
(20:1, 20:2). *fundamentum* may be compared with στερέωμα (Ezek. 122);
*subdiuum* with <span id="page_166">p. 166</span> αἴθριον, (9:3, 10:4);
*imagines hominum* with όμοίωμα ἀνθρώπου (1:9); *similitudo* with
ὁμοίωσισ (1:10); *ecce uox dicens* with ἰδοὺ φωνὴ ὑπεράνωθεν τοῦ
στερεώματοσ (1:25).

<span id="fn_119"></span>[166:1](bap44.htm#fr_119) 9. *they are those
that shall dwell therein, and the name of* <span id="page_167">p.
167</span> *that man is* \*. A puts an asterisk after "dwell therein" as
well as at the end of the sentence. VR read: *these are they which shall
have the name of that man*: *qui habebunt nomen eius hominis*. J says
"and the light which is between them and illumines the path of man is
Jerusalem, and there the men will dwell."

I do not think that any mystical name filled the blank, or that there
was any mention of a definite place, such as Jerusalem: the lines on
which the vision is drawn are too broad to admit of this. "Adam" is the
most likely supplement, if we consider the words which come next: "and
it shall be when he hath sinned against me, and the time is fulfilled."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](bap45)
