[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap51) 
[Next](bap53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXVI.

XXXVI\. And Gedeon took 300 men and departed and came unto the uttermost
part of the camp of Madian, and he heard every man speaking to his
neighbour and saying: Ye shall sec a confusion above reckoning, of the
sword of Gedeon,

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 7:11 |

coming upon us, for God hath delivered into his hands the camp of the
Madianites, and he will begin to make an end of us, even the mother with
the children, because our sins are filled up, even as also our gods have
shewed us and we believed them not. And now arise, let us succour our
souls and fly. 2. And when Gedeon heard these words, immediately he was
clothed with the spirit of the Lord, and, being endued with power, he
said unto the 300 men: Arise and let every one of you gird on his sword,
for the Madianites are delivered into our hands. And the men went down
with him, and he drew near and began to fight. And they blew the trumpet
and cried out

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 7:20 |

together and said: The sword of the Lord is upon us. And they slew of
the Madianites about 120,000 men, and the residue of the Madianites
fled.

3\. And after these things Gedeon came and gathered the people of Israel
together and said unto them: Behold, the Lord sent me to fight

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 8:24 |

your battle, and I went according as he commanded me. And now I ask one
petition of you: turn not away your face; and let every man of you give
me the golden armlets which ye have on your hands. And Gedeon spread out
a coat, and every man cast upon it their armlets, and they were all
weighed, and the weight of them was found to be 12 talents (*or* 12,000
shekels). And Gedeon took them., and of them he made idols and
worshipped them. 4. And God said: One way is *verily* 

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

appointed, <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129) that I should not
rebuke Gedeon in his lifetime, even because when he destroyed the
sanctuary of Baal, then all men said: Let Baal avenge himself. Now,
therefore, if I chastise him for that he hath done evil against me, ye
will say: It was not God that chastised him, but Baal, because he sinned
aforetime against him. Therefore now shall Gedeon die in a good old age,
that they may not have whereof to speak. But after that Gedeon is dead I
will punish him once, because he hath transgressed against me. And
Gedeon died in a good old age and was buried in his own city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[185:1](bap52.htm#fr_129) XXXVI. 4. *One way is
verily appointed*: *Una uia posita est, ut*. I understand this to mean:
"This at least is clear," but others may be able to suggest a better
interpretation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII](bap53)
