[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap55) 
[Next](bap57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XL.

XL\. And Jepthan came and fought against the children of Ammon, and the
Lord delivered them into his hand, and he smote threescore of their
cities. And Jepthan returned in peace. And the

|       |
|-------|
| 11:34 |

women came out to meet him with dances. And he had an only begotten
daughter; the same came out first in the dances to meet her father. And
when Jepthan saw her he fainted and said: Rightly is thy name called
Seila, <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132) that thou shouldest be
offered for a sacrifice. And now who will put my heart in the balance
and weigh my soul? and I will stand and see whether one will outweigh
*the other*, the rejoicing that is come or the affliction which cometh
upon me? for in that I have opened my mouth unto my Lord in the song of
*my* vows,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I cannot call it back again. 2. And Seila his
daughter said unto him: And who is it that can be sorrowful in their
death when they see the people delivered? Rememberest thou not that
which was in the days of our fathers, when the father set his son for a
burnt offering and he gainsaid him not, but consented unto him
rejoicing? And he that was offered was ready, and he that offered was
glad. 3. Now therefore annul not

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 11:37 |

anything of that thou has vowed, but grant unto me one prayer. I ask of
thee before I die a small request: I beseech thee that before I give up
my soul, I may go into the mountains and wander (*or* abide) among the
hills and walk about among the rocks, I and the virgins that are my
fellows, and pour out my tears there and tell the affliction of my
youth; and the trees of the field shall bewail me and the beasts of the
field shall lament for me; for I am not sorrowful for that I die,
neither doth it grieve me that I give up my soul: but whereas my father
was overtaken in his vow, \[and\] if I offer not myself willingly for a
sacrifice, I fear lest my death be not acceptable, and that I shall lose
my life to no purpose. These things will I tell unto the mountains, and
after that I will return. And her father said: Go. 4.  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133)And Seila the daughter of Jepthan went
forth, she and the virgins that were her fellows, and came and told it
to the wise men of the people. And no man could answer

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 11:36 |

her words. And after that she went into the mount Stelac, and by night
the Lord thought upon her, and said: Lo, now have I shut up the tongue
of the wise among my people before this generation,

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

that they could not answer the word of the daughter of Jepthan, that my
word might be fulfilled, and my counsel not destroyed which I had
devised: and I have seen that she is more wise than her father, and a
maiden of understanding more than all the wise which are here. And now
let her life be given her at her request, and her death shall be
precious in my sight at all times.

5\. And when the daughter of Jepthan came unto the mount Stelac, she
began to lament. And this is her lamentation wherewith she mourned and
bewailed herself before she departed, and she said: Hearken, O
mountains, to my lamentation, and look, O hills, upon the tears of mine
eyes, and be witness, O rocks, in the bewailing of my soul. Behold how I
am accused, but my soul shall not be taken away in vain. Let my words go
forth into the heavens, and let my tears be written before the face of
the firmament, that the father overcome not (*or* fight not against) his
daughter whom he hath vowed to offer up, that her ruler may hear that
his only begotten daughter is promised for a sacrifice. 6. Yet I have
not been satisfied with my bed of marriage, neither filled with the
garlands of my wedding. For I have not been arrayed with brightness,
sitting in my maidenhood; I have not used my precious ointment, neither
hath my soul enjoyed the oil of anointing which was prepared for me. O
my mother, to no purpose hast thou borne thine only begotten, and
begotten her upon the earth, for hell is become my marriage chamber. Let
all the mingling of oil which thou hast prepared for me be poured out,
and the white robe which my mother wove for me, let the moth eat it, and
the crown of flowers which my nurse plaited for me aforetime, let it
wither, and the coverlet which she wove of violet and purple for my
virginity, let the

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

worm spoil it; and when the virgins, my fellows, tell of me, let them
bewail me with groaning for *many* days. 7. Bow down your branches, O ye
trees, and lament my youth. Come, ye beasts of the forest, and trample
upon my virginity. For my years are cut off, and the days of my life are
waxen old in darkness.

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 11:39 |

8\. And when she had so said, Seila returned unto her father, and he did
all that he had vowed, and offered burnt offerings. Then all the maidens
of Israel gathered together and buried the daughter of Jepthan and
bewailed her. And the children

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 11:40 |

of Israel made a great lamentation and appointed in that month, on the
14th day of the month, that they should come together every year and
lament for the daughter of Jepthan four days. And they called the name
of her sepulchre according to her own name Seila.

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 12:7 |

9\. And Jepthan judged the children of Israel ten years, and died, and
was buried with his fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[191:1](bap56.htm#fr_132) XL. 1. *Seila*. The
name, according to Dr. Cohn, may mean "she who was demanded."

<span id="fn_133"></span>[192:1](bap56.htm#fr_133) 4 *end*. The addition
in R, "and when she departeth, she shall fall into the bosom of her
mothers," may be genuine. "Her mothers," an unusual phrase, would
correspond to the ordinary one "her (your, their) fathers."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI](bap57)
