[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap64) 
[Next](bap66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LI.

|            |
|------------|
| 1 Sam 1:20 |

LI\. And in the time of those days she conceived and bare a son and
called his name Samuel, which is interpreted Mighty, according as God
called his name when he prophesied of him. And Anna sat and gave suck to
the child until he was

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 1:23 |

two years old, and when she had weaned him, she went up with him bearing
gifts in her hands, and the child was very fair and the Lord was with
him.

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 1:26 |

2\. And Anna set the child before the face of Heli and said unto him:
This is the desire which I

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

desired, and this is the request which I sought. And Heli said unto her:
Not thou only didst seek it, but the people *also* prayed for this. It
is not thy request alone, but it was promised aforetime unto the tribes;
and by this child is thy womb justified, that thou shouldest set up
prophecy before the people, and appoint the milk of thy breasts for a
fountain unto the twelve tribes.

3\. And when Anna heard that, she prayed and

|            |
|------------|
| 1 Sam. 2:1 |

said: Come ye at my voice, all ye peoples, and give ear unto my speech,
all ye kingdoms, for my mouth is opened that I may speak, and my lips
are commanded that I may sing praises unto the Lord. Drop, O my breasts,
and give forth your testimonies, for it is appointed to you to give
suck. For he shall be set up that is suckled by you, and by his words
shall the people be enlightened, and he shall shew unto the nations
their boundaries, and his horn shall be greatly exalted. 4. And
therefore will I utter my words openly, for out of me shall arise the
ordinance of the Lord, and all men shall find the truth. Haste ye not to
talk

|            |
|------------|
| 1 Sam. 2:3 |

proudly, neither to utter high words out of your mouth, but delight
yourselves in boasting when the light shall come forth out of which
wisdom shall be born, that they be not called rich which have most
possessions, neither they that have borne abundantly be termed mothers:
for the barren hath been satisfied, and she that was multi plied in sons
is become empty; 5. For the Lord killeth with judgement, and quickeneth
in mercy: for the ungodly are in this world: therefore quickeneth he the
righteous when he will, but the ungodly he will shut up in darkness. But
unto the righteous he preserveth their light, and when the ungodly are
dead, then shall they perish, and when the righteous are fallen asleep,
then shall

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

they be delivered. And so shall all judgement endure until he be
revealed which holdeth *it*. 6. Speak thou, speak thou, O Anna, and keep
not silence: sing praises, O daughter of Bathuel, be cause of thy
wonders which God hath wrought with thee. Who is Anna, that a prophet
should come out of her? or who is the daughter of Bathuel, that she
should bring forth a light foil the peoples? Arise thou also, Elchana,
and gird up thy loins. Sing praises for the signs of the Lord: For of
thy son did Asaph prophesy in the wilderness

|          |
|----------|
| Ps. 99:6 |

saying: *Moses and Aaron among his priests and Samuel among them*. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_146) Behold the word is accomplished and the
prophecy come to pass. And these things endure thus, until they give an
horn unto his anointed, and power cleaveth unto the throne of his king.
Yet let my son stand here and minister, until there arise a light unto
this people.

7\. And they departed thence and set forth with mirth, rejoicing and
exulting in heart for all the glory that God had wrought with them. But
the people went down with one accord unto Silo with timbrels and dances,
with lutes and harps, and came unto Heli the priest and offered Samuel
unto him, whom they set before the face of the Lord and anointed him and
said: Let the prophet live among the people, and let him be long a light
unto this nation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[218:1](bap65.htm#fr_147) LI. 6. The quotation
of Ps. 99:6 is a curious phenomenon, comparable to the mention of
Jeremiah in LVI. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LII](bap66)
