[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap73) 
[Next](bap75) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LX.

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 16:14 |

LX\. And at that time the spirit of the Lord was taken away from Saul,
and an evil spirit oppressed (*lit*. choked) him. And Saul sent and
fetched David, and he played a psalm upon his harp in the night. And
this is the psalm which he sang unto Saul that the evil spirit might
depart from him.

2\. There were darkness and silence before the world was, and the
silence spake, and the darkness became visible. And then was thy name
created, even at the drawing together of that which was stretched out,
whereof the upper was called heaven and the lower was called earth. And
it was commanded to the upper that it should rain according to its
season, and to the lower that it should bring forth food for man that
*should be* made. And after that was the tribe of your spirits made. 3.
Now therefore, be not injurious, whereas thou art a second creation, but
if not, then remember Hell (*lit*. be mindful of Tartarus) wherein thou
walkedst. Or is it not enough for thee to hear

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

that by that which resoundeth before thee I sing unto many? Or
forgettest thou that out of a rebounding echo in the abyss (*or* chaos)
thy creation was born? <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_156) But that
new womb shall rebuke thee, whereof I am born, of whom shall be born
after a time of my loins he that shall subdue you.

And when David sung praises, the spirit spared

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 16:23 |

Saul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_156"></span>[233:1](bap74.htm#fr_157) LX. 3. *evil spirits
born of an echo in chaos*: *de resultatione in chaomate*. In the
*Testament of Solomon* a female demon, Onoskelis, says that she was born
ἀπὸ ἀκαίρου τῆσ καλουμένησ ἤχου οὐρανοῦ † μολύβδου † φωνὴν ἀφέντοσ ἐν
ὕλῃ. Again, in a text on the Creation in the Leyden magical papyrus, of
which Dieterich gives an edition in *Abraxas*, p. 17 *seq*., are several
such phrases as this: God laughed seven times, and when he laughed seven
gods were born . . . He laughed the second time . . . and the earth
heard the echo (ἤχουσ) . . . and a god appeared: p. 19, καὶ ἐγεννήθη ἐκ
τοῦ ἤχουσ μέγασ θεόσ κ.τ.λ.

That evil spirits (*Mazzikin*) were created on the second day (as our
text states) is the view expressed in some texts of *Pirke R. Eliezer*
3, and in *Jerahmeel* I. 3: c. 18 of *Pirke R. E.* and later books say
they were created on the eve of the first Sabbath day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXI](bap75)
