[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap75) 
[Next](bap77) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXII.

LXII\. And after these things Saul envied David and sought to kill him.
But David and Jonathan, Saul's son, made a covenant together. And when
David saw that Saul sought to kill him, he fled unto Armathem; and
*Saul* went out after him.

2\. And the spirit abode in Saul, and he prophesied,

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 19:23 |

saying: Why art thou deceived, O Saul, or whom dost thou persecute in
vain? The time of thy kingdom is fulfilled. Go unto thy place, for thou
shalt die and David shall reign. Shalt not thou and thy son die
together? And then shall

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

the kingdom of David appear. And the spirit departed from Saul, and he
knew not what he had prophesied.

|           |
|-----------|
| 1 Sam. 20 |

3\. But David came unto Jonathan and said unto him: Come and let us make
a covenant before we be parted one from the other. For Saul, thy father,
seeketh to slay me without cause. And since he hath perceived that thou
lovest me he telleth thee not what he deviseth concerning me. 4. But for
this cause he hateth me, because thou lovest me, and lest I should reign
in his stead. And whereas I have done him good he requiteth me with
evil. And whereas I slew Golia by the word of the Most Mighty, see thou
what an end he purposeth for me. For he hath determined concerning my
father's house, to destroy it. And would that the judgement of truth
might be put in the balance, that the multitude of the prudent might
hear the sentence. 5. And now I fear lest he kill me and lose his own
life for my sake. For he shall never shed innocent blood without
punishment. Wherefore should my soul suffer persecution? For I was the,
least among my brethren, feeding the sheep, and wherefore am I in peril
of death? For I am righteous and have none iniquity. And wherefore doth
thy father hate me? Yet the righteousness of my father shall help me
that I fall not into thy father's hands. And seeing I am young and
tender of age, it is to no purpose that Saul envieth me. 6. If I had
wronged him, I would pray him to forgive me the sin. For if God
forgiveth iniquity, how much more thy father who is flesh and blood? I
have walked in his house with a perfect heart, yea, I grew up before his
face like a swift eagle, I put mine hands unto the harp and blessed him
in songs, and he hath devised to slay me, and

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

like a sparrow that fleeth before the face of the hawk, so have I fled
before his face. 7. Unto whom have I spoken this, or unto whom have I
told the things that I have suffered save unto thee and Melchol thy
sister? For as for both of us, let us go together in truth. 8. And it
were better, my brother, that I should be slain in battle than that I
should fall into the hands of thy father: for in the battle mine eyes
were looking on every side that I might defend him from his enemies. O
my brother Jonathan, hear my words, and if there be iniquity in me,
reprove me.

9\. And Jonathan answered and said: Come unto me, my brother David, and
I will tell thee thy righteousness. My soul pineth away sore at thy
sadness because now we are parted one from another. And this have our
sins compelled, that we should be parted from one another. But let us
remember one another day and night while we live. And even if death part
us, yet I know that our souls will know one another. For thine is the
kingdom in this world, and of thee shall be the beginning of the
kingdom, and it cometh in its time. 10. And now, like a child that is
weaned from its mother, even so shall be our separation. Let the heaven
be witness and let the earth be witness of those things which we have
spoken together. And let us weep each with the other and Jay up our
tears in one vessel and commit the vessel to the earth, and it shall be
a testimony unto us. ii. And they bewailed each one the

|           |
|-----------|
| 1 Sam. 20 |

other sore, and kissed one another. But Jonathan feared and said unto
David: Let us remember, O my brother, the covenant that is made betwixt
us, and the oath which is set in our heart. And if I die before thee and
thou indeed reign, as the Lord hath spoken, be not mindful of the anger

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

of my father, but of the covenant which is made betwixt me and thee.
Neither think upon the hatred wherewith my father hateth thee in vain
but upon my love wherewith I have loved thee. Neither think upon that
wherein my father was unthankful unto thee, but remember the table
whereat we have eaten together. Neither keep in mind the envy wherewith
my father envied thee evilly, but the faith which I and thou keep.
Neither care thou for the lie wherewith Saul hath lied, but for the
oaths that we have sworn one to

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 20:42 |

another. And they kissed one another. And after that David departed into
the wilderness, and Jonathan went into the city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIII](bap77)
