[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft46)  [Next](efft48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE WELL OF ST. LUDGVAN  <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)

ST. LUDGVAN, an Irish missionary, had finished his work. On the
hill-top, looking over the most beautiful of bays, the church stood with
all its blessings. Yet the saint, knowing human nature, determined on
associating with it some object of a miraculous character, which should
draw people from all parts of the world to Ludgvan. The saint prayed
over the dry earth, which was beneath him, as he knelt on the church
stile. His prayer was for water, and presently a most beautiful crystal
stream welled up from below. The holy man prayed on, and then, to try
the virtues of the water, he washed his eyes. They were rendered at once
more powerful, so penetrating, indeed, as to enable him to see
microscopic objects. The saint prayed again, and then he drank of the
water. He discovered that his powers of utterance were greatly improved,
his tongue formed words with scarcely any effort of his will. The saint
now prayed that all children baptised in the waters of this well might
be protected against the hangman and his hempen cord; and an angel from
heaven came down into the water, and promised the saint that his prayers
should be granted. Not long after this, a good farmer and his wife
brought their babe to the saint, that it might derive all the blessings
belonging to this holy well. The priest stood at the baptismal font, the
parents, with their friends around. The saint proceeded with the
baptismal ceremonial, and at length the time arrived when he took the
tender babe into his holy arms. He signed the sign of the cross over the
child, and when he sprinkled water on the face of the infant its face
glowed with a divine intelligence. The priest then proceeded with the
prayer; but, to the astonishment of all, whenever he used the name of
Jesus, the child, who had received the miraculous power of speech from
the water, pronounced distinctly the name of the devil, much to the
consternation of all present. The saint knew that an evil spirit had
taken possession of the child, and he endeavoured to cast him out; but
the devil proved stronger than the saint for some time. St. Ludgvan was
not to be beaten; he knew that the spirit was a restless soul, which had
been exorcised from Treassow, and he exerted all his energies in prayer.
At length the spirit became obedient, and left the child. He was now
commanded by the saint to take his flight to the Red Sea. He rose before
the terrified spectators into a gigantic size, he then spat into the
well; he laid hold of the pinnacles of the tower, and shook the church
until they thought it would fall. The saint was alone unmoved. He prayed
on, until, like a flash of lightning, the demon vanished, shaking down a
pinnacle in his flight. The demon, by spitting in the water, destroyed
the spells of the water upon the eyes  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54) and the tongue too; but it fortunately
retains its virtue of preventing any child baptised in it from being
hanged with a cord of hemp. Upon a cord of silk it is stated to have no
power.

This well had nearly lost its reputation once--a Ludgvan woman was
hanged, under the circumstances told in the following narrative:--

A small farmer, living in one of the most western districts of the
county, died some years back of what was supposed at that time to be
"English cholera." A few weeks after his decease his wife married again.
This circumstance excited some attention in the neighbourhood. It was
remembered that the woman had lived on very bad terms with her late
husband, that she had on many occasions exhibited strong symptoms of
possessing a very vindictive temper, and that during the farmer's
lifetime she had openly manifested rather more than a Platonic
preference for the jnan whom she subsequently married. Suspicion was
generally excited; people began to doubt whether the first husband had
died fairly. At length the proper order was applied for, and his body
was disinterred. On examination, enough arsenic to have poisoned three
men was found in the stomach. The wife was accused of murdering her
husband, was tried, convicted on the clearest evidence, and hanged. Very
shortly after she had suffered capital punishment horrible stories of a
ghost were widely circulated. Certain people declared that they had seen
a ghastly- resemblance of the murderess, robed in her winding-sheet,
with the black mark of the rope round her swollen neck, standing on
stormy nights upon her husband's grave, and digging there with a spade,
in hideous imitation of the actions of the men who had disinterred the
corpse for medical examination. This was fearful enough; nobody dared go
near the place after nightfall. But soon another circumstance was talked
of in connection with the poisoner, which affected the tranquillity of
people's minds in the village where she had lived, and where it was
believed she had been born, more seriously than even the ghost story
itself. The well of St. Ludgvan, celebrated among the peasantry of the
district for its one remarkable property, that every child baptised in
its water (with which the church was duly supplied on christening
occasions) was secure from ever being hanged.

No one doubted that all the babies fortunate enough to be born and
baptised in the parish, though they might live to the age of Methuselah,
and might during that period commit all the capital crimes recorded in
the "Newgate Calendar," were still destined to keep quite clear of the
summary jurisdiction of Jack Ketch. No one doubted this until the story
of the apparition of the murderess began to be spread abroad, then awful
misgivings arose in the popular mind.

A woman who had been born close by the magical well, and who had
therefore in all probability been baptised in its water, like her
neighbours of the parish, had nevertheless been publicly and
unquestionably hanged. However, probability is not always the truth.
Every parishioner determined that the baptismal register of the poisoner
should be sought for, and that it should be thus officially ascertained
whether she had been christened with the well water or not. After much
trouble, the important document was discovered--not where it was first
looked after, but in a neighbouring parish. A mistake had been made
about the woman's birthplace; she had not been baptised in St. Ludgvan
church, and had therefore not been protected by the marvellous virtue of
the local water. Unutterable was the joy and triumph of this discovery.
The wonderful character of the parish well was wonderfully vindicated;
its celebrity immediately spread wider than ever. The peasantry of the
neighbouring districts began to send for the renowned water before
christenings; and many of them actually continue, to this day, to bring
it corked up in bottles to their churches, and to beg particularly that
it may be used whenever they present their children to be baptised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[1](efft47.htm#fr_53) Robert Hunt, *Popular
Romances of the West of England*, 2nd series, p. 39.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[2](efft47.htm#fr_54) It is curious that the
farm over which some of this water flows is called "Collurian" to this
day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hedley Kow](efft48)
