[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft38)  [Next](efft40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BOGGART  <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

IN the house of an honest farmer in Yorkshire, named George Gilbertson,
a Boggart had taken up his abode. He here caused a good deal of
annoyance, especially by tormenting the children in various ways.
Sometimes their bread and butter would be snatched away, or their
pot-ringers of bread and milk be capsized by an invisible hand; for the
Boggart never let himself be seen; at other times the curtains of their
beds would be shaken backwards and forwards, or a heavy weight would
press on and nearly suffocate them. The parents had often, on hearing
their cries, to fly to their aid. There was a kind of closet, formed by
a wooden partition on the kitchen stairs, and a large knot having been
driven out of one of the deal-boards of which it was made, there
remained a hole. Into this one day the farmer's youngest boy stuck the
shoe-horn with which he was amusing himself, when immediately it was
thrown out again, and struck the boy on the head. The agent was of
course the Boggart, and it soon became their sport (which they called
*laking with Boggart*) to put the shoe-born into the hole and have it
shot back at them.

The Boggart at length proved such a torment that the farmer and his wife
resolved to quit the house and let him have it all to himself. This was
put into execution, and the farmer and his family were following the
last loads of furniture, when a neighbour named John Marshall came up:
"Well, Georgey," said he, "and sca you're leaving t'ould hoose at
last?"--"Heigh, Johnny, my lad, I'm forced tull it; for that villain
Boggart torments us soa, we can neither rest fleet nor day for't. It
seems bike to have such a malice again t'poor bairns, it ommost kills my
poor dame here at thoughts on't, and soa, ye see, we're forced to flitt
loike." He scarce had uttered the words when a voice from a deep upright
churn cried out: "Aye, aye, Georgey, we're flitting, ye see."--"Od bang
thee," cried the poor farmer, "if I'd known thou'd been there, I wadn't
ha' stirred a peg. Nay, nay, it's no use, Mally," turning to his wife,
"we may as weel turn back again to t'ould hoose as be tormented in
another' that's not so convenient"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[1](efft39.htm#fr_45) T . Keightley, *The Fairy
Mythology*, p. 307, quoting the *Literary Gazette* for 1825.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ainsel](efft40)
