[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft17)  [Next](efft19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BLINDED GIANT.  <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)

AT Dalton, near Thirsk, in Yorkshire, is a mill. It has quite recently
been rebuilt; but when I was at Dalton, six years ago, the old building
stood. In front of the house was a long mound, which went by the name of
"the giant's grave," and in the mill was shown a long blade of iron
something like a scythe-blade, but not curved, which was said to have
been the giant's knife. A curious story was told of this knife. There
lived a giant at this mill, and he ground men's bones to make his bread.
One day he captured a lad on Pilmoor, and instead of grinding him in the
mill he kept him as his servant, and never let him get away. Jack served
the giant many years, and never was allowed a holiday. At last he could
bear it no longer. Topcliffe fair was coming on, and the lad entreated
that he might be allowed to go there to see the lasses and buy some
spice. The giant surlily refused leave: Jack resolved to take it.

The day was hot, and after dinner the giant lay down in the mill with
his head on a sack and dozed. He had been eating in the mill, and had
laid down a great loaf of bone bread by his side, and the knife was in
his hand, but his fingers relaxed their hold of it in sleep. Jack seized
the moment, drew the knife away, and holding it with both his hands
drove the blade into the single eye of the giant, who woke with a howl
of agony, and starting up barred the door.

Jack was again in difficulties, but he soon found a way out of them. The
giant had a favourite dog, which had also been sleeping when his master
was blinded. Jack killed the dog, skinned it, and throwing the hide over
his back ran on all-fours barking between the legs of the giant, and so
escaped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[1](efft18.htm#fr_19) Henderson, *Notes on the
Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders*, p. 195.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Worcestershire Fairies](efft19)
