[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft18)  [Next](efft20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# FAIRIES.

## WORCESTERSHIRE FAIRIES.  <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)

ACCORDING to tradition, that interesting headland called Oseberrow, or
Osebury (*vulgo* Rosebury) Rock, which lies not far from Alfrick, and is
situated upon the border of the river Teme, in Luisley, opposite to
Knightsford Bridge, was a favourite haunt of the fairies (vulgo
pharises). It is said they had a cave there (which is still shown); and
that once upon a time, as a man and boy were ploughing in an adjoining
field, they heard an outcry in the copse on the steep declivity of the
rock; and upon their going to see what was the matter, they came up to a
fairy, who was exclaiming that he had lost his pick, or pick-axe. This,
after much search, the ploughman found for him; and thereupon the fairy
said if they would go to a certain corner of the field wherein they had
been ploughing, they would get their reward. They accordingly went, and
found plenty of bread and cheese, and cider, on which the man feasted
heartily; but the boy was so much frightened that he would not partake
of the repast.

It also is said that upon another occasion a fairy came to a ploughman
in the same field, and exclaimed:

"Oh, lend a hammer and a nail,  
Which we want to mend our pail"

There likewise is a saying in the neighbourhood, that if a woman should
break her peel (a kind of shovel used in baking bread), and should leave
it for a little while at the fairies' cave in Osebury Rock, it would be
mended for her. In days of yore, when the church at Inkberrow was taken
down and rebuilt upon a new site, the fairies, whose haunt was near the
latter place, took offence at the change, and endeavoured to obstruct
the building by carrying back the materials in the night to the old
locality. At length, however, the church was triumphant, but for many a
day afterwards the following lament is said to have been occasionally
heard:

"Neither sleep, neither lie,  
For Inkbro's ting-tang hangs so high."

The church is a large and handsome edifice, of mixed styles of
architecture. It is supposed to have been built about five centuries
ago, but has undergone much alteration.

As a countryman was one day working in a field in Upton Snodsbury, he
all of a sudden beard a great outcry in a neighbouring piece of ground,
which was followed by a low, mournful voice, saying: "I have broke my
bilk, I have broke my bilk;" and thereupon the man picked up the hammer
and nails which he had with him, and ran to the spot from whence the
outcry came, where he found a fairy lamenting over his broken bilk,
which was a kind of cross-barred seat; this the man soon mended, and the
fairy, to make him amends for his pains danced round him till he wound
him down into a cave, where he was treated with plenty of biscuits and
wine; and it is said that from thence-forward that man always did well
in life

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[1](efft19.htm#fr_20) Jabez Allies, *On the
Antiquities and Folk-Lore of Worcestershire*, p. 413.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairy Midwife](efft20)
