[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Tantra](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Next](maha01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Introduction and Preface

**PREFACE  
**

THE Indian Tantras, which are numerous, constitute the Scripture
(*Shastra*) of the Kaliyuga, and as such are the voluminous source of
present and practical orthodox "Hinduism." The Tantra Shastra is, in
fact, and whatever be its historical origin, a development of the
*Vaidika Karmakanda*, promulgated to meet the needs of that age. Shiva
says: "For the benefit of men of the Kali age, men bereft of energy and
dependent for existence on the food they eat, the Kaula doctrine, O
auspicious one! is given" (Chap. IX., verse 12). To the Tantra we must
therefore look if we would understand aright both ritual, *yoga*, and
*sadhana* of all kinds, as also the general principles of which these
practices are but the objective expression.

Yet of all the forms of Hindu Shastra, the Tantra is that which is least
known and understood, a circumstance in part due to the difficulties of
its subject-matter and to the fact that the key to much of its
terminology and method rest with the initiate. The present translation
is, in fact, the first published in Europe of any Indian Tantra. An
inaccurate version rendered in imperfect English was published in
Calcutta by a Bengali editor some twelve years ago, preceded by an
Introduction which displayed insufficient knowledge in respect of what
it somewhat quaintly described as "the mystical and superficially
technical passages" of this Tantra. A desire to attempt to do it greater
justice has in part prompted its selection as the first for publication.
This Tantra is, further, one which is well known and esteemed, though
perhaps more highly so amongst that portion of the Indian public which
favours "reformed" Hinduism than amongst some Tantrikas, to whom, as I
have been told, certain of its provisions appear to display unnecessary
timidity. The former admire it on account of its noble exposition of the
worship of the Supreme Brahman, and in the belief that certain of its
passages absolutely discountenance the orthodox ritual. Nothing can be
more mistaken than such belief, even though it be the fact that "for him
who has faith in the root, of what use are the branches and leaves."
This anyone will discover who reads the text. It is true that, as Chap.
VII., verse 94, says: "In the purified heart knowledge of Brahman
grows," and *Brahmajnane samutpanne krityakrityang na vidyate*. But the
statement assumes the attainment of *Brahmajñana*, and this, the Shastra
says, can be attained, not by Vedantic discussions nor mere prayer,
after the manner of Protestant systems of Christian worship; but by the
*Sadhana* which is its main subject-matter. I have referred to
Protestant systems, for the Catholic Church possesses an elaborate
ritual and a *sadhana* of its own which is in many points strikingly
analogous to the Hindu system. The section of Tantrikas to whom I have
referred are, I believe, also in error. For the design of this Tantra
appears to be, whilst conserving commonly-recognized Tantrik principles,
to secure that, as has sometimes proved to be the case, they are not
abused. Parvvati says (Chap. I., verse 67): "I fear, 0 Lord! that even
that which Thou hast ordained for the good of men will, through them,
turn out for evil." *Hitaya yane*, *karmani kathitani tvaya prabho
Manyetani mahadeva viparitani manave*. It is significant, in connection
with these observations, to note that this particular Tantra was chosen
as the subject of commentary by Shrimad Hariharananda Bharati, the Guru
of the celebrated Hindu "reformer," Raja Ram Mohun Roy.

The Tantra has been assigned to the group of sixty-four known as those
of the Rathakranta. It was first published by the Adi-Brahma-Samaja in
1798 Shakabda (A.D. 1876), and was printed in Bengali characters, with
the notes of the Kulavadhuta Shrimad Hariharananda Bharati under the
editorship of Anandachandra Vidyavagisha. The preface to this edition
stated that three MSS. were consulted; one belonging to the library of
the Samaja; the second supplied by Durgadasa Chandhuri, and the third
taken from the library of Raja Ram Mohun Roy. This text appears to be
the basis of subsequent publications. It was again printed in 1888 by
Shri Krishna Gopala Bhakta, since when there have been several editions
with Bengali translations, including that of Shri Prasanna Kumara
Shastri. The late Pandit Jivananda Vidyasagara published an edition in
Devanagari character, with the notes of Hariharananda; and the
Venkateshvara Press at Bombay have issued another in similar character
with a Hindi translation.

The translation published is that of the first part only. It is commonly
thought (and was so stated by the author of the Calcutta edition in
English to which I have referred) that the second portion is lost. This
is, however, not so, though copies of the complete Tantra are rare
enough. The full text exists in manuscript, and I hope at a later date
to have an opportunity of publishing a translation of it. I came across
a complete manuscript some two years ago in the possession of a Nepalese
Pandit. He would, however, only permit me to make a copy of his
manuscript on the condition that the *Shatkarmma* Mantras were not
published. For, as he said, virtue not being a condition precedent for
the acquisition of *siddhi* in such Mantras, their publication might
enable the evilly disposed to work harm against others, a crime which,
he added, was, in his own country, where the Tantra was current,
punishable by the civil power. I was unable to persuade him even with
the observation that the mere publication of the Mantra without
knowledge of what is called the *prayoga* (which cannot be learned of
books) would in any case be ineffectual. I could not give an undertaking
which would have involved the publication of a mutilated text, and the
reader must therefore for the present be content with a translation of
the first part of the Tantra, which is generally known, and has, as
stated, been several times printed. The incident has further value than
the direct purpose for which I have told it. There are some to whom the
Tantra, though they may not have read a line of it, is "nothing but
black magic," and all its followers are "black magicians." This is of
course absurd. In this connection I cannot avoid interposing the
observation that certain practices are described in Tantra which, though
they are alleged to have the results described therein, yet exist "for
delusion." The true attitude of the higher Tantrika is illustrated by
the action of the Pandit who, if he disappointed my expectations, at any
rate by his refusal afforded an answer to these too general allegations.

The second portion of the manuscript in his possession contained over
double the number of Shlokas to be found in the first part here
published.

The edition which has been used for the translation is that (now out of
print) edited and published at Calcutta by Shri Krishna Gopala Bhakta in
Chaitra 1295 Bengali era (April, 1888), with Commentary of Shrimad
Hariharananda Bharati, and with additional notes by the learned and
lately deceased Pandit Jaganmohana Tarkalangkara, called Vriddha in
order to distinguish him from another celebrated Pandit of the same
name. A new edition of the same work is now, in course of publication,
with further notes by the latter’s son, Pandit Jnanendranatha
Tantraratna.

This valuable Commentary is not, however, altogether suitable for the
general reader, for it assumes a certain amount of knowledge on his part
which he does not possess. I have accordingly, whilst availing myself of
its aid, written my own commentary, and added an Introduction explaining
certain matters and terms referred to or presupposed by the text which,
as they require a somewhat more extended treatment, could not be
conveniently dealt with in the footnotes. Some of the matters there
explained are, though common and fundamental, seldom accurately defined.
Nothing, therefore, is lost by a re-statement of them with an intention
to serve such accuracy. Other matters are of a special character, and
are either not generally known or are misunderstood. The Introduction,
however, does not profess to be an exhaustive treatment of that with
which it deals. On the contrary, it is but an extended note written to
help some way towards a better understanding of the text by the ordinary
reader. For a fuller exposition of general principles and practice the
interested are referred to three works which I have in preparation,
"Principles of Tantra" (*Tantratattva*), "Exposition of the Secret
Worship" (*Rahasyapujapaddhati*), and "Description of the Six Centres"
(*Shatchakranirupana*). There are, however, some matters in the
*Shastra* or its accompanying oral tradition which he must, and if
disposed thereto will, find out for himself. This, too, is implied by
the saying in this Tantra that it is by merit acquired in previous
births that the mind inclines to Kaula doctrine (Chapter VII., verse
99). However this may be, no one will understand the *Shastra* who
starts his inquiry with a mind burdened with the current prejudices
against it, whatever be the colour of truth some of them may possess by
reason of actual abuse of Shastric principles.

In conclusion, I wish to thank my Indian friends for the aid they have
given me in the preparation of this and other kindred works, and to whom
I am indebted for much information gathered during many pleasant hours
which we have spent together in the study of a subject of common
interest to them and myself. The Tantras generally are written in
comparatively simple Sanskrit. For their rendering, however, a working
knowledge of their terminology and ritual is required, which can be only
fully found in those to whom it is familiar through race, upbringing,
and environment, and in whom there is still some regard for their
ancient inheritance. As for others, they must learn to see through the
Indian eye of knowledge until their own have been trained to its lines
of vision. In this way we shall be in the future spared some of the
ridiculous presentments of Indian beliefs common in the past and even
now too current.

ARTHUR AVALON.

January 7, 1913.

 

 

 

 

**INTRODUCTION**

Mount Kailasa

The scene of the revelation of this Tantra is laid in Himalaya, the
"Abode of Snow," a holy land weighted with the traditions of the Aryan
race. Here in these lofty uplands, encircled with everlasting snows,
rose the great mountain of the north, the Sapta Kula Parvata. Hence the
race itself came, and there its early legends have their setting. There
are still shown at Bhimudiyar the caves where the sons of Pandu and
Draupadi rested, as did Rama and his faithful wife at the point where
the Kosi joins the Sita in the grove of Asoka trees. In these mountains
Munis and Rishis lived. Here also is the *Kshetra* of Shiva Mahadeva,
where His Spouse Parvvati, the daughter of the Mountain King, was born,
and where Mother Ganges also has her source. From time immemorial
pilgrims have toiled through these mountains to visit the three great
shrines of Gangotri, Kedarnath, and Badrinath. At Kangri, further north,
the pilgrims make the *parikrama* of Mount Kailasa (Kang Rinpoche),
where Shiva is said to dwell. This nobly towering peak rises to the
north-west of the sacred Mansarowar Lake (Mapham Yum-tso) from amidst
the purple ranges of the lower Kangri Mountains. The paradise of Shiva
is a summerland of both lasting sunshine and cool shade, musical with
the song of birds and bright with undying flowers. The air, scented with
the sweet fragrance of Mandara chaplets, resounds with the music and
song of celestial singers and players. The Mount is *Gana Parvata*,
thronged with trains of Spirits (*devayoni*), of which the opening
Chapter speaks.

And in the regions beyond rises Mount Meru, centre of the world-lotus.
Its heights, peopled with spirits, are hung with clusters of stars as
with wreaths of Malati flowers. In short, it is written: "He who thinks
of Himachala, though he should not behold him, is greater than he who
performs all worship in Kashi (Benares). In a hundred ages of the Devas
I could not tell thee of the glories of Himachala. As the dew is dried
up by the morning sun, so are the sins of mankind by the sight of
Himachala."

It is not, however, necessary to go to the Himalayan Kailasa to find
Shiva. He dwells wheresoever his worshippers, versed in Kulatattva,
abide, and His mystic mount is to be sought in the thousand-petalled
lotus (*sahasrara-padma*) in the body of every human *jiva*, hence
called Shivasthana, to which all, wheresoever situate, may repair when
they have learned how to achieve the way thither.

Shiva promulgates His teaching in the world below in the works known as
Yamala, Damara, Shiva Sutra, and in the Tantras which exist in the form
of Dialogues between the Devata and his Shakti, the Devi in Her form as
Parvvati. According to the Gayatri Tantra, the Deva Ganesha first
preached the Tantra to the *Devayoni* on Mount Kailasa, after he had
himself received them from the mouth of Shiva.

After a description of the mountain, the Dialogue opens with a question
from Parvvati in answer to which and those which succeed it, Shiva
unfolds His doctrine on the subjects with which this particular Tantra
deals.

Shiva and Shakti

That eternal immutable existence which transcends the *turiya* and all
other states is the unconditioned Absolute, the supreme Brahman or
Para-brahman, without Prakriti (*nishkala*) or Her attributes
(*nir-guna*), which, as being the inner self and knowing subject, can
never be the object of cognition, and is to be apprehended only through
*yoga* by the realization of the Self (*atmajñana*), which It is. For as
it is said, "Spirit can alone know Spirit." Being beyond mind, speech,
and without name, the Brahman was called "*Tat*," "That," and then "*Tat
Sat*," "That which is." For the sun, moon, and stars, and all visible
things, what are they but a glimpse of light caught from "That" (*Tat*)?

Brahman is both *nishkala* and *sakala*. *Kala* is Prakriti. The
*nishkala* Brahman or Para-brahman is the *Tat*, when thought of as
without Prakriti (*prakriteranya*). It is called *sakala* when with
Prakriti. As the substance of Prakriti is the three gunas It is then
*su-guna*, as in the previous state It was *nir-guna*. Though in the
latter state It is thought of as without Shakti, yet (making
accommodation to human speech) in It potentially exists Shakti, Its
power and the whole universe produced by It. To say, however, that the
Shakti exists in the Brahman is but a form of speech, since It and
Shakti are, in fact, one, and Shakti is eternal (*Anadi-rupa*). She is
*Brahma-rupa* and both *vi-guna* (*nir-guna*) and *sa-guna*; the
*Chaitanya-rupini-Devi*, who manifests all *bhuta*. She is the
*Ananda-rupini-Devi*, by whom the Brahman manifests Itself, and who, to
use the words of the Sarada, pervades the universe as does oil the
sesamum seed.

In the beginning the *Nishkala* Brahman alone existed. In the beginning
there was the One. It willed and became many. *Ahab bahu syam* – "may I
be many." In such manifestation of Shakti the Brahman is known as the
lower (*apara*) or manifested Brahman, who, as the subject of worship,
is meditated upon with attributes. And, in fact, to the mind and sense
of the embodied spirit (*jiva*) the Brahman has body and form. It is
embodied in the forms of all Devas and Devils, and in the worshipper
himself. Its form is that of the universe, and of all things and beings
therein.

As *Shruti* says: "He saw" (*Sa aikshata*, *aham bahu syam prajayeya*).
"He thought to Himself may I be many." "*Sa aikshaya*" was itself a
manifestation of Shakti, the *Para-mapurva-nirvana shakti*, or Brahman
as Shakti. From the Brahman, with Shakti (*Para-shakti-maya*) issued
Nada (Shiva-Shakti as the "Word" or "Sound" ), and from Nada, Vindu
appeared. Kalicharana in his commentary on the Shatchakra-nirupana says
that Shiva and Nirvana Shakti bound by a mayik bond and covering, should
be thought of as existing in the form of Parang Vindu.

The Sarada says: *Sachchidananda vibhavat sakalat parameshvarat
asichchhaktistato nado*, *nadad vindu-samudbhavah* ("From Parameshvara
vested with the wealth of sachchidananda and with Prakriti (*sakala*)
issued Shakti; from Shakti came Nada and from Nada was born Vindu" ).
The state of subtle body which is known as Kama-kala is the *mula* of
*mantra*. The term *mula-mantratmika*, when applied to the Devi, refers
to this subtle body of Hers known as the Kama-kala. The Tantra also
speaks of three Vindus, namely Shiva-maya, Shakti-maya, and
Shiva-shakti-maya.

The Parang-vindu is represented as a circle, the centre of which is the
*brahma-pada*, or place of Brahman, wherein are Prakriti-Purusha, the
circumference of which is encircling *maya*. It is on the crescent of
*nirvana-kala*, the seventeenth, which is again in that of *ama-kala*,
the sixteenth digit (referred to in the text) of the moon-circle
(*Chandramandala*), which circle is situate above the Sun-Circle
(*Suryyamandala*), the *Guru* and the *hangsah*, which are in the
pericarp of the thousand-petalled lotus (*sahasrarapadma*). Next to the
Vindu is the fiery Bodhini, or Nibodhika (v. *post*). The Vindu, with
the Nirvana-kala, Nibodhika, and Ama-kala, are situated in the
lightning-like inverted triangle known as "*A*, *Ka*, *Tha*," and which
is so called because at its apex is *A*; at its right base is *Za*; and
at its left base *Tha*. It is made up of forty-eight letters
(*matrika*): the sixteen vowels running from *A* to *Ka*; sixteen
consonants of the *ka-varga* and other groups running from *A* to *Ka*;
and the remaining sixteen from *Ka* to *Tha*. Inside are the remaining
letters (*matrika*), *ha*, *la*(second), and *ksha*. As the substance of
Devi is *matrika* (*matrika-mayi*) the triangle represents the "Word" of
all that exists. The triangle is itself encircled by the
*Chandramandala*. The Vindu is symbolically described as being like a
grain of gram (*chanaka*), which under its encircling sheath contains a
divided seed. This *Parang-vindu* is Prakriti-Purusha, Shiva-Shakti. It
is known as the Shabda-Brahman (the Sound Brahman), or Aparabrahman. A
polarization of the two Shiva and Shakti *Tattvas* then takes place in
*Parashaktimaya*. The Devi becomes *Unmukhi*. Her face turns towards
Shiva. There is an unfolding which bursts the encircling shell of Maya,
and creation then takes place by division of Shiva and Shakti or of
"Hang" and "Sah." The Sarada says: "The *Devataparashaktimaya* is again
Itself divided, such divisions being known as Vindu, Vaja, and Nada.
Vindu is of the nature of Nada or Shiva, and Vaja of Shakti, and Nada
has been said to be the relation of these two by those who are versed in
all the Agamas." The Sarada says that before the bursting of the shell
enclosing the *brahma-pada*, which, together with its defining
circumference, constitute the Shabda-brahman, an indistinct sound arose
(*avyaktatmaravobhavat*). This *avyaktanada* is both the first and the
last state of Nada, according as it is viewed from the standpoint of
evolution or involution. For Nada, as Raghava-bhatta says, exists in
three states. In Nada are the guna (*sattva*, *rajas*, and *tamas*),
which form the substance of Prakriti, which with Shiva It is. When
*tamo-guna* predominates Nada is merely an indistinct or unmanifested
(*dhvanyat – mako*’*vykta-nadah*) sound in the nature of *dhvani*. In
this state, in which it is a phase of Avyaktanada, it is called
Nibodhika, or Bodhini. It is Nada when *rajoguna* is in the ascendant,
when there is a sound in which there is something like a connected or
combined disposition of the letters. When the sattva-guna preponderates
Nada assumes the form of Vindu. The action of *rajas* on *tamas* is to
veil. Its own independent action effects an arrangement which is only
perfected by the emergence of the essentially manifesting *sattvika
guna* set into play by it. Nada, Vindu, and Nibodhika, and the Shakti,
of which they are the specific manifestation, are said to be in the form
of Sun, Moon, and Fire respectively. *Jñana* (spiritual wisdom) is
spoken of as fire as it burns up all actions, and the *tamoguna* is
associated with it. For when the effect of cause and effect of action
are really known, then action ceases. *Ichchha* is the Moon. The Moon
contains the sixteenth digit, the Ama-kala with its nectar, which
neither increases nor decays, and *Ichchha*, or will, is the eternal
precursor of creation. *Kriya* is like the Sun, for as the Sun by its
light makes all things visible, so unless there is action and striving
there cannot be realization or manifestation. As the Gita sways: "As one
Sun makes manifest all the *loka*."

The Shabda-Brahman manifests Itself in a triad of energies – knowledge
(*jñanashakti*), will (*ichchha-shakti*), and action (*kriya-shakti*),
associated with the three *gunas* of Prakriti, *tamas*, *sattva*, and
*rajas*. From the Parang-Vindu, who is both *vindvat-maka* and *kalatma*
– *i.e.*, Shakti – issued Raudri, Rudra, and his Shakti, whose forms are
fire (*vahni*), and whose activity is knowledge (*jñana*); Vama, and
Vishnu and his Shakti, whose form is the sun, and whose activity is
*kriya* (action): and Jyeshtha and Brahma and his Shakti, whose form is
the Moon and whose activity is desire. The Vamakeshvara Tantra says that
Tri-pura is threefold, as Brahma, Vishnu, and Isha; and as the energies
desire, wisdom, and action, the energy of will when Brahman would
create; the energy of wisdom when She reminds Him, saying "Let this be
thus" ; and when, thus knowing, He acts, She becomes the energy of
action. The Devi is thus
*Ichchha-shakti-jñana-shakti-kriya-shakti-svaru-pini*.

Para-shiva exists as a septenary under the form, firstly, of Shambhu,
who is the associate of time (*kala-bandhu*). From Him issues
Sada-shiva, Who pervades and manifests all things, and then come Ishana
and the triad, Rudra, Vishnu, and Brahma, each with their respective
Shakti (without whom they avail nothing) separately and particularly
associated with the gunas, *tamas*, *sattva* and *rajas*. Of these
Devas, the last triad, together with Ishana, and Sada-shiva, are the
five Shivas who are collectively known as the *Maha-preta*, whose *vija*
is "*Hsauh*." Of the Maha-preta, it is said that the last four form the
support, and the fifth the seat, of the bed on which the Devi is united
with Parama-shiva, in the room of *chintamani* stone, on the jewelled
island clad with clumps of *kadamba* and heavenly trees set in the ocean
of Ambrosia.

Shiva is variously addressed in this work as Shambhu, Sada-shiva,
Shankara, Maheshvara, etc., names which indicate particular states,
qualities, and manifestations of the One in its descent towards the
many; for there are many Rudras. Thus Sada-shiva indicates the
predominance of the *sattva-guna*. His names are many, 1,008 being given
in the sixty-ninth chapter of the Shiva Purana, and in the seventeenth
chapter of the Anushasana Parvan of the Mahabharata.

Shakti is both *maya*, that by which the Brahman creating the universe
is able to make Itself appear to be different from what It really is,
and *mula-prakriti*, or the unmanifested (*avyakta*) state of that
which, when manifest, is the universe of name and form. It is the
primary so called "material cause," consisting of the equipoise of the
triad of *guna* or "qualities" which are *sattva* (that which manifests)
*rajas* (that which *acts*), *tamas* (that which veils and produces
inertia). The three gunas represent Nature as the revelation of spirit,
Nature as the passage of descent from spirit to matter, or of ascent
from matter to spirit, and Nature as the dense veil of spirit. The Devi
is thus *guna-nidhi* ("treasure-house of guna" ). *Mula-prakriti* is the
womb into which Brahman casts the seed from which all things are born.
The womb thrills to the movement of the essentially active *rajo-guna*.
The equilibrium of the triad is destroyed, and the *guna*, now in varied
combinations, evolve under the illumination of Shiva (*chit*), the
universe which is ruled by Maheshvara and Maheshvari. The dual
principles of Shiva and Shakti, which are in such dual form the product
of the polarity manifested in *Parashakti-maya*, pervade the whole
universe, and are present in man in the Svayambhu-Linga of the
*muladhara* and the Devi Kundalini, who, in serpent form, encircles it.
The Shabda-Brahman assumes in the body of man the form of the Devi
Kundalini, and as such is in all *prani* (breathing creatures), and in
the shape of letters appears in prose and verse. *Kundala* means coiled.
Hence Kundalini, whose form is that of a coiled serpent, means that
which is coiled. She is the luminous vital energy (*jiva-shakti*) which
manifests as *prana*, She sleeps in the *muladhara*, and has three and a
half coils corresponding in number with the three and a half *vindus* of
which the Kubjika Tantra speaks. When after closing the ears the sound
of Her hissing is not heard death approaches.

From the first *avyakta* creation issued the second *mahat*, with its
three guna distinctly manifested. Thence sprung the third creation
*ahangkara* (selfhood), which is of threefold form – *vaikarika*, or
pure *sattvika ahangkara*; the *taijasa*, or *rajasika ahangkara*; and
the *tamasika*, or *bhutadika ahangkara*. The latter is the origin of
the subtle essences (*tan-matra*) of the *Tattvas*, ether, air, fire,
water, earth, associated with sound, touch, sight, taste and smell, and
with the colours – pure transparency, shyama, red, white, and yellow.
There is some difference in the schools as to that which each of the
three forms produces, but from such threefold form of *Ahang-kara* issue
the *indriya* ("senses"), and the Devas Dik, Vata, Arka, Prachetas,
Vahni, Indra, Upendra, Mitra, and the Ashvins. The *vaikarika*,
*taijasa*, and *bhutadika* are the fourth, fifth, and sixth creations,
which are known as *prakrita*, or appertaining to Prakriti. The rest,
which are products of these, such as the vegetable world with its upward
life current, animals with horizontal life current, and *bhuta*, *preta*
and the like, whose life current tends downward, constitute the
*vaikrita* creation, the two being known as the *kaumara* creation.

The Goddess (Devi) is the great Shakti. She is *Maya*, for of Her the
*maya* which produces the *sangsara* is. As Lord of *Maya* She is
*Mahamaya*. Devi is *a-vidya* (nescience) because She binds and *vidya*
(knowledge) because She liberates and destroys the *sangsara*. She is
Prakriti, and as existing before creation is the *Adya* (primordial)
Shakti. Devi is the *vachaka-shakti*, the manifestation of *chit* in
Prakriti, and the *vachya-shakti*, or *Chit* itself. The *Atma* should
be contemplated as Devi. Shakti or Devi is thus the Brahman revealed in
Its mother aspect (*shri-mata*) as Creatrix and Nourisher of the worlds.
Kali says of Herself in Yogini Tantra "*Sachchidananda-rupaham
brahmaivaham sphurat-prab-ham*." So the Devi is described with
attributes both of the qualified Brahman; and (since that Brahman is but
the manifestation of the Absolute) She is also addressed with epithets,
which denote the unconditioned Brahman. She is the great Mother
(*Ambika*) sprung from the sacrificial hearth of the fire of the Grand
Consciousness (*chit*); decked with the Sun and Moon; Lalita, "She who
plays"; whose play is world-play; whose eyes playing like fish in the
beauteous waters of her Divine face, open and shut with the appearance
and disappearance of countless worlds now illuminated by her light now
wrapped in her terrible darkness.

The Devi, as Para-brahman, is beyond all form and *guna*. The forms of
the Mother of the Universe are threefold. There is first the Supreme
(*para*) form, of which, as the Vishnu-yamala says, "none know." There
is next her subtle (*sukshma*) form, which consists of *mantra*. But as
the mind cannot easily settle itself upon that which is formless, She
appears as the subject of contemplation in Her third, or gross
(*sthula*), or physical form, with hands and feet and the like as
celebrated in the *Devi-stotra* of the Puranas and Tantras. Devi, who as
Prakriti is the source of Brahma, Vishnu, and Mahesh-vara, has both male
and female forms. But it is in Her female forms that She is chiefly
contemplated. For though existing in all things, in a peculiar sense
female beings are parts of Her. The Great Mother, who exists in the form
of all Tantras and all Yantras, is, as the Lalita says, the "unsullied
treasure-house of beauty" ; the Sapphire Devi, whose slender waist,
bending beneath the burden of the ripe fruit of her breasts, swells into
jewelled hips heavy with the promise of infinite maternities.

As the Mahadevi She exists in all forms as Sarasvati, Lakshmi, Gayatri,
Durga, Tripura-sundari, Anna-purna, and all the Devi who are *avatara*
of the Brahman.

Devi, as Sati, Uma, Parvvati, and Gauri, is spouse of Shiva. It was as
Sati prior to Daksha’s sacrifice (*daksha-yajna*) that the Devi
manifested Herself to Shiva in the ten celebrated forms known as the
*dasha-mahavidya* referred to in the text – Kali, Bagala, Chhinnamasta,
Bhuvaneshvari, Matangini, Shodashi, Dhumavati, Tripura-sundari, Tara,
and Bhairavi. When, at the Daksha-yajna She yielded up her life in shame
and sorrow at the treatment accorded by her father to Her Husband, Shiva
took away the body, and, ever bearing it with Him, remained wholly
distraught and spent with grief. To save the world from the forces of
evil which arose and grew with the withdrawal of His Divine control,
Vishnu with His discus (*chakra*) cut the dead body of Sati, which Shiva
bore, into fifty-one fragments, which fell to earth at the places
thereafter known as the fifty-one *maha-pitha-sthana* (referred to in
the text), where Devi, with Her Bhairava, is worshipped under various
names.

Besides the forms of the Devi in the *brahmanda* there is Her subtle
form called Kundalini in the body (*pindanda*). These are but some only
of Her endless forms. She is seen as one and as many, as it were, but
one moon reflected in countless waters. She exists, too, in all animals
and inorganic things, since the universe with all its beauties is, as
the Devi Purana says, but a part of Her. All this diversity of form is
but the infinite manifestations of the flowering beauty of the One
Supreme Life, a doctrine which is nowhere else taught with greater
wealth of illustration than in the Shakta Shastras, and Tantras. The
great Bharga in the bright Sun and all Devatas, and, indeed, all life
and being, are wonderful, and are worshipful, but only as Her
manifestations. And he who worships them otherwise is, in the words of
the great Devi-bhagavata, "like unto a man who, with the light of a
clear lamp in his hands, yet falls into some waterless and terrible
well." The highest worship for which the *sadhaka* is qualified
(*adhikari*) only after external worship and that internal form known as
*sadhara*, is described as *niradhara*. Therein Pure Intelligence is the
Supreme Shakti who is worshipped as the Very Self, the Witness freed of
the glamour of the manifold Universe. By one’s own direct experience of
Maheshvari as the Self She is with reverence made the object of that
worship which leads to liberation.

Guna

It cannot be said that current explanations give a clear understanding
of this subject. Yet such is necessary, both as affording one of the
chief keys to Indian philosophy and to the principles which govern
*Sadhana*. The term *guna* is generally translated "quality," a word
which is only accepted for default of a better. For it must not be
overlooked that the three *guna* (*Sattva*, *rajas*, and *tamas*), which
are of Prakriti, constitute Her very substance. This being so, all
Nature which issues from Her, the *Maha-karana-svarupa*., is called
*tri-gunatmaka*, and is composed of the same *guna* in different states
of relation to one another. The functions of *sattva*, *rajas*, and
*tamas* are to reveal, to make active, and to suppress respectively.
*Rajas* is the dynamic, as *sattva* and *tamas* are static principles.
That is to say, *sattva* and *tamas* can neither reveal nor suppress
without being first rendered active by *rajas*. These gunas work by
mutual suppression.

The unrevealed Prakriti (*avyakta-prakriti*) or Devi is the state of
stable equilibrium of these three *guna*. When this state is disturbed
the manifested universe appears, in every object of which one or other
of the three *guna* is in the ascendant. Thus in Devas, as in those who
approach the *divya* state, *sattva* predominates, and *rajas* and
*tamas* are very much reduced. That is, their independent manifestation
is reduced. They are in one sense still there, for where *rajas* is not
independently active it is operating on *sattva* to suppress *tamas*,
which appears or disappears to the extent to which it is, or is not,
subject to suppression by the revealing principle. In the ordinary human
*jiva*, considered as a class, *tamas* is less reduced than in the case
of the Deva, but very much reduced when comparison is made with the
animal *jiva*. *Rajas* has great independent activity, and *sattva* is
also considerably active. In the animal creation *sattva* has
considerably less activity. *Rajas* has less independent activity than
in man, but is much more active than in the vegetable world. *Tamas* is
greatly less preponderant than in the latter. In the vegetable kingdom
*tamas* is more preponderant than in the case of animals, and both
*rajas* and *sattva* less so. In the inorganic creation *rajas* makes
*tamas* active to suppress both *sattva* and its own independent
activity. It will thus be seen that the "upward" or revealing movement
from the predominance of *tamas* to that of *sattva* represents the
spiritual progress of the *jivatma*.

Again, as between each member of these classes one or other of the three
*guna* may be more or less in the ascendant.

Thus, in one man as compared with another, the *sattva guna* may
predominate, in which case his temperament is sattvik, or, as the Tantra
calls it, *divyabhava*. In another the *rajoguna* may prevail, and in
the third the *tamoguna*, in which case the individual is described as
rajasik, or tamasik, or, to use Tantrik phraseology, he is said to
belong to *virabhava*, or is a *pashu* respectively. Again the vegetable
creation is obviously less tamasik, and more rajasik and sattvik than
the mineral, and even amongst these last there may be possibly some
which are less tamasik than others.

Etymologically, *sattva* is derived from "*sat*," that which is
eternally existent. The eternally existent is also *chit*, pure
Intelligence or Spirit, and *ananda* or Bliss. In a secondary sense,
*sat* is also used to denote the "good." And commonly (though such use
obscures the original meaning), the word *sattva guna* is rendered "good
quality." It is, however, "good" in the sense that it is productive of
good and happiness. In such case, however, stress is laid rather on a
necessary quality or effect (in the ethical sense) of "*sat*" than upon
its original meaning. In the primary sense *sat* is that which
*reveals*. Nature is a revelation of spirit (*sat*). Where Nature is
such a revelation of spirit there it manifests as *sattva guna*. It is
the shining forth from under the veil of the hidden spiritual substance
(*sat*). And that equality in things which reveals this is *sattva
guna*. So of a pregnant woman it is said that she is *antahsattva*, or
instinct with *sattva*; she in whom *sattva* as *jiva* (whose
characteristic guna is *sattva*) is living in an hidden state.

But Nature not only reveals, but is also a dense covering or veil of
spirit, at times so dense that the ignorant fail to discern the spirit
which it veils. Where Nature is a veil of spirit there it appears in its
quality of *tamoguna*.

In this case the *tamoguna* is currently spoken of as representative of
inertia, because that is the effect of the nature which veils. This
quality, again, when translated into the moral sphere, becomes
ignorance, sloth, etc.

In a third sense nature is a bridge between spirit which reveals and
matter which veils. Where Nature is a bridge of descent from spirit to
matter, or of ascent from matter to spirit, there it manifests itself as
*rajoguna*. This is generally referred to as the quality of activity,
and when transferred to the sphere of feeling it shows itself as
passion. Each thing in Nature then contains that in which spirit is
manifested or reflected as in a mirror or *sattvaguna*; that by which
spirit is covered, as it were, by a veil of darkness or *tamoguna*, and
that which is the vehicle for the descent into matter or the return to
spirit or *rajoguna*. Thus *sattva* is the light of Nature, as *tamas*
is its *shade*. *Rajas* is, as it were, a blended tint oscillating
between each of the extremes constituted by the other guna.

The object of Tantrik *sadhana* is to bring out and make preponderant
the *sattva guna* by the aid of *rajas*, which operates to make the
former guna active. The subtle body (*lingasharira*) of the *jivatma*
comprises in it *buddhi*, *ahangkara*, *manas*, and the ten senses. This
subtle body creates for itself gross bodies suited to the spiritual
state of the *jivatma*. Under the influence of *prarabdhda karmma*,
*buddhi* becomes *tamasik*, *rajasik*, or *sattvik*. In the first case
the *jivatma* assumes inanimate bodies; in the second, active passionate
bodies; and in the third, sattvik bodies of varying degrees of spiritual
excellence, ranging from man to the Deva. The gross body is also
*trigunatmaka*. This body conveys impressions to the *jivatma* through
the subtle body and the *buddhi* in particular. When *sattva* is made
active impressions of happiness result, and when *rajas* or *tamas* are
active the impressions are those of sorrow and delusion. These
impressions are the result of the predominance of these respective guna.
The action of *rajas* on *sattva* produces happiness, as its own
independent activity or operation on *tamas* produce sorrow and delusion
respectively. Where *sattva* or happiness is predominant, there sorrow
and delusion are suppressed. Where *rajas* or sorrow is predominant,
there happiness and delusion are suppressed. And where *tamas* or
delusion predominates there, as in the case of the inorganic world, both
happiness and sorrow are suppressed. All objects share these three
states in different proportions. There is, however, always in the
*jivatma* an admixture of sorrow with happiness, due to the operation of
*rajas*. For happiness, which is the fruit of righteous acts done to
attain happiness, is after all only a *vikara*. The natural state of the
*jivatma –* that is, the state of its own true nature – is that bliss
(*ananda*) which arises from the pure knowledge of the Self, in which
both happiness and sorrow are equally objects of indifference. The
worldly enjoyment of a person involves pain to self or others. This is
the result of the pursuit of happiness, whether by righteous or
unrighteous acts. As spiritual progress is made, the gross body becomes
more and more refined. In inanimate bodies *karma* operates to the
production of pure delusion. On the exhaustion of such *karma* the
*jivatma* assumes animate bodies for the operation of such forms of
*karma* as lead to sorrow and happiness mixed with delusion. In the
vegetable world *sattva* is but little active, with a corresponding lack
of discrimination, for discrimination is the effect of *sattva* in
*buddhi*, and from discrimination arises the recognition of pleasure and
pain, conceptions of right and wrong, of the transitory and
intransitory, and so forth, which are the fruit of a high degree of
discrimination, or of activity of *sattva*. In the lower animal *sattva*
in *buddhi* is not sufficiently active to lead to any degree of
development of these conceptions. In man, however, the *sattva* in
*buddhi* is considerably active, and in consequence these conceptions
are natural in him. For this reason the human birth is, for spiritual
purposes, so important. All men, however, are not capable of forming
such conceptions in an equal degree. The degree of activity in an
individual’s *buddhi* depends on his *prarabdha karma*. However bad such
*karma* may be in any particular case, the individual is yet gifted with
that amount of discrimination which, if properly aroused and aided, will
enable him to better his spiritual condition by inducing the *rajoguna*
in him to give more and more activity to the *sattva guna* in his
*buddhi*.

On this account proper guidance and spiritual direction are necessary. A
good *guru*, by reason of his own nature and spiritual attainment and
disinterested wisdom, will both mark out for the *sishya* the path which
is proper for him, and aid him to follow it by the infusion of the
*tejas* which is in the Guru himself. Whilst *sadhana* is, as stated, a
process for the stimulation of the *sattva guna*, it is evident that one
form of it is not suitable to all. It must be adapted to the spiritual
condition of the *sishya*, otherwise it will cause injury instead of
good. Therefore it is that the adoption of certain forms of *sadhana* by
persons who are not competent (*adhikari*), may not only be fruitless of
any good result, but may even lead to evils which *sadhana* as a general
principle is designed to prevent. Therefore also is it said that it is
better to follow one’s own *dharma* than that, however exalted it be, of
another.

The Worlds (Loka)

This earth, which is the object of the physical senses and of the
knowledge based thereon, is but one of fourteen worlds or regions placed
"above" and "below" it, of which (as the *sutra* says) knowledge may be
obtained by meditation on the solar "nerve" (*nada*) *sushumna* in the
*merudanda*. On this *nadi* six of the upper worlds are threaded, the
seventh and highest overhanging it in the *Sahasrara Padma*, the
thousand-petalled lotus. The sphere of earth (*Bhurloka*), with its
continents, their mountains and rivers, and with its oceans, is the
seventh or lowest of the upper worlds. Beneath it are the Hells and
Nether Worlds, the names of which are given below. Above the terrestrial
sphere is *Bhuvarloka*, or the atmospheric sphere known as the
*antariksha*, extending "from the earth to the sun," in which the
Siddhas and other celestial beings (*devayoni*) of the upper air dwell.
"From the sun to the pole star" *dhruva*) is *svarloka*, or the heavenly
sphere. Heaven (*svarga*) is that which delights the mind, as hell
(*naraka*) is that which gives it pain. In the former is the abode of
the *Deva* and the blest.

These three spheres are the region of the consequences of work, and are
termed transitory as compared with the three highest spheres, and the
fourth, which is of a mixed character. When the *jiva* has received his
reward he is reborn again on earth. For it is not good action, but the
knowledge of the *atma* which procures Liberation (*moksha*). Above
*Svarloka* is *Maharloka*, and above it the three ascending regions
known as the *janarloka*, *tapoloka*, and *satyaloka*, each inhabited by
various forms of celestial intelligence of higher and higher degree.
Below the earth (*Bhuh*) and above the nether worlds are the Hells
(commencing with *Avichi*), and of which, according to popular theology,
there are thirty-four, though it is elsewhere said there are as many
hells as there are offences for which particular punishments are meted
out. Of these, six are known as the great at hells. Hinduism, however,
even when popular, knows nothing of a hell of eternal torment. To it
nothing is eternal but the Brahman. Issuing from the Hells the *jiva* is
again reborn to make its future. Below the Hells are the seven nether
worlds, Sutala, Vitala, Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala, Atala, and Patala,
where, according to the Puranas, dwell the Naga serpent divinities,
brilliant with jewels, and where, too, the lovely daughters of the
Daityas and Danavas wander, fascinating even the most austere. Yet below
Patala is the form of Vishnu proceeding from the dark quality
(*tamogunah*), known as the Sesha serpent or Ananta, bearing the entire
world as a diadem, attended by his Shakti Varuni, his own embodied
radiance.

Inhabitants of the Worlds

The worlds are inhabited by countless grades of beings, ranging from the
highest Devas (of whom there are many classes and degrees) to the lowest
animal life. The scale of beings runs from the shining manifestations of
Spirit to those in which it is so veiled that it would seem almost to
have disappeared in its material covering. There is but one Light, one
Spirit, whose manifestations are many. A flame enclosed in a clear glass
loses but little of its brilliancy. If we substitute for the glass,
paper, or some other more opaque yet transparent substance, the light is
dimmer. A covering of metal may be so dense as to exclude from sight the
rays of light which yet burns within with an equal brilliancy. As a
fact, all such veiling forms are *maya*. They are none the less true for
those who live in and are themselves part of the mayik world. Deva, or
"heavenly and shining one" – for spirit is light and self-manifestation
– is applicable to those descending yet high manifestations of the
Brahman, such as the seven Shivas, including the Trinity (*trimurtti*),
Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra. Devi, again, is the title of the Supreme
Mother Herself, and is again applied to the manifold forms assumed by
the one only Maya, such as Kali, Sarasvati, Lakshmi, Gauri, Gayatri,
Sandhya, and others. In the sense also in which it is said, "Verily, in
the beginning there was the Brahman. It created the Devas," the latter
term also includes lofty intelligencies belonging to the created world
intermediate between Ishvara (Himself a *Purusha*) and man, who in the
person of the Brahmana is known as Earth-deva (*bhudeva*). These spirits
are of varying degrees. For there are no breaks in the creation which
represents an apparent descent of the Brahman in gradually lowered
forms. Throughout these forms play the divine currents of *pravritti*
and *nivritti*, the latter drawing to Itself that which the former has
sent forth.

Deva, *jiva* and *jara* (inorganic matter) are, in their real, as
opposed to their phenomenal and illusory, being, the one Brahman, which
appears thus to be other than Itself through its connection with the
*upadhi* or limiting conditions with which ignorance (*avidya*) invests
it. Therefore all beings which are the object of worship are each of
them but the Brahman seen through the veil of *avidya*. Though the
worshippers of Devas may not know it, their worship is in reality the
worship of the Brahman, and hence the Mahanirvana Tantra says that, "as
all streams flow to the ocean, so the worship given to any Deva is
received by the Brahman." On the other hand, those who, knowing this,
worship the Devas, do so as manifestations of the Brahman, and thus
worship It mediately. The sun, the most glorious symbol in the physical
world, is the mayik vesture of Her who is "clothed with the sun."

In the lower ranks of the celestial hierarchy are the Devayonis, some of
whom are mentioned in the opening verses of the first chapter of the
text. The Devas are of two classes: "unborn" (*ajata*) *–* that is,
those which have not, and those which have (*sadhya*) evolved from
humanity as in the case of King Nahusha, who became Indra. Opposed to
the divine hosts are the Asura, Danava, Daitya, Rakshasa, who, with
other spirits, represent the tamasik or demonic element in creation. All
Devas, from the highest downwards, are subordinate to both time and
*karma*. So it is said, "Salutation to Karma, over which not even Vidhi
(Brahma) prevails" (*Namastat karmmabhyovidhirapi na yebhyah
prabhavati*). The rendering of the term "Deva" by "God" has led to a
misapprehension of Hindu thought. The use of the term "angel" may also
mislead, for though the world of Devas has in some respects analogy to
the angelic choirs, the Christian conception of these Beings, their
origin and functions, does not include, but in fact excludes, other
ideas connoted by the Sanskrit term.

The *pitris*, or "Fathers," are a creation (according to some) separate
from the predecessors of humanity, and are, according to others, the
lunar ancestry who are addressed in prayer with the Devas. From Brahma,
who is known as the "Grandfather" Pita Maha of the human race, issued
Marichi, Atri, and others, his "mental sons": the Agnishvattvah,
Saumnyah, Havishmantah, Ushmapah, and other classes of *Pitris*,
numbering, according to the Markandeya Purana, thirty-one. *Tarpanam*,
or oblation, is daily offered to these pitris. The term is also applied
to the human ancestors of the worshipper generally up to the seventh
generation to whom in *shraddha* (the obsequial rites) *pinda* and water
are offered with the mantra "*svadha*."

The *Rishi* are seers who know, and by their knowledge are the makers of
*shastra* and "see" all mantras. The word comes from the root rish
*Rishati-prapnoti sarvvang mantrang jnanena pashyati sangsaraparangva*,
etc. The seven great *Rishi* or *saptarshi* of the first *manvantara*
are Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastya, and Vashishtha. In
other *manvantara* there are other *sapta-rshi*. In the present
*manvantara* the seven are Kashyapa Atri, Vashishtha, Vishvamitra,
Gautama, Jamadagni, Bharadvaja. To the *Rishi* the Vedas were revealed.
Vyasa taught the Rigveda so revealed to Paila, the Yajurveda to
Vaishampayana, the Samaveda to Jaimini, Atharvaveda to Samantu, and
*Itihasa* and Purana to Suta. The three chief classes of *Rishi* are the
*Brah-marshi*, born of the mind of Brahma, the *Devarshi* of lower rank,
and *Rajarshi* or Kings who became *Rishis* through their knowledge and
austerities, such as Janaka, Ritaparna, etc. Thc *Shrutarshi* are makers
of Shastras, as Sushruta. The *Kandarshi* are of the Karmakanda, such as
Jaimini.

The *Muni*, who may be a *Rishi*, is a sage. Muni is so called on
account of his *mananam* (*mananat muniruchyate*). *Mananam* is that
thought, investigation, and discussion which marks the independent
thinking mind. First there is *shravanam* listening; then *mananam*,
which is the thinking or understanding, discussion upon, and testing of
what is heard as opposed to the mere acceptance on trust of the lower
intelligence. There two are followed by *nididhyasanam*, which is
attention and profound meditation on the conclusions (*siddhanta*) drawn
from what is so heard and reasoned upon. As the Mahabharata says, "The
Veda differ, and so do the *Smriti*. No one is a *muni* who has no
independent opinion of his own (*nasau muniryasya matang na bhinnam*).

The human being is called *jiva –* that is, the embodied *Atma*
possessed by egoism and of the notion that it directs the *puryashtaka*,
namely, the five organs of action (*karmendriya*), the five organs of
perception (*jnanendriya*), the fourfold *antahkarana* or mental self
(*Manas*, *Buddhi*, *Ahangkara*, *Chitta*), the five vital airs
(*Prana*), the five elements, *Kama* (desire), *Karma* (action and its
results), and *Avidya* (illusion). When these false notions are
destroyed, the embodiment is destroyed, and the wearer of the mayik
garment attains *nirvana*. When the *jiva* is absorbed in Brahman, there
is no longer any *jiva* remaining *as such*.

Varna

Ordinarily there are four chief divisions or castes (*varna*) of Hindu
society – viz.: *Brahmana* (priesthood; teaching); *Kshattriya*
(warrior); *Vaishya* (merchant); *Shudra* (servile) – said to have
sprung respectively from the mouth, arm, thigh, and foot of Brahma. A
man of the first three classes becomes an investiture, during the
*upanayana* ceremony of the sacred thread, twice-born (*dvija*). It is
said that by birth one is *shudra*, by *sangskara* (*upanayana*),
*dvija* (twice-born); by study of the Vedas one attains the state of a
*vipra*; and that he who has knowledge of the Brahman is a *Brahmana*.
The present Tantra, however, speaks of a fifth or hybrid class
(*samanya*), resulting from intermixture between the others. It is a
peculiarity of Tantra that its worship is largely free of Vaidik
exclusiveness, whether based on caste, sex, or otherwise. As the
Gautamiya Tantra says, "The Tantra is for all men, of whatever caste,
and for all women" (*Sarvvavarnadhikaraschcha narinang yogya eva cha*).

Ashrama

The four stages, conditions, or periods in the life of a Brahman are:
First, that of the chaste student, or *brahmachari*; second, the period
of secular life as a married householder, or *grihastha*; third, that of
the recluse, or *vanaprastha*, when there is retirement from the world;
and lastly, that of the beggar, or *bhikshu*, who begs his single daily
meal, and meditates upon the Supreme Spirit to which he is about to
return. For the *Kshattriya* there are the first three Ashramas; for the
*Vaishya*, the first two; and for the *Shudra*, the *grihastha Ashrama*
only. This Tantra states that in the Kali age there are only two
Ashrama. The second *garhasthya* and the last *bhikshuka* or *avadhuta*.
Neither the conditions of life, nor the character, capacity, and powers
of the people of this age allow of the first and third. The two
*ashramas* prescribed for the Kali age are open to all castes
indiscriminately.

There are, it is now commonly said, two main divisions of *avadhuta –*
namely, *Shaivavadhuta* and *Brahmavadhuta* – of each of which there
are, again, three divisions. Of the first class the divisions are
firstly *Shaivavadhuta*, who is *apurna* (imperfect). Though an ascetic,
he is also a householder and like Shiva. Hence his name. The second is
the wandering stage of the *Shaiva* (or the *parivrajaka)*, who has now
left the world, and passes his time doing *puja*, *japa*, etc., visiting
the *tirtha* and *pitha*, or places of pilgrimage. In this stage, which,
though higher, is still imperfect, the *avadhuta* is competent for
ordinary *sadhana* with a *shakti.* The third is the perfect stage of a
Shaiva. Wearing only the *kaupina*, he renounces all things and all
rites, though within certain limits he may practise some *yoga*, and is
permitted to meet the request of a woman who makes it of him. Of the
second class the three divisions are, firstly, the *Brahma-vadhuta*,
who, like the *Shaivavadhuta*, is imperfect *(apurna)* and a
householder. He is not permitted, however, to have a *Shaiva Shakti*,
and is restricted to *sviya-shakti.* The second-class
*Brahma-parivrajaka* is similar to the *Shaiva* of the same class,
except that ordinarily he is not permitted to have anything to do with
any woman, though he may, under the guidance of his *Guru*, practise
*yoga* accompanied by *Shakti.* The third or highest class –
*Hangsavadhuta –* is similar to the third *Shaiva* degree, except that
he must under no circumstances touch a woman or metals, nor may he
practise any rites or keep any observances.

Correspondence Between Macrocosm and Microcosm

The universe consists of a *Mahabrahmanda*, or grand Kosmos, and of
numerous *Brihatbrahmanda*, or macrocosms evolved from it. As is said by
the Nirvana Tantra, all which is in the first is in the second. In the
latter are heavenly bodies and beings, which are microcosms reflecting
on a minor scale the greater worlds which evolve them. "As above, so
below." This mystical maxim of the West is stated in the Vishvasara
Tantra as follows: "What is here is elsewhere; what is not here is
nowhere" (*yadihasti tadanyatra yannehasti natatkvachit*). The macrocosm
has its *meru*, or vertebral column, extending from top to bottom. There
are fourteen regions descending from *Satyaloka*, the highest. These are
the seven upper and the seven nether worlds (*vide ante*). The *meru* of
the human body is the spinal column, and within it are the *chakra*, in
which the worlds are said to dwell. In the words of the
Shaktananda-Tarangini, they are *pindamadhyesthita*. *Satya* has been
said to be in the *sahasrara*, and *Tapah*, *Janah*, *Mahah*, *Svah*,
*Bhuvah*, *Bhuh* in the *ajna*, *vishuddha*, *anahata*, *manipura*,
*svadishthana*, and *muladhara* lotuses respectively. Below *muladhara*
and in the joints, sides, *anus*, and organs of generation are the
nether worlds. The bones near the spinal column are the *kula-parvata*.
Such are the correspondences as to earth. Then as to water. The nadi are
the rivers. The seven substances of the body (*dhatu*) are the seven
islands. Sweat, tears, and the like are the oceans. Fire exists in the
*muladhara*, *sushumna*, navel, and elsewhere. As the worlds are
supported by the *pravahana* and other *vayu* ("airs"), so is the body
supported by the ten *vayu prana*, etc. There is the same *akasha*
(ether) in both. The witness within is the *purusha* without, for the
personal soul of the microcosm corresponds to the cosmic soul
(*hiranyagarbha*) in the macrocosm.

The Ages

The passage of time within a *maha-yoga* influences for the worse man
and the world in which he lives. This passage is marked by the four ages
(*yuga*), called Satya, Treta, Dvapara, and Kali-yuga, the last being
that in which it is generally supposed the world now is. The *yuga* is a
fraction of a *kalpa*, or day of Brahma of 4,320,000 human years. The
*kalpa* is divided into fourteen *manvantara*, which are again
subdivided into seventy-one *maha*.*-yuga*; the length of each of which
is 4,320,000 human years. The *maha-yuga* (great age) is itself composed
of four *yuga* (ages) – (*a*) Satya, (*b*) Treta, (*c*) Dvapara, (*d*)
Kali. Official science teaches that man appeared on the earth in an
imperfect state, from which he has since been gradually, though
continually, raising himself. Such teaching is, however, in conflict
with the traditions of all peoples – Jew, Babylonian, Egyptian, Hindu,
Greek, Roman, and Christian – which speak of an age when man was both
innocent and happy. From this state of primal perfection he fell,
continuing his descent until such time as the great *Avatara*, Christ
and others, descended to save his race and enable it to regain the
righteous path. The Garden of Eden is the emblem of the paradisiacal
body of man. There man was one with Nature. He was himself paradise, a
privileged enclosure in a garden of delight – *gan be Eden. Et eruditus
est Moyse omni sapientia Ægyptiorum*. The Satya Yuga is, according to
Hindu belief, the Golden Age of righteousness, free of sin, marked by
longevity, physical strength, beauty, and stature. "There were giants in
those days" whose moral, mental, and physical strength enabled them to
undergo long *brahmacharyya* (continence) and *tapas* (austerities).
Longevity permitted lengthy spiritual exercises. Life then depended on
the marrow, and lasted a *lakh* of years, men dying when they willed.
Their stature was 21 cubits.

To this age belong the Avatara or incarnations of Vishnu, Matsya, Kurma,
Varaha, Nri-singha, and Vamana. Its duration is computed to be 4,800
Divine years, which, when multiplied by 360 (a year of the Devas being
equal to 360 human years) are the equivalent of 1,728,000 of the years
of man. (b) The second age, or Treta (three-fourth) Yuga, is that in
which righteousness (*dharmma*) decreased by one-fourth. The duration
was 3,600 Divine years, or 1,296,000 human years. Longevity, strength,
and stature decreased. Life was in the bone, and lasted 10,000 years.
Man’s stature was 14 cubits. Of sin there appeared one-quarter, and of
virtue there remained three-quarters. Men were still attached to pious
and charitable acts, penances, sacrifice, and pilgrimage, of which the
chief was that to Naimisharanya. In this period appeared the *avatars*
of Vishnu as Parashurama and Rama. (c) The third, or Dvapara (one-half)
Yuga, is that in which righteousness decreased by one-half, and the
duration of which was 2,400 Divine, or 864,000 human, years. A further
decrease in longevity and strength, and increase of weakness and
disease, mark this age. Life which lasted 1,000 years was centred in the
blood. Stature was 7 cubits. Sin and virtue were of equal force. Men
became restless, and, though eager to acquire knowledge, were deceitful,
and followed both good and useful pursuits. The principal place of
pilgrimage was Kurukshetra. To this age belongs (according to Vyasa,
Anushtubhacharya and Jiya-deva) the *avatara* of Vishnu as Bala-rama,
the elder brother of Krishna, who, according to other accounts, takes
his place. In the *sandhya*, or intervening period of 1,000 years
between this and the next *yuga* the Tantra was revealed, as it will be
revealed at the dawn of every Kali-yuga. (d) Kali-yuga is the alleged
present age, in which righteousness exists to the extent of one-fourth
only, the duration of which is 1,200 Divine,or 432,000 human, years.
According to some, this age commenced in 3120 B.C. on the date of
Vishnu’s return to heaven after the eighth incarnation. This is the
periodwhich, according to the Puranas and Tantras, is characterized by
the prevalence of viciousness, weakness, disease, and the general
decline of all that is good. Humanlife, which lasts at most 120, or, as
some say, 100, years,is dependent on food. Stature is 3½ cubits. The
chief pilgrimage is now to the Ganges. In this age has appeared the
Buddha *Avatara.* The last, or Kalki Avatara,the Destroyer of sin, has
yet to come. It is He who will destroy iniquity and restore the age of
righteousness.The Kalki Purana speaks of Him as One whose body is blue
like that of the rain-charged cloud, who with sword in hand rides, as
does the rider of the Apocalypse, a white horse swift as the wind, the
Cherisher of the people, Destroyer of the race of the Kali-yuga, the
Source of true religion. And Jayadeva, in his Ode to the
Incarnations,addresses Him thus: "For the destruction of all the impure
thou drawest thy cimeter like a blazing comet. O how tremendous! Oh,
Keshava, assuming the body of Kalki! Be victorious. O Hari, Lord of the
Universe!" With the Satya-yuga a new *maha-yaga* will commence, and the
ages will continue to revolve with their rising and descending races
until the close of the *kalpa* or day of Brahma.. Then a night of
dissolution *(pralaya)* of equal duration follows, the Lord reposing in
*yoga-nidra (yoga* sleep in *pralaya)* on the Serpent Shesha, the
Endless One, till day break, when the universe is created anew and the
next *kalpa* follows.

The Scriptures of the Ages

Each of these Ages has its appropriate *Shastra* or Scripture, designed
to meet the characteristics and needs of the men who live in them The
Hindu *Shastra* are classed into: (1) *Shruti*, which commonly includes
the four Veda. (Rik, Yajuh, Sama, Atharva, and the Upanishads), the
doctrine of which is philosophically exposed in the *Vedanta-Darshana.*
(2) *Smriti,* such as the Dharma-Shastra of Manu and other works on
family and social duty prescribing for *pavritti-dhamia*, as the
Upanishads had revealed the *nivritti-dharma.* (3) The Puranas, of
which, according to the Brahma-vaivartta Purana, there were originally
four lakhs, and of which eighteen are now regarded as the principal. (4)
The Tantra.

For each of these ages a suitable *Shastra* is given. The Veda is the
root of all Shastra *(mula-shastra).* All others are based on it. The
Tantra is spoken of as a fifth Veda. Kulluka-Bhatta, the celebrated
Commentator on Manu, says that *Shruti* is of two kinds, Vaidik and
Tantrik *(vaidiki-tantriiki chaiva dvi-vidha shrutih-kirttita).* The
various *Shastras*, however, are different presentments of *shruti*
appropriate to the humanity of the age for which they are given. Thus
the Tantra is that presentment of *shruti* which is modelled as regards
its ritual to meet the characteristics and infirmities of the Kali-yuga.
As men have no longer the capacity, longevity, and moral strength
necessary for the application of the *Vaidika Karma-kanda*, the Tantra
prescribes a special *sadhana* or means or practice of its own, for the
attainment of that which is the ultimate and common end of all
*Shastra*. The Kularnava Tantra says that in the Satya or Krita age the
*Shastra* is *Shruti* (in the sense of the Veda and Upanishads); in
Treta-yuga, *Smriti* (in the sense of the *Dharma-Shastra* and
*Shruti-jivika*, etc.); in Dvapara Yuga the Purana; and in the last or
Kali-yuga the Tantra, which should now be followed by all orthodox Hindu
worshippers. The Maha-nirvana and other Tantras and Tantrik works lay
down the same rule. The Tantra is also said to contain the very core of
the Veda to which, it is described to bear the relation of the
*Paramatma* to the *Jivatma*. In a similar way, *Kaulachara* is the
central informing life of the gross body called *vedachara*, each of the
*achara* which follow it up to *kaulachara* being more and more subtle
sheaths.

The Human Body

The human body is *Brahma-para*, the city of Brahman. Ishvara Himself
enters into the universe as *jiva*. Wherefore the *maha-vakya* "That
thou art" means that the *ego* (which is regarded as *jiva* only from
the standpoint of an *upadhi*) is Brahman.

The Five Sheaths

In the body there are five kosha or sheaths – *anna-maya*, *prana-maya*,
*mano-maya*, *vijñana-maya*, *ananda-maya*, or the physical and vital
bodies, the two mental bodies, and the body of bliss. In the first the
Lord is self-conscious as being dark or fair, short or tall, old or
youthful. In the vital body He feels alive, hungry, and thirsty. In the
mental bodies He thinks and understands. And in the body of Bliss He
resides in happiness. Thus garmented with the five garments, the Lord,
though all pervading, appears as though He were limited by them.

Anna-Maya Kosha

In the material body, which is called the "sheath of food" (*anna-maya
kosha*), reign the elements earth, water, and fire, which are those
presiding in the lowest *Chakra*, the *Muladhara*, *Svadhishthana*, and
*mani-pura* centres. The two former produce food and drink, which is
assimilated by the fire of digestion, and converted into the body of
food. The *indriya* are both the faculty and organs of sense. There are
in this body the material organs, as distinguished from the faculty of
sense.

In the gross body (*sharira-kosha*) there are six external kosha – viz.,
hair, blood, flesh, which come from the mother, and bone, muscle,
marrow, from the father.

The organs of sense (*indriya*) are of two kinds – viz.: *jnanendriya*,
or organs of sensation, through which knowledge of the external world is
obtained (ear, skin, eyes, tongue, nose); and *karmendriya*, or organs
of action – mouth, arms, legs, anus, penis, the functions of which are
speech, holding, walking, excretion, and procreation.

Prana-Maya Kosha

The second sheath is the *prana-maya-kosha*, or sheath of "breath"
(*prana*), which manifests itself in air and ether, the presiding
elements in the *Anahata* and *Vishuddha chakra*.

There are ten *vayu* (airs), or inner vital forces, of which the first
five are the principal – namely, the sapphire *prana*; *apana*, the
colour of an evening cloud; the silver *vyana*; *udana*, the colour of
fire; and the milky *samana*. These are all aspects of the action of the
one Prana-devata. Kundalini is the Mother of *prana*, which She the
Mula-Prakriti, illumined by the light of the Supreme *Atma*, generates.
*Prana* is *vayu*, or the universal force of activity, divided on
entering each individual into fivefold function. Specifically
considered, *prana* is inspiration, which with expiration is from and to
a distance of eight and twelve inches respectively. *Udana* is the
ascending *vayu*. *Apana* is the downward *vayu*, expelling wind,
excrement, urine, and semen. The *samana*, or collective *vayu*, kindles
the bodily fire, "conducting equally the food, etc., throughout the
body." *Vyana* is the separate *vayu*, effecting division and diffusion.
These forces cause respiration, excretion, digestion, circulation.

Mano-maya, Vijñana Kosha, and Ananda-maya Kosha

The next two sheaths are the *mano-maya* and *vijñana kosha*. These
constitute the *antah-karana*, which is fourfold – namely, mind in its
twofold aspect of *buddhi* and *manas*, self-hood (*ahankara*), and
*chitta*. The function of the first is doubt *sangkalpa-vikalpatmaka*,
(uncertainty, certainty); of the second, determination
(*nishchaya-karini*); of the third (egoity), consciousness (*abhimana*).
*Manas* automatically registers the facts which the senses perceive.
*Buddhi*, on attending to such registration, discriminates, determines,
and cognizes the object registered, which is set over and against the
subjective self by *Ahangkara*. The function of *chitta* is
contemplation (*chinta*), the faculty whereby the mind in its widest
sense raises for itself the subject of its thought and dwells thereon.
For whilst *buddhi* has but three moments in which it is born, exists,
and dies, *chitta* endures.

The *antah-karana* is master of the ten senses, which are the outer
doors through which it looks forth upon the external world. The
faculties, as opposed to the organs or instruments of sense, reside
here. The centres of the powers inherent in the last two sheaths are in
the *Ajna Chakra* and the region above this and below the *sahasrara*
lotus. In the latter the *Atma* of the last sheath of bliss resides. The
physical or gross body is called *sthula-sharira*. The subtle body
(*sukshma-sharira*, also called *linga-sharira* and *karana-shanra*)
comprises the ten *indriya*, *manas*, *ahangkara*, *buddhi*, and the
five functions of *prana*. This subtle body contains in itself the cause
of rebirth into the gross body when the period of reincarnation arrives.

The *atma*, by its association with the *upadhis*, has three states of
consciousness – namely, the *jagrat*, or waking state, when through the
sense organs are perceived objects of sense through the operation of
*manas* and *buddhi*. It is explained in the Ishvara-pratya-bhijna as
follows – "the waking state dear to all is the source of external action
through the activity of the senses." The *jiva* is called *jagari* –
that is, he who takes upon himself the gross body called *Vishva*. The
second is *svapna*, the dream state, when, the sense organs being
withdrawn, *Alma* is conscious of mental images generated by the
impressions of *jagrat* experience. Here *manas* ceases to record fresh
sense impressions, and it and *buddhi* work on that which *manas* has
registered in the waking state. The explanation of this state is also
given in the work last cited. "The state of *svapna* is the
objectification of visions perceived in the mind, due to the perception
of ideas there latent." *Jiva* in the state of *svapna* is termed
*taijasa*. Its individuality is merged in the subtle body.
*Hiranyagarbha* is the collective form of these *jiva*, as *Vaisvanara*
is such form of the *jiva* in the waking state. The third state is that
of *sushupti*, or dreamless sleep, when *manas* itself is withdrawn, and
*buddhi*, dominated by *tamas*, preserves only the notion: "Happily I
slept; I was not conscious of anything" (Patanjala-yoga-sutra). In the
Macrocosm the *upadhi* of these states are also called *Virat*,
*Hiranyagarbha*, and *Avyakta*. The description of the state of sleep is
given in the Shiva-sutra as that in which there is incapacity of
discrimination or illusion. By the saying cited from the
*Patanjala-sutra* three modifications of *avidya* are indicated – viz.,
ignorance, egoism, and happiness. Sound sleep is that state in which
these three exist. The person in that state is termed *prajna*, his
individuality being merged in the causal body (*karana*). Since in the
sleeping state the *prajna* becomes Brahman, he is no longer *jiva* as
before; but the *jiva* is then not the supreme one (*Paramatma*),
because the state is associated with *avidya*. Hence, because the
vehicle in the *jiva* in the sleeping state is *Karana*, the vehicle of
the *jiva* in the fourth is declared to be *mahakarana*. Ishvara is the
collective form of the *prajna jiva*.

Beyond *sushupti* is the *turiya*, and beyond *turiya* the transcendent
fifth state without name. In the fourth state *shuddha-vidya* is
acquired, and this is the only realistic one for the *yogi* which he
attains through, *samadhi-yoga*. *Jiva* in *turiya* is merged in the
great causal body (*maha-karana*). The fifth state arises from firmness
in the fourth. He who is in this state becomes equal to Shiva, or, more
strictly, tends to a close equality; for it is only beyond that, that
"the spotless one attains the highest equality," which is unity. Hence
even in the fourth and fifth states there is an absence of that full
perfection which constitutes the Supreme. Bhaskara-raya, in his
Commentary on the Lalita, when pointing out that the Tantrik theory adds
the fourth and fifth states to the first three adopted by the followers
of the Upanishads, says that the latter states are not separately
enumerated by them owing to the absence in those two states of the full
perfection of Jiva or of Shiva.

Nadi

It is said that there are 3½ crores of *nadi* in the human body, of
which some are gross and some are subtle. *Nadi* means a nerve or artery
in the ordinary sense; but all the nadis of which the books on *Yoga*
speak are not of this physical character, but are subtle channels of
energy. Of these *nadi*, the principal are fourteen; and of these
fourteen, *ida*, *pingala*, and *sushumna* are the chief; and, again, of
these three *sushumna* is the greatest, and to it all others are
subordinate. *Sushumna* is in the hollow of the *meru* in the
cerebro-spinal axis. It extends from the *Muladhara* lotus, the Tattvik
earth centre, to the cerebral region. *Sushumna* is in the form of Fire
(*vahni-svarupa*), and has within it the *vajrini-nadi* in the form of
the sun (*surya-svarupa*). Within the latter is the pale nectar-dropping
*chitra* or *chitrini-nadi*, which is also called *Brahma-nadi*, in the
form of the moon (*chandra-svarupa*,). *Sushumna* is thus *triguna*. The
various lotuses in the different *Chakra* of the body (*vide post*) are
all suspended from the *chitra-nadi*, the *chakra* being described as
knots in the *nadi*, which is as thin as the thousandth part of a hair.
Outside the *meru* and on each side of *sushumna* are the *nadi ida* and
*pingala*. *Ida* is on the left side, and, coiling round *sushumna*, has
its exit in the left nostril. *Pingala* is on the right, and, similarly
coiling, enters the right nostril. The *sushumna*, interlacing *ida* and
*pingala* and the *ajna-chakra* round which they pass, thus forms a
representation of the caduceus of Mercury. *Ida* is of a pale colour, is
moon-like (*chandra-svarupa*), and contains nectar. *Pingala* is red,
and is sun-like (*suryya-svarupa*), containing "venom," the fluid of
mortality. These three "rivers," which are united at the *ajna-chakra*,
flow separately from that point, and for this reason the *ajna-chakra*
is called *mukta triveni*. The *muladhara* is called *Yukta*
(united)*-tri-veni*, since it is the meeting-place of the three *nadi*,
which are also called Ganga (*Ida*), Yamuna (*Pingala*), and Sarasvati
(*sushumna*), after the three sacred rivers of India. The opening at the
end of the *sushumna* in the *muladhara* is called *brahma-dvara*, which
is closed by the coils of the sleeping Devi Kundalini.

Chakra

There are six chakra, or dynamic Tattvik centres, in the body – viz.,
the muladhara, svadhishthana, mani-pura, anahata, vishuddha, and ajna –
which are described in the following notes. Over all there is the
thousand-petalled lotus (sahasrara-padma).

Muladhara

Muladhara is a triangular space in the midmost portion of the body, with
the apex turned downwards like a young girl’s *yoni*. It is described as
a red lotus of four petals, situate between the base of the sexual organ
and the anus. "Earth" evolved from "water" is the Tattva of this
*chakra*. On the four petals are the four golden *varnas –* "*vang*,"
"*shang*," "*shang*," and "*sang*," In the four petals pointed towards
the four directions (*Ishana*, etc.) are the four forms of bliss –
*yogananda* (yoga bliss), *paramananda* (supreme bliss), *samaj-ananda*
(natural bliss), and *virananda* (vira bliss). In the centre of this
lotus is *Svayambhu-linga*, ruddy brown, like the colour of a young
leaf. *Chitrini-nadi* is figured as a tube, and the opening at its end
at the base of the *linga* is called the door of Brahman
(*brahma-dvara*), through which the Devi ascends. The lotus, *linga* and
*brahma-dvara*, hang downwards. The Devi Kundalini, more subtle than the
fibre of the lotus, and luminous as lightning, lies asleep coiled like a
serpent around the *linga*, and closes with Her body the door of
Brahman. The Devi has forms in the *brahmanda*. Her subtlest form in the
*pindanda*, or body, is called *Kundalini*, a form of Prakriti
pervading, supporting, and expressed in the form of the whole universe;
"the Glittering Dancer "(as the Sarada-tilaka calls Her) "in the
lotus-like head of the yogi." When awakened, it is She who gives birth
to the world made of *mantra*. A red fiery triangle surrounds
*svayambhu-linga*, and within the triangle is the red *Kandarpa-vayu*,
or air, of *Kama*, a form of the *apana vayu*, for here is the seat of
creative desire. Outside the triangle is a yellow square, called the
*prithivi-*(earth)-*mandala*, to which is attached the "eight thunders"
(*ashta-vajra*). Here is the *vija* "lang", and with it *prithivi* on
the back of an elephant. Here also are Brahma and Savitri, and the red
four-handed Shakti Dakini.

Svadhisthana

Svadhishthana is a six-petalled lotus at the base of the sexual organ,
above *muladhara* and below the navel. Its pericarp is red, and its
petals are like lightning. "Water" evolved from "fire" is the Tattva of
this *chakra*. The *varnas* on the petals are "bang," "bhang," "mang,"
"yang," "rang," and "lang." In the six petals are also the vritti
(states, qualities, functions, or inclinations) – namely, *prashraya*
(credulity), *a-vishvasa* (suspicion, mistrust), *avajna* (disdain),
*murchchha* (delusion, or, as some say, disinclination), *sarvva-nasha*
(false knowledge), and *krurata* (pitilessness). Within a semicircular
space in the pericarp are the Devata, the dark blue Maha-vishnu,
Maha-lakshmi, and Sarasvati. In front is the blue four-handed Rakini
Shakti, and the *vija* of Varuna, Lord of water or "vang." Inside the
*vija* there is the region of Varuna., of the shape of an half-moon, and
in it is Varuna himself seated on a white alligator (*makara*).

Mani-pura

Mani-para-chakra is a ten-petalled golden lotus, situate above the last
in the region of the navel. "Fire" evolved from "air" is the Tattva of
this *chakra*. The ten petals are of the colour of a cloud, and on them
are the blue *varnas –* "*dang*," "*dhang*," "*nang*," *tang*,"
"*thang*," "*dang*," "*dhang*," "*nang*," "*pang*," "*phang*," – and the
ten vritti (*vide ante*), namely, *lajja* (shame), *pishunata*
(fickleness), *irsha* (jealousy), *trishna* (desire), *sushupti*
(laziness), *vishada* (sadness), *kashaya* (dullness), *moha*
(ignorance), *ghrina* (aversion, disgust), *bhaya* (fear). Within the
pericarp is the *vija* of fire ("*rang*"), and a triangular figure
(*mandala*) of Agni, Lord of Fire, to each side of which figure are
attached three auspicious signs or *svastika*. Agni, red, four-handed,
and seated on a ram, is within the figure. In front of him are Rudra and
his Shakti Bhadra-kali. Rudra is of the colour of vermilion, and is old.
His body is smeared with ashes. He has three eyes and two hands. With
one of these he makes the sign which grants boons and blessings, and
with the other that which dispels fear. Near him is the four-armed
Lakini Shakti, of the colour of molten gold (*tapta-kanchana*), wearing
yellow raiments and ornaments. Her mind is maddened with passion
(*mada-matta-chitta*). Above the lotus is the abode and region of
Suryya. The solar region drinks the nectar which drops from the region
of the Moon.

Anahata

Anahata-chakra is a deep red lotus of twelve petals, situate above the
last and in the region of the heart, which is to be distinguished from
the heart-lotus facing upwards of eight petals, spoken of in the text,
where the patron deity (*Ishta-devata*) is meditated upon. "Air" evolved
from "ether" is the Tattva of the former lotus. On the twelve petals are
the vermilion *varnas –* "*Kang*" "*Khang*," "*Gang*," "*Ghang*,"
"*ngang*," "*chang*", "*Chhang*," "*Jang*," "*Jhang*," "*Nyang*,"
"*Tang*," "*Thang*," and the twelve vrittis (*vide ante*) – namely
*asha* (hope), *chinta* (care, anxiety), *cheshta* (endeavour), *mamata*
(sense of mineness), *dambha* (arrogance or hypocrisy), *vikalata*
(languor), *ahangkara* (conceit), *viveka* (discrimination), *lolata*
(covetousness), *kapatata* (duplicity), *vitarka* (indecision),
*anutapa* (regret). A triangular *mandala* within the pericarp of this
lotus of the lustre of lightning is known as the *Tri-kona Shakti*.
Within this *mandala* is a red *vana-linga*, called Narayana or
Hiranya-garbha, and near it Ishvara and His Shakti Bhuvaneshvari.
Ishvara, who is the Overlord of the first three *chakra*, is of the
colour of molten gold, and with His two hands grants blessings and
dispels fear. Near him is the three-eyed Kakini Shakti, lustrous as
lightning, with four hands holding the noose and drinking-cup, and
making the sign of blessing, and that which dispels fear. She wears a
garland of human bones. She is excited, and her heart is softened with
wine. Here, also, are several other *Shakti*, such as Kala-ratri, as
also the *vija* of air (*vayu*) or "*vang*." Inside the lotus is a
six-cornered smoke-coloured *mandala*, and the circular region of
smoke-coloured *Vayu*, who is seated on a black antelope. Here, too, is
the embodied *atma* (*jivatma*), like the tapering flame of a lamp.

Vishuddha

Vishuddha chakra or *Bharatisthana*, abode of the Devi of speech, is
above the last and at the lower end of the throat (*kantha-mula*). The
Tattva of this *chakra* is "ether." The lotus is of a smoky colour, or
the colour of fire seen through smoke. It has sixteen petals, which
carry the red vowels – "*ang*," "*ang*" "*ing*," "*ing*," "*ung*,"
"*ung*"," "*ring*," "*ring*," "*lring*," "*lring*," "*eng*," "*aing*,"
"*ong*," "*aung*," "*ang*," "*ah*;" the seven musical notes (*nishada*,
*rishabha*, *gandhara*, *shadaja*, *madhyama*, *dhaivata* and
*panchama*)*:* "venom" (in the eighth petal); the *vija* "*hung*,"
"*phat*," "*vaushat*," "*vashat*," "*svadha*," "*svaha*," "*namah*," and
in the sixteenth petal nectar (*amrita*). In the pericarp is a
triangular region, within which is the androgyne Shiva, known as
*Arddha-narishvara*. There also are the region of the full moon and
ether, with its *vija* "*hang*." The *akasha-mandala* is transparent and
round in shape.

Akasha himself is here dressed in white, and mounted on a white
elephant. He has four hands, which hold the noose (*pasha*), the
elephant-hook (*angkusha*), and with the other he makes the *mudra*
which grant blessing and dispel fear. Shiva is white, with five faces,
three eyes, ten arms, and is dressed in tiger skins. Near Him is the
white Shakti Shakini, dressed in yellow raiments, holding in Her four
hands the bow, the arrow, the noose, and the hook.

Above the *chakra*, at the root of the palate (*talumula*) is a
concealed *chakra*, called *Lalana* and, in some Tantras, *Kala-chakra*.
It is a red lotus with twelve petals, bearing the following vritti –
*shraddha* (faith), *santosha* (contentment), *aparadha* (sense of
error), *dana* (self-command), *mana* (anger), *sneha* (affection),
*shoka* (sorrow, grief), *kheda* (dejection), *shuddhata* (purity),
*arati* (detachment), *sambhrama* (agitation), *Urmmi* (appetite,
desire).

Ajna

Ajna chakra is also called *parama-hula* and *mukta-tri-veni*, since it
is from here that the three *nadis – Ida*, *Pingala*, and Sushumna – go
their separate ways. It is a two-petalled lotus, situate between the two
eyebrows. In this Chakra there is no gross Tattva, but the subtle Tattva
mind is here. *Hakararddha*, or half the letter *La*, is also there. On
its two petals are the red *varnas* "*hang* "and "*kshang*."

In the pericarp is concealed the *vija* "ong." In the two petals and the
pericarp there are the three guna – *sattva*, *rajas*, and *tamas*.
Within the triangular *mandala* in the pericarp there is the lustrous
(*tejo-maya*) *linga* in the form of the *pranava* (*pranavakriti*),
which is called *Itara*. Para-Shiva, in the form of *hangsa*
(*hangsa-rupa*) is also there with his Shakti – Siddha-Kali. In the
three corners of the triangle are Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara,
respectively. In this *chakra* there is the white Hakini-Shakti, with
six heads and four hands, in which are *jñana-mudra*, a skull, a drum
(*damaru*), and a rosary.

Sahasrara Padma

Above the *ajna-chakra* there is another secret *chakra*, called
*manas-chakra*. It is a lotus of six petals, on which are
*shabda-jñana*, *sparsha-jñana*, *rupa-jñana*, *aghrano-palabdhi*,
*rasopabhoga*, and *svapna*, or the faculties of hearing, touch, sight,
smell, taste, and sleep, or the absence of these. Above this, again,
there is another secret *chakra*, called *Soma-chakra*. It is a lotus of
sixteen petals, which are also called sixteen *Kala*. These *Kala* are
called *kripa* (mercy), *mriduta* (gentleness), *dhairyya* (patience,
composure), *vairagya* (dispassion), *dhriti* (constancy), *sampat*
(prosperity), *hasya* (cheerfulness), *romancha* (rapture, thrill),
*vinaya* (sense of propriety, humility), *dhyana* (meditation),
*susthirata* (quietude, restfulness), *gambhiryya* (gravity), *udyama*
(enterprise, effort), *akshobha* (emotionlessness), *audarya*
(magnanimity), and *ekagrata* (concentration).

Above this last *chakra* is "the house without support"
(*niralamba-puri*), where yogis see the radiant Ishvara. Above this is
the *pranava* shining like a flame, and above *pranava* the white
crescent Nada, and above this last the point Vindu. There is then a
white lotus of twelve petals with its head upwards, and over this lotus
there is the ocean of nectar (*sudha-sagara*), the island of gems
(*mani-dvipa*), the altar of gems (*mani-pitha*), the forked
lightning-like lines *a*, *ka*, *tha*, and therein *Nada* and *Vindu*.
On *Nada* and *Vindu*, as an altar, there is the *Paramahangsa*, and the
latter serves as an altar for the feet of the *Guru*; there the *Guru*
of all should be meditated. The body of the *Hangsa* on which the feet
of the Guru rest is *jñana-maya*, the wings *Agama* and *Nigama*, the
two feet Shiva and Shakti, the beak *Pranava*, the eyes and throat
*Kama-Kala*.

Close to the thousand-petalled lotus is the sixteenth digit of the moon,
which is called *ama-kala*, which is pure red and lustrous like
lightning, as fine as a fibre of the lotus, hanging downwards,
receptacle of the lunar nectar. In it is the crescent *nirvana-kala*,
luminous as the Sun, and finer than the thousandth part of a hair. This
is the *Ishta-devata* of all. Near *nirvana-kala* is
*parama-nirvana-Shakti*, infinitely subtle, lustrous as the Sun,
creatrix of *tattva-jnana*. Above it are *Vindu* and *Visarga-Shakti*,
root and abode of all bliss.

Sahasrara-padma – or thousand petalled lotus of all colours – hangs with
its head downwards from the *brahma-randhra* above all the *chakra*.
This is the region of the first cause (*Brahma-loka*), the cause of the
six proceeding causes. It is the great Sun both cosmically and
individually, in whose effulgence Parama-Shiva and Adya-Shakti reside.
The power is the *vachaka-Shakti* or *saguna-brahman*, holding
potentially within itself, the *gunas*, *powers*, and *planes*.
Parama-Shiva is in the form of the Great Ether (*paramakasha-rupi*), the
Supreme Spirit (*paramatma*), the Sun of the darkness of ignorance. In
each of the petals of the lotus are placed all the letters of the
alphabet; and whatever there is in the lower *chakra* or in the universe
(*brahmanda*) exist here in potential state (*avyakta-bhava*). Shaivas
call this place *Shiva-sthana*, Vaishnavas, *Parama-purusha*, *Shaktas*,
*Devi-sthana*, the Sankhya sages *Prakriti-purusha-sthana*. Others call
it by other names, such as *Hari-hara-sthana*. *Shakti-sthana*,
*Parama-Brahma*, *Parama-hangsa*, *Parama-jyotih*, *Kula-sthana*, and
*Parama-Shiva-Akula*. But whatever the name, all speak of the same.

The Three Temperaments

The Tantras speak of three temperaments, dispositions, characters
(*bhava*), or classes of men – namely, the *pashu-bhava* (animal),
*vira-bhava* (heroic), and *divya-bhava* (deva-like or divine). These
divisions are based on various modifications of the *guna* (v. *ante*)
as they manifest in man (*jiva*). It has been pointed out that the
analogous Gnostic classification of men as material, psychical, and
spiritual, correspond to the three *guna* of the *Sankhya-darshana*.
*In* the *pashu* the *rajo-guna* operates chiefy on tamas, producing
such dark characteristics as error (*bhranti*), drowsiness (*tandra*),
and sloth (*alasya*). It is however, an error to suppose that the
*pashu* is as such a bad man; on the contrary, a jiva of this class may
prove superior to a jiva of the next. If the former, who is greatly
bound by matter, lacks enlightenment, the latter may abuse the greater
freedom he has won. There are also numerous kinds of *pashu*, some more
some less tamasik than others. Some there are at the lowest end of the
scale, which marks the first advance upon the higher forms of animal
life. Others approach and gradually merge into the *vira* class. The
term *pashu* comes from the root *pash*, "to bind." The *pashu* is, in
fact, the man who is bound by the bonds (*pasha*), of which the
Kularnava Tantra enurnerates eight – namely, pity (*daya*), ignorance
and delusion (*moha*), fear (*bhaya*), shame (*lajja*), disgust
(*ghrina*), family (*kula*), custom (*shila*), and caste (*varna*).
Other enumerations are given of the afflictions which, according to
some, are sixty-two, but all such larger divisions are merely
elaborations of the simpler enumerations. The *pashu* is also the
worldly man, in ignorance and bondage, as opposed to the *yogi* and the
tattva-jnani. Three divisions of *pashsu* are also spoken of – namely,
*sakala*, who are bound by the three *pasha*, called *anu* (want of
knowledge or erroneous knowledge of the self), *bheda* (the division
also induced by *maya* of the one self into many), and *karmma* (action
and its product. These are the three impurities (*mala*) called
*anava-mala*, *maya-mala*, and *Karmma-mala*. *Pratayakala* are those
bound by the first and last, and *Vijnana-kevala* are those bound by
*anava-mala* only. He who frees himself of the remaining impurity of
*anu* becomes Shiva Himself. The Devi bears the *pasha*, and is the
cause of them, but She, too, is *pashupasha-vimochini*, Liberatrix of
the *pashu* from his bondage.

What has been stated gives the root notion of the term *pashu.* Men of
this class are also described in Tantra by exterior traits, which are
manifestations of the interior disposition. So the Kubjika Tantra says:
"Those who belong to *pashu-bhava* .re simply *pashu.* A *pashu* does
not touch a *yantra*, nor make *japa* of *mantra* at night. He
entertains doubt about sacrifices and Tantra; regards a *mantra* as
being merely letters only. He lacks faith in the *guru*, and thinks that
the image is but a block of stone. He distinguishes one Deva from
another, and worships without flesh and fish. He is always bathing,
owing to his ignorance, and talks ill of others. Such an one is called
*pashu*, and he is the worst kind of man." Similarly the Nitya Tantra
describes the *pashu* as – "He who does not worship at night, nor in the
evening, nor in the latter part of the day; who avoids sexual
intercourse, except on the fifth day after the appearance of the courses
(*ritu-kalang vina devi ramanang parivarjayet*); who do not eat meat,
etc., even on the five auspicious days (*parvvana*)"; in short, those
who, following Vedachara, Vaishnavachara, and Shaivachara, are bound by
the Vaidik rules which govern all *pashus*.

In the case of *vira-bhava*, *rajas* more largely works on *sattva*, yet
also largely (though in lessening degrees, until the highest stage of
*divya-bhava* is reached) works independently towards the production of
acts in which sorrow inheres. There are several classes of *vira*.

The third, or highest, class of man is he of the *divya-bhava* (of
which, again, there are several degrees – some but a stage in advance of
the highest form of *vira-bhava*, others completely realizing the
deva-nature), in which rajas operate on *sattva-guna* to the confirmed
preponderance of the latter.

The Nitya Tantra says that of the *bhava* the *divya* is the best, the
*vira* the next best, and the *pashu* the lowest; and that
*devata-bhava* must be awakened through *vira-bhava*. The Pichchhila
Tantra says that the only difference between the *vira* and *divya* men
is that the former are very *uddhata*, by which is probably meant
excitable, through the greater prevalence of the independent working of
the *rajo-guna* in them than in the calmer sattvik temperament. It is
obvious that such statements must not be read with legal accuracy. There
may be, in fact, a considerable difference between a low type of *vira*
and the highest type of *divya*, though it seems to be true that this
quality of *uddhata* which is referred to is the cause of such
differences, whether great or small.

The Kubjika Tantra describes the marks of the *divya* as he "who daily
does ablutions, *sandhya*; and wearing clean cloth, the *tripundara*
mark in ashes, or red sandal, and ornaments of *rudraksha* beads,
performs *japa* and *archchana*. He gives charity daily also. His faith
is strong in Veda, *Shastra*, *guru*, and *Deva*. He worships the
*Pitri* and *Deva*, and performs all the daily rites. He has a great
knowledge of *mantra*. He avoids all food, except that which his *guru*
offers him, and all cruelty and other bad actions, regarding both friend
and foe as one and the same. He himself ever speaks the truth, and
avoids the company of those who decry the *Devata*. He worships thrice
daily, and meditates upon his *guru* daily, and, as a *Bhairava*,
worships Parameshvari with *divya-bhava*. All Devas he regards as
beneficial. He bows down at the feet of women, regarding them as his
*guru* (*strinang pada-talang drishtva* *guru-vad bhavayet sada*). He
worships the Devi at night, and makes *japa* at night with his mouth
full of *pan*, and makes obeisance to the *kula* vriksha. He offers
everything to the Supreme Devi. He regards this universe as pervaded by
*stri* (*shakti*), and as Devata. Shiva is in all men, and the whole
*brahmanda* is pervaded by Shiva-Shakti. He ever strives for the
attainment and maintenance of *devata-bhava*, and is himself of the
nature of a *Devata*.

Here, again, the Tantra only seeks to give a general picture, the
details of which are not applicable to all men of the *divya-bhava*
class. The passage shows that it, or portions of it, refer to the ritual
*divya*, for some of the practices there referred to would not be
performed by the *avadkuta*, who is above all ritual acts, though he
would also share (possibly in intenser degree) the beliefs of *divya*
men of all classes – that he and all else are but manifestations of the
universe-pervading Supreme Shakti.

According to the temperament of the *sadhaka*, so is the form of worship
and *sadhana*. In fact, the specific worship and *sadhana* of the other
classes is strictly prohibited by the Tantra to the *pashu*.

It is said in this Tantra and elsewhere that, in the Kali-yuga, *divya*
and *pashu* dispositions can scarcely be found. It may be thought
difficult at first sight to reconcile this (so far as the *pasha* is
concerned) with other statements as to the nature of these respective
classes. The term *pashu*, in these and similar passages, would appear
to be used in a good sense as referring to a man who, though tamasic,
yet performs his functions with that obedience to nature which is shown
by the still more tamasic animal creation free from the disturbing
influences of *rajas*, which, if it may be the source of good, may also
be, when operating independently, the source of evil.

The Commentator explains the passage cited from the Tantra as meaning
that the conditions and character of the Kali-yuga are not such as to be
productive of *pasha-bhava* (apparently in the sense stated), or to
allow of its *achara* (that is, *Vaidikachara*). No one, he says, can
fully perform the *vedachara*, *vaishnavachara*, and *shavachara* rites,
without which the Vaidik, Pauranik *mantra*, and *yajna* are fruitless.
No one now goes through the *brahma-charya ashrama*, or adopts after the
fiftieth year that called *vana-prastha*. Those whom the Veda does not
control cannot expect the fruit of Vaidik observances. On the contrary,
men have taken to drink, associate with the low, and are fallen; as are
also those men who associate with them. There can therefore be no pure
*pashu*. Under these circumstances the duties prescribed by the Vedas
which are appropriate for the *pasha* being incapable of performance,
Shiva for the liberation of men of the Kali Age has proclaimed the
Agama. "Now, there is no other way." The explanation thus given,
therefore, appears to amount to this. The pure type of *pashu* for whom
*vedachara* was designed does not exist. For others who though *pasha*
are not purely so, the Tantra is the governing Shastra. This, however,
does not mean that all are now competent for *virachara*.

It is to be noted, however, that the Prana-toshini cites a passage
purporting to come from the Mahanirvana Tantra, which is apparently in
direct opposition to the foregoing:

Divya-vira-mayo bhavah kalau nasti kada-chana

Kevalang pasha-bhavena mantra-siddhirbhavennrinam.

"In the Kali Age there is no *divya* or *vira-bhava*. It is only by the
*pashu-bhava* that men may obtain *mantra-siddhi*."

This matter of the *bhava* prevalent in the *Kali-yuga* has been the
subject of considerable discussion and difference of opinion, and is
only touched upon here.

Guru and Shishya

The *Guru* is the religious teacher and spiritual guide to whose
direction orthodox Hindus of all divisions of worshippers submit
themselves. There is in reality but one *Guru*. The ordinary human
*Guru* is but the manifestation on the phenomenal plane of the Adi-natha
Maha-kala, the Supreme *Guru* abiding in Kailasa. He it is who enters
into and speaks with the voice of the earthly *Guru* at the time of
giving mantra. *Guru* is the root (*mala*) of diksha (imitation).
*Diksha* is the root of *mantra*. *Mantra* is the root of *Devata*; and
Devata is the root of *siddhi*. The Munda-mala Tantra says that *mantra*
is born of *Guru* and *Devata* of *mantra*, so that the *Guru* occupies
the position of a grandfather to the *Ishta-devata*.

It is the *Guru* who initiates and helps, and the relationship between
him and the disciple (*shishya*) continues until the attainment of
monistic *siddhi*. Manu says: "Of him who gives natural birth and of him
who gives knowledge of the Veda the giver of sacred knowledge is the
more venerable father. Since second or divine birth insures life to the
twice-born in this world and the next." The *Shastra* is, indeed, full
of the greatness of *Guru*. The *Guru* is not to be thought of as a mere
man. There is no difference between *Guru*, *mantra*, and Deva. *Guru*
is father, mother, and Brahman. *Guru*, it is said, can save from the
wrath of Shiva, but none can save from the wrath of the *Guru*. Attached
to this greatness there is, however, responsibility; for the sins of the
disciple recoil upon him.

Three lines of *Guru* are worshipped: heavenly (*divyangga*) *siddha*
(*siddhangga*), and human (*manavangga*). The *kala-guru* are four in
number, viz.: the *Guru*, *Parama-guru*, *Parapara-guru*,
*Parameshti-guru*; each of these being the *guru* of the preceding one.
According to the Tantra, woman with the necessary qualifications may be
a *guru*, and give initiation. Good qualities are required in the
disciple, and according to the Sara-sangraha a *guru* should examine and
test the intending disciple for a year. The qualifications of a good
disciple are stated to be good birth, purity of soul (*shuddhatma*), and
capacity for enjoyment, combined with desire for liberation
(*purushartha-parayanah*). Those who are lewd (*kamuka*), adulterous
(*para-daratura*), constantly addicted to sin (*sada papa-kriya*),
ignorant, slothful, and devoid of religion, should be rejected.

The perfect *sadhaka* who is entitled to the knowledge of all *Shastra*
is he who is pure-minded, whose senses are controlled (*jitendriyah*),
who is ever engaged in doing good to all beings, free from false notions
of dualism, attached to the speaking of, taking shelter with, and living
in the supreme unity of the Brahman. So long as Shakti is not fully
communicated (see next note) to the *shishya’s* body from that of the
*guru*, so long the conventional relation of *guru* and *shishya*
exists. A man is *shishya* only so long as he is *sadhaka*. When,
however, *siddhi* is attained, both *Guru* and *Shishya* are above this
dualism. With the attainment of pure monism, naturally this relation, as
all others, disappears.

Initiation

Diksha

Initiation is the giving of mantra by the *guru*. At the time of
initiation the *guru* must first establish the life of the *guru* in his
own body; that is the vital force (*prana-shakti*) of the Supreme *Guru*
whose abode is in the thousand-petalled lotus. As an image is the
instrument (*yantra*) in which divinity (*devatva*) inheres, so also is
the body of *guru*. The day prior thereto the *guru* should, according
to Tantra, seat the intending candidate on a mat of *kusha* grass. He
then makes *japa* of a "sleep mantra" (*supta-mantra*) in his ear, and
ties his crown lock. The disciple, who should have fasted and observed
sexual continence, repeats the mantra thrice, prostrates himself at the
feet of the *guru*, and then retires to rest. Initiation, which follows,
gives spiritual knowledge and destroys sin. As one lamp is lit at the
flame of another, so the divine *shanti*, consisting of *mantra*, is
communicated from the *guru’s* body to that of the *Shishya*. Without
*daksha*, *japa* of the *mantra*, *puja*, and other ritual acts, are
said to be useless. Certain *mantra* are also said to be forbidden to
*shudra* and women. A note, however, in the first Chalakshara Sutra, to
the Lalita would, however, show that even the *shudra* are not debarred
the use even of the *Pranava*, as is generally asserted. For, according
to the Kalika Purana (when dealing with *svara* or tone), whilst the
*udatta*, *an-udatta*, and *prachita* are appropriate to the first of
these castes, the *svara*, called *aukara*, with *anusvara* and *nada*,
is appropriate to *shudra*, who may use the *Pranava*, either at the
beginning or end of *mantra*, but not, as the *dvija* may, at both
places. The *mantra* chosen for initiation should be suitable
(*anukala*). Whether a *mantra* is *sva-kula* or *a-kula* to the person
about to be initiated is ascertained by the *kula-chakra*, the zodiacal
circle called *rashichakra* and other *chakra* which may be found
described in the Tantra-sara. Initiation by a woman is efficacious; that
by a mother is eight-fold so. Certain special forms of initiation,
called *abhisheka*, are described in the next note.

Abhisheka

Abhisheka is of eight kinds, and the forms of *abhisheka* which follow
the first at later stages, mark greater and greater degrees of
initiation. The first *shaktabhisheka* is given on entrance into the
path of *sadhana*. It is so called because the *guru* then reveals to
the *shishya* the preliminery mysteries of *shakti-tattva*. By it the
*shishya* is cleansed of all sinful or evil *shakti* or proclivities,
and acquires a wonderful new *shakti*. The next *purnabhisheka* is given
in the stage beyond *dakshinachara*, when the disciple has qualified
himself by *purascharana* and other practices to receive it. Here the
real work of *sadhana* begins. *Asana*, *yama*, etc., strengthen the
disciple’s determina,tion (*pratijna*) to persevere along the higher
stages of *sadhana*. The third is the difficult stage commenced by
*krama-dikshabhisheka*, in which it is said the great Vashishtha became
involved, and in which the *Rishi* Vishvamitra acquired *brahma-jnana*,
and so became a Brahmana. The sacred thread is now worn round the neck
like a garland. The *shishya*, then undergoing various ordeals
(*pariksha*), receives *samrajyabhisheka* and *maha-samrajyabhisheka*,
and at length arrives at the most dificult of all stages introduced by
*yoga-dikshabhisheka*. In previous stages the *sadhaka* has performed
the *panchanga-puraschharana*, and, with the assistance of his *guru*
(with whom he must constantly reside, and whose instructions he must
receive direct), he does the *panchanga-yoga –* that is, the last five
limbs of the ashtanga. He is thereafter qualified for
*purna-dikshabhisheka*, and, following that,
*maha-purna-diksha-bhisheka*, sometimes called *viraja-grahanabhisheka*.
On the attainment of perfection in this last grade, the *sadhaka*
performs his own funeral rite (*shraddha*), makes *purnahuti* with his
sacred thread and crown lock. The relation of *guru* and *shishya* now
ceases. From this point he ascends by himself until he realizes the
great saying, *So*’*ham* ("I am He"). At this stage, which the Tantra
calls *jivan-mukta* (liberated whilst yet living), he is called
*parama-hangsa*.

Sadhana

Sadhana is that which produces *siddhi* (*q.v.*). It is the means, or
practice, by which the desired end may be attained, and consists in the
exercise and training of the body and psychic faculties, upon the
gradual perfection of which *siddhi* follows; the nature and degree of
which, again, depends upon the progress made towards the realization of
the *atma*, whose veiling vesture the body is. The means employed are
various, such as worship (*puja*), exterior or mental; shastric
learning; austerities (*tapas*); the *pancha-tattva*, *mantra*, and so
forth. *Sadhana* takes on a special character, according to the end
sought. Thus, *sadhana* for *brahma-jñana*, which consists in the
acquisition of internal control (*shama*) over *buddhi*, *manas*, and
*ahangkara*; external control (*dama*) over the ten *indriya*,
discrimination between the transitory and the external, and renunciation
both of the world and heaven (*svarga*), is obviously different from
that prescribed for, say, the purposes of the lower magic. The *sadhaka*
and *sadhika* are respectively the man or woman who perform *sadhana*.
They are, according to their physical, mental, and moral qualities,
divided into four classes – *mridu*, *madhya*, *adhimatraka*, and the
highest *adhimatrama*, who is qualified (*adhikari*) for all forms of
*yoga*. In a similar way the *Kaula* division of worshippers are divided
into the *prakriti*, or common *Kaula* following *virachara*, addicted
to ritual practice, and *sadhana*, with *pancha-tattva*; the
*madhyama-kaulika*, or middling Kaula, accomplishing the same *sadhana*,
but with a mind more turned towards meditation, knowledge, and
*samadhi*; and the highest type of Kaula (*kaulikottama*), who, having
surpassed all ritualism, meditates upon the Universal Self.

Worship Generally

There are four different forms of worship corresponding with four states
(*bhava*). The realization that the *jivatma* and *paramatma* are one,
that everything is Brahman, and that nothing but the Brahman exists, is
the highest state, or *brahma-bhava*. Constant meditation by the *yoga*
process upon the *Devata* in the heart is the lower and middlemost
(*dhyana-bhava*) *japa* (*q*.*v*.) and *stava* (hymns and prayer) is
still lower and the lowest of all is mere external worship (*puja*)
(*q*.*v*.). *Puja-bhava* is that which arises out of the dualistic
notions of worshipper and worshipped; the servant and the Lord. This
dualism exists in greater or less degree in all the states except the
highest. But for him who, having realized the *advaita-tattva*, knows
that all is Brahman, there is neither worshipper nor worshipped, neither
*yoga* nor *puja*, nor *dharana*, *dhyana*, *stava*, *japa*, *vrata*, or
other ritual or process of *sadhana*.

In external worship there is worship either of an image (*pratima*), or
of a *yantra* (*q.v.*), which takes its place. The *sadhaka* should
first worship inwardly the mental image of the form assumed by the Devi,
and then by the life-giving (*prana-pratishtha*) ceremony infuse the
image with Her life by the communication to it of the light and energy
(*tejas*) of the Brahman which is within him to the image without, from
which there bursts the lustre of Her whose substance is consciousness
itself (*chaitanya-mayi*). She exists as Shakti in stone or metal, or
elsewhere, but is there veiled and seemingly inert. *Chaitanya*
(consciousness) is aroused by the worshipper through the
*prana-pratishtha mantra*.

Rites (*karma*) are of two kinds. *Karma* is either *nitya* nr
*naimittika*. The first is both daily and obligatory, and is done
because so ordained. Such as the sandhya (*v*. *post*), which in the
case of Shudras is in the Tantrik form; and daily *puja* (*v*. *post*)
of the *Ishta*- and *Kula-Devata* (*v*. *post*); and for Brahmamas the
*pancha-maha-yajna* (*v*. *post*). The second or conditional *karma* is
occasional and voluntary, and is *kamya* when done to gain some
particular end, such as *yajna* for a particular object; *tapas* with
the same end (for certain forms of *tapas* are also *nitya*); and
*vrata* (*v*. *post*).

The Shudra is precluded from the performance of Vaidik rites, or the
reading of the Vedas, or the recital of the Vaidik *mantra*. His worship
is practically limited to that of the Ishta-Devata and the
Bana-linga-puja, with Tantrik and Pauranik *mantra* and such *vrata* as
consist in penance and charity. In other cases the *vrata* is performed
through a Brahmana. The Tantra makes no caste distinctions as regards
worship. All may read the Tantras, perform the Tantrik worship, such as
the *sandhya* (*v*. *post*), and recite the Tantrik *mantra*, such as
the Tantrik Gayatri. All castes, and even the lowest *chandala*, may be
a member of a *chakra*, or Tantrik circle of worship. In the *chakra*
all its members partake of food and drink together, and are deemed to be
greater than Brahmanas; though upon the break-up of the *chakras* the
ordinary caste and social relations are re-established. All are
competent for the specially Tantrik worship, for, in the words of the
Gautamiya Tantra, the Tantra Shastra is for all castes and for all
women. The latter are also excluded under the present Vaidik system,
though it is said by Shankha Dharma-shastra-kara that the wife may, with
the consent of her husband, fast, take vows, perform *homa* and *vrata*,
etc. According to the Tantra, a woman may not only receive *mantra*, but
may, as a Guru, initiate and give it. She is worshipful as Guru, and as
wife of Guru. The Devi is Herself Guru of all Shastras and woman, as,
indeed, all females who are Her embodiments are, in a peculiar sense,
Her earthly representatives.

Forms of Achara

There are seven, or, as some say, nine, divisions of worshippers. The
extra divisions are bracketed in the following quotation. The Kularnava
Tantra mentions seven, which are given in their order of superiority,
the first being the lowest: *Vedachara*, *Vaishnavachara*,
*Shaivachara*, *Dakshinachara*, *Vamachara*, *Siddhantachara*
(*Aghorachara*, *Yogachara*), and *Kaulachara*, the highest of all. The
*achara* is the way, custom, and practice of a particular class of
*sadhaka*. They are not, as sometimes supposed, different sects, but
stages through which the worshipper in this or other births has to pass
before he reaches the supreme stage of the *Kaula*. *Vedachara*, which
consists in the daily practice of the Vaidik rites, is the gross body
(*sthula-deha*), which comprises within it all other *acharas*, which
are, as it were, its subtle bodies (*sukshma-deha*) of various degrees.
The worship is largely of an external and ritual character, the object
of which is to strengthen *dharma*. This is the path of action
(*kriya-marga*). In the second stage the worshipper passes from blind
faith to an understanding of the supreme protecting energy of the
Brahman, towards which he has feelings of devotion. This is the path of
devotion (*bhakti-marga*), and the aim at this stage is the union of it
and faith previously acquired. With an increasing determination to
protect *dharma* and destroy *a-dharma*, the *sadhaka* passes into
*Shaivachara*, the warrior (*kshatriya*) stage, wherein to love and
mercy are added strenuous striving and the cultivation of power. There
is union of faith, devotion (*bhakti*), and inward determination
(*antar-laksha*). Entrance is made upon the path of knowledge
(*jnana-marga*). Following this is *Dakshinachara*, which in Tantra does
not mean "right-hand worship," but "favourable" – that is, that *achara*
which is favourable to the accomplishment of the higher *sadhana*, and
whereof the Devi is the Dakshina Kalika. This stage commences when the
worshipper can make *dhyana* and *dharana* of the threefold *shakti* of
the Brahman (*kriya*, *ichchha*, *jñana*), and understands the mutual
connection (*samanvaya*) of the three guna until he receives
*purnabhisheka* (*q*.*v*.). At this stage the *sadhaka* is *Shakta*, and
qualified for the worship of the threefold *shakti* of Brahma, Vishnu,
Maheshvara. He is fully initiated in the Gayatri-mantra, and worships
the Devi Gayatri, the Dakshina Kalika, or Adya Shakti – the union of the
three Shakti. This is the stage of individualistic Brahmana-tattva, and
its aim is the union of faith, devotion, and determination, with a
knowledge of the threefold energies. After this a change of great
importance occurs, marking, as it does, the entry upon the path of
return (*nivritti*). This it is which has led some to divide the
*achara* into the two broad divisions of *Dakshinachara* (including the
first four) and *Vamachara* (including the last three), it being said
that men are born into *Dakshinachara*, but are received by initiation
into *Vamachara*. The latter term does not mean, as is vulgarly
supposed, "left-hand worship," but the worship in which woman (*vama*)
enters that is *lata-sadhana*. In this *achara* there is also worship of
the Vama Devi. *Vija* is here "adverse," in that the stage is adverse to
*pravritti*, which governed in varying degrees the preceding *achara*,
and entry is here made upon the path of *nivritti*, or return to the
source whence the world sprung. Up to the fourth stage the *sadhaka*
followed *pravrittimarga*, the outgoing path which led from the source,
the path of worldly enjoyment, albeit curved by *dharma*. At first
unconsciously, and later consciously, *sadhana* sought to induce
*nivrittt*, which, however, can only fully appear after the exhaustion
of the forces of the outward current. In *Vamachara*, however, the
*sadhaka* commences to directly destroy *pravritti*, and with the help
of the Guru (whose help throughout is in this necessary) to cultivate
*nivritti*. The method at this stage is to use the force of *pravritti*
in such a way as to render them self-destructive. The passions which
bind may be so employed as to act as forces whereby the particular life
of which they are the strongest manifestation is raised to the universal
life. Passion, which has hitherto run downwards and outwards to waste,
is directed inwards and upwards, and transformed to power. But it is not
only the lower physical desires of eating, drinking, and sexual
intercourse which must be subjugated. The *sadhaka* must at this stage
commence to cut off all the eight bonds (*pasha*) which mark the *pashu*
which the Kularnava Tantra enumerates as pity (*daya*), ignorance
(*moha*), shame (*lajja*), family (*kula*), custom (*shila*), and caste
(*varna*). When Shri *Krishna* stole the clothes of the bathing *Gopi*,
and made them approach him naked, he removed the artificial coverings
which are imposed on man in the *sangsara*. The *Gopi* were eight, as
are the bonds (*pasha*), and the errors by which the *jiva* is misled
are the clothes which Shri *Krishna* stole. Freed of these, the *jiva*
is liberated from all bonds arising from his desires, family, and
society. He then reaches the stage of Shiva (*shivatva*). It is the aim
of *Vamachara* to liberate from the bonds which bind men to the
*sangsara*, and to qualify the *sadhaka* for the highest grades of
*sadhana* in which the *sattvika guna* predominates. To the truly
sattvik there is neither attachment, fear, or disgust. That which has
been commenced in these stages is by degrees completed in those which
follow – viz.: *Siddhantachara*, and according to some, *Aghorachara*
and *Yogachara*. The *sadhaka* becomes more and more freed from the
darkness of the *sangsara*, and is attached to nothing, hates nothing,
and is ashamed of nothing, having freed himself of the artificial bonds
of family, caste, and society. The *sadhaka* becomes, like Shiva
himself, a dweller in the cremation ground (*smashana*). He learns to
reach the upper heights of *sadhana* and the mysteries of *yoga*. He
learns the movements of the different *vayu* in the microcosm the
*Kshudra-brahmanda*, the regulation of which controls the inclinations
and propensities (*vritti*). He learns also the truth which concern the
macrocosm (*brahmanda*). Here also the Guru teaches him the inner core
of *Vedachara*. Initiation by *yoga-diksha* fully qualifies him for
*yogachara*. On attainment of perfection in *ashtanga-yoga*, he is fit
to enter the highest stage of *Kaulachara*.

Kaula-dharma is in no wise sectarian, but, on the contrary, is the heart
of all sects. This is the true meaning of the phrase which, like many
another touching the Tantra, is misunderstood, and used to fix the kaula
with hypocrisy – *antah-shaktah*, *vahih-shaivah sabhayang
vaishnavahmatah nana – rupadharah kaulah vicharanti mahitale* (outwardly
Shaivas; in gatherings, Vaishnavas; at heart, Shaktas; under various
forms the Kaulas wander on earth). A Kaula is one who has passed through
these and other stages, which have as their own inmost doctrine (whether
these worshippers know it or not) that of Kaulachara. It is indifferent
what the Kaula’s apparent sect may be. The form is nothing and
everything. It is nothing in the sense that it has no power to narrow
the Kaula’s own inner life; it is everything in the sense that knowledge
may infuse its apparent limitations with an universal meaning. So
understood, form is never a bond. The Vishva-sara Tantra, says of the
Kaula that "for him there is neither rule of time; nor place. His
actions are unaffected either by the phases of the moon or the position
of the stars. The Kaula roams the earth in differing forms. At times
adhering to social rules (*shishta*), he at others appears, according to
their standard, to be fallen (*bhrashta*). At times, again, he seems to
be as unearthly as a ghost (*bhuta* or *pishacha*) To him no difference
is there between mud and sandal paste, his son and an enemy, home and
the cremation ground."

At this stage the *sadhaka* attains to *Brahma-jnana*, which is the true
*gnosis* in its perfect form. On receiving *mahapurna-daksha* he
performs his own funeral rites and is dead to the *sangsara*. Seated
alone in some quiet place, he remains in constant *samadhi*, and attains
its *nir-vikalpa* form. The Great Mother, the Supreme Prakriti
Maha-shakti, dwells in the heart of the *sadhaka*, which is now the
cremation ground wherein all passions have been burnt away. He becomes a
*Parama-hangsa*, who is liberated whilst yet living (*javan-mukta*).

It must not, however, be supposed that each of these stages must
necessarily be passed through by each *jiva* in a single life. On the
contrary, they are ordinarily traversed in the course of a multitude of
births. The weaving of the spiritual garment is recommenced where in a
previous birth, it was dropped on death. In the present life a *sadhaka*
may commence at any stage. If he is born into *Kaulachara*, and so is a
Kaula in its fullest sense, it is because in previous births he has by
*sadhana*, in the preliminary stages, won his entrance into it.
Knowledge of Shakti is, as the Niruttara Tantra says, acquired after
many births; and, according to the Mahanirvana Tantra, it is by merit
acquired in previous births that the mind is inclined to *Kaulachara*.

Mantra

*Shabda*, or sound, which is of the Brahman, and as such the cause of
the *Brahmanda*, is the manifestation of the Chit-shakti Itself. The
Vishva-sara Tantra says that tha Para-brahman, as Shabda-brahman, whose
substance is all *mantra*, exists in the body of the *jivatma*. It is
either unlettered (*dhvani*) or lettered (*varna*). The former, which
produces the latter, is the subtle aspect of the *jiva’s* vital
*shakti*. As the Prapancha-sara states, the *brahmanda* is pervaded by
*shakti*, consisting of *dhvani*, also called *nada*, *prana*, and the
like. The manifestation of the gross form (*sthula*) of *shabda* is not
possible unless *shabda* exists in a subtle (*sukshma*) form. *Mantras*
are all aspects of the Brahman and manifestations of *Kula-kundalini*.
Philosophically *shabda* is the *guna* of *akasha*, or ethereal space.
It is not, however, produced by *akasha*, but manifests in it. *Shabda*
is itself the Brahman. In the same way, however, as in outer space,
waves of sound are produced by movements of air (*vayu*); so in the
space within the *jiva’s* body waves of sound are produced according to
the movements of the vital air (*prana-vayu*) and the process of
inhalation and exhalation. *Shabda* first appears at the *muladhara*,
and that which is known to us as such is, in fact, the *shakti* which
gives life to the *jiva*. She it is who, in the *muladhara*, is the
cause of the sweet indistinct and murmuring *dhvani*, which sounds like
the humming of a black bee.

The extremely subtle aspect of sound which first appears in the
*Muladhara* is called *para*; less subtle when it has reached the heart,
it is known as *pashyanti*. When connected with *buddhi* it becomes more
gross, and is called *madhyama*. Lastly, in its fully gross form, it
issues from the mouth as *vaikhari*. As Kula-Kundalini, whose substance
is all *varna* and *dhvani*, is but the manifestation of, and Herself
the Paramatma; so the substance of all *mantra* is *chit*,
notwithstanding their external manifestation, as sound, letters, or
words; in fact, the letters of the alphabet, which are known as
*akshara*, are nothing but the *yantra* of the *akshara*, or
imperishable Brahman. This, however, is only realized by the *sadhaka*
when his *shakti*, generated by *sadhana*, is united with the
*mantra-shakti*.

It is the *sthula* or gross form of Kulakundalini, appearing in
different aspects as different Devata, which is the presiding Devata
(*adhishthatri*) of all *mantra*, though it is the subtle or *sukshma*
form at which all *sadhakas* aim. When the *mantrashakti* is awakened by
*sadhana* the Presiding Devata appears, and when perfect *mantra-siddhi*
is acquired, the Devata, who is *sachchidananda*, is revealed. The
relations of *varna*, *nada*, *vindu*, vowel and consonant in a
*mantra*, indicate the appearance of *Devata* in different forms.
Certain *vibhuti*, or aspects, of the *Devata* are inherent in certain
*varna*, but perfect Shakti does not appear in any but a whole *mantra*.
Any word or letter of the *mantra* cannot be a *mantra*. Only that
*mantra* in which the playful Devata has revealed any of Her particular
aspects can reveal that aspect, and is therefore called the individual
*mantra* of that one of Her particular aspects. The form of a particular
*Devata*, therefore, appears out of the particular *mantra* of which
that Devata is the *adhishthatri* Devata.

A *mantra* is composed of certain letters arranged in definite sequence
of sounds of which the letters are the representative signs. To produce
the designed effect *mantra* must be intoned in the proper way,
according to *svara* (rhythm), and *varna* (sound). Their textual source
is to be found in Veda, Purana, and Tantra. The latter is essentially
the *mantra-shastra*, and so it is said of the embodied *shastra*, that
Tantra, which consists of *mantra*, is the *paramatma*, the Vedas are
the *jivatma*, Darshana (systems of philosophy) are the senses, Puranas
are the body, and Smriti are the limbs. Tantra is thus the *shakti* of
consciousness, consisting of *mantra*. A mantra is not the same thing as
prayer or self-dedication (*atma-nivedana*). Prayer is conveyed in what
words the worshipper chooses, and bears its meaning on its face. It is
only ignorance of shastrik principle which supposes that *mantra* is
merely the name for the words in which one expresses what one has to say
to the Divinity. If it were, the *sadhaka* might choose his own language
without recourse to the eternal and determined sounds of *Shastra*.

A *mantra* may, or may not, convey on its face its meaning. *Vija*
(seed) *mantra*, such as *Aing*, *Kling*, *Hring*, have no meaning,
according to the ordinary use of language. The initiate, however, knows
that their meaning is the own form (*sva-rupa*) of the particular
Devata, whose *mantra* they are, and that they are the *dhvani* which
makes all letters sound and which exists in all which we say or hear.
Every *mantra* is, then, a form (*rupa*) of the Brahman. Though,
therefore, manifesting in the form and sound of the letters of the
alphabet, *Shastra* says that they go to Hell who think that the *Guru*
is but a stone, and the *mantra* but letters of the alphabet.

From *manana*, or thinking, arises the real understanding of the
monistic truth, that the substance of the Brahman and the brahmanda are
one and the same. *Man-* of *mantra* comes from the first syllable of
*manana*, and *-tra* from *trana*, or liberation from the bondage of the
*sangsara* or phenomenal world. By the combination of *man-* and *-tra*,
that is called *mantra* which calls forth (*amantrana*), the
*chatur-varga* (*vide post*), or four aims of sentient being. Whilst,
therefore, mere prayer often ends in nothing but physical sound,
*mantra* is a potent compelling force, a word of power (the fruit of
which is *mantra-siddhi*), and is thus effective to produce the
*chatur-varga*, advaitic perception, and *mukti*. Thus it is said that
*siddhi* is the certain result of *japa* (*q*.*v*.). By Mantra the
sought for (*sadhya*) *Devata*, is attained and compelled. By *siddhi*
in *mantra* is opened the vision of the three worlds. Though the purpose
of worship (*puja*), reading (*patha*), hymn (*stava*), sacrifice
(*homa*), *dhyana*, *dharana*, and *samadhi* (*vide post*), and that of
the *diksha-mantra* are the same, yet the latter is far more powerful,
and this for the reason that, in the first, the *sadhaka’s
sadhana-shakti* only operates, whilst in the case of *mantra* that
*sadhana-shakti* works, in conjunction with *mantra-shakti*, which has
the revelation and force of fire, and than which nothing is more
powerful. The special *mantra* which is received at initiation
(*diksha*) is the *vija*, or seed mantra, sown in the field of the
*sadhaka’s* heart, and the Tantrik *sandhya*, *nyasa*, *puja*, and the
like are the stem and branches upon which hymns of praise (*stuti*) and
prayer and homage (*vandana*) are the leaves and flower, and the
*kavacha*, consisting of *mantra*, the fruit.

Mantra are solar (*saura*) and lunar (*saumya*), and are masculine,
feminine, or neuter. The solar are masculine and lunar feminine. The
masculine and neuter forms are called *mantra*. The feminine *mantra* is
known as *vidya*. The neuter *mantra*, such as the Pauranik-mantra,
ending with *namah*, are said to lack the force and vitality of the
others. The masculine and feminine *mantra* end differently. Thus,
*Hung*, *Phat*, are masculine terminations, and "*thang*," or *svaha*,
are feminine ones.

The Nitya Tantra gives various names to *mantra*. according to the
number of their syllables, a one-syllabled *mantra* being called
*pinda*, a three-syllabled one *kartari*, a *mantra* with four to nine
syllables *vija*, with ten to twenty syllables *mantra*, and *mantra*
with more than twenty syllables *mala*. Commonly, however, the term
*vija* is applied to monosyllabic *mantra*. The Tantrik *mantras* called
*vija* (seed) are so named because they are the seed of the fruit, which
is *siddhi*, and because they are the very quintessence of *mantra*.
They are short, unetymological vocables, such as *Hring*, *Shring*,
*Kring*, *Hung*, *Aing*, *Phat*, etc., which will be found throughout
the text. Each Devata has His or Her *vija*. The primary *mantra* of a
Devata is known as the root mantra (*mula-mantra*). It is also said that
the word *mula* denotes the subtle body of the Devata called
*Kama-kala*. The utterance of a *mantra* without knowledge of its
meaning or of the *mantra* method is a mere movement of the lips and
nothing more. The *mantra* sleeps. There are various processes
preliminary to, and involved in, its right utterance, which processes
again consist of *mantra*, such as, purification of the mouth
(*mukha-shodhana*), purification of the tongue (*jihva-shodhana*), and
of the *mantra* (*ashaucha-bhanga*), *kulluka*, *nirvvana*, *setu*,
*nidra-bhanga*, awakening of mantra, *mantra-chaitanya*, or giving of
life or vitality to the *mantra*. *Mantrarthabhavana*, forming of mental
image of the Divinity. There are also ten *sangskara* of the *mantra*.
*Dipani* is seven *japa* of the *vija*, preceded and followed by one.
Where *hring* is employed instead of *Ong* it is prana-yoga. Yoni-mudra
is meditation on the *Guru* in the head and on the Ishta-devata in the
heart, and then on the *Yoni-rupa Bhagavati* from the head to the
*muladhara*, and from the *muladhara* to the head, making *japa* of the
*yoni vija* (*eng*) ten times. The *mantra* itself is *Devata*. The
worshipper awakens and vitalizes it by *chit-shakti*, putting away all
thought of the letter, piercing the six *Chakra*, and contemplating the
Spotless One. The *shakti* of the *mantra* is the *vachaka-shakti*, or
the means by which the *vachya-shakti* or object of the *mantra* is
attained. The *mantra* lives by the energy of the former. The
*saguna-shanti* is awakened by *sadhana* and worshipped, and She it is
who opens the portals whereby the *vachya-shakti* is reached. Thus the
Mother in Her *saguna* form is the presiding deity (*adhishthatri
Devata*) of the Gayatri-*mantra*. As the nirguna (formless) One, She is
its *vachya-shakti*. Both are in reality one and the same; but the
*jiva*, by the laws of his nature and its three *guna*, must first
meditate on the gross (*sthula*) form before he can realize the subtle
(*sukshma*) form, which is his liberator.

The mantra of a Devata is the Devata. The rhythmical vibrations of its
sounds not merely regulate the unsteady vibrations of the sheaths of the
worshipper, thus transforming him, but from it arises the form of the
Devata, which it is. *Mantra-siddhi* is the ability to make a *mantra*
efficacious and to gather its fruit in which case the *mantra* is called
*mantra-siddha*. *Mantra* are classified as *siddha*, *sadhya*,
*susiddha*, and *ari*, according as they are friends, servers,
supporters, or destroyers – a matter which is determined for each
*sadhaka* by means of *chakra* calculations.

The Gayatri Mantra

The Gayatri is the most sacred of all Vaidik *mantras*. In it the Veda
lies embodied as in its seed. It runs: *Ong bhur bhuvah svah: tat
savitur varenyam bhargo devasya dhimahi: dhiyo yo nah prachodayat*.
*Om*. "*Ong*. Let us contemplate the wondrous spirit of the Divine
Creator (Savitri) of the earthly, atmospheric, and celestial spheres.
May He direct our minds (that is, ‘towards’ the attainment of
*dharmma*., *artha*, *kama*, and *moksha*), *Om*."

The Gayatrt-Vyakarana of Yogi Yajnavalkya thus explains the following
words: *Tat*, that. The word *yat* (which) is understood. *Savituh* is
the possessive case of *Savitri*, derived from the root *su*, "to bring
forth." Savitri is, therefore, the Bringer-forth of all that exists. The
Sun (*Suryya*) is the cause of all that exists, and of the state in
which they exist. Bringing forth and creating all things, it is called
Savitri. The Bhavishya Purana says Suryya is the visible Devata. He is
the Eye of the world and the Maker of the day. There is no other Devata
eternal like unto Him. This universe has emanated from, and will be
again absorbed into, Him. Time is of and in Him. The planets, sta.rs,
the Vasus. Rudras, Vayu, Agni, and the rest are but parts of Him. By
*Bhargah* is meant the Aditya-devata, dwelling in the region of the Sun
(*suryya-mandala*) in all His might and glory. He is to the Sun what our
spirit (*atma*) is to our body. Though He is in the region of the sun in
the outer or material sphere He also dwells in our inner selves. He is
the light of the light in the solar circle, and is the light of the
lives of all beings. As He is in the outer ether, so also is He in the
ethereal region of the heart. In the outer ether He is Suryya, and in
the inner ether He is the wonderful Light which is the Smokeless Fire.
In short, that Being whom the *sadhaka* realizes in the region of his
heart is the Aditya in the heavenly firmament. The two are one. The word
is derived in two ways: (1) from the root *bhrij*, "to ripen, mature,
destroy, reveal, shine." In this derivation Suryya is He who matures and
transforms all things. He Himself shines and reveals all things by His
light. And it is He who at the final Dissolution (*pralaya*) will in His
image of destructive Fire (*kalagni*) destroy all things. (2) From *bha
=* dividing all things into different classes; *ra =* colour; for He
produces the colour of all created objects; *ga*, constantly going and
returning. The sun divides all things, produces the different colours of
all things, and is constantly going and returning. As the
Brahmana-sarvasva says: "The *Bhargah* is the *Atma* of all that exists,
whether moving or motionless, in the three *loka* (*Bhur bhuvah svah*).
There is nothing which exists apart from it."

Devasya is the genitive of Deva, agreeing with *Savituh*. Deva is the
radiant and playful (*lilamaya*) one. Suryya is in constant play with
creation (*srishti*), existence (*sthiti*), and destruction (*pralaya*),
and by His radiance pleases all. (*Lila*, as applied to the Brahman, is
the equivalent of *maya*.) *Varenyam = varaniya*, or adorable. He should
be meditated upon and adored that we may be relieved of the misery of
birth and death. Those who fear rebirth, who desire freedom from death
and liberation and who strive to escape the three kinds of pain
(*tapa-traya*), which are *adhyatmika*, *adhidaivika*, and
*adhibhautika*, meditate upon and adore the *Bharga*, who, dwelling in
the region of the Sun, is Himself the three regions called *Bhur-loka*,
*Bhuvar-loka*, and *Svar-loka*. *Dhimahi = dhya-yema*, from the root
*dhyai*. We meditate upon, or let us meditate upon.

Prachodayat = may He direct. The Gayatri does not so expressly state,
but it is understood that such direction is along the *chatur-varga*, or
four-fold path, which is *dharmma*, *artha*, *kama*, and *moksha*
(piety, wealth, desire and its fulfilment, and liberation, *vide post*).
The Bhargah is ever directing our inner faculties (*buddhi-vritti*)
along these paths.

The above is the *Vaidika Gayatri*, which, according to the Vaidik
system, none but the twice-born may utter. To the Shudra whether man or
woman, and to women of all other castes it is forbidden. The Tantra,
which has Gayatri-Mantra of its own, shows no such exclusiveness;
Chapter III., verses 109-111, gives the *Brahma-gayatri* for worshippers
of the Brahman: "*Parameshva-raya vidmahe para-tattvaya dhimahi: tan no
Brahma prachodayat* "(May we know the supreme Lord. Let us contemplate
the Supreme essence. And may that Brahman direct us).

Yantra

This word in its most general sense means an instrument, or that by
which anything is accomplished. In worship it is that by which the mind
is fixed on its object. The Yogini Tantra says that the Devi should be
worshipped either in *pratima* (image), *mandala*, or *yantra*. At a
certain stage of spiritual progress the *sadhaka* is qualified to
worship *yantra*. The *siddha-yogi* in inward worship (*antar-puja*)
commences with the worship of *yantra*, which is the sign (*sangketa*)
of *brahma-vijnana* as the *mantra* is the *sangketa* of the Devata. It
is also said that *yantra* is so called because it subdues
(*niyantrana*) lust, anger, and the other sins of *jiva* and the
sufferings caused thereby.

This *yantra* is a diagram engraved or drawn on metal, paper, or other
substances, which is worshipped in the same manner as an image
(*pratima*). As different *mantra* are prescribed for different
worships, so are different *yantra*. The *yantras* are therefore of
various designs, according to the object of worship. The cover of this
work shows a silver Gayatri *yantra* belonging to the author. In the
centre triangle are engraved in the middle the words, *Shri Shri Gayatri
sva-prasada siddhing kuru* ("Shri Shri Gayatri Devi: grant me success"),
and at each inner corner there are the *vija Hring* and *Hrah*. In the
spaces formed by the intersections of the outer ovoid circles is the
*vija* "*Hring*." The outside circular band contains the *vija* "*Tha*"
which indicates "*Svaha*," commonly employed to terminate the feminine
*mantra* or *vidya*. The eight lotus petals which spring from the band
are inscribed with the *vija*, "*Hring*, *Ing*, *Hrah*." The outermost
band contains all the *matrika*, or letters of the alphabet, from
*ankara* to *laksha*. The whole is enclosed in the way common to all
*yantra* by a *bhupura*, by which, as it were, the *yantra* is enclosed
from the outer world. The *yantra* when inscribed with *mantra*, serves
(so far as these are concerned) the purpose of a mnemonic chart of the
*mantra* appropriate to the particular Devata whose presence is to be
invoked into the *yantra*. Certain preliminaries precede, as in the case
of a *pratima*, the worship of a *yantra*. The worshipper first
meditates upon the Devata, and then arouses Him or Her in himself. He
then communicates the divine presence thus aroused to the *yantra*. When
the Devata has by the appropriate *mantra* been invoked into the
*yantra*, the vital airs (*prana*) of the Devata are infused therein by
the *prana-pratishtha* ceremony, *mantra*, and *mudra*. The Devata is
thereby installed in the *yantra*, which is no longer mere gross matter
veiling the spirit which has been always there, but instinct with its
aroused presence, which the *sadhaka* first welcomes and then worships.
Mantra in itself is Devata, and *yantra* is *mantra* in that it is the
body of the Devata who is *mantra*.

Mudra

The term *mudra*is derived from the root *mud*, "to please," and in its
*upasana* form is so called because it gives pleasure to the Devas.
*Devanang moda-da mudra tasmat tang yatnatashcharet*. It is said that
there are 108, of which 55 are commonly used. The term means ritual
gestures made with the hands in worship or positions of the body in yoga
practice. Thus of the first class the *matsya –* (fish) *mudra* is
formed in offering *arghya* by placing the right hand on the back of the
left and extending, fin-like, on each side the two thumbs, with the
object that the conch which contains water may be regarded as an ocean
with aquatic animals; and the *yoni-mudra* which presents that organ as
a triangle formed by the thumbs, the two first fingers, and the two
little fingers is shown with the object of invoking the Devi to come and
take Her place before the worshipper, the *yoni* being considered to be
Her *pitha* or *yantra*. The *upasana mudra* is thus nothing but the
outward expression of inner resolve which it at the same time
intensifies. *Mudra* are employed in worship (*archchana*) *japa*,
*dhyana* (*q*.*v*.), *kamya-karma* (rites done to effect particular
objects), *pratishtha* (*q*.*v*.), *snana* (bathing), *avahana*
(welcoming), *naivedya* (offering of food), and *visarjana*, or
dismissal of the Devata. Some *mudra* of *hatha yoga* are described *sub
voc*. "*Yoga*." The Gheranda Sanghita says that knowledge of the *yoga
mudras* grants all *siddhi*, and that their performance produces
physical benefits such as stability, firmness and cure of disease.

Sandhya

The *Vaidika sandhya* is the rite performed by the twice-born castes
thrice a day, at morning, midday, and evening. The morning *sandhya* is
preceded by the following acts. On awakening, a *mantra* is said in
invocation of the *Tri-murtti* and the sun, moon, and planets, and
salutation is made to the Guru. The Hindu *dvi-ja* then recites the
*miantra:* "I am a Deva. I am indeed the sorrowless Brahman. By nature I
am eternally free, and in the form of existence, intelligence, and
Bliss." He then offers the actions of the day to the Deity, confesses
his inherent frailty, and prays that he may do right. Then, leaving his
bed and touching the earth with his right foot, the *dvi-ja* says, "Om,
0 Earth! salutation to Thee, the Guru of all that is good." After
attending to natural calls, the twice-born does *achamana* (sipping of
water) with *mantra*, cleanses his teeth, and takes his early morning
bath to the accompaniment of *mantra*. He then puts on his caste-mark
(*tilaka*) and makes *tarpanam*, or oblation of water, to the *Deva*,
*Rishi*, and *Pitri*. The *sandhya* follows, which consists of
*achamana* (sipping of water), *marjjana-snanam* (sprinkling of the
whole body with water taken with the hand or *kasha-grass*), *pranayama*
(regulation of *prana* through its manifestation in breath),
*agha-marshana* (expulsion of the person of sin from the body; the
prayer to the sun, and then (the canon of the *sandhya*) the silent
recitation (*japa*) of the Gayatn *mantra*, which consists of invocation
(*avahana*) of the *Gayatri-Devi*; *rishi-nyasa* and *shadanga-nyasa*
(*vide post*), meditation on the Devi-Gayatri in the morning as
Brahmani; at midday as Vaishnavi; and in the evening as Rudrani; *japa*
of the Gayatri a specified number of times; dismissal (*visarjana*) of
the Devi, followed by other mantra.

Besides the Brahmanical *Vaidiki-sandhya* from which the Shudras are
debarred, there is the *Tantriki-sandhya*, which may be performed by
all. The general outline is similar; the rite is simpler; the *mantra*
vary; and the *Tantrika-vijas* or "seed" *mantras* are employed.

Puja

This word is the common term for worship of which there are numerous
synonyms in the Sanskrit language. Puja is done daily of the
*Ishta-devata* or the particular Deity worshipped by the *sadhaka –* the
Devi in the case of a Shakti, Vishnu in the case of a Vaishnava, and so
forth. But though the Ishta-devata is the principal object of worship,
yet in *puju* all worship the *Pancha-devata*, or the Five Deva – Aditya
(the Sun), Ganesha, the Devi, Shiva, and Vishnu, or Narayana. After
worship of the Pancha-devata, the family Deity (*Kula-devata*), who is
generally the same as the Ishta-devata, is worshipped. *Puja*, which is
*kamya*, or done to gain a particular end as also *vrata*, are preceded
by the *sangkalpa*; that is, a statement of the resolution to do the
worship, as also of the particular object, if any, with which it is
done.

There are sixteen *upachara*, or things done or used in *puja:* (1)
*asana* (seat of the image); (2) *svagata* (welcome); (3) *padya* (water
for washing the feet); (4) *arghya* (offering of unboiled rice, flowers,
sandal paste, *durva* grass, etc., to the Devata in the *kushi*)
(vessel); (5 and 6) *achamana* (water for sipping, which is offered
twice); (7) *madhuparka* (honey, ghee, milk, and curd offered in a
silver or brass vessel); (8) *snana* (water for bathing); (9) *vasana*
(cloth); (10) *abharana* (jewels); (11) *gandha* (scent and sandal paste
is given); (12) *pushpa* (flowers); (13) *dhupa* (incense stick); (14)
*dipa* (light); (15) *naivedya* (food); (16) *vandana* or *namas-kara*
(prayer). Other articles are used which vary with the *puja*, such as
Tulasi leaf in the *Vishnu-puju* and bael-(*bilva*) leaf in the
Shiva-puja. The *mantras* said also vary according to the worship. The
seat (*asana*) of the worshipper is purified. Salutation being made to
the Shakti of support or the sustaining force (*adhara-shakti*); the
water, flowers, etc., are purified. All obstructive spirits are driven
away (*Bhutapasarpana*), and the ten quarters are fenced from their
attack by striking the earth three times with the left foot, uttering
the *Astra vija* "*phat*," and by snapping the fingers (twice) round the
head. *Pranayama* (regulation of breath) is performed and (*vide post*)
the elements of the body are purified (*bhuta-shuddhi*). There is
*nyasa* (*vide post*); *dhyana* (meditation) offering of the *upachara*;
*japa* (*vide post*), prayer and obeisance (*pranama*). In the
*ashta-murti-puja* of Shiva the Deva is worshipped under the eight
forms: Sharvva (Earth), Bhava (Water), Rudra (Fire), Ugra (Air), Bhima
(Ether), Pashupati (*yajamana –* the Sacrificer man), Ishana (Sun),
Mahadeva (Moon).

Yajna

This word, which comes from the root *yaj* (to worship), is commonly
translated "sacrifice." The Sanskrit word is, however, retained in the
translation, since *Yajna* means other things also than those which come
within the meaning of the word "sacrifice," as understood by an English
reader. Thus the "five great sacrifices" (*pancha-maha-yajna*) which
should be performed daily by the Brahmana are: The *homa* sacrifice,
including *Vaishva-deva* offering, "*bhuta-yajna* or *vali*, in which
offerings are made to Deva, *Bhuta*, and other Spirits and to animals;
*pitri-yajna* or *tarpana*, oblations to the pitri; *Brahma-yajna*, or
study of the Vedas and *Manushyayajna*, or entertainment of guests
(*atithisaparyya*). By these five *yajna* the worshipper places himself
in right relations with all being, affirming such relation between Deva,
Pitri, Spirits, men, the organic creation, and himself.

Homa, or *Deva-yajna*, is the making of offerings to Fire. which is the
carrier thereof to the Deva. A firepit (*kunda*) is prepared and fire
when brought from the house of a Brahmana is consecrated with *mantra*.
The fire is made conscious with the *mantra – Vang vahni-chaitanyaya
namah*, and then saluted and named. Meditation is then made on the three
*nadis* (*vide ante*) *–* Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna – and on Agni, the
Lord of Fire. Offerings are made to the *Ishta-devata* in the fire.
After the *puja* of fire, salutation is given as in *Shadanga-nyasa*,
and then clarified butter (ghee) is poured with a wooden spoon into the
fire with *mantra*, commencing with *Om* and ending with *Svaha*. *Homa*
is of various kinds, several of which are referred to in the text, and
is performed either daily, as in the case of the ordinary
*nitya-vaishva-deva-homa*, or on special occasions, such as the
*upanayana* or sacred thread ceremony, marriage, *vrata*, and the like.
It is of various kinds, such as *prayashchitta-homa*,
*srishtikrit*-*homa*, *janu homa*, *dhara-homa*, and others, some of
which will be found in the text.

Besides the *yajna* mentioned there are others. Manu speaks of four
kinds: *deva*, *bhauta* (where articles and ingredients are employed, as
in the case of *homa*, *daiva*, *vali*), *nriyajna*, and *pitri-yajna*.
Others are spoken of, such as *japa-yajna*, *dhyana-yajna*, etc. *Yajna*
are also classified according to the dispositions and intentions of the
worshipper into *sattvika*, *rajasika*, and *tamasika yajna*.

Vrata

*Vrata* is a part of *Naimittika*, or voluntary *karma*. It is that
which is the cause of virtue (*punya*), and is done to achieve its
fruit. *Vrata* are of various kinds. Some of the chief are Janmashtami
on *Krishna*’*s* birthday; Shiva-ratri in honour of Shiva; and the
Shat-panchami, Durvashtami, Tala-navami. Ananta-chaturdashi performed at
specified times in honour of Lakshmi, Narayana, and Ananta. Others may
be performed at any time, such as the Savitri *vrata* by women only, and
the Karttikeya-*puja* by men only. The great *vrata* is the celebrated
Durga-puja, *maha-vrata* in honour of the Devi as Durga, which will
continue as long as the sun and moon endure, and which, if once
commenced, must always be continued. There are numerous other *vrata*
which have developed to a great extent in Bengal, and for which there is
no Shastric authority such as Madhu-sankranti-vrata,
Jala-sankranti-vrata, and others. While each *vrata* has its
peculiarities, certain features are common to *vrata* of differing
kinds. There is both in preparation and performance *sangyama*, such as
sexual continence, eating of particular food, such as *havishyanna*,
fasting, bathing. No flesh or fish are taken. The mind is concentrated
to its purposes, and the vow or resolution (*niyama*) is taken. Before
the *vrata* the Sun, Planets, and Kula-devata are worshipped, and by the
"*suryahsomoyamahkala*" mantra all Deva and Beings are invoked to the
side of the worshipper. In the *vaidika vrata* the *sangkalpa* is made
in the morning, and the *vrata* is done before midday.

Tapas

This term is generally translated as meaning penance or austerities. It
includes these, such as the four monthly fast (*chatur-masya*), the
sitting between five fires (*pancha-gnitapah*), and the like. It has,
however, also a wider meaning, and in this wider sense is of three
kinds, namely, *sharira*, or bodily; *vachika*, by speech; *manasa*, in
mind. The first includes external worship, reverence, and support given
to the Guru, Brahmanas, and the wise (*prajna*), bodily cleanliness,
continence, simplicity of life and avoidance of hurt to any being
(*a-hingsa*). The second form includes truth, good, gentle, and
affectionate speech, and the study of the Vedas. The third or mental
*tapas* in-cludes self-restraint, purity of disposition, silence,
tranquillity, and silence. Each of these classes has three subdivisions,
for *tapas* may be *sattvika*, *rajasika*, or *tamasika*, according as
it is done with faith, and without regard to its fruit; or for its
fruit; or is done through pride and to gain honour and respect; or,
lastly, which is done ignorantly or with a view to injure and destroy
others, such as the *sadhana* of the *Tantrika-shat-karma*, when
performed for a malevolent purpose (*abhichara*).

Japa

*Japa* is defined as "*vidhanena mantrochcharanam*," or the repeated
utterance or recitation of *mantra* according to certain rules. It is
according to the Tantra-sara of three kinds: *Vachika* or verbal *japa*,
in which the *mantra* is audibly recited, the fifty matrika being
sounded nasally with *vindu*; *Upangshu-japa*, which is superior to the
last kind, and in which the tongue and lips are moved, but no sound, or
only a slight whisper, is heard; and, lastly, the highest form which is
called *manasa-japa*, or mental utterance. In this there is neither
sound nor movement of the external organs, but a repetition in the mind
which is fixed on the meaning of the *mantra*. One reason given for the
differing values attributed to the several forms is that where there is
audible utterance the mind thinks of the words and the process of
correct utterance, and is therefore to a greater (as in the case of
*vachika-japa*), or to a less degree (as in the case of
*upangshu-japa*), distracted from a fixed attention to the meaning of
the *mantra*. The japa of different kinds have also the relative values
attachable to thought and its materialization in sound and word. Certain
conditions are prescribed as those under which *japa* should be done,
relating to physical cleanliness, the dressing of the hair, and wearing
of silk garments, the seat (*asana*), the avoidance of certain
conditions of mind and actions, and the nature of the recitation. The
*japa* is useless unless done a specified number of times – of which 108
is esteemed to be excellent. The counting is done either with a *mala*
or rosary (*mala-japa*), or with the thumb of the right hand upon the
joints of the fingers of that hand (*kara-japa*). The method of counting
in the latter case may differ according to the *mantra*.

Sangskara

There are ten (or, in the case of Shudras, nine) purificatory
ceremonies, or "sacraments," called *sangskara*, which are done to aid
and purify the *jiva* in the important events of his life. These are
*jiva-sheka*, also called *garbhadhana-ritu-sangskara*, performed after
menstruation, with the object of insuring and sanctifying conception.
The *garbhadhana* ceremony takes place in the daytime on the fifth day,
and qualifies for the real *garbhadhana* at night – that is, the placing
of the seed in the womb. It is preceded on the first day by the
*ritu-sangskara* which is mentioned in Chapter IX. of the text. After
conception and during pregnancy, the *pung-savana* and *simantonnayana*
rites are performed; the first upon the wife perceiving the signs of
conception, and the second during the fourth, sixth, or eighth month of
pregnancy.

In the ante-natal life there are three main stages, whether viewed from
the objective (physical) standpoint, or from the subjective
(super-physical) standpoint. The first period includes on the physical
side all the structural and physiological changes which occur in the
fertilized ovum from the moment of fertilization until the period when
the embryonic body, by the formation of trunk, limbs, and organs, is fit
for the entrance of the individualized life, or *jivatma*. When the
pronuclear activity and differentiation are completed, the *jivatma*,
whose connection with the *pronuclei* initiated the pro-nuclear or
formative activity, enters the miniature human form, and the second
stage of growth and de-velopment begins. The second stage is the fixing
of the connection between the *jiva* and the body, or the rendering of
the latter viable. This period includes all the anatomical and
physiological modifications by which the embryonic body becomes a viable
fœtus. With the attainment of viability, the stay of the *jiva* has been
assured; physical life is possible for the child, and the third stage in
ante-natal life is entered. Thus, on the form side, if the language of
comparative embryology is used, the first *sangskara* denotes the
impulse to development, from the "fertilization of the ovum" to the
"critical period." The second *sangskara* denotes the impulse to
development from the "critical period" to that of the "viability stage
of the *fœtus* "; and the third *sangskara* denotes the development from
"viability" to "full term."

On the birth of the child there is the *jata-karma*, performed for the
continued life of the new-born child. Then follows the *nama-karana*, or
naming ceremony, and *nishkramana* in the fourth month after delivery,
when the child is taken out of doors for the first time and shown the
sun, the vivifying source of life, the material embodiment of the Divine
Savita. Between the fifth and eighth month after birth the *annaprasana*
ceremony is observed, when rice is put in the child’s mouth for the
first time. Then follows the *chuda-karana*, or tonsure ceremony; and in
the case of the first three, or "twice-born" classes, *upanayana*, or
investiture with the sacred thread. Herein the *jiva* is reborn into
spiritual life. There is, lastly, *udvaha*, or marriage, whereby the
unperfected *jiva* insures through offspring that continued human life
which is the condition of its progress and ultimate return to its Divine
Source. These are all described in the Ninth Chapter of this Tantra.
There are also ten *sangskara* of the *mantra* (*q*.*v*.). The
*sangskara* are intended to be performed at certain stages in the
development of the human body, with the view to effect results
beneficial to the human organism. Medical science of to-day seeks to
reach the same results, but uses for this purpose the physical methods
of modern Western science, suited to an age of materiality; whereas in
the *sangskara* the super-physical (psychic, or occult, or metaphysical
and subjective) methods of ancient Eastern science are employed. The
sacraments of the Catholic Church and other of its ceremonies, some of
which have now fallen into disuse, are Western examples of the same
psychic method.

Purashcharana

This form of *sadhana* consists in the repetition (after certain
preparations and under certain conditions) of a *mantra* a large number
of times. The ritual deals with the time and place of performance, the
measurements and decoration of the *mandapa*, or pandal, and of the
altar and similar matters. There are certain rules as to food both prior
to, and during, its performance. The *sadhaka* should eat *havishyanna*,
or alternately boiled milk (*kshira*), fruits, or Indian vegetables, or
anything obtained by begging, and avoid all food calculated to influence
the passions. Certain conditions and practices are enjoined for the
destruction of sin, such as continence, bathing, *japa* (*q*.*v*.) of
the *Savitri-mantra* 5,008, 3,008, or 1,008 times, the entertainment of
Brahmamas, and so forth. Three days before *puja* there is worship of
Ganesha and Kshetra-pala, Lord of the Place. *Pancha-gavya*, or the five
products of the cow, are eaten. The Sun, Moon, and Devas are invoked.
Then follows the *sangkalpa*. The *ghata*, or *kalasa* (jar), is then
placed into which the Devi is to be invoked. A *mandala*, or figure of a
particular design, is marked on the ground, and on it the *ghata* is
placed. Then the five or nine gems are placed on the *kalasa*, which is
painted with red and covered with leaves. The ritual then prescribes for
the tying of the crown lock (*shikha*), the posture (*asana*) of the
*sadhaka*; *japa* (*q*.*v*.) *nyasa* (*q.v.*), and the *mantra* ritual
or process. There is meditation, as directed. *Kulluka* is said, and the
*mantra* "awakened" (*mantra-chaitanya*), and recited the number of
times for which the vow has been taken.

Bhuta-shuddhi

The object of this ritual, which is described in Chapter V., verses 93
*et seq*., is the purification of the elements of which the body is
composed.

The Mantra-mahodadhi speaks of it as a rite which is preliminary to the
worship of a Deva. The process of evolution from the Para-brahman has
been described. By this ritual a mental process of involution takes
place whereby the body is in thought resolved into the source from
whence it has come. Earth is associated with the sense of smell, water,
with taste, fire, with sight, air, with touch, and ether, with sound.
Kundalini is roused, and led to the *svadhishthana Chakra*. The "earth"
element is dissolved by that of "water," as "water" is by "fire," "fire"
by "air," and "air" by "ether." This is absorbed by a higher emanation,
and that by a higher, and so on, until the Source of all is reached.
Having dissolved each gross element (*maha-bhuta*), together with the
subtle element (*tan-matra*) from which it proceeds, and the connected
organ of sense (*indriya*) by another, the worshipper absorbs the last
element, "ether," with the *tan-matra* sound into self-hood
(*ahangkara*), the latter into *Mahat*, and that, again, into Prakriti,
thus retracing the steps of evolution. Then, in accordance with the
monistic teaching of the Vedanta, Prakriti is Herself thought of as the
Brahman, of which She is the energy, and with which, therefore, She is
already one. Thinking then of the black *Purusha*, which is the image of
all sin, the body is purified by *mantra*, accompanied by *kumbhaka* and
*rechaka*, and the *sadhaka* meditates upon the new celestial (*deva*)
body, which has thus been made and which is then strengthened by a
"celestial gaze."

Nyasa

This word, which comes from the root "to place," means placing the tips
of the fingers and palm of the right hand on various parts of the body,
accompanied by particular *mantra*. The *nyasa* are of various kinds.
*Jiva-nyasa* follows upon *bhuta-shuddhi*. After the purification of the
old, and the formation of the celestial body, the *sadhaka* proceeds by
*jiva-nyasa* to infuse the body with the life of the Devi. Placing his
hand on his heart, he says the "*so*’*hang*" *mantra* ("I am He"),
thereby identifying himself with the Devi. Then, placing the eight
Kula-kundalini in their several places he says the following *mantra:
Ang*, *Kring*, *Kring*, *Yang*, *Rang*, *Lang*, *Vang*, *Shang*,
*Shang*, *Sang*, *Hong*, *Haung*, *Hangsah:* the vital airs of the
highly blessed and auspicious Primordial Kalika are here. "*Ang*, etc.,
the embodied spirit of the highly blessed and auspicious Kalika is
placed here." "*Ang*, etc., here are all the senses of the highly
auspicious and blessed Kalika," and, lastly, "*Ang*, etc., may the
speech, mind, sight, hearing, smell, and vital airs of the highly
blessed and auspicious Kalika coming here always abide here in peace and
happiness *Svaha*." The *sadhaka* then becomes *devata-maya*. After
having thus dissolved the sinful body, made a new Deva body, and infused
it with the life of the Devi, he proceeds to *matrika-nyasa*. *Mahika*
are the fifty letters of the Sanskrit alphabet; for as from a mother
comes birth, so from *matrika*, or sound, the world proceeds.
Shabda-brahman, the "Sound," "*Logos*," or "Word," is the Creator of the
worlds of name and of form.

The bodies of the Devata are composed of the fifty *matrika*. The
*sadhaka*, therefore, first sets mentally (*antar-matrika-nyasa*) in
their several places in the six *chakra*, and then externally by
physical action (*Vahy-amatrika-nyasa*) the letters of the alphabet
which form the different parts of the body of the Devata, which is thus
built up in the *sadhaka* himself. He places his hand on different parts
of his body, uttering distinctly at the same time the appropriate
*matrika* for that part.

The mental disposition in the *chakra* is as follows: In the *Ajna*
Lotus, *Hang*, *Kshang* (each letter in this and the succeeding cases is
said, followed by the *mantra namah*); in the *Vishuddha* Lotus *Ang*,
*Ang*, and the rest of the vowels; in the *Anahata* Lotus *kang*,
*khang* to *thang*; in the *Manipura* Lotus, *dang dhang*, etc., to
*Phang*; in the *Svadisthana* Lotus *bang*, *bhang* to *lang*; and,
lastly, in the *Muladhara* Lotus, *vang*, *shang*, *shang, sang*. The
external disposition then follows. The vowels in their order with
*anusvara* and *visarga* are placed on the forehead, face, right and
left eye, right and left ear, right and left nostril, right and left
cheek, upper and lower lip, upper and lower teeth, head, and hollow of
the mouth. The consonants *kang* to *vang* are placed on base of right
arm and the elbow, wrist, base and tips of fingers, left arm, right and
left leg, right and left side, back, navel, belly, heart, right and left
shoulder, space between the shoulders (*kakuda*), and then from the
heart to the right palm *shang* is placed; and from the heart to the
left palm the (second) *shang*; from the heart to the right foot,
*sang*; from the heart to the left foot, *hang*; and, lastly, from the
heart to the belly, and from the heart to the mouth, *kshang*. In each
case *ong* is said at the beginning and *namah* at the end. According to
the Tantra-sara, *matrika-nyasa* is also classified into four kinds,
performed with different aims – viz.: *kevala* where the *matrika* is
pronounced without *vindu*; *vindu-sangyuta* with *vindu*; *sangsarga*
with *visarga*; and *sobhya* with *visarga* and *vindu*.

Rishi-nyasa then follows for the attainment of the *chatur-varga*. The
assignment of the *mantra* is to the head, mouth, heart, anus, the two
feet, and all the body generally. The *mantra* commonly employed are:
"In the head, salutation to the Rishi (Revealer) Brahma; in the mouth,
salutation to the *mantra Gayatri*, in the heart, salutation to the Devi
Mother Sarasvati; in the hidden part, salutation to the *vija*, the
consonants; salutation to the *shakti*, the vowels in the feet,
salutation to *visargah*, the *kilaka* in the whole body." Another form
in which the *vija* employed is that of the *Aiya*: it is referred to
but not given in Chap. V., verse 123, and is: "In the head, salutation
to Brahma and the *Brahmarshis*, in the mouth, salutation to Gayatri and
the other forms of verse; in the heart, salutation to the primordial
Devata Kali, in the hidden part, salutation to the *vija*, *kring*; in
the two feet, salutation to the *shakti*, *Hring*; in all the body,
salutation to the Kalika *Shring*."

Then follows *anga-nyasa* and *kara-nyasa*. These are both forms of
*shad-anga-nyasa*. When *shad-anga-nyasa* is performed on the body, it
is called *hridayadi-shad-anga-nyasa*; and when done with the five
fingers and palms of the hands only, *angushthadi-shad-anga-nyasa*. The
former kind is done as follows: The short vowel *a*, the consonants of
the *ka-varga* group, and the long vowel *a*, are recited with
"*hridayaya namah*" (*namah* salutation to the heart). The short vowel
*i*, the consonants of the *cha-varga* group, and the long vowel *i*,
are said with "*shirasi svaha*" (*svaha* to the head). The hard
*ta-varga* consonants set between the two vowels *u* are recited with
"*shikhayai vashat*" (*vashat* to the crown lock); similarly the soft
*ta-varga* between the vowels *e* and *ai* are said with "*kavachaya
hung*." The short vowel *o*, the *pavarga*, and the long vowel *o* are
recited with *netra-trayaya vaushat* (*vaushat* to the three eyes).
Lastly, between *vindu* and *visargah* the consonants *ya* to *ksha*
with "*kara-tala-prishthabhyang astraya phat*" (*phat* to the front and
back of the palm).

The *mantras* of *shadanga-nyasa* on the body are used for *Kara-nyasa*,
in which they are assigned to the thumbs, the "threatening" or index
fingers, the middle fingers, the fourth, little fingers, and the front
and back of the palm.

These actions on the body, fingers, and palms also stimulate the nerve
centres and nerves therein.

In *pitha-nyasa* the pitha are established in place of the matrika. The
pitha, in their ordinary sense, are Kama-rupa and the other places, a
list of which is given in the Yogini-hridaya.

For the attainment of that state in which the *sadhaka* feels that the
*bhava* (nature, disposition) of the Devata has come upon him *nyasa* is
a great auxiliary. It is, as it were, the wearing of jewels on different
parts of the body. The *vija* of the Devata are the jewels which the
*sudkaka* places on the different parts of his body. By *nyasa* he
places his *Abhishta-devata* in such parts, and by *vyapaka-nyasa* he
spreads Its presence throughout himself. He becomes permeated by it
losing himself in the divine Self.

Nyasa is also of use in effecting the proper distribution of the
*shaktis* of the human frame in their proper positions so as to avoid
the production of discord and distraction in worship. *Nyasa* as well as
*Asana* are necessary for the production of the desired state of mind
and of *chitta-shuddhi* (its purification). "Das denken ist der mass der
Dinge." Transformation of thought is Transformation of being. This is
the essential principle and rational basis of all this and similar
Tantrik *sadhana*.

Panchatattva

There are, as already stated, three classes of men – *pashu*, *Vira*,
and *Divya*. The operation of the *guna* which produce these types
affect, on the gross material plane, the animal tendencies, manifesting
in the three chief physical functions – eating and drinking, whereby the
*annamayakosha* is maintained; and sexual intercourse, by which it is
reproduced. These functions are the subject of the *panchatattva* or
*panchamakara* ("five m’s"), as they are vulgarly called – viz.: *madya*
(wine), *mangsa* (meat), *matsya* (fish), *mudra* (parched grain), and
*maithuna* (coition). In ordinary parlance, *mudra* means ritual
gestures or positions of the body in worship and *hathayoga*, but as one
of the five elements it is parched cereal, and is defined as
*Bhrishtadanyadikang yadyad chavyaniyam prachakshate*, *sa mudra kathita
devi sarvveshang naganam-dini*. The Tantras speak of the five elements
as *pancha-tattva*, *kuladravya*, *kulatattva*, and certain of the
elements have esoteric names, such as *Karanavari* or *tirtha-vari*, for
wine, the fifth element being usually called *lata-sadhana* (*sadhana*
with woman, or *shakti*). The five elements, moreover have various
meanings, according as they form part of the *tamasika* (*pashvachara*),
*rajasika* (*virachara*), or *divya* or *sattvika sadhanas*
respectively.

All the elements or their substitutes are purified and consecrated, and
then, with the appropriate ritual, the first four are consumed, such
consumption being followed by *lata-sadhana* or its symbolic equivalent.
The Tantra prohibits indiscriminate use of the elements, which may be
consumed or employed only after purification (*sho-dhana*) and during
worship according to the Tantric ritual. Then, also, all excess is
forbidden. The Shyama-rahasya says that intemperance leads to Hell, and
this Tantra condemns it in Chapter V. A well-known saying in Tantra
describes the true "hero" (*vira*) to be, not he who is of great
physical strength and prowess, the great eater and drinker, or man of
powerful sexual energy, but he who has controlled his senses, is a
truth-seeker, ever engaged in worship, and who has sacrificed lust and
all other passions. (*Jitendriyah satyavadi nityanushthanatatparah
kamadi-validanashcha sa vira iti giyate*.)

The elements in their literal sense are not available in *sadhana* for
all. The nature of the *Pashu* requires strict adherence to Vaidik rule
in the matter of these physical functions even in worship. This rule
prohibits the drinking of wine, a substance subject to the three curses
of

Brahma, Kacha, and Krishna, in the following terms:
*Madyamapeyamadeyamagrahyam* ("Wine must not be drunk, given, or
taken"). The drinking of wine in ordinary life for satisfaction of the
sensual appetite is, in fact, a sin, involving *prayaschiyta*, and
entailing, according to the Vishnu Purama, punishment in the same Hell
as that to which a killer of a Brahmana goes. As regards flesh and fish,
the higher castes (outside Bengal) who submit to the orthodox *Smarta*
discipline eat neither. Nor do high and strict Brahmanas even in that
Province. But the bulk of the people there, both men and women, eat
fish, and men consume the flesh of male goats which have been previously
offered to the Deity. The *Vaidika dharmma* is equally strict upon the
subject of sexual intercourse. *Maithuna* other than with the
householder’s own wife is condemned. And this is not only in its literal
sense, but in that of which is known as *Ashtanga* (eight-fold)
*maithuna –* viz., *smaranam* (thinking upon it), *kirttanam* (talking
of it), *keli* (play with women), *prekshanam* (looking upon women),
*guhyabhashanan* (talk in private with women), *sangkalpa* (wish or
resolve for *maithuua*), *adhyavasaya* (determination towards it),
*kriyanishpati* (actual accomplishment of the sexual act). In short, the
*pashu* (and except for ritual purposes those who are not *pashu*)
should, in the words of the Shaktakramya, avoid *maithuna*, conversation
on the subject, and assemblies of women (*maithunam tatkathalapang
tadgoshthing* *parivarjjayet*). Even in the case of the householder’s
own wife marital continency is enjoined. The divinity in woman, which
the Tantra in particular proclaims, is also recognized in the ordinary
Vaidik teaching, as must obviously be the case given the common
foundation upon which all the *Shastra* rest. Woman is not to be
regarded merely as an object of enjoyment, but as a house-goddess
(*grihadevata*). According to the sublime notions of *Shruti*, the union
of man and wife is a veritable sacrificial rite – a sacrifice in fire
(*homa*), wherein she is both hearth (*kunda*) and flame – and he who
knows this as *homa* attains liberation. Similarly the *Tantrika Mantra*
for the Shivashakti Yoga runs: "This is the in-ternal *homa* in which,
by the path of *sushumna*, sacrifice is made of the functions of sense
to the spirit as fire kindled with the ghee of merit and demerit taken
from the mind as the ghee-pot *Svaha*." It is not only thus that wife
and husband are associated, for the *Vaidika dharmma* (in this now
neglected) prescribes that the householder should worship in company
with his wife. *Brahmacharyya*, or continency, is not as is sometimes
supposed, a requisite of the student *ashrama* only, but is a rule which
governs the married householder (*grihastha*) also. According to Vaidika
injunctions, union of man and wife must take place once a month on the
fifth day after the cessation of the menses, and then only. Hence it is
that the Nitya Tantra, when giving the characteristics of a *pashu*,
says that he is one who avoids sexual union except on the fifth day
(*ritukalangvina devi rama-nang parivarjjayet*). In other words, the
*pashu* is he who in this case, as in other matters, follows for all
purposes, ritual or otherwise, the Vaidik injunctions which govern the
ordinary life of all.

The above-mentioned rules govern the life of all men. The only exception
which the Tantra makes is for purpose of *sudhana* in the case of those
who are competent (*adhikari*) for *virachara*. It is held, indeed, that
the exception is not strictly an exception to Vaidik teaching at all,
and that it is an error to suppose that the *Tantrika rahasya-puja* is
opposed to the Vedas. Thus, whilst the vaidik rule prohibits the use of
wine in ordinary life, and for purpose of mere sensual gratification it
prescribes the religious *yajna* with wine. This ritual use the Tantra
also allows, provided that the *sadhaka* is competent for the *sadhana*,
in which its consumption is part of its ritual and method.

The Tantra enforces the Vaidik rule in all cases, ritual or otherwise,
for those who are governed by the *vaidikachara*. The Nitya Tantra says:
"They (*pashu*) should never worship the Devi during the latter part of
the day in the evening or at night" (*ratrau naiva yajeddeving
sandhyayang vaparanhake*); for all such worship connotes *maithuna*
prohibited to the *pashu*. In lieu of it, varying substitutes are
prescribed, such as either an offering of flowers with the hands formed
into the *kachchchapa mudra*, or union with the worshipper’s own wife.
In the same way, in lieu of wine, the *pashu* should (if a Brahmana)
take milk, (if a *Kshattriya*) ghee, (if a *vaishya*) honey, and (if a
*shudra*) a liquor made from rice. Salt, ginger, sesamum, wheat,
*mashkalai* (beans), and garlic are various substitutes for meat; and
the white *brinjal* vegetable, red radish, *masur* (a kind of gram), red
sesamum, and *paniphala* (an aquatic plant), take the place of fish.
Paddy, rice, wheat, and gram geneally are *mudra*.

The *vira*, or rather he who is qualified (*adhikari*) for *virachara –*
since the true *vira* is its finished product – commences *sadhana* with
the *rajasika panchatattva* first stated, which are employed for the
destruction of the sensual tendencies which they connote. For the
worship of Shakti the *panchatattva* are declared to be essential. This
Tantra declares that such worship without their use is but the practice
of evil magic.

Upon this passage the commentator Jaganmohana Tarkalangkara observes as
follows: "Let us consider what most contributes to the fall of a man,
making him forget his duty, sink into sin, and die an early death. First
among these are wine and women, fish, meat and *mudra*, and accessories.
By these things men have lost their manhood. Shiva then desires to
employ these very poisons in order to eradicate the poison in the human
system. Poison is the antidote for poison. This is the right treatment
for those who long for drink or lust for women. The physician must,
however, be an experienced one. If there be a mistake as to the
application, the patient is like to die. Shiva has said that the way of
*Kulachara* is as difficult as it is to walk on the edge of a sword or
to hold a wild tiger. There isa secret argument in favour of the
*panchatattva*, and those *tattva* so understood should be followed by
all. None, however, but the initiate can grasp this argument, and
therefore Shiva has directed that it should not be revealed before
anybody and everybody. An initiate, when he sees a woman, will worship
her as his own mother or goddess (*Ishtadevata*), and bow before her.
The *Vishnu* Purana says that by feeding your desires you cannot satisfy
them. It is like pouring ghee on fire. Though this is true, an
experienced spiritual teacher (*guru*) will know how, by the application
of this poisonous medicine, to kill the poison of *sangsara*. Shiva has,
however, prohibited the indiscriminate publication of this. The meaning
of this passage would therefore appear to be this: "The object of
Tantrika worship is *brahmasayujya*, or union with Brahman. If that is
not attained, nothing is attained. And, with men’s propensities as they
are, this can only be attained through the special treatment prescribed
by the Tantras. If this is not followed, then the sensual pro-pensities
are not eradicated, and the work is for the desired end of Tantra as
useless as magic which, worked by such a man, leads only to the injury
of others." The other secret argument here referred to is that by which
it is shown that the particular may be raised to the universal life by
the vehicle of those same passions, which, when flowing only in an
outward and downward current, are the most powerful bonds to bind him to
the former. The passage cited refers to the necessity for the spiritual
direction of the Guru. To the want of such is accredited the abuses of
the system. When the patient (*sishya*) and the disease are working
together, there is poor hope for the former; but when the patient, the
disease, and the physician (*guru*) are on one, and that the wrong,
side, then nothing can save him from a descent on that downward path
which it is the object of the *sadhana* to prevent. Verse 67 in Chapter
I. of this Tantra is here in point.

Owing, however, to abuses, particularly as regards the *tattva* of
*madya* and *maithuna*, this Tantra, according to the current version,
prescribes in certain cases, limitations as regards their use. It
prescribes that when the *Kaliyuga* is in full strength, and in the case
of householders (*grihastha*) whose minds are engrossed with worldly
affairs, the "three sweets" (*madhuratraya*) are to be substituted for
wine. Those who are of virtuous temperament, and whose minds are turned
towards the Brahman, are permitted to take five cups of wine. So also as
regards *maithuna*, this Tantra states that men in this Kali age are by
their nature weak and disturbed by lust, and by reason of this do not
recognize woman (*shakti*) to be the image of the Deity. It accordingly
ordains that when the *Kaliyuga* is in full sway, the fifth *tattva*
shall only be accomplished with *sviyashakti*, or the worshipper’s own
wife, and that union with a woman who is not married to the *sadhaka* in
either *Brahma* or *Shaiva* form is forbidden. In the case of other
*shakti* (*parakiya* and *sadharani*) it prescribes, in lieu of
*maithuna*, meditation by the worshipper upon the lotus feet of the
Devi, together with *japa* of his *ishtamantra*. This rule, however, the
Commentator says, is not of universal application. Shiva has, in this
Tantra, prohibited *sadhana* with the last *tattva*, with *parakiya*,
and *sadharani shakti*, in the case of men of ordinary weak intellect
ruled by lust; but for those who have by *sadhana* conquered their
passions and attained the state of a true *vira*, or *siddha*, there is
no prohibition as to the mode of *latasadhana*. This Tantra appears to
be, in fact, a protest against the misuse of the *tattwa*, which had
followed upon a relaxation of the original rules and conditions
governing them. Without the *panchatattva* in one form or another, the
*shaktipuja* cannot be performed. The Mother of the Universe must be
worshipped with these elements. By their use the universe
(*jagatbrahmanda*) itself is used as the article of worship. Wine
signifies the power (*shakti*) which produces all fiery elements; meat
and fish all terrestrial and aquatic animals; *mudra* all vegetable
life; and *maithuna* the will (*ichchha*) action (*kriya*) and knowledge
(*jnana*) *shakti* of the Supreme Prakriti productive of that great
pleasure which accompanies the process of creation. To the Mother is
thus offered the restless life of Her universe.

The object of all *sadhana* is the stimulation of the *sattvaguna*. When
by such *sadhana* this guna largely preponderates, the *sattvika
sadhana* suitable for men of a high type of *divyabhava* is adopted. In
this latter *sadhana* the names of the *panchatattva* are used
symbolically for operations of a purely mental and spiritual character.
Thus, the Kaivalya says that "wine" is that intoxicating knowledge
acquired by *yoga* of the Parabrahman, which renders the worshipper
senseless as regards the external world. Meat (*mangsa*) is not any
fleshly thing, but the act whereby the *sadhaka* consigns all his acts
to Me (*Mam*). *Matsya* (fish) is that *sattvika* knowledge by which
through the sense of "mineness" the worshipper sympathizes with the
pleasure and pain of all beings. *Mudra* is the act of relinquishing all
association with evil which results in bondage, and *maithuna* is the
union of the Shakti Kundalini with Shiva in the body of the worshipper.
This, the Yogini Tantra says, is the best of all unions for those who
have already con-trolled their passions (*yati*). According to the
Agamasara, wine is the *somadhara*, or lunar ambrosia, which drops from
the *brahmarandhra*; *Mangsa* (meat) is the tongue (ma), of which its
part (*angsha*) is speech. The *sadhaka*, in "eating" it, controls his
speech. *Matsya* (fish) are those two which are constantly moving in the
two rivers Ida and Pingala. He who controls his breath by *pranayama*
(q.v.), "eats" them by *kumbhaka*. *Mudra* is the awakening of knowledge
in the pericarp of the great *sahasrara* Lotus, where the *Atma*, like
mercury, resplendent as ten million suns, and deliciously cool as ten
million moons, is united with the Devi Kundalini. The esoteric meaning
of *maithuna* is thus stated by the Agama: The ruddy-hued letter *Ra* is
in the *Kunda*, and the letter *Ma*, in the shape of *vindu*, is in the
*mahayoni*. When *Makara* (m), seated on the *Hangsa* in the form of
*Akara* (a), unites with *rakara* (r), then the *Brahmajnana*, which is
the source of supreme Bliss, is gained by the *sadhaka*, who is then
called *atmarama*, for his enjoyment is in the *Atma*. in the
*sahasrara*. This is the union on the purely *sattvika* plane, which
corresponds on the *rajasika* plane to the union of Shiva and Shakti in
the persons of their worshippers.

The union of Shiva and Shakti is described as a true *yoga*, from which,
as the Yamala says, arises that joy which is known as the Supreme Bliss.

Chakrapuja

Worship with the *panchatattva* generally takes place in an assembly
called a *chakra*, which is composed of men (*sadhaka*) and women
(*shakti*), or *Bhairava* and *Bhairavi*. The worshippers sit in a
circle (*chakra*), men and women alternately, the *shakti* sitting on
the left of the *sadhaka*. The Lord of the *chakra* (*chakrasvamin*, or
*chakreshvara*) sits with his Shakti in the centre, where the wine-jar
and other articles used in the worship are kept. During the *chakra* all
eat, drink, and worship together, there being no distinction of caste.
No *pashu* should, however, be introduced. There are various kinds of
*chakra*, such as the *Vira*, *Raja*, *Deva*, *Maha – Chakras*
productive, it is said, of various fruits for the participators therein.
Chapter VI. of the Mahanirvvana Tantra deals with the *panchatattva*,
and Chapter VIII. gives an account of the *Bhairavi* and *Tattva* (or
*Divya*) *chakras*. The latter is for worshippers of the
*Brahma-Mantra*.

Yoga

This word, derived from the root *Yuj* ("to join"), is in grammar
*sandhi*, in logic *avayavashakti*, or the power of the parts taken
together, and in its most widely known and present sense the union of
the *jiva*, or embodied spirit, with the *Paramatma*, or Supreme Spirit,
and the practices by which this union may be attained. There is a
natural *yoga*, in which all beings are, for it is only by virtue of
this identity in fact that they exist. This position is common ground,
though in practice too frequently overlooked. "Primus modus unionis est,
quo Deus, ratione suæ immensitatis est in omnibus rebus per essentiam,
præsentiam, et potentiam; per essentiam ut dans omnibus esse; per
præsentiam ut omnia prospiciens; per potentiam ut de omnibus disponens."
The mystical theologian cited, however, proceeds to say: "Sed hæc unio
animæ cum Deo est generalis, communis omnibus et ordinis naturalis . . .
illa namque de qua loquimur est ordinis supernaturalis actualis et
fructiva." It is of this special *yaga*, though not in reality more
"supernatural" than the first, that we here deal. *Yoga* in its
technical sense is the realization of this identity, which exists,
though it is not known, by the destruction of the false appearance of
separation. "There is no bond equal in strength to *maya*, and no force
greater to destroy that bond than *yoga*. There is no better friend than
knowledge (*jnana*), nor worse enemy than egoism (*ahangkara*). As to
learn the Shastra one must learn the alphabet, so *yoga* is necessary
for the acquirement of *tattvajnana* (truth)." The animal body is the
result of action, and from the body flows action, the process being
compared to the seesaw movement of a *ghatiyantra*, or water-lifter.
Through their actions beings continually go from birth to death. The
complete attainment of the fruit of *yoga* is lasting and unchanging
life in the noumenal world of the Absolute.

Yoga is variously named according to the methods employed, but the two
main divisions are those of the *hathayoga* (or *ghatasthayoga*) and
*samadhi yoga*, of which *raja-yoga* is one of the forms. *Hathayoga* is
commonly misunderstood, both in its definition and aim being frequently
identified with exaggerated forms of self-mortification.

The Gherandasanghita well defines it to be "the means whereby the
excellent *rajayoga* is attained." Actual union is not the result of
*Hathayoga* alone, which is concerned with certain physical processes
preparatory or auxiliary to the control of the mind, by which alone
union may be directly attained. It is, however, not meant that all the
processes of *Hathayoga* here or in the books described are necessary
for the attainment of *rajayoga*. What is necessary must be determined
according to the circumstances of each particular case. What is suited
or necessary in one case may not be so for another. A peculiar feature
of *Tan-trika virachara* is the union of the *sadhaka* and his *shakti*
in *latasadhana*. This is a process which is expressly forbidden to
Pashus by the same Tantras which prescribe it for the *vira*. The union
of Shiva and Shakti in the higher sadhana is different in form, being
the union of the Kundalini Shakti of the Muladhara with the Vindu which
is upon the Sahasrara. This process, called the piercing of the six
*chakra*, is described later on in a separate paragraph. Though,
however, all *Hathayoga* processes are not necessary, some, at least,
are generally considered to be so. Thus, in the well-known
*ashtangayoga* (eight-limbed yoga), of which *samadhi* is the highest
end, the physical conditions and processes known as *asana* and
*pranayama* (*vide post*) are prescribed.

This *yoga* prescribes five exterior (*vahiranga*) methods for the
subjugation of the body – namely (1) *Yama*, forbearance or
self-control, such as sexual continence, avoidance of harm to others
(*ahingsa*), kindness, forgiveness, the doing of good without desire for
reward, absence of covetousness, temperance, purity of mind and body,
etc. (2) *Niyama*, religious observances, charity, austerities, reading
of the *Shastra* and *Ishvara Pranidhana*, *persevering* devotion to the
Lord. (3) *Asana*, seated positions or postures (*vide post*). (4)
*Pranayama*, regulation of the breath. A *yogi* renders the vital airs
equable, and consciously produces the state of respiration which is
favourable for mental concentration, as others do it occasionally and
unconsciously (*vide post*). (5) *Pratyahara*, restraint of the senses,
which follow in the path of the other four processes which deal with the
subjugation of the body. There are then three interior (*yogangga*)
methods for the subjugation of the mind – namely (6) *Dharana*,
attention, steadying of the mind, the fixing of the internal organ
(*chitta*) in the particular manner indicated in the works on yoga. (7)
*Dhyana* or the uniform continuous contemplation of the object of
thought; and (8) that *samadhi* which is called *savikalpasamadhi*.
*Savikalpasamadhi* is a deeper and more intense contemplation on the
Self to the exclusion of all other objects, and constituting trance or
ecstasy. This ecstasy is perfected to the stage of the removal of the
slightest trace of the distinction of subject and object in
*nirvikalpasamadhi*, in which there is complete union with the
Paramatma, or Divine Spirit. By *vairagya* (dispassion), and keeping the
mind in its unmodified state, *yoga* is attained. This knowledge, *Ahang
Brahmasmi* ("I am the Brahman"), does not produce liberation (moksha),
but is liberation itself, Whether *yoga* is spoken of as the union of
Kulakundalini with Paramashiva, or the union of the individual soul
(*jivatma*) with the Supreme Soul (*paramatma*), or as the state of mind
in which all outward thought is suppressed, or as the controlling or
suppression of the thinking faculty (*chittavritti*), or as the union of
the moon and the sun (Ida and Pingala), Prana and Apana, Nada and Vindu,
the meaning and the end are in each case the same.

Yoga, in seeking mental control and concentration, makes use of certain
preliminary physical processes (*sadhana*), such as the *shatkarmma*,
*asana*, *mudra*, and *pranayama*. By these four processes and three
mental acts, seven qualities, known as *shodhana*, *dridhata*,
*sthirata*, *dhairyya*, *laghava*, *pratyaksha*, *nirliptatva* (*vide
post*), are acquired.

Shodhana: Shatkarmma

The first, or cleansing, is effected by the six processes known as the
*shatkarmma*. Of these, the first is *Dhauti*, or washing, which is
fourfold, or inward washing (*antar-dhauti*), cleansing of the teeth,
etc. (*dantadhauti*) of the "heart" (*hriddhauti*), and of the *rectum*
(*muladhauti*). *Antardhauti* is also fourfold – namely, *vatasara*, by
which air is drawn into the belly and then expelled; *varisara*, by
which the body is filled with water, which is then evacuated by the
*anus*; *vahnisara*, in which the *nabhi-granthi* is made to touch the
spinal column (*meru*); and *vahishkrita*, in which the belly is by
*kakinimudra* filled with air, which is retained half a *yama*, and then
sent downward. *Dantadhauti* is fourfold, consisting in the cleansing of
the root of the teeth and tongue, the ears, and the "hollow of the
forehead" (*kapalarandhra*). By *hriddhauti* phlegm and bile are
removed. This is done by a stick (*dandadhauti*) or cloth (*vasodhauti*)
pushed into the throat, or swallowed, or by vomiting (*vamanadhauti*).
*Mudadhauti* is done to cleanse the exit of the *apanavayu* either with
the middle finger and water or the stalk of a turmeric plant.

Vasti, the second of the *shatkarmma*, is twofold, and is either of the
dry (*shuska*) or watery (*jala*) kind. In the second form the yogi sits
in the *utkatasana* posture in water up to the navel, and the anus is
contracted and expanded by *ashvini mudra*; or the same is done in the
*pashchimottanasana*, and the abdomen below the navel is gently moved.
In *neti* the nostrils are cleansed with a piece of string. *Lauliki* is
the whirling of the belly from side to side. In *trataka* the *yogi*,
without winking, gazes at some minute object until the tears start from
his eyes. By this the "celestial vision" (*divya* drishti) so often
referred to in the *Tantrika upasana* is acquired. *Kapalabhati* is a
process for the removal of phlegm, and is threefold – *vatakrama* by
inhalation and exhalation; *vyutkrama* by water drawn through the
nostrils and ejected through the mouth; and *shitkrama* the reverse
process.

These are the various processes by which the body is cleansed and made
pure for the *yoga* practice to follow.

Dridhata: Asana

Dridhata, or strength or firmness, the acquisition of which is the
second of the above-mentioned processes, is attained by *asana*.

Asana are postures of the body. The term is generally described as modes
of seating the body. But the posture is not necessarily a sitting one;
for some *asana* are done on the belly, back, hands, etc. It is said
that the *asana* are as numerous as living beings, and that there are
8,400,000 of these; 1,600 are declared to be excellent, and out of these
thirty-two are auspicious for men, which are described in detail. Two of
the commonest of these are *muktapadmasana* ("the loosened lotus seat"),
the ordinary position for worship, and *baddhapadmasana*. Patanjali, on
the subject of *asana*, merely points out what are good conditions,
leaving each one to settle the details for himself according to his own
requirements. There are certain other *asana*, which are peculiar to the
Tantras, such as *munddasana*, *chitasana*, and *shavasana*, in which
skulls, the funeral pyre, and a corpse respectively form the seat of the
*sadhaka*. These, though they may have other ritual objects, form part
of the discipline for the conquest of fear and the attainment of
indifference, which is the quality of a *yoga*. And so the Tantras
pre-scribe as the scene of such rites the solitary mountain-top, the
lonely empty house and river-side, and the cremation-ground. The
interior cremation-ground is there where the kamik body and its passions
are consumed in the fire of knowledge.

Sthirata: Mudra

*Sthirata*, or fortitude, is acquired by the practice of the *mudra*.
The *mudra* dealt with in works of *hathayoga* are positions of the
body. They are gymnastic, health-giving, and destructive of disease, and
of death, such as the *jaladhara* and other *mudra*. They also preserve
from injury by fire, water, or air. Bodily action and the health
resulting therefrom react upon the mind, and by the union of a perfect
mind and body *siddhi* is by their means attained. The Gheranda Sanghita
describes a number of *mudra*, of which those of importance may be
selected. In the celebrated *yonimudra* the *yogi* in *siddhasana* stops
with his fingers the ears, eyes, nostrils, and mouth. He inhales
*pranavayu* by *kakinimudra*, and unites it with *apanavayu*. Meditating
in their order upon the six *chakra*, he arouses the sleeping
Kulakundalini by the *mantra* "*Hung Hangsah*," and raises Her to the
*Sahasrara*; then, deeming himself pervaded with the Shakti, and in
blissful union (*sanggama*) with Shiva, he meditates upon himself, as by
reason of that union Bliss itself and the Brahman. *Ashvinimudra*
consists of the repeated contraction and expansion of the anus for the
purpose of *shodhana* or of contraction to restrain the *apana* in
*Skatchakrabheda*. *Shaktichalana* employs the latter *mudra*, which is
repeated until *vayu* manifests in the *sushumna*. The process is
accompanied by inhalation and the union of *prana* and *apana* whilst in
*siddhasana*.

Dhairya: Pratyahara

*Dhairya*, or steadiness, is produced by *pratyahara*. *Pratyahara* is
the restraint of the senses, the freeing of the mind from all
distractions, and the keeping of it under the control of the *Atma*. The
mind is withdrawn from whatsoever direction it may tend by the dominant
and directing Self. *Pratyahara* destroys the six sins.

Laghava: Pranayama

From *pranayama* (*q.v.*) arises *laghava* (lightness).

All beings say the *ajapa Gayatri*, which is the expulsion of the breath
by *Hangkara*, and its inspiration by *Sahkara*, 21,600 times a day.
Ordinarily, the breath goes forth a distance of 12 finger’s breadth, but
in singing, eating, walking, sleeping, coition, the distances are 16,
20, 24, 30, and 36 breadths respectively. In violent exercise these
distances are exceeded, the greatest distance being 96 breadths. Where
the breathing is under the normal distance, life is prolonged. Where it
is above that, it is shortened. *Puraka* is inspiration, and *rechaka*
expira-tion. *Kumbhaka* is the retention of breath between these two
movements. *Kumbhaka* is, according to the Gheranda Sanghita of eight
kinds: *sahita*, *suryyabheda*, *ujjayi*, *shitali*, *bhastrika*,
*bhramari*, *murchchha*, and *kevali*. *Pranayama* similarly varies.
*Pranayama* is the control of the breath and other vital airs. It
awakens *shakti*, frees from disease, produces detachment from the
world, and bliss. It is of varying values, being the best (*uttama*)
where the measure is 20; middling (*madhyama*) when at 16 it produces
spinal tremor; and inferior (*adhama*) when at 12 it induces
perspiration. It is necessary that the *nadi* should be cleansed, for
air does not enter those which are impure. The cleansing of the nadi
(*nadi-shuddhi*) is either *samau«* or *nirmanu –* that is, with or
without, the use of *vija*. According to the first form, the *yogi* in
*padmasana* does *gurunyasa* according to the directions of the *guru*.
Meditating on "*yang*," he does *japa* through Ida of the *vija* 16
times, *kumbhaka* with *japa* of *vija* 64 times, and then exhalation
through the solar *nadi* and *japa* of *vija* 32 times. Fire is raised
from *manipura* and united with *prithivi*. Then follows inhalation by
the solar *nadu* with the *vahni vija* 16 times, *kumbhaka* with 64
*japa* of the *vija*, followed by exhalation through the lunar *nadi*
and *japa* of the *vija* 32 times. He then meditates on the lunar
brilliance, gazing at the tip of the nose. and inhales by Ida with
*japa* of the *vija* "*thang*" 16 times. *Kumbhaka* is done with the
*vija vang* 64 times. He then thinks of himself as flooded by nectar,
and considers that the *nadi* have been washed. He exhales by Pingala
with 32 *japa* of the *vija lang*, and considers himself thereby as
strengthened. He then takes his seat on a mat of *kusha* grass, a
deerskin, etc., and, facing east or north, does *pranayama*. For its
exercise there must be, in addition to *nadi shuddhi*, consideration of
proper place, time, and food. Thus, the place should not be so distant
as to induce anxiety, nor in an unprotected place, such as a forest, nor
in a city or crowded locality, which induces distraction. The food
should be pure, and of a vegetarian character. It should not be too hot
or too cold, pungent, sour, salt, or bitter. Fasting, the taking of one
meal a day, and the like, are prohibited. On the contrary, the Yogi
should not remain without food for more than one *yama* (three hours).
The food taken should be light and strengthening. Long walks and other
violent exercise should be avoided, as also – cer-tainly in the case of
beginners – sexual intercourse. The stomach should only be half filled.
*Yoga* should be commenced, it is said, in spring or autumn. As stated,
the forms of *pranayama* vary. Thus, *sahita*, which is either with
(*sagarbha*) or without (*nirgarbha*) *vija*, is, according to the
former form, as follows: The *sadhaka* meditates on Vidhi (Brahma), who
is full of *rajoguna*, red in colour, and the image of *akara*. He
inhales by Ida in six measures (*matra*). Before *kumbhaka* he does the
*uddiyanabandha mudra*. Meditating on Hari (Vishnu) as *sattvamaya* and
the black *vija ukara*, he does *kumbhaka* with 64 *japa* of the *vija*;
then, meditating on Shiva as *tamomaya* and his white *vija makara*, he
exhales through Pingala with 32 *japa* of the *vija*; then, inhaling by
Pingala, he does *kumbhaka*, and exhales by Ida with the same *vija*.
The process is repeated in the normal and reversed order.

Pratyaksha: Dhyana

Through *dhyana* is gained the third quality of realization or
*pratyaksha*. *Dhyana*, or meditation, is of three kinds: (1) *sthula*,
or gross; (2) *jyotih*; (3) *sukshma*, or subtle. In the first the form
of the Devata is brought before the mind. One form of *dhyana* for this
purpose is as follows: Let the *sadhana* think of the great ocean of
nectar in his heart. In the middle of that ocean is the island of gems,
the shores of which are made of powdered gems. The island is clothed
with a *kadamba* forest in yellow blossom. This forest is surrounded by
*Malati*, *Champaka*, *Parijata*, and other fragrant trees. In the midst
of the *Kadamba* forest there rises the beautiful *Kalpa* tree, laden
with fresh blossom and fruit. Amidst its leaves the black bees hum and
the koel birds make love. Its four branches are the four Vedas. Under
the tree there is a great *mandapa* of precious stones, and within it a
beautiful bed, on which let him picture to himself his *Ishtadevata*.
The *Guru* will direct him as to the form, raiment, *vahana*, and the
title of the Devata. *Jyotirdhyana* is the infusion of fire and life
(*tejas*) into the form so imagined. In the *muladhara* lies the
snake-like Kundalini. There the *jivatma*, as it were the tapering flame
of a candle, dwells. The *sadhaka* then meditates upon the *tejomaya*
Brahman, or, alternatively, between the eyebrows on *pranavatmaka*, the
flame emitting its lustre.

Sukshmadhyana is meditation on Kundalini with *sham-bhavi mudra* after
She has been roused. By this *yoga* (*vide post*) the *atma* is revealed
(*atmasakshatkara*).

Nirliptatva: Samadhi

Lastly, through *samadhi* the quality of *nirliptatva*, or detachment,
and thereafter *mukti* (liberation) is attained. *Samadhi* considered as
a process is intense mental con-centration, with freedom from all
*sangkalpa*, and attachment to the world, and all sense of "mineness,"
or self-interest (*mamata*). Considered as the result of such process it
is the union of *Jiva* with the *Paramatma*.

Forms Of Samadhi Yoga

This *samadhi yoga* is, according to the Gheranda Sanghita, of six
kinds. (1) *Dhyanayogasamadhi*, attained by *shambhavi mudra*, in which,
after meditation on the Vindu-Brahman and realization of the *Atma*
(*atmapratyaksha*), the latter is resolved into the *Mahakasha*. (2)
*Nadayoga*, attained by *khechari mudra*, in which the *frenum* of the
tongue is cut, and the latter is lengthened until it reaches the space
between the eyebrows, and is then introduced in a reversed position into
the mouth. (3) *Rasanandayoga*, attained by *kumbhaka*, in which the
*sadhaka* in a silent place closes both ears and does *puraka* and
*kumbhaka* until he hears the word *nada* in sounds varying in strength
from that of the cricket’s chirp to that of the large kettledrum. By
daily practice the *anahata* sound is heard, and the *jyotih* with the
*manas* therein is seen, which is ultimately dissolved in the supreme
Vishnu. (4) *Layasiddhiyoga*, accomplished by the celebrated *yonimudra*
already described. The *sadhaka*, thinking of himself as Shakti and the
Paramatma as Purusha, feels himself in union (*sanggama*) with Shiva,
and enjoys with him the bliss which is *shringararasa*, and becomes
Bliss itself, or the Brahman. (5) *Bhakti Yoga*, in which meditation is
made on the *Ishtadevata* with devotion (*bhakti*) until, with tears
flowing from the excess of bliss, the ecstatic condition is attained.
(6) *Rajayoga*, accomplished by aid of the *manomurchchha kumbhaka*.
Here the *manas* detached from all worldly objects is fixed between the
eyebrows in the *ajnachakra*, and *Kumbhaka* is done. By the union of
the *manas* with the *atma*, in which the *jnani* sees all things,
*rajayogasamadhi* is attained.

Shatchakra-bheda

The piercing of the six *chakra* is one of the most important subjects
dealt with in the Tantras, and is part of the practical *yaga* process
of which they treat. Details of practice can only be learnt from a
*Guru*, but generally it may be said that the particular is raised to
the universal life, which as *chit* is realizable only in the
*sahasrara* in the following manner: The *jivatma* in the subtle body,
the receptacle of the five vital airs (*pancha prana*), mind in its
three aspects of *manas*, *ahangkara*, and *buddhi*; the five organs of
action (*panchakarmendriya*) and the five organs of perception
(*panchajnanendriya*) is united with the Kulakundalini. The *Kandarpa*
or *Kama Vayu* in the *muladhara* a form of the *Apana Vayu* is given a
leftward revolution and the fire which is round Kundalini is kindled. By
the *vija* "*Hung*," and the heat of the fire thus kindled, the coiled
and sleeping Kundalini is wakened. She who lay asleep around
*svayambhu-linga*, with her coils three circles and a half closing the
entrance of the *brahma-dvara*, will, on being roused, enter that door
and move upwards, united with the *jivatma*.

On this upward movement, Brahma, Savitri, Dakini-Shakti, the Devas,
vija, and vritti, are dissolved in the body of Kundalini. The
*Mahimandala* or *prithivi* is converted into the *vija* "*Lang*," and
is also merged in Her body. When Kundalini leaves the *muladhara*, that
lotus which, on the awakening of Kundalini had opened and turned its
flower upwards, again closes and hangs down-wards. As Kundalini reaches
the *svadhishthana-chakra*, that lotus opens out, and lifts its flower
upwards. Upon the entrance of Kundalini, Mahavishnu, Mahalakshmi,
Sarasvati, Rakini Shakti, Deva, Matrikas, and vritti, Vaikunthadhama,
Golaka, and the Deva and Devi residing therein are dissolved in the body
of Kundalini. The *prithivi*, or "earth" *vija* "*Lang*," is dissolved
in *apas*, and *apas* converted into the *vija vang* remains in the body
of Kundalini. When the Devi reaches the *manipura chakra* all that is in
the *chakra* merges in Her body. The *Varuna vija* "*vang*" is dissolved
in fire, which remains in the body of the Devi as the *Vija* "*rang*."
This *chakra* is called the *Brahma-granthi* (or knot of Brahma). The
piercing of this *chakra* may involve considerable pain, physical
disorder, and even disease. On this account the directions of an
experienced *Guru* are necessary, and therefore also other modes of yoga
have been recommended for those to whom they are applicable: for in such
modes activity is provoked directly in the higher centre and it is not
necessary that the lower *chakras* should be pierced. Kundalini next
reaches the *anahata chakra*, where all which is therein is merged in
Her. The *vija* of *Tejas*, "*rang*," disappears in Vayu and Vayu
converted into its *vija* "Yang" merges into the body of Kundalini. This
*chakra* is known as *Vishnu-granthi* (knot of Vishnu). Kundalini then
ascends to the abode of Bharati (or Sarasvati) or the *vishuddha
chakra*. Upon Her entrance, *Arddha-narishvara* Shiva, Shakini, the
sixteen vowels, *mantra*, etc., are dissolved in the body of Kundalini.
The *vija* of *Vayu*, "*yang*," is dissolved in *akasha*, which itself
being transformed into the *vija* "*hang*," is merged in the body of
Kundalini. Piercing the *lalana chakra*, the Devi reaches the
*ajnachakra*, where Parama Shiva, Siddha-Kali, the Deva, guna, and all
else therein, are absorbed into Her body. The *vija* of *akasha*,
"*Hang*," is merged in the *manas chakra*, and mind itself in the body
of Kundalini. The *ajnachakra* is known as *Rudra-granthi* (or knot of
Rudra or Shiva). After this *chakra* has been pierced, Kundalini of Her
own motion unites with Parama Shiva. As She proceeds upwards from the
two-petalled lotus, the *niralamba puri*, *pranava*, *nada*, etc., are
merged in Her.

The Kundalini has then in her progress upwards absorbed in herself the
twenty-four *tattva* commencing with the gross elements, and then unites
Herself and becomes one. with Parama Shiva. This is the *maithuna*
(coition) of the *sattvika-pancha-tattva*. The nectar which flows from
such union floods the *kshudrabrahmanda* or human body. It is then that
the *sadhaka*, forgetful of all in this world, is immersed in ineffable
bliss.

Thereafter the *sadhaka*, thinking of the *vayu vija* "*yang*" as being
in the left nostril, inhales through Ida, making *japa* of the *vija*
sixteen times. Then, closing both nostrils, he makes *japa* of the
*vija* sixty-four times. He then thinks that the black "man of sin"
(*Papapurusha*) in the left cavity of the abdomen is being dried up (by
air), and so thinking he exhales through the right nostril Pingala,
making *japa* of the *vija* thirty-two times. The *sadhaka* then
meditating upon the red-coloured *vija* "*rang*" in the *manipura*,
inhales, making sixteen *japa* of the *vija*, and then closes the
nostrils, making sixteen *japa*. While making the *japa* he thinks that
the body of "the man of sin" is being burnt and reduced to ashes (by
fire). He then exhales through the right nostril with thirty-two *japa*.
He then meditates upon the white *chandravija* "*thang*." He next
inhales through Ida, making *japa* of the *vija* sixteen times, closes
both nostrils with *japa* done sixty-four times, and exhales through
Pingala with thirty-two *japa*. During inhalation, holding of breath,
and exhalation, he should consider that a new celestial body is being
formed by the nectar (composed of all the letters of the alphabet,
*matrika-varna*) dropping from the moon. In a similar way with the
*vija* "*vang*," the formation of the body is continued, and with the
*vija* "*lang*" it is completed and strengthened. Lastly, with the
*mantra* "*So*’*hang*," the *sadhaka* leads the *jivatma* into the
heart. Thus Kundalini, who has enjoyed Her union with Paramashiva, sets
out on her return journey the way she came. As she passes through each
of the *chakra* all that she has absorbed therefrom come out from
herself and take their several places in the *chakra*.

In this manner she again reaches the *muladhara*, when all that is
described to be in the *chakras* (see pp. lvii-lxiii) are in the
positions which they occupied before her awakening.

The *Guru*’*s* instructions are to go above the *ajna-chakra*, but no
special directions are given; for after this *chakra* has been pierced
the *sadhaka* can reach the *brahmasthana* unaided. Below the "seventh
month of Shiva" the relationship of *Guru* and *sishya* ceases. The
instructions of the seventh *amnaya* is not expressed (*aprakashita*).

Sin and Virtue

According to Christian conceptions, sin is a violation of the personal
will of, and apostasy from, God. The flesh is the source of lusts which
oppose God’s commands, and in this lies its positive significance for
the origin of a bias of life against God. According to St. Thomas, in
the original state, no longer held as the normal, the lower powers were
subordinate to reason, and reason subject to God. "Original sin" is
formally a "defect of original righteousness," and materially
"concupiscence." As St. Paul says (Rom. vii. 8, 14), the pneumatic law,
which declares war on the lusts, meets with opposition from the "law in
the members." These and similar notions involve a religious and moral
conscious judgment which is assumed to exist in humanity alone. Hindu
notions of *papa* (wrong) and *punya* (that which is pure, holy, and
right) have a wider content. The latter is accordance and working with
the will of Ishvara (of whom the *jiva* is itself the embodiment), as
manifested at any particular time in the general direction taken by the
cosmic process, as the former is the contrary. The two terms are
relative to the state of evolution and the surrounding circumstances of
the *jiva* to which they are applied. Thus, the impulse towards
individuality which is necessary and just on the path of inclination or
"going forth" (*pra-vritti marga*), is wrongful as a hindrance to the
attainment of unity, which is the goal of the path of return (*nivritti
marga*) where inclinations should cease. In short, what makes for
progress on the one path is a hindrance on the other. The matter, when
rightly undertsood, is not (except, perhaps, sometimes popularly) viewed
from the juristic standpoint of an external Lawgiver, His commands, and
those subject to it, but from that in which the exemplification of the
moral law is regarded as the true and proper expression of the
*jiva*’*s* own evolution. Morality, it has been said, is the true nature
of a being. For the same reason wrong is its destruction. What the
*jiva* actually does is the result of his *karmma*. Further, the term
*jiva*, though commonly applicable to the human embodiment of the
*atma*, is not limited to it. Both *papa* and *punya* may therefore be
manifested in beings of a lower rank than that of humanity in so far as
what they (whether consciously or unconsciously) do is a hindrance to
their true development. Thus, in the Yoga Vashishtha it is said that
even a creeping plant acquired merit by association with the holy *muni*
on whose dwelling it grew. Objectively considered, sin is concisely
defined as *duhkhajanakam papam*. It is that which has been, is, and
will be the cause of pain, mental or physical, in past, present, and
future births. The pain as the consequence of the action done need not
be immediate. Though, however, the suffering may be experienced as a
result later than the action of which it is the cause, the consequence
of the action is not really something separate, but a part of the action
itself – namely, that part of it which belongs to the future. The six
chief sins are *kama*, *krodha*, *lobha*, *moha*, *mada*, *matsaryya –*
lust, anger, covetousness, ignorance or delusion, pride and envy.

All wrong is at base self-seeking, in ignorance or disregard of the
unity of the Self in all creatures. Virtue (*punya*), therefore, as the
contrary of sin, is that which is the cause of happiness (*sukhajanakam
punyam*). That happiness is produced either in this or future births, or
leads to the enjoyment of heaven (*Svarga*). Virtue is that which leads
towards the unity whose substance is Bliss (*ananda*). This good
*karmma* produces pleasant fruit, which, like all the results of
*karmma*, is transitory. As *Shruti* says: "It is not by acts or the
pindas offered by one’s children or by wealth, but by renunciation that
men have attained liberation." It is only by escape from *karmma*
through knowledge, that the *jiva* becoming one with the unchanging
Absolute attains lasting rest. It is obvious that for those who obtain
such release neither vice nor virtue, which are categories of phenomenal
being, exist.

Karmma

*Karmma* is action, its cause, and effect. There is no uncaused action,
nor action without effect. The past, the present, and the future are
linked together as one whole. The *ichchha*, *jnana*, and *kriya shakti*
manifest in the *jivatma* living on the worldly plane as desire,
knowledge, and action. As the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad says: "Man is
verily formed of desire. As is his desire, so is his thought. As is his
thought, so is his action. As is his action, so is his attainment."
These fashion the individual’s *Karmma*. "He who desires goes by work to
the object on which his mind is set." "As he thinks, so he becometh."
Then, as to action, "whatsoever a man sows that shall he reap." The
matter is not one of punishment and reward, but of consequence, and the
consequence of action is but a part of it. If anything is caused, its
result is caused, the result being part of the original action, whigh
continues, and is transformed into the result. The *jivatma* experiences
happiness for his good acts and misery for his evil ones.

Karmma is of three kinds – viz., *sanchita karmma –* that is, the whole
vast accumulated mass of the unexhausted *karmma* of the past, whether
good or bad, which has still to be worked out. This past *karmma* is the
cause of the character of the succeeding births, and, as such, is called
*sangskara*, or *vasana*. The second form of *karmma* is *prarabdha*, or
that part of the first which is ripe, and which is worked out and bears
fruit in the present birth. The third is the new *karmma*, which man is
continually making by his present and future actions, and is called
*vartamana* and *agami*. The embodied soul (*jivatma*), whilst in the
*sangsara* or phenomenal world, is by its nature ever making present
*karmma* and experiencing the past. Even the Devas themselves are
subject to time and *karmma*. By his *karmma* a *jiva* may become an
Indra.

Karmma is thus the invisible (*adrishta*), the product of ordained or
prohibited actions capable of giving bodies. It is either good or bad,
and together these are called the impurity of action (*karmma mala*).
Even good action, when done with a view to its fruit, can never secure
liberation. Those who think of the reward will receive benefit in the
shape of that reward. Liberation is the work of Shiva-Shakti, and is
gained only by *brahmajnana*, the destruction of the will to separate
life, and realization of unity with the Supreme. All accompanying action
must be without thought of self. With the cessation of desire the tie
which binds man to the *sangsara* is broken.

According to the Tantra, the *sadhana* and *achara* (*q*.*v*.)
appropriate to an individual depends upon his *karmma*. A man’s
tendencies, character, and temperament is moulded by his *sanchita
karmma*. As regards *prarabdha-karmma*, it is unavoidable. Nothing can
be done but to work it out. Some systems prescribe the same method for
men of divers tendencies. But the Tantra recognizes the force of
*karmma*, and moulds its method to the temperament produced by it. The
needs of each vary, as also the methods which will be the best suited to
each to lead them to the common goal. Thus, forms of worship which are
permissible to the *vira* are forbidden to the *pashu*. The *guru* must
determine that for which the *sadhaka* is qualified (*adhikara*).

Four Aims Of Being

There is but one thing which all seek – happiness – though it be of
differing kinds and sought in different ways. All forms, whether
sensual, intellectual, or spiritual, are from the Brahman, who is Itself
the Source and Essence of all Bliss, and Bliss itself (*rasovai sah*).
Though issuing from the same source – pleasure differs in its forms in
being higher and lower, transitory or durable, or permanent. Those on
the path of desire (*pravritti marga*) seek it through the enjoyments of
this world (*bhukti*) or in the more durable, though still impermanent
delights of heaven (*svarga*). He who is on the path of return
(*nivritti marga*) seeks happiness, not in the created worlds, but in
everlasting union with their primal source (*mukti*); and thus it is
said that man can never be truly happy until he seeks shelter with
Brahman, which is Itself the great Bliss (*rasam hyevayam labdhva anandi
bhavati*).

The eternal rhythm of the Divine Breath is outwards from spirit to
matter and inwards from matter to spirit. Devi as Maya evolves the
world. As Mahamaya She recalls it to Herself. The path of outgoing is
the way of *pravritti*; that of return *nivritti*. Each of these
movements is Divine. Enjoyment (*bhukti*) and liberation (*mukti*) are
each Her gifts. And in the third chapter of the work cited it is said
that of Vishnu and Shiva *mukti* only can be had, but of Devi both
*bhukti* and *mukti*; and this is so in so far as the Devi is, in a
peculiar sense, the source whence those material things come from which
enjoyment (*bhoga*) arises. All *jiva* on their way to humanity, and the
bulk of humanity itself, is on the forward path, and rightly seeks the
enjoyment which is appropriate to its stage of evolution.

The thirst for life will continue to manifest itself until the point of
return is reached and the outgoing energy is exhausted. Man must, until
such time, remain on the path of desire. In the hands of Devi is the
noose of desire. Devi herself is both desire and that light of knowledge
which in the wise who have known enjoyment lays bare its futilities. But
one cannot renounce until one has enjoyed, and so of the world-process
itself it is said: that the unborn ones, the Purushas, are both
subservient to Her (*prakriti*), and leave Her by reason of *viveka*.

Provision is made for the worldly life which is the "outgoing" of the
Supreme. And so it is said that the Tantrika has both enjoyment
(*bhukti*) and liberation (*mukti*). But enjoyment itself is not without
its law. Desire is not to be let loose without bridle. The mental self
is, as is commonly said, the charioteer of the body, of which the senses
are the horses. Contrary to mistaken notions on the subject, the Tantras
take no exception to the ordinary rule that it is necessary not to let
them run away. If one would not be swept away and lost in the mighty
force which is the descent into matter, thought and action must be
controlled by *Dharmma.* Hence the first three of the aims of life
*(trivarga)* on the path of *pravritti* are *dharmma, artha,* and

kama.

Dharmma

*Dharmma* means that which is to be held fast or kept – law, usage,
custom, religion, piety, right, equity, duty, good works, and morality.
It is, in short, the eternal and immutable *(sanatana)* principles which
hold together the universe in its parts and in its whole, whether
organic or inorganic matter. "That which supports and holds together the
peoples (of the universe) is *dharmma.*" "It was declared for well-being
and bringeth well-being. It upholds and preserves. Because it supports
and holds together, it is called Dharmma. By Dharmma are the people
upheld." It is, in short, not an artificial rule, but the principle of
right living. The mark of *dharmma* and of the good is *achara* (good
conduct), from which *dharmma* is born and fair fame is acquired here
and hereafter. The sages embraced *achara* as the root of all *tapas.
Dharmma* is not only the principle of right living, but also its
application. That course of meritorious action by which man fits himself
for this world, heaven, and liberation. *Dharmma* is also the result of
good action – that is, the merit acquired thereby. The basis of the
*sanatana dharmma* is revelation *(shruti)* as presented in the various
Shastra.– Smriti, Purana, and Tantra. In the Devi Bhagavata it is said
that in the Kaliyuga Vishnu in the form of Vyasa divides the one Veda
into many parts, with the desire to benefit men, and with the knowledge
that they are short-lived and of small intelligence, and hence unable to
master the whole. This *dharmma* is the first of the four leading arms
(*chaturvarga*) of all being.

Kama

*Kama* is desire, such as that for wealth, success, family, position, or
other forms of happiness for self or others. It also involves the notion
of the necessity for the posses-sion of great and noble aims, desires,
and ambitions, for such possession is the characteristic of greatness of
soul. Desire, whether of the higher or lower kinds, must, however, be
lawful, for man is subject to *dharmma*, which regulates it.

Artha

*Artha* (wealth) stands for the means by which this life may be
maintained – in the lower sense, food, drink, money, house, land, and
other property; and in the higher sense the means by which effect may be
given to the higher desires, such as that of worship, for which *artha*
may be necessary, aid given to others, and so forth. In short, it is all
the necessary means by which all right desire, whether of the lower or
higher kinds, may be fulfilled. As the desire must be a right desire –
for man is subject to *dharmma*, which regulates them – so also must be
the means sought, which are equally so governed.

This first group is known as the *trivarga*, which must be cultivated
whilst man is upon the *pravritti marga*. Unless and until there is
renunciation on entrance upon the path of return, where inclination
ceases (*nivritti marga*), man must work for the ultimate goal by
meritorious acts (*dharmma*), desires (*kama*), and by the lawful means
(*artha*) whereby the lawful desires which give birth to righteous acts
are realized. Whilst on the *pravritti marga* "the *trivarga* should be
equally cultivated, for he who is addicted to one only is despicable"
(*dharmmartha-kamah samameva sevyah yo hyekasaktah sa jano-jagha-nyah*).

Moksha

Of the four aims, *moksha* or *mukti* is the truly ultimate end, for the
other three are ever haunted by the fear of Death the Ender.

Mukti means "loosening" or liberation. It is advisable to avoid the term
"salvation," as also other Christian terms, which connote different,
though in a loose sense, analogous ideas. According to the Christian
doctrine (soteriology), faith in Christ’s Gospel and in His Church
effects salvation, which is the forgiveness of sins mediated by Christ’s
redeeming activity, saving from judgment, and admitting to the Kingdom
of God. On the other hand, *mukti* means a loosening from the bonds of
the *sangsara* (phenomenal existence), resulting in a union (of various
degrees of completeness) of the embodied spirit (*jivatma*) or
individual life with the Supreme Spirit (*paramatma*). Liberation can be
attained by spiritual knowledge (*atmajnana*) alone, though it is
obvious that such knowledge must be preceded by, and accompanied with,
and, indeed, can only be attained in the sense of actual realization, by
freedom from sin and right action through adherence to *dharmma*. The
idealistic system of Hinduism, which posits the ultimate reality as
being in the nature of mind, rightly, in such cases, insists on what,
for default of a better term, may be described as the intellectual, as
opposed to the ethical, nature. Not that it fails to recognize the
importance of the latter, but regards it as subsidiary and powerless of
itself to achieve that extinction of the modifications of the energy of
consciousness which constitute the supreme *mukti* known as *Kaivalya*.
Such extinction cannot be effected by conduct alone, for such conduct,
whether good or evil, pro-duces *karmma*, which is the source of the
modifications which it is man’s final aim to suppress. *Moksha* belongs
to the *nitvritti marga*, as the *trivarga* appertain to the *pravritti
marga*.

There are various degrees of *mukti*, some more perfect than the others,
and it is not, as is generally supposed, one state.

There are four future states of Bliss, or *pada*, being in the nature of
abodes – viz., *salokya*, *samipya*, *sarupya*, and *sayujya –* that is,
living in the same *loka*, or region, with the Deva worshipped; being
near the Deva,; receiving the same form or possessing the same
*aishvaryya* (Divine qualities) as the Deva, and becoming one with the
Deva worshipped. The abode to which the *jiva* attains depends upon the
worshipper and the nature of his worship, which may be with, or without,
images, or of the Deva regarded as distinct from the worshipper, and
with attributes, and so forth. The four abodes are the result of action,
transitory and conditioned. *Mahanirvvana*, or *Kaivalya*, the real
moksha, is the result of spiritual knowledge (*jnana*), and is
unconditioned and permanent. Those who know the Brahman, recognizing
that the worlds resulting from action are imperfect, reject them, and
attain to that unconditioned Bliss which transcends them all. *Kaivalya*
is the supreme state of oneness without attributes, the state in which,
as the Yogasutra says, modification of the energy of consciousness is
extinct, and when it is established in its own real nature.

Liberation is attainable while the body is yet living, in which case
there exists the state of *jivanmukti* celebrated in the
*Jivanmuktigita* of Dattatreya. The soul, it is true, is not really
fettered, and any appearance to the contrary is illusory. There is, in
fact, freedom, but though *moksha* is already in possession still,
because of the illusion that it is not yet attained, means must be taken
to remove the illusion, and the *jiva* who succeeds in this is
*jivanmukta*, though in the body, and is freed from future embodi-ments.
The enlightened Kaula, according to the Nitya-nita, sees no difference
between mud and sandal, friend and foe, a dwelling-house and the
cremation-ground. He knows that the Brahman is all, that the Supreme
soul (*paramatma*) and the individual soul (*jivatma*) are one, and
freed from all attachment he is *jivanmukta*, or liberated, whilst yet
living. The means whereby *mukti* is attained is the *yoga* process
(*vide ante*).

Siddhi

*Siddhi* is produced by *sadhana*. The former term, which literally
means "success," includes accomplishment, achievement, success, and
fruition of all kinds. A person may thus gain *siddhi* in speech,
*siddhi* in *mantra*, etc. A person is *siddha* also who has perfected
his spiritual development. The various powers attainable – namely,
*anima*, *mahima*, *laghima*, *garima*, *prapti*, *prakamya*, *ishitva*,
*vashitva*, the powers of becoming small, great, light, heavy, attaining
what one wills, and the like – are known as the eight *siddhi*. The
thirty-ninth chapter of the Brahmavaivarta Purana mentions eighteen
kinds, but there are many others, including such minor accomplishments
as *nakhadarpana siddhi* or "nail-gazing." The great *siddhi* is
spiritual perfection. Even the mighty powers of the "eight *siddhi*" are
known as the "lesser *siddhi*," since the greatest of all *siddhi* is
full liberation (*mahanirvana*) from the bonds of phenomenal life and
union with the Paramatma, which is the supreme object (*paramartha*) to
be attained through human birth.

A. A.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1 - Questions relating to the Liberation of
Beings](maha01)

  
