[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](blt08)  [Next](blt10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### THE LOST CHILDREN

Once a camp of people stopped on the bank of a river. There were but a
few lodges of them. One day the little children in the camp crossed the
river to play on the other side. For some time they stayed near the
bank, and then they went up over a little hill, and found a bed of sand
and gravel; and there they played for a long time.

There were eleven of these children. Two of them were daughters of the
chief of the camp, and the smaller of these wanted the best of
everything. If any child found a pretty stone, she would try to take it
for herself. The other children did not like this, and they began to
tease the little girl, and to take her things away from her. Then she
got angry and began to cry, and the more she cried, the more the
children teased her; so at last she and her sister left the others, and
went back to the camp.

When they got there, they told their father what the other children had
done to them, and this made the chief very angry. He thought for a
little while, and then got up and went out of the lodge, and called
aloud, so that everybody might hear, saying: "Listen! listen! Your
children have teased my child and made her cry. Now we will move away,
and leave them behind. If they come back before we get started, they
shall be killed. If they follow us and overtake the camp, they shall be
killed. If the father and mother of any one of them take them into their
lodge, I will kill that father and mother. Hurry now, hurry and

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

pack up, so that we can go. Everybody tear down the lodges, as quickly
as you can."

When the people heard this, they felt very sorry, but they had to do as
the chief said; so they tore down the lodges, and quickly packed the dog
travois, and started off. They packed in such a hurry that they left
many little things lying in camp,—knives and awls, bone needles and
moccasins.

The little children played about in the sand for a long time, but at
last they began to get hungry; and one little girl said to the others,
"I will go back to the camp, and get some dried meat and bring it here,
so that we may eat." And she started to go to the camp. When she came to
the top of the hill and looked across the river, she saw that there were
no lodges there, and did not know what to think of it. She called down
to the children, and said, "The camp has gone"; but they did not believe
her, and went on playing. She kept on calling, and at last some of them
came to her, and then all, and saw that it was as she had said. They
went down to the river, and crossed it, and went to where the lodges had
stood. When they got there, they saw on the ground the things that had
been left out in packing; and as each child saw and knew something that
had belonged to its own parents, it cried and sang a little song,
saying: "Mother, here is your bone needle; why did you leave your
children?" "Father, here is your arrow; why did you leave your
children?" It was very mournful, and they all cried.

There was among them a little girl who had on her back her baby brother,
whom she loved dearly. He was very young, a nursing child, and already
he was hungry and beginning to fret. This little girl said to the
others: "We do not know why they have gone, but we know they have gone.
We must follow the trail of the camp, and try to catch up with them." So
the children started to follow the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

camp. They travelled on all day; and just at night they saw, near the
trail, a little lodge. They had heard the people talk of a bad old woman
who killed and ate persons, and some of the children thought that this
old woman might live here; and they were afraid to go to the lodge.
Others said: "Perhaps some person lives here who has a good heart. We
are very tired and very hungry and have nothing to eat and no place to
keep warm. Let us go to this lodge."

They went to it; and when they went in, they saw sitting by the fire an
old woman. She spoke kindly to them, and asked them where they were
travelling; and they told her that the camp had moved on and left them,
and that they were trying to find their people, that they had nothing to
eat, and were tired and hungry. The old woman fed them, and told them to
sleep here to-night, and to-morrow they could go on and find their
people. "The camp," she said, "passed here to-day when the sun was low.
They have not gone far. To-morrow you will overtake them." She spread
some robes on the ground and said: "Now lie here and sleep. Lie side by
side with your heads toward the fire, and when morning comes, you can go
on your journey." The children lay down and soon slept.

In the middle of the night, the old woman got up, and built a big fire,
and put on it a big stone kettle, full of water. Then she took a big
knife, and, commencing at one end of the row, began to cut off the heads
of the children, and to throw them into the pot. The little girl with
the baby brother lay at the other end of the row, and while the old
woman was doing this, she awoke and saw what was taking place. When the
old woman came near to her, she jumped up and began to beg that she
would not kill her. "I am strong," she said. "I will work hard for you.
I can bring your wood and water, and tan your skins. Do not kill my
little brother and me. Take pity on us and save us alive.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Everybody has left
us, but do you have pity. You shall see how quickly I will work, how you
will always have plenty of wood. I can work quickly and well." The old
woman thought for a little while, then she said: "Well, I will let you
live for a time, anyhow. You shall sleep safely to-night."

The next day, early, the little girl took her brother on her back, and
went out and gathered a big pile of wood, and brought it to the lodge
before the old woman was awake. When she got up, she called to the girl,
"Go to the river and get a bucket of water." The girl put her brother on
her back, and took the bucket to go. The old woman said to her: "Why do
you carry that child everywhere? Leave him here." The girl said: "Not
so. He is always with me, and if I leave him he will cry and make a
great noise, and you will not like that." The old woman grumbled, but
the girl went on down to the river.

When she got there, just as she was going to fill her bucket, she saw
standing by her a great bull. It was a mountain buffalo, one of those
who live in the timber; and the long hair of its head was all full of
pine needles and sticks and branches, and matted together. (It was a
*Su'ye-stŭ'mik*, a water bull.) When the girl saw him, she prayed him to
take her across the river, and so to save her and her little brother
from the bad old woman. The bull said, "I will take you across, but
first you must take some of the sticks out of my head." The girl begged
him to start at once; but the bull said, "No, first take the sticks out
of my head." The girl began to do it, but before she had done much, she
heard the old woman calling to her to bring the water. The girl called
back, "I am trying to get the water clear," and went on fixing the
buffalo's head. The old woman called again, saying, "Hurry, hurry with
that water." The girl answered, "Wait, I am washing my little brother."
Pretty soon the old woman called out, "If you don't bring that water, I
will kill you and your brother." By this time

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the girl had most of the sticks out of the bull's head, and he told her
to get on his back, and went into the water and swam with her across the
river. As he reached the other bank, the girl could see the old woman
coming from her lodge down to the river with a big stick in her hand.

When the bull reached the bank, the girl jumped off his back and started
off on the trail of the camp. The bull swam back again to the other side
of the river, and there stood the old woman. This bull was a sort of
servant of the old woman. She said to him: "Why did you take those
children across the river? Take me on your back now and carry me across
quickly, so that I can catch them." The bull said, "First take these
sticks out of my head." "No," said the old woman; "first take me across,
then I will take the sticks out." The bull repeated, "First take the
sticks out of my head, then I will take you across." This made the old
woman very mad, and she hit him with the stick she had in her hand; but
when she saw that he would not go, she began to pull the sticks out of
his head very roughly, tearing out great handfuls of hair, and every
moment ordering him to go, and threatening what she would do to him when
she got back. At last the bull took her on his back, and began to swim
across with her, but he did not swim fast enough to please her, so she
began to pound him with her club to make him go faster; and when the
bull got to the middle of the river, he rolled over on his side, and the
old woman slipped off, and was carried down the river and drowned.

The girl followed the trail of the camp for several days, feeding on
berries and roots that she dug; and at last one night after dark she
overtook the camp. She went into the lodge of an old woman, who was
camped off at one side, and the old woman pitied her and gave her some
food, and told her where her father's lodge was. The girl went to it,
but when she went in, her parents would not receive her.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> She had tried to
overtake them for the sake of her little brother, who was growing thin
and weak because he had not nursed; and now her mother was afraid to
have her stay with them. She even went and told the chief that her
children had come back. Now when the chief heard that these two children
had come back, he was angry; and he ordered that the next day they
should be tied to a post in the camp, and that the people should move on
and leave them here. "Then," he said, "they cannot follow us."

The old woman who had pitied the children, when she heard what the chief
had ordered, made up a bundle of dried meat, and hid it in the grass
near the camp. Then she called her dog to her,—a little curly dog. She
said to the dog:—

"Now listen. To-morrow when we are ready to start, I will call you to
come to me, but you must pay no attention to what I say. Run off, and
pretend to be chasing squirrels. I will try to catch you, and if I do
so, I will pretend to whip you; but do not follow me. Stay behind, and
when the camp has passed out of sight, chew off the strings that bind
those children; and when you have done this, show them where I have
hidden that food. Then you can follow the camp and catch up to us." The
dog stood before the old woman, and listened to all that she said,
turning his head from side to side, as if paying close attention.

Next morning it was done as the chief had said. The children were tied
to the tree with raw hide strings, and the people tore down all the
lodges and moved off. The old woman called her dog to follow her, but he
was digging at a gopher hole and would not come. Then she went up to him
and struck at him hard with her whip, but he dodged and ran away, and
then stood looking at her. Then the old woman got very mad and cursed
him, but he paid no attention; and finally she left him, and followed
the camp. When the people had all passed out of sight, the dog went

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

to the children, and gnawed the strings which tied them, until he had
bitten them through. So the children were free.

Then the dog was glad, and danced about and barked and ran round and
round. Pretty soon he came up to the little girl, and looked up in her
face, and then started away, trotting. Every little while he would stop
and look back. The girl thought he wanted her to follow him. She did so,
and he took her to where the bundle of dried meat was, and showed it to
her. Then, when he had done this, he jumped up on her, and licked the
baby's face, and then started off, running as hard as he could along the
trail of the camp, never stopping to look back. The girl did not follow
him. She now knew that it was no use to go to the camp again. Their
parents would not receive them, and the chief would perhaps order them
to be killed.

She went on her way, carrying her little brother and the bundle of dried
meat. She travelled for many days, and at last came to a place where she
thought she would stop. Here she built a little lodge of poles and
brush, and stayed there. One night she had a dream, and an old woman
came to her in the dream, and said to her, "To-morrow take your little
brother, and tie him to one of the lodge poles, and the next day tie him
to another, and so every day tie him to one of the poles, until you have
gone all around the lodge and have tied him to each pole. Then you will
be helped, and will no more have bad luck."

When the girl awoke in the morning, she remembered what the dream had
told her, and she bound her little brother to one of the lodge poles;
and each day after this she tied him to one of the poles. Each day he
grew larger, until, when she had gone all around the lodge, he was grown
to be a fine young man.

Now the girl was glad, and proud of her young brother who was so large
and noble-looking. He was quiet, not speaking much, and sometimes for
days he would not say

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

anything. He seemed to be thinking all the time. One morning he told the
girl that he had a dream and that he wished her to help him build a
pis´kun. She was afraid to ask him about the dream, for she thought if
she asked questions he might not like it. So she just said she was ready
to do what he wished. They built the pis´kun, and when it was finished,
the boy said to his sister: "The buffalo are to come to us, and you are
not to see them. When the time comes, you are to cover your head and to
hold your face close to the ground; and do not lift your head nor look,
until I throw a piece of kidney to you." The girl said, "It shall be as
you say."

When the time came, the boy told her where to go; and she went to the
place, a little way from the lodge, not far from the corral, and sat
down on the ground, and covered her head, holding her face close to the
earth. After she had sat there a little while, she heard the sound of
animals running, and she was excited and curious, and raised her head to
look; but all she saw was her brother, standing near, looking at her.
Before he could speak, she said to him: "I thought I heard buffalo
coming, and because I was anxious for food, I forgot my promise and
looked. Forgive me this time, and I will try again." Again she bent her
face to the ground, and covered her head.

Soon she heard again the sound of animals running, at first a long way
off, and then coming nearer and nearer, until at last they seemed close,
and she thought they were going to run over her. She sprang up in fright
and looked about, but there was nothing to be seen but her brother,
looking sadly at her. She went close to him and said: "Pity me. I was
afraid, for I thought the buffalo were going to run over me." He said:
"This is the last time. If again you look, we will starve; but if you do
not look, we will always have plenty, and will never be without meat."
The girl looked at him, and said, "I will try hard this time, and

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

even if those animals run right over me, I will not look until you throw
the kidney to me." Again she covered her head, pressing her face against
the earth and putting her hands against her ears, so that she might not
hear. Suddenly, sooner than she thought, she felt the blow from the meat
thrown at her, and, springing up, she seized the kidney and began to eat
it. Not far away was her brother, bending over a fat cow; and, going up
to him, she helped him with the butchering. After that was done, she
kindled a fire and cooked the best parts of the meat, and they ate and
were satisfied.

The boy became a great hunter. He made fine arrows that went faster than
a bird could fly, and when he was hunting, he watched all the animals
and all the birds, and learned their ways, and how to imitate them when
they called. While he was hunting, the girl dressed buffalo hides and
the skins of deer and other animals. She made a fine new lodge, and the
boy painted it with figures of all the birds and the animals he had
killed.

One day, when the girl was bringing water, she saw a little way off a
person coming. When she went in the lodge, she told her brother, and he
went out to meet the stranger. He found that he was friendly and was
hunting, but had had bad luck and killed nothing. He was starving and in
despair, when he saw this lone lodge and made up his mind to go to it.
As he came near it, he began to be afraid, and to wonder if the people
who lived there were enemies or ghosts; but he thought, "I may as well
die here as starve," so he went boldly to it. The strange person was
very much surprised to see this handsome young man with the kind face,
who could speak his own language. The boy took him into the lodge, and
the girl put food before him. After he had eaten, he told his story,
saying that the game had left them, and that many of his people were
dying of hunger. As he talked, the girl listened; and at last she
remembered the man, and knew that he belonged to her camp.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

She asked him questions, and he talked about all the people in the camp,
and even spoke of the old woman who owned the dog. The boy advised the
stranger, after he had rested, to return to his camp, and tell the
people to move up to this place, that here they would find plenty of
game. After he had gone, the boy and his sister talked of these things.
The girl had often told him what she had suffered, what the chief had
said and done, and how their own parents had turned against her, and
that the only person whose heart had been good to her was this old
woman. As the young man heard all this again, he was angry at his
parents and the chief, but he felt great kindness for the old woman and
her dog. When he learned that those bad people were living, he made up
his mind that they should suffer and die.

When the strange person reached his own camp, he told the people how
well he had been treated by these two persons, and that they wished him
to bring the whole camp to where they were, and that there they should
have plenty. This made great joy in the camp, and all got ready to move.
When they reached the lost children's camp, they found everything as the
stranger had said. The brother gave a feast; and to those whom he liked
he gave many presents, but to the old woman and the dog he gave the best
presents of all. To the chief nothing at all was given, and this made
him very much ashamed. To the parents no food was given, but the boy
tied a bone to the lodge poles above the fire, and told the parents to
eat from it without touching it with their hands. They were very hungry,
and tried to eat from this bone; and as they were stretching out their
necks to reach it—for it was above them—the boy cut off their heads with
his knife. This frightened all the people, the chief most of all; but
the boy told them how it all was, and how he and his sister had
survived.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

When he had finished speaking, the chief said he was sorry for what he
had done, and he proposed to his people that this young man should be
made their chief. They were glad to do this. The boy was made the chief,
and lived long to rule the people in that camp.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mik-a´pi—Red Old Man](blt10.md)
