[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](blt06)  [Next](blt08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### KŬT-O´-YIS

Long ago, down where Two Medicine and Badger Creeks come together, there
lived an old man. He had but one wife and two daughters. One day there
came to his camp a young man who was very brave and a great hunter. The
old man said: "Ah! I will have this young man to help me. I will give
him my daughters for wives." So he gave him his daughters. He also gave
this son-in-law all his wealth, keeping for himself only a little lodge,
in which he lived with his old wife. The son-in-law lived in a lodge
that was big and fine.

At first the son-in-law was very good to the old people. Whenever he
killed anything, he gave them part of the meat, and furnished plenty of
robes and skins for their bedding and clothing. But after a while he
began to be very mean to them.

Now the son-in-law kept the buffalo hidden under a big log jam in the
river. Whenever he wanted to kill anything, he would have the old man go
to help him; and the old man would stamp on the log jam and frighten the
buffalo, and when they ran out, the young man would shoot one or two,
never killing wastefully. But often he gave the old people nothing to
eat, and they were hungry all the time, and began to grow thin and weak.

One morning, the young man called his father-in-law to go down to the
log jam and hunt with him. They started, and the young man killed a fat
buffalo cow. Then he said to the old man, "Hurry back now, and tell your
children to get the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

dogs and carry this meat home, then you can have something to eat." And
the old man did as he had been ordered, thinking to himself: "Now, at
last, my son-in-law has taken pity on me. He will give me part of this
meat." When he returned with the dogs, they skinned the cow, cut up the
meat and packed it on the dog travois, and went home. Then the young man
had his wives unload it, and told his father-in-law to go home. He did
not give him even a piece of liver. Neither would the older daughter
give her parents anything to eat, but the younger took pity on the old
people and stole a piece of meat, and when she got a chance threw it
into the lodge to the old people. The son-in-law told his wives not to
give the old people anything to eat. The only way they got food was when
the younger woman would throw them a piece of meat unseen by her husband
and sister.

Another morning, the son-in-law got up early, and went and kicked on the
old man's lodge to wake him, and called him to get up and help him, to
go and pound on the log jam to drive out the buffalo, so that he could
kill some. When the old man pounded on the jam, a buffalo ran out, and
the son-in-law shot it, but only wounded it. It ran away, but at last
fell down and died. The old man followed it, and came to where it had
lost a big clot of blood from its wound. When he came to where this clot
of blood was lying on the ground, he stumbled and fell, and spilled his
arrows out of his quiver; and while he was picking them up, he picked up
also the clot of blood, and hid it in his quiver. "What are you picking
up?" called out the son-in-law. "Nothing," said the old man; "I just
fell down and spilled my arrows, and am putting them back." "Curse you,
old man," said the son-in-law, "you are lazy and useless. Go back and
tell your children to come with the dogs and get this dead buffalo." He
also took away his bow and arrows from the old man.

The old man went home and told his daughters, and then

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

went over to his own lodge, and said to his wife: "Hurry now, and put
the kettle on the fire. I have brought home something from the
butchering." "Ah!" said the old woman, "has our son-in-law been
generous, and given us something nice?" "No," answered the old man;
"hurry up and put the kettle on." When the water began to boil, the old
man tipped his quiver up over the kettle, and immediately there came
from the pot a noise as of a child crying, as if it were being hurt,
burnt or scalded. They looked in the kettle, and saw there a little boy,
and they quickly took it out of the water. They were very much
surprised. The old woman made a lashing to put the child in, and then
they talked about it. They decided that if the son-in-law knew that it
was a boy, he would kill it, so they resolved to tell their daughters
that the baby was a girl. Then he would be glad, for he would think that
after a while he would have it for a wife. They named the child
Kŭt-o´-yis (Clot of Blood).

The son-in-law and his wives came home, and after a while he heard the
child crying. He told his youngest wife to go and find out whether that
baby was a boy or a girl; if it was a boy, to tell them to kill it. She
came back and told them that it was a girl. He did not believe this, and
sent his oldest wife to find out the truth of the matter. When she came
back and told him the same thing, he believed that it was really a girl.
Then he was glad, for he thought that when the child had grown up he
would have another wife. He said to his youngest wife, "Take some
pemmican over to your mother; not much, just enough so that there will
be plenty of milk for the child."

Now on the fourth day the child spoke, and said, "Lash me in turn to
each one of these lodge poles, and when I get to the last one, I will
fall out of my lashing and be grown up." The old woman did so, and as
she lashed him to each lodge pole he could be seen to grow, and finally
when they lashed

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

him to the last pole, he was a man. After Kŭt-o´-yis had looked about
the inside of the lodge, he looked out through a hole in the lodge
covering, and then, turning round, he said to the old people: "How is it
there is nothing to eat in this lodge? I see plenty of food over by the
other lodge." "Hush up," said the old woman, "you will be heard. That is
our son-in-law. He does not give us anything at all to eat." "Well,"
said Kŭt-o´-yis, "where is your pis´kun?" The old woman said, "It is
down by the river. We pound on it and the buffalo come out."

Then the old man told him how his son-in-law abused him. "He has taken
my weapons from me, and even my dogs; and for many days we have had
nothing to eat, except now and then a small piece of meat our daughter
steals for us."

"Father," said Kŭt-o´-yis, "have you no arrows?" "No, my son," he
replied; "but I have yet four stone points."

"Go out then and get some wood," said Kŭt-o´-yis. "We will make a bow
and arrows. In the morning we will go down and kill something to eat."

Early in the morning Kŭt-o´-yis woke the old man, and said, "Come, we
will go down now and kill when the buffalo come out." When they had
reached the river, the old man said: "Here is the place to stand and
shoot. I will go down and drive them out." As he pounded on the jam, a
fat cow ran out, and Kŭt-o´-yis killed it.

Meantime the son-in-law had gone out, and as usual knocked on the old
man's lodge, and called to him to get up and go down to help him kill.
The old woman called to him that her husband had already gone down. This
made the son-in-law very angry. He said: "I have a good mind to kill you
right now, old woman. I guess I will by and by."

The son-in-law went on down to the jam, and as he drew near, he saw the
old man bending over, skinning a buffalo. "Old man," said he, "stand up
and look all around you. Look well, for it will be your last look." Now
when he

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

had seen the son-in-law coming, Kŭt-o´-yis had lain down and hidden
himself behind the buffalo's carcass. He told the old man to say to his
son-in-law, "You had better take your last look, for I am going to kill
you, right now." The old man said this. "Ah!" said the son-in-law, "you
make me angrier still, by talking back to me." He put an arrow to his
bow and shot at the old man, but did not hit him. Kŭt-o´-yis told the
old man to pick up the arrow and shoot it back at him, and he did so.
Now they shot at each other four times, and then the old man said to
Kŭt-o´-yis: "I am afraid now. Get up and help me." So Kŭt-o´-yis got up
on his feet and said: "Here, what are you doing? I think you have been
badly treating this old man for a long time."

Then the son-in-law smiled pleasantly, for he was afraid of Kŭt-o´-yis.
"Oh, no," he said, "no one thinks more of this old man than I do. I have
always taken great pity on him."

Then Kŭt-o´-yis said: "You lie. I am going to kill you now." He shot him
four times, and the man died. Then Kŭt-o´-yis told the old man to go and
bring down the daughter who had acted badly toward him. He did so, and
Kŭt-o´-yis killed her. Then he went up to the lodges and said to the
younger woman, "Perhaps you loved your husband." "Yes," she said, "I
love him." So he killed her, too. Then he said to the old people: "Go
over there now, and live in that lodge. There is plenty there to eat,
and when it is gone I will kill more. As for myself, I will make a
journey around about. Where are there any people? In what direction?"
"Well," said the old man, "up above here on Badger Creek and Two
Medicine, where the pis´kun is, there are some people."

Kŭt-o´-yis went up to where the pis´kun was, and saw there many lodges
of people. In the centre of the camp was a large lodge, with a figure of
a bear painted on it. He did not go into this lodge, but went into a
very small one near by, where two old women lived; and when he went in,
he asked

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

them for something to eat. They set before him some lean dried meat and
some belly fat. "How is this?" he asked. "Here is a pis´kun with plenty
of fat meat and back fat. Why do you not give me some of that?" "Hush,"
said the old women. "In that big lodge near by, lives a big bear and his
wives and children. He takes all those nice things and leaves us
nothing. He is the chief of this place."

Early in the morning, Kŭt-o´-yis told the old women to get their dog
travois, and harness it, and go over to the pis´kun, and that he was
going to kill for them some fat meat. He reached there just about the
time the buffalo were being driven in, and shot a cow, which looked very
scabby, but was really very fat. Then he helped the old women to
butcher, and when they had taken the meat to camp, he said to them, "Now
take all the choice fat pieces, and hang them up so that those who live
in the bear lodge will notice them."

They did this, and pretty soon the old chief bear said to his children:
"Go out now, and look around. The people have finished killing by this
time. See where the nicest pieces are, and bring in some nice back fat."
A young bear went out of the lodge, stood up and looked around, and when
it saw this meat close by, at the old women's lodge, it went over and
began to pull it down. "Hold on there," said Kŭt-o´-yis. "What are you
doing here, taking the old women's meat?" and he hit him over the head
with a stick that he had. The young bear ran home crying, and said to
his father, "A young man has hit me on the head." Then all the bears,
the father and mother, and uncles and aunts, and all the relations, were
very angry, and all rushed out toward the old women's lodge.

Kŭt-o´-yis killed them all, except one little child bear, a female,
which escaped. "Well," said Kŭt-o´-yis, "you can go and breed bears, so
there will be more."

Then said Kŭt-o´-yis to the old women: "Now, grandmothers,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

where are there any more people? I want to travel around and see them."
The old women said: "The nearest ones are at the point of rocks (on Sun
River). There is a pis´kun there." So Kŭt-o´-yis travelled off toward
this place, and when he reached the camp, he entered an old woman's
lodge.

The old woman set before him a plate of bad food. "How is this?" he
asked. "Have you nothing better than this to set before a stranger? You
have a pis´kun down there, and must get plenty of fat meat. Give me some
pemmican." "We cannot do that," the old woman replied, "because there is
a big snake here, who is chief of the camp. He not only takes the best
pieces, but often he eats a handsome young woman, when he sees one."
When Kŭt-o´-yis heard this he was angry, and went over and entered the
snake's lodge. The women were cooking up some sarvis berries. He picked
up the dish, and ate the berries, and threw the dish out of the door.
Then he went over to where the snake was lying asleep, pricked him with
his knife, and said: "Here, get up. I have come to see you." This made
the snake angry. He partly raised himself up and began to rattle, when
Kŭt-o´-yis cut him into pieces with his knife. Then he turned around and
killed all his wives and children, except one little female snake, which
escaped by crawling into a crack in the rocks. "Oh, well," said
Kŭt-o´-yis, "you can go and breed young snakes, so there will be more.
The people will not be afraid of little snakes." Kŭt-o´-yis said to the
old woman, "Now you go into this snake's lodge and take it for yourself,
and everything that is in it."

Then he asked them where there were some more people. They told him that
there were some people down the river, and some up in the mountains. But
they said: "Do not go there, for it is bad, because Ai-sin´-o-ko-ki
(Wind Sucker) lives there. He will kill you." It pleased Kŭt-o´-yis to

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

know that there was such a person, and he went to the mountains. When he
got to the place where Wind Sucker lived, he looked into his mouth, and
could see many dead people there,—some skeletons and some just dead. He
went in, and there he saw a fearful sight. The ground was white as snow
with the bones of those who had died. There were bodies with flesh on
them; some were just dead, and some still living. He spoke to a living
person, and asked, "What is that hanging down above us?" The person
answered that it was Wind Sucker's heart. Then said Kŭt-o´-yis: "You who
still draw a little breath, try to shake your heads (in time to the
song), and those who are still able to move, get up and dance. Take
courage now, we are going to have the ghost dance." So Kŭt-o´-yis bound
his knife, point upward, to the top of his head and began to dance,
singing the ghost song, and all the others danced with him; and as he
danced up and down, the point of the knife cut Wind Sucker's heart and
killed him. Kŭt-o´-yis took his knife and cut through Wind Sucker's
ribs, and freed those who were able to crawl out, and said to those who
could still travel to go and tell their people that they should come
here for the ones who were still alive but unable to walk.

Then he asked some of these people: "Where are there any other people? I
want to visit all the people." They said to him: "There is a camp to the
westward up the river, but you must not take the left-hand trail going
up, because on that trail lives a woman, a handsome woman, who invites
men to wrestle with her and then kills them. You must avoid her." This
was what Kŭt-o´-yis was looking for. This was his business in the world,
to kill off all the bad things. So he asked the people just where this
woman lived, and asked where it was best to go to avoid her. He did
this, because he did not wish the people to know that he wanted to meet
her.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

He started on his way, and at length saw this woman standing by the
trail. She called out to him, "Come here, young man, come here; I want
to wrestle with you." "No," replied the young man, "I am in a hurry. I
cannot stop." But the woman called again, "No, no, come now and wrestle
once with me." When she had called him four times, Kŭt-o´-yis went up to
her. Now on the ground, where this woman wrestled with people, she had
placed many broken and sharp flints, partly hiding them by the grass.
They seized each other, and began to wrestle over these broken flints,
but Kŭt-o´-yis looked at the ground and did not step on them. He watched
his chance, and suddenly gave the woman a wrench, and threw her down on
a large sharp flint, which cut her in two; and the parts of her body
fell asunder.

Then Kŭt-o´-yis went on, and after a while came to where a woman kept a
sliding place; and at the far end of it there was a rope, which would
trip people up, and when they were tripped, they would fall over a high
cliff into deep water, where a great fish would eat them. When this
woman saw him coming, she cried out, "Come over here, young man, and
slide with me." "No," he replied, "I am in a hurry." She kept calling
him, and when she had called the fourth time, he went over to slide with
her. "This sliding," said the woman, "is a very pleasant pastime." "Ah!"
said Kŭt-o´-yis, "I will look at it." He looked at the place, and,
looking carefully, he saw the hidden rope. So he started to slide, and
took out his knife, and when he reached the rope, which the woman had
raised, he cut it, and when it parted, the woman fell over backward into
the water, and was eaten up by the big fish.

Again he went on, and after a while he came to a big camp. This was the
place of a man-eater. Kŭt-o´-yis called a little girl he saw near by,
and said to her: "Child, I am going into that lodge to let that
man-eater kill and eat me.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Watch close,
therefore, and when you can get hold of one of my bones, take it out and
call all the dogs, and when they have all come up to you, throw it down
and cry out, 'Kŭt-o´-yis, the dogs are eating your bones!'"

Then Kŭt-o´-yis entered the lodge, and when the man-eater saw him, he
cried out, "*O'ki, O'ki,"* and seemed glad to see him, for he was a fat
young man. The man-eater took a large knife, and went up to Kŭt-o´-yis,
and cut his throat, and put him into a great stone kettle to cook. When
the meat was cooked, he drew the kettle from the fire, and ate the body,
limb by limb, until it was all eaten up.

Then the little girl, who was watching, came up to him, and said, "Pity
me, man-eater, my mother is hungry and asks you for those bones." So the
old man bunched them up together and handed them to her. She took them
out, and called all the dogs to her, and threw the bones down to the
dogs, crying out, "Look out, Kŭt-o´-yis; the dogs are eating you!" and
when she said that, Kŭt-o´-yis arose from the pile of bones.

Again he went into the lodge, and when the man-eater saw him, he cried
out, "How, how, how! the fat young man has survived," and seemed
surprised. Again he took his knife and cut Kŭt-o´-yis' throat, and threw
him into the kettle. Again, when the meat was cooked, he ate it up, and
again the little girl asked for the bones, which he gave her; and,
taking them out, she threw them to the dogs, crying, "Kŭt-o´-yis, the
dogs are eating you!" and Kŭt-o´-yis again arose from the bones.

When the man-eater had cooked him four times, he again went into the
lodge, and, seizing the man-eater, he threw him into the boiling kettle,
and his wives and children too, and boiled them to death.

The man-eater was the seventh and last of the bad animals and people who
were destroyed by Kŭt-o´-yis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bad Wife](blt08.md)
