[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt15)  [Next](blt17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

### ORIGIN OF THE I-KUN-UH´-KAH-TSI <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18)

#### I

#### THE BULL BAND

The people had built a great pis´kun, very high and strong, so that no
buffalo could escape; but somehow the buffalo would not jump over the
cliff. When driven toward it, they would run nearly to the edge, and
then, swerving to the right or left, they would go down the sloping
hills and cross the valley in safety. So the people were hungry, and
began to starve.

One morning, early, a young woman went to get water, and she saw a herd
of buffalo feeding on the prairie, right on the edge of the cliff above
the pis´kun. "Oh!" she cried out, "if you will only jump off into the
pis´kun, I will marry one of you." This she said for fun, not meaning
it, and great was her wonder when she saw the buffalo come jumping,
tumbling, falling over the cliff.

Now the young woman was scared, for a big bull with one bound cleared
the pis´kun walls and came toward her. "Come," he said, taking hold of
her arm. "No, no!" she replied pulling back. "But you said if the
buffalo would jump over, you would marry one; see, the pis´kun is
filled." And without more talk he led her up over the bluff, and out on
to the prairie.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

When the people had finished killing the buffalo and cutting up the
meat, they missed this young woman, and her relations were very sad,
because they could not find her. Then her father took his bow and
quiver, and said, "I will go and find her." And he went up over the
bluff and out on the prairie.

After he had travelled some distance he came to a wallow, and a little
way off saw a herd of buffalo. While sitting by the wallow,—for he was
tired—and thinking what he should do, a magpie came and lit near him.
"Ha! *Ma-me-at-si-kim-i*," he said, "you are a beautiful bird; help me.
Look everywhere as you travel about, and if you see my daughter, tell
her, 'Your father waits by the wallow.'" The magpie flew over by the
herd of buffalo, and seeing the young woman, he lit on the ground near
her, and commenced picking around, turning his head this way and that
way, and, when close to her, he said, "Your father waits by the wallow."
"Sh-h-h! sh-h-h!" replied the girl, in a whisper, looking around scared,
for her bull husband was sleeping near by. "Don't speak so loud. Go back
and tell him to wait."

"Your daughter is over there with the buffalo. She says 'wait!'" said
the magpie, when he had flown back to the man.

By and by the bull awoke, and said to his wife, "Go and get me some
water." Then the woman was glad, and taking a horn from his head she
went to the wallow. "Oh, why did you come?" she said to her father. "You
will surely be killed."

"I came to take my daughter home; come, let us hurry."

"No, no!" she replied; "not now. They would chase us and kill us. Wait
till he sleeps again, and I will try to get away," and, filling the horn
with water, she went back.

The bull drank a swallow of the water. "Ha!" said he, "a person is close
by here."

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

"No one," replied the woman; but her heart rose up.

The bull drank a little more, and then he stood up and bellowed,
"*Bu-u-u! m-m-ah-oo!"* Oh, fearful sound! Up rose the bulls, raised
their short tails and shook them, tossed their great heads, and bellowed
back. Then they pawed the dirt, rushed about here and there, and coming
to the wallow, found that poor man. There they trampled him with their
great hoofs, hooked him and trampled him again, and soon not even a
small piece of his body could be seen.

Then his daughter cried, "*Oh! ah! Ni-nah-ah! Oh! ah! Ni-nah-ah!*" (My
father! My father!) "Ah!" said her bull husband, "you mourn for your
father. You see now how it is with us. We have seen our mothers,
fathers, many of our relations, hurled over the rocky walls, and killed
for food by your people. But I will pity you. I will give you one
chance. If you can bring your father to life, you and he can go back to
your people."

Then the woman said to the magpie: "Pity me. Help me now; go and seek in
the trampled mud; try and find a little piece of my father's body, and
bring it to me."

The magpie flew to the place. He looked in every hole, and tore up the
mud with his sharp nose. At last he found something white; he picked the
mud from around it, and then pulling hard, he brought out a joint of the
backbone, and flew with it back to the woman.

She placed it on the ground, covered it with her robe, and then sang.
Removing the robe, there lay her father's body as if just dead. Once
more she covered it with the robe and sang, and when she took away the
robe, he was breathing, and then he stood up. The buffalo were
surprised; the magpie was glad, and flew round and round, making a great
noise.

"We have seen strange things this day," said her bull husband. "He whom
we trampled to death, even into small pieces, is alive again. The
people's medicine is very

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

strong. Now, before you go, we will teach you our dance and our song.
You must not forget them." <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) When the
dance was over, the bull said: "Go now to your home, and do not forget
what you have seen. Teach it to the people. The medicine shall be a
bull's head and a robe. All the persons who are to be 'Bulls' shall wear
them when they dance."

Great was the joy of the people, when the man returned with his
daughter. He called a council of the chiefs, and told them all that had
happened. Then the chiefs chose certain young men, and this man taught
them the dance and song of the bulls, and told them what the medicine
should be. This was the beginning of the *I-kun-uh´-kah-tsi*.

#### II

#### THE OTHER BANDS

For a long time the buffalo had not been seen. The pis´kun was useless,
and the hunters could find no food for the people. Then a man who had
two wives, a daughter, and two sons, said: "I shall not stop here to
die. To-morrow we will move toward the mountains, where we shall perhaps
find deer and elk, sheep and antelope, or, if not, at least we shall
find plenty of beaver and birds. Thus we shall survive."

When morning came, they packed the travois, lashed them on the dogs, and
then moved out. It was yet winter, and they travelled slowly. They were
weak, and could go but a little way in a day. The fourth night came, and
they sat in their lodge, very tired and hungry. No one spoke, for those
who are hungry do not care for words. Suddenly

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

the dogs began to bark, and soon, pushing aside the door-curtain, a
young man entered.

"*O´kyĭ!*" said the old man, and he motioned the stranger to a
sitting-place.

They looked at this person with surprise and fear, for there was a black
wind <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) which had melted the snow, and
covered the prairie with water, yet this person's leggings and moccasins
were dry. They sat in silence a long time.

Then said he: "Why is this? Why do you not give me some food?"

"Ah!" replied the old man, "you behold those who are truly poor. We have
no food. For many days the buffalo did not come in sight, and we shot
deer and other animals which people eat, and when all these had been
killed, we began to starve. Then said I, 'We will not stay here to
starve to death'; and we started for the mountains. This is the fourth
night of our travels."

"Ah!" said the young man. "Then your travels are ended. Close by here,
we are camped by our pis´kun. Many buffalo have been run in, and our
parfleches are filled with dried meat. Wait; I will go and bring you
some."

As soon as he went out, they began to talk about this strange person.
They were very much afraid of him, and did not know what to do. The
children began to cry, and the women were trying to quiet them, when the
young man returned, bringing some meat and three *pis-tsi-ko'-an.* <span
id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21)

"*Kyi!*" said he. "To-morrow move over to our lodges. Do not be afraid.
No matter what strange things you see, do not fear. All will be your
friends. Now, one thing I caution you about. In this be careful. If you
should find an arrow lying about, in the pis´kun, or outside, no matter
where, do not touch it; neither you, nor your wives nor children."
Having said this, he went out.

Then the old man took his pipe and smoked and prayed,

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

saying: "Hear now, Sun! Listen, Above People. Listen, Under Water
People. Now you have taken pity. Now you have given us food. We are
going to those strange ones, who walk through water with dry moccasins.
Protect us among those to-be-feared people. Let us survive. Man, woman,
child, give us long life; give us long life!"

Once more the smell of roasting meat. The children played. They talked
and laughed who had so long been silent. They ate plenty and lay down
and slept.

Early in the morning, as soon as the sun rose, they took down their
lodge, packed up, and started for the strange camp. They found it was a
wonderful place. There by the pis´kun, and far up and down the valley
were the lodges of meat-eaters. They could not see them all, but close
by they saw the lodges of the Bear band, the Fox band, and the Badger
band. The father of the young man who had given them meat was chief of
the Wolf band, and by that band they pitched their lodge. Ah! That was a
happy place. Food there was plenty. All day people shouted out for
feasts, and everywhere was heard the sound of drums and song and
dancing.

The new-comers went to the pis´kun for meat, and one of the children
found an arrow lying on the ground. It was a beautiful arrow, the stone
point long and sharp, the shaft round and straight. All around the
people were busy; no one was looking. The boy picked up the arrow and
hid it under his robe. Then there was a fearful noise. All the animals
howled and growled, and ran toward him. But the chief Wolf said: "Hold!
We will let him go this time; for he is young yet, and not of good
sense." So they let him go.

When night came, some one shouted out for a feast, saying: "*Wo´-ka-hit!
Wo´-ka-hit! Mah-kwe´-i-ke-tum-ok-ah-wah-hit. Ke-tŭk´-ka-pŭk´-si-pim*."
("Listen! Listen! Wolf, you are to feast. Enter with your friend.") "We

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

are asked," said the chief Wolf to his new friend, and together they
went to the lodge.

Within, the fire burned brightly, and many men were already there, the
old and wise of the Raven band. Hanging behind the seats were the
writings <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) of many deeds. Food was
placed before them,—pemmican of berries and dried back fat; and when
they had eaten, a pipe was lighted. Then spoke the Raven chief: "Now,
Wolf, I am going to give our new friend a present. What say you?"

"It is as you say," replied the Wolf. "Our new friend will be glad."

Then the Raven chief took from the long parfleche sack a slender stick,
beautifully dressed with many colored feathers; and on the end of it was
fastened the skin of a raven, head, wings, feet, and all. "We," he said,
"are the *Mas-to-pa´-ta-kiks* (Raven carriers, or those who bear the
Raven). Of all the above animals, of all the flyers, where is one so
smart? None. The Raven's eyes are sharp. His wings are strong. He is a
great hunter and never hungry. Far, far off on the prairie he sees his
food, and deep hidden in the pines it does not escape his eye. Now the
song and the dance."

When he had finished singing and dancing, he gave the stick to the man,
and said: "Take it with you, and when you have returned to your people,
you shall say: Now there are already the Bulls, and he who is the Raven
chief says: 'There shall be more, there shall be the
*I-kun-uh´-kah-tsi*, so that the people may survive, and of them shall
be the Raven carriers.' You will call a council of the chiefs and wise
old men, and they will choose the persons. Teach them the song and the
dance, and give them the medicine. It shall be theirs forever."

Soon they heard another person shouting for a feast, and, going, they
entered the lodge of the *Sin´-o-pah* chief. Here,

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

too, were the old men assembled. After they had eaten of that set before
them, the chief said: "Those among whom you are newly arrived are
generous. They do not look at their possessions, but give to the
stranger and pity the poor. The Kit-fox is a little animal, but what one
is smarter? None. His hair is like the dead prairie grass. His eyes are
sharp, his feet noiseless, his brain cunning. His ears receive the
far-off sound. Here is our medicine, take it." And he gave the stick. It
was long, crooked at one end, wound with fur, and tied here and there to
it were eagle feathers. At the end was a fox's skin. Again the chief
said: "Hear our song. Do not forget it; and the dance, too, you must
remember. When you get home, teach them to the people."

Again they heard the feast shout, and he who called was the Bear chief.
Now when they had smoked, the chief said: "What say you, friend Wolf?
Shall we give our new friend something?"

"As you say," replied the Wolf. "It is yours to give."

Then said the Bear: "There are many animals, and some of them are
powerful. But the Bear is the strongest and bravest of all. He fears
nothing, and is always ready to fight." Then he put on a necklace of
bear claws, a belt of bear fur, and around his head a band of the fur;
and sang and danced. When he had finished, he gave them to the man,
saying: "Teach the people our song and dance, and give them this
medicine. It is powerful."

It was now very late. The Seven Persons had arrived at midnight, yet
again they heard the feast shout from the far end of camp. In this lodge
the men were painted with streaks of red and their hair was all brushed
to one side. After the feast the chief said: "We are different from all
the others here. We are called the *Mŭt´-siks* <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) We are death. We know not fear. Even if
our enemies are in number like

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the grass, we do not turn away, but fight and conquer. Bows are good
weapons. Spears are better, but our weapon is the knife." Then the chief
sang and danced, and afterwards he gave the Wolf's friend the medicine.
It was a long knife, and many scalps were tied on the handle. "This," he
said, "is for the *I-kun-uh´-kah-tsi*."

Once more they were called to a feast and entered the Badger chief's
lodge. He taught the man the Badger song and dance and gave him the
medicine. It was a large rattle, ornamented with beaver claws and bright
feathers. They smoked two pipes in the Badger's lodge, and then went
home and slept.

Early next day, the man and his family took down their lodge, and
prepared to move camp. Many women came and made them presents of dried
meat, pemmican, and berries. They were given so much they could not take
it all with them. It was many days before they joined the main camp, for
the people, too, had moved to the south after buffalo. As soon as the
lodge was pitched, the man called all the chiefs to come and feast, and
he told them all he had seen, and showed them the medicines. The chiefs
chose certain young men for the different bands, and this man taught
them the songs and dances, and gave each band their medicine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[104:1](blt16.htm#fr_18) An account of the
*I-kun-uh´-kah-tsi*, with a list of its different bands or societies and
their duties, will be found in the chapter on Social Organization.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[107:1](blt16.htm#fr_19) Here the narrator
repeated the song and showed the dance. As is fitting to the dance of
such great beasts, the air is slow and solemn, and the step ponderous
and deliberate.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[108:1](blt16.htm#fr_20) The "Chinook."

<span id="fn_21"></span>[108:2](blt16.htm#fr_21) Unborn buffalo calves.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[110:1](blt16.htm#fr_22) That is, the painting
on cowskin of the various battles and adventures in which the owner of
the lodge had taken part.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[111:1](blt16.htm#fr_23) Brave, courageous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin Of The Medicine Pipe](blt17)
