[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt18)  [Next](blt20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

#### THE BUFFALO ROCK

A small stone, which is usually a fossil shell of some kind, is known by
the Blackfeet as I-nis´-kim, the buffalo stone. This object is strong
medicine, and, as indicated in some of these stories, gives its
possessor great power with buffalo. The stone is found on the prairie,
and the person who succeeds in obtaining one is regarded as very
fortunate. Sometimes a man, who is riding along on the prairie, will
hear a peculiar faint chirp, such as a little bird might utter. The
sound he knows is made by a buffalo rock. He stops and searches on the
ground for the rock, and if he cannot find it, marks the place and very
likely returns next day, either alone or with others from the camp, to
look for it again. If it is found, there is great rejoicing. How the
first buffalo rock was obtained, and its power made known, is told in
the following story.

Long ago, in the winter time, the buffalo suddenly disappeared. The snow
was so deep that the people could not move in search of them, for in
those days they had no horses. So the hunters killed deer, elk, and
other small game along the river bottoms, and when these were all killed
off or driven away, the people began to starve.

One day, a young married man killed a jack-rabbit. He was so hungry that
he ran home as fast as he could, and told one of his wives to hurry and
get some water to cook it. While the young woman was going along the
path to the river, she heard a beautiful song. It sounded close by, but
she looked all around and could see no one.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

The song seemed to come from a cotton-wood tree near the path. Looking
closely at this tree she saw a queer rock jammed in a fork, where the
tree was split, and with it a few hairs from a buffalo, which had rubbed
there. The woman was frightened and dared not pass the tree. Pretty soon
the singing stopped, and the I-nis´-kim \[buffalo rock\] spoke to the
woman and said: "Take me to your lodge, and when it is dark, call in the
people and teach them the song you have just heard. Pray, too, that you
may not starve, and that the buffalo may come back. Do this, and when
day comes, your hearts will be glad."

The woman went on and got some water, and when she came back, took the
rock and gave it to her husband, telling him about the song and what the
rock had said. As soon as it was dark, the man called the chiefs and old
men to his lodge, and his wife taught them this song. They prayed, too,
as the rock had said should be done. Before long, they heard a noise far
off. It was the tramp of a great herd of buffalo coming. Then they knew
that the rock was very powerful, and, ever since that, the people have
taken care of it and prayed to it.

\[NOTE.—I-nis´-kims are usually small *Ammonites*, or sections of
*Baculites,* or sometimes merely oddly shaped nodules of flint. It is
said of them that if an I-nis´-kim is wrapped up and left undisturbed
for a long time, it will have young ones; two small stones similar in
shape to the original one will be found in the package with it.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin Of The Worm Pipe](blt20)
