[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](blt17)  [Next](blt19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

### THE BEAVER MEDICINE

This story goes back many years, to a time before the Indians went to
war against each other. Then there was peace among all the tribes. They
met, and did not kill each other. They had no guns and they had no
horses. When two tribes met, the head chiefs would take each a stick and
touch each other. Each had counted a *coup* on the other, and they then
went back to their camps. It was more a friendly than a hostile
ceremony.

Oftentimes, when a party of young men had gone to a strange camp, and
had done this to those whom they had visited, they would come back to
their homes and would tell the girls whom they loved that they had
counted a *coup* on this certain tribe of people. After the return of
such a party, the young women would have a dance. Each one would wear
clothing like that of the man she loved, and as she danced, she would
count a *coup*, saying that she herself had done the deed which her
young lover had really done. Such was the custom of the people.

There was a chief in a camp who had three wives, all very pretty women.
He used to say to these women, whenever a dance was called: "Why do not
you go out and dance too? Perhaps you have some one in the camp that you
love, and for whom you would like to count a *coup*" Then the women
would say, "No, we do not wish to join the dance; we have no lovers."

There was in the camp a poor young man, whose name was Ápi-kŭnni. He had
no relations, and no one to tan

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

robes or furs for him, and he was always badly clad and in rags.
Whenever he got some clothing, he wore it as long as it would hold
together. This young man loved the youngest wife of the chief, and she
loved him. But her parents were not rich, and they could not give her to
Ápi-kŭnni, and when the chief wanted her for a wife, they gave her to
him. Sometimes Ápi-kŭnni and this girl used to meet and talk together,
and he used to caution her, saying, "Now be careful that you do not tell
any one that you see me." She would say, "No, there is no danger; I will
not let it be known."

One evening, a dance was called for the young women to dance, and the
chief said to his wives: "Now, women, you had better go to this dance.
If any of you have persons whom you love, you might as well go and dance
for them." Two of them said: "No, we will not go. There is no one that
we love." But the third said, "Well, I think I will go and dance." The
chief said to her, "Well, go then; your lover will surely dress you up
for the dance."

The girl went to where Ápi-kŭnni as living in an old woman's lodge, very
poorly furnished, and told him what she was going to do, and asked him
to dress her for the dance. He said to her: "Oh, you have wronged me by
coming here, and by going to the dance. I told you to keep it a secret."
The girl said: "Well, never mind; no one will know your dress. Fix me
up, and I will go and join the dance anyway." "Why," said Api-kŭnni, "I
never have been to war. I have never counted any *coups*. You will go
and dance and will have nothing to say. The people will laugh at you."
But when he found that the girl wanted to go, he painted her forehead
with red clay, and tied a goose skin, which he had, about her head, and
lent her his badly tanned robe, which in spots was hard like a
parfleche. He said to her, "If you will go to the dance, say, when it
comes your turn to speak, that when the water in the creeks gets warm,

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

you are going to war, and are going to count a *coup* on some people."

The woman went to the dance, and joined in it. All the people were
laughing at her on account of her strange dress,—a goose skin around her
head, and a badly tanned robe about her. The people in the dance asked
her: "Well, what are you dancing for? What can you tell?" The woman
said, "I am dancing here to-day, and when the water in the streams gets
warm next spring, I am going to war; and then I will tell you what I
have done to any people." The chief was standing present, and when he
learned who it was that his young wife loved, he was much ashamed and
went to his lodge.

When the dance was over, this young woman went to the lodge of the poor
young man to give back his dress to him. Now, while she had been gone,
Ápi-kŭnni had been thinking over all these things, and he was very much
ashamed. He took his robe and his goose skin and went away. He was so
ashamed that he went away at once, travelling off over the prairie, not
caring where he went, and crying all the time. As he wandered away, he
came to a lake, and at the foot of this lake was a beaver dam, and by
the dam a beaver house. He walked out on the dam and on to the beaver
house. There he stopped and sat down, and in his shame cried the rest of
the day, and at last he fell asleep on the beaver house.

While he slept, he dreamed that a beaver came to him—a very large
beaver—and said: "My poor young man, come into my house. I pity you, and
will give you something that will help you." So Ápi-kŭnni got up, and
followed the beaver into the house. When he was in the house, he awoke,
and saw sitting opposite him a large white beaver, almost as big as a
man. He thought to himself, "This must be the chief of all the beavers,
white because very old." The beaver was singing a song. It was a very
strange song, and

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

he sang it a long time. Then he said to Ápi-kŭnni, "My son, why are you
mourning?" and the young man told him everything that had happened, and
how he had been shamed. Then the beaver said: "My son, stay here this
winter with me. I will provide for you. When the time comes, and you
have learned our songs and our ways, I will let you go. For a time make
this your home." So Ápi-kŭnni stayed there with the beaver, and the
beaver taught him many strange things. All this happened in the fall.

Now the chief in the camp missed this poor young man, and he asked the
people where he had gone. No one knew. They said that the last that had
been seen of him he was travelling toward the lake where the beaver dam
was.

Ápi-kŭnni had a friend, another poor young man named Wolf Tail, and
after a while, Wolf Tail started out to look for his friend. He went
toward this lake, looking everywhere, and calling out his name. When he
came to the beaver house, he kicked on the top and called, "Oh, my
brother, are you here?" Ápi-kŭnni answered him, and said: "Yes, I am
here. I was brought in while I was asleep, and I cannot give you the
secret of the door, for I do not know it myself." Wolf Tail said to him,
"Brother, when the weather gets warm a party is going to start from camp
to war." Ápi-kŭnni said: "Go home and try to get together all the
moccasins you can, but do not tell them that I am here. I am ashamed to
go back to the camp. When the party starts, come this way and bring me
the moccasins, and we two will start from here." He also said: "I am
very thin. The beaver food here does not agree with me. We are living on
the bark of willows." Wolf Tail went back to the camp and gathered
together all the moccasins that he could, as he had been asked to do.

When the spring came, and the grass began to start, the war party set
out. At this time the beaver talked to Ápi-kŭnni

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

a long time, and told him many things. He dived down into the water, and
brought up a long stick of aspen wood, cut off from it a piece as long
as a man's arm, trimmed the twigs off it, and gave it to the young man.
"Keep this," the beaver said, "and when you go to war take it with you."
The beaver also gave him a little sack of medicine, and told him what he
must do.

When the party started out, Wolf Tail came to the beaver house, bringing
the moccasins, and his friend came out of the house. They started in the
direction the party had taken and travelled with them, but off to one
side. When they stopped at night, the two young men camped by
themselves.

They travelled for many days, until they came to Bow River, and found
that it was very high. On the other side of the river, they saw the
lodges of a camp. In this camp a man was making a speech, and Api-kŭnni
said to his friend, "Oh, my brother, I am going to kill that man to-day,
so that my sweetheart may count *coup* on him." These two were at a
little distance from the main party, above them on the river. The people
in the camp had seen the Blackfeet, and some had come down to the river.
When Api-kunni had said this to Wolf Tail, he took his clothes off and
began to sing the song the beaver had taught him. This was the song:—

I am like an island,  
For on an island I got my power.  
In battle I live  
While people fall away from me.

While he sang this, he had in his hand the stick which the beaver had
given him. This was his only weapon.

He ran to the bank, jumped in and dived, and came up in the middle of
the river, and started to swim across. The rest of the Blackfeet saw one
of their number swimming across the river, and they said to each other:
"Who is that?

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Why did not some
one stop him?" While he was swimming across, the man who had been making
the speech saw him and went down to meet him. He said: "Who can this man
be, swimming across the river? He is a stranger. I will go down and meet
him, and kill him." As the boy was getting close to the shore, the man
waded out in the stream up to his waist, and raised his knife to stab
the swimmer. When Ápi-kŭnni got near him, he dived under the water and
came up close to the man, and thrust the beaver stick through his body,
and the man fell down in the water and died. Ápi-kŭnni caught the body,
and dived under the water with it, and came up on the other side where
he had left his friend. Then all the Blackfeet set up the war whoop, for
they were glad, and they could hear a great crying in the camp. The
people there were sorry for the man who was killed.

People in those days never killed one another, and this was the first
man ever killed in war.

They dragged the man up on the bank, and Ápi-kŭnni said to his brother,
"Cut off those long hairs on the head." The young man did as he was
told. He scalped him and counted *coup* on him; and from that time
forth, people, when they went to war, killed one another and scalped the
dead enemy, as this poor young man had done. Two others of the main
party came to the place, and counted *coup* on the dead body, making
four who had counted *coup*. From there, the whole party turned about
and went back to the village whence they had come.

When they came in sight of the lodges, they sat down in a row facing the
camp. The man who had killed the enemy was sitting far in front of the
others. Behind him sat his friend, and behind Wolf Tail, sat the two who
had counted *coup* on the body. So these four were strung out in front
of the others. The chief of the camp was told that some people were
sitting on a hill near by, and when he had gone out and looked, he said:
"There is some one sitting way in

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

front. Let somebody go out and see about it." A young man ran out to
where he could see, and when he had looked, he ran back and said to the
chief, "Why, that man in front is the poor young man."

The old chief looked around, and said: "Where is that young woman, my
wife? Go and find her." They went to look for her, and found her out
gathering rosebuds, for while the young man whom she loved was away, she
used to go out and gather rosebuds and dry them for him. When they found
her, she had her bosom full of them. When she came to the lodge, the
chief said to her: "There is the man you love, who has come. Go and meet
him." She made ready quickly and ran out and met him. He said: "Give her
that hair of the dead man. Here is his knife. There is the coat he had
on, when I killed him. Take these things back to the camp, and tell the
people who made fun of you that this is what you promised them at the
time of that dance."

The whole party then got up and walked to the camp. The woman took the
scalp, knife and coat to the lodge, and gave them to her husband. The
chief invited Ápi-kûnni to come to his lodge to visit him. He said: "I
see that you have been to war, and that you have done more than any of
us have ever done. This is a reason why you should be a chief. Now take
my lodge and this woman, and live here. Take my place and rule these
people. My two wives will be your servants." When Ápi-kûnni heard this,
and saw the young woman sitting there in the lodge, he could not speak.
Something seemed to rise up in his throat and choke him.

So this young man lived in the camp and was known as their chief.

After a time, he called his people together in council and told them of
the strange things the beaver had taught him, and the power that the
beaver had given him. He said:

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "This will be a
benefit to us while we are a people now, and afterward it will be handed
down to our children, and if we follow the words of the beaver we will
be lucky. This seed the beaver gave me, and told me to plant it every
year. When we ask help from the beaver, we will smoke this plant."

This plant was the Indian tobacco, and it is from the beaver that the
Blackfeet got it. Many strange things were taught this man by the
beaver, which were handed down and are followed till to-day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Buffalo Rock](blt19.md)
