[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt11)  [Next](blt13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

### THE WOLF-MAN

There was once a man who had two bad wives. They had no shame. The man
thought if he moved away where there were no other people, he might
teach these women to become good, so he moved his lodge away off on the
prairie. Near where they camped was a high butte, and every evening
about sundown, the man would go up on top of it, and look all over the
country to see where the buffalo were feeding, and if any enemies were
approaching. There was a buffalo skull on the hill, which he used to sit
on.

"This is very lonesome," said one woman to the other, one day. "We have
no one to talk with nor to visit."

"Let us kill our husband," said the other. "Then we will go back to our
relations and have a good time."

Early in the morning, the man went out to hunt, and as soon as he was
out of sight, his wives went up on top of the butte. There they dug a
deep pit, and covered it over with light sticks, grass, and dirt, and
placed the buffalo skull on top.

In the afternoon they saw their husband coming home, loaded down with
meat he had killed. So they hurried to cook for him. After eating, he
went up on the butte and sat down on the skull. The slender sticks gave
way, and he fell into the pit. His wives were watching him, and when
they saw him disappear, they took down the lodge, packed everything on
the dog travois, and moved off, going toward the main camp. When they
got near it, so that the people could hear them, they began to cry and
mourn.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

"Why is this?" they were asked. "Why are you mourning? Where is your
husband?"

"He is dead," they replied. "Five days ago he went out to hunt, and he
never came back." And they cried and mourned again.

When the man fell into the pit, he was hurt. After a while he tried to
get out, but he was so badly bruised he could not climb up. A wolf,
travelling along, came to the pit and saw him, and pitied him.
*Ah-h-w-o-o-o-o! Ah-h-w-o-o-o-o!* he howled, and when the other wolves
heard him they all came running to see what was the matter. There came
also many coyotes, badgers, and kit-foxes.

"In this hole," said the wolf, "is my find. Here is a fallen-in man. Let
us dig him out, and we will have him for our brother."

They all thought the wolf spoke well, and began to dig. In a little
while they had a hole close to the man. Then the wolf who found him
said, "Hold on; I want to speak a few words to you." All the animals
listening, he continued, "We will all have this man for our brother, but
I found him, so I think he ought to live with us big wolves." All the
others said that this was well; so the wolf went into the hole, and
tearing down the rest of the dirt, dragged the almost dead man out. They
gave him a kidney to eat, and when he was able to walk a little, the big
wolves took him to their home. Here there was a very old blind wolf, who
had powerful medicine. He cured the man, and made his head and hands
look like those of a wolf. The rest of his body was not changed.

In those days the people used to make holes in the pis´kun walls and set
snares, and when wolves and other animals came to steal meat, they were
caught by the neck. One night the wolves all went down to the pis´kun to
steal meat, and when they got close to it, the man-wolf said: "Stand
here a little while. I will go down and fix the places, so

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

you will not be caught." He went on and sprung all the snares; then he
went back and called the wolves and others,—the coyotes, badgers, and
foxes,—and they all went in the pis´kun and feasted, and took meat to
carry home.

In the morning the people were surprised to find the meat gone, and
their nooses all drawn out. They wondered how it could have been done.
For many nights the nooses were drawn and the meat stolen; but once,
when the wolves went there to steal, they found only the meat of a
scabby bull, and the man-wolf was angry, and cried out:
"Bad-you-give-us-o-o-o! Bad-you-give-us-o-o-o-o!"

The people heard him, and said: "It is a man-wolf who has done all this.
We will catch him." So they put pemmican and nice back fat in the
pis´kun, and many hid close by. After dark the wolves came again, and
when the man-wolf saw the good food, he ran to it and began eating. Then
the people all rushed in and caught him with ropes and took him to a
lodge. When they got inside to the light of the fire, they knew at once
who it was. They said, "This is the man who was lost."

"No," said the man, "I was not lost. My wives tried to kill me. They dug
a deep hole, and I fell into it, and I was hurt so badly that I could
not get out; but the wolves took pity on me and helped me, or I would
have died there."

When the people heard this, they were angry, and they told the man to do
something.

"You say well," he replied. "I give those women to the
*I-kun-uh´-kah-tsi;* they know what to do."

After that night the two women were never seen again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fast Runners](blt13)
