[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](blt21)  [Next](blt23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

# STORIES OF OLD MAN

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### THE BLACKFOOT GENESIS

All animals of the Plains at one time heard and knew him, and all birds
of the air heard and knew him. All things that he had made understood
him, when he spoke to them,—the birds, the animals, and the people.

Old Man was travelling about, south of here, making the people. He came
from the south, travelling north, making animals and birds as he passed
along. He made the mountains, prairies, timber, and brush first. So he
went along, travelling northward, making things as he went, putting
rivers here and there, and falls on them, putting red paint here and
there in the ground,—fixing up the world as we see it to-day. He made
the Milk River (the Teton) and crossed it, and, being tired, went up on
a little hill and lay down to rest. As he lay on his back, stretched out
on the ground, with arms extended, he marked himself out with
stones,—the shape of his body, head, legs, arms, and everything. There
you can see those rocks to-day. After he had rested, he went on
northward, and stumbled over a knoll and fell down on his knees. Then he
said, "You are a bad thing to be stumbling against"; so he raised up two
large buttes there, and named them the Knees, and they are called so to
this day. He went on further north, and with some of the rocks he
carried with him he built the Sweet Grass Hills.

Old Man covered the plains with grass for the animals to feed on. He
marked off a piece of ground, and in it he made to grow all kinds of
roots and berries,—camas, wild carrots,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

wild turnips, sweet-root, bitter-root, sarvis berries, bull berries,
cherries, plums, and rosebuds. He put trees in the ground. He put all
kinds of animals on the ground. When he made the bighorn with its big
head and horns, he made it out on the prairie. It did not seem to travel
easily on the prairie; it was awkward and could not go fast. So he took
it by one of its horns, and led it up into the mountains, and turned it
loose; and it skipped about among the rocks, and went up fearful places
with ease. So he said, "This is the place that suits you; this is what
you are fitted for, the rocks and the mountains." While he was in the
mountains, he made the antelope out of dirt, and turned it loose, to see
how it would go. It ran so fast that it fell over some rocks and hurt
itself. He saw that this would not do, and took the antelope down on the
prairie, and turned it loose; and it ran away fast and gracefully, and
he said, "This is what you are suited to."

One day Old Man determined that he would make a woman and a child; so he
formed them both—the woman and the child, her son—of clay. After he had
moulded the clay in human shape, he said to the clay, "You must be
people," and then he covered it up and left it, and went away. The next
morning he went to the place and took the covering off, and saw that the
clay shapes had changed a little. The second morning there was still
more change, and the third still more. The fourth morning he went to the
place, took the covering off, looked at the images, and told them to
rise and walk; and they did so. They walked down to the river with their
Maker, and then he told them that his name was *Na´pi,* Old Man.

As they were standing by the river, the woman said to him, "How is it?
will we always live, will there be no end to it?" He said: "I have never
thought of that. We will have to decide it. I will take this buffalo
chip and throw it in the river. If it floats, when people die, in four
days they

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

will become alive again; they will die for only four days. But if it
sinks, there will be an end to them." He threw the chip into the river,
and it floated. The woman turned and picked up a stone, and said: "No, I
will throw this stone in the river; if it floats we will always live, if
it sinks people must die, that they may always be sorry for each
other." <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md) The woman threw the stone
into the water, and it sank. "There," said Old Man, "you have chosen.
There will be an end to them."

It was not many nights after, that the woman's child died, and she cried
a great deal for it. She said to Old Man: "Let us change this. The law
that you first made, let that be a law." He said: "Not so. What is made
law must be law. We will undo nothing that we have done. The child is
dead, but it cannot be changed. People will have to die."

That is how we came to be people. It is he who made us.

The first people were poor and naked, and did not know how to get a
living. Old Man showed them the roots and berries, and told them that
they could eat them; that in a certain month of the year they could peel
the bark off some trees and eat it, that it was good. He told the people
that the animals should be their food, and gave them to the people,
saying, "These are your herds." He said: "All these little animals that
live in the ground—rats, squirrels, skunks, beavers—are good to eat. You
need not fear to eat of their flesh." He made all the birds that fly,
and told the people that there was no harm in their flesh, that it could
be eaten. The first people that he created he used to take about through
the timber and swamps and over the prairies, and show them the different
plants. Of a certain plant he would say, "The root of this plant, if
gathered in a certain month of the year, is good for a certain
sickness." So they learned the power of all herbs.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

In those days there were buffalo. Now the people had no arms, but those
black animals with long beards were armed; and once, as the people were
moving about, the buffalo saw them, and ran after them, and hooked them,
and killed and ate them. One day, as the Maker of the people was
travelling over the country, he saw some of his children, that he had
made, lying dead, torn to pieces and partly eaten by the buffalo. When
he saw this he was very sad. He said: "This will not do. I will change
this. The people shall eat the buffalo."

He went to some of the people who were left, and said to them, "How is
it that you people do nothing to these animals that are killing you?"
The people said: "What can we do? We have no way to kill these animals,
while they are armed and can kill us." Then said the Maker: "That is not
hard. I will make you a weapon that will kill these animals." So he went
out, and cut some sarvis berry shoots, and brought them in, and peeled
the bark off them. He took a larger piece of wood, and flattened it, and
tied a string to it, and made a bow. Now, as he was the master of all
birds and could do with them as he wished, he went out and caught one,
and took feathers from its wing, and split them, and tied them to the
shaft of wood. He tied four feathers along the shaft, and tried the
arrow at a mark, and found that it did not fly well. He took these
feathers off, and put on three; and when he tried it again, he found
that it was good. He went out and began to break sharp pieces off the
stones. He tried them, and found that the black flint stones made the
best arrow points, and some white flints. Then he taught the people how
to use these things.

Then he said: "The next time you go out, take these things with you, and
use them as I tell you, and do not run from these animals. When they run
at you, as soon as they get pretty close, shoot the arrows at them, as I
have taught

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

you; and you will see that they will run from you or will run in a
circle around you."

Now, as people became plenty, one day three men went out on to the plain
to see the buffalo, but they had no arms. They saw the animals, but when
the buffalo saw the men, they ran after them and killed two of them, but
one got away. One day after this, the people went on a little hill to
look about, and the buffalo saw them, and said, "*Saiyah*, there is some
more of our food," and they rushed on them. This time the people did not
run. They began to shoot at the buffalo with the bows and arrows *Na´pi*
had given them, and the buffalo began to fall; but in the fight a person
was killed.

At this time these people had flint knives given them, and they cut up
the bodies of the dead buffalo. It is not healthful to eat the meat raw,
so Old Man gathered soft dry rotten driftwood and made punk of it, and
then got a piece of hard wood, and drilled a hole in it with an arrow
point, and gave them a pointed piece of hard wood, and taught them how
to make a fire with fire sticks, and to cook the flesh of these animals
and eat it.

They got a kind of stone that was in the land, and then took another
harder stone and worked one upon the other, and hollowed out the softer
one, and made a kettle of it. This was the fashion of their dishes.

Also Old Man said to the people: "Now, if you are overcome, you may go
and sleep, and get power. Something will come to you in your dream, that
will help you. Whatever these animals tell you to do, you must obey
them, as they appear to you in your sleep. Be guided by them. If anybody
wants help, if you are alone and travelling, and cry aloud for help,
your prayer will be answered. It may be by the eagles, perhaps by the
buffalo, or by the bears. Whatever animal answers your prayer, you must
listen to him."

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

That was how the first people got through the world, by the power of
their dreams.

After this, Old Man kept on, travelling north. Many of the animals that
he had made followed him as he went. The animals understood him when he
spoke to them, and he used them as his servants. When he got to the
north point of the Porcupine Mountains, there he made some more mud
images of people, and blew breath upon them, and they became people. He
made men and women. They asked him, "What are we to eat?" He made many
images of clay, in the form of buffalo. Then he blew breath on these,
and they stood up; and when he made signs to them, they started to run.
Then he said to the people, "Those are your food." They said to him,
"Well, now, we have those animals; how are we to kill them?" "I will
show you," he said. He took them to the cliff, and made them build rock
piles like this, **&gt;**; and he made the people hide behind these
piles of rock, and said, "When I lead the buffalo this way, as I bring
them opposite to you, rise up."

After he had told them how to act, he started on toward a herd of
buffalo. He began to call them, and the buffalo started to run toward
him, and they followed him until they were inside the lines. Then he
dropped back; and as the people rose up, the buffalo ran in a straight
line and jumped over the cliff. He told the people to go and take the
flesh of those animals. They tried to tear the limbs apart, but they
could not. They tried to bite pieces out, and could not. So Old Man went
to the edge of the cliff, and broke some pieces of stone with sharp
edges, and told them to cut the flesh with these. When they had taken
the skins from these animals, they set up some poles and put the hides
on them, and so made a shelter to sleep under. There were some of these
buffalo that went over the cliff that were not dead. Their legs were
broken, but they were still alive.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The people cut
strips of green hide, and tied stones in the middle, and made large
mauls, and broke in the skulls of the buffalo, and killed them.

After he had taught those people these things, he started off again,
travelling north, until he came to where Bow and Elbow rivers meet.
There he made some more people, and taught them the same things. From
here he again went on northward. When he had come nearly to the Red
Deer's River, he reached the hill where the Old Man sleeps. There he lay
down and rested himself. The form of his body is to be seen there yet.

When he awoke from his sleep, he travelled further northward and came to
a fine high hill. He climbed to the top of it, and there sat down to
rest. He looked over the country below him, and it pleased him. Before
him the hill was steep, and he said to himself, "Well, this is a fine
place for sliding; I will have some fun," and he began to slide down the
hill. The marks where he slid down are to be seen yet, and the place is
known to all people as the "Old Man's Sliding Ground."

This is as far as the Blackfeet followed Old Man. The Crees know what he
did further north.

In later times once, *Na´pi* said, "Here I will mark you off a piece of
ground," and he did so. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md) Then he
said: "There is your land, and it is full of all kinds of animals, and
many things grow in this land. Let no other people come into it. This is
for you five tribes (Blackfeet, Bloods, Piegans, Gros Ventres, Sarcees).
When people come to cross the line, take your bows and arrows, your
lances and

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

your battle axes, and give them battle and keep them out. If they gain a
footing, trouble will come to you."

Our forefathers gave battle to all people who came to cross these lines,
and kept them out. Of late years we have let our friends, the white
people, come in, and you know the result. We, his children, have failed
to obey his laws.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[139:1](blt22.htm#fr_24.md) That is, that their
friends who survive may always remember them.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[143:1](blt22.htm#fr_25.md) The boundaries of this
land are given as running east from a point in the summit of the Rocky
Mountains west of Fort Edmonton, taking in the country to the east and
south, including the Porcupine Hills, Cypress Mountains, and Little
Rocky Mountains, down to the mouth of the Yellowstone on the Missouri;
then west to the head of the Yellowstone, and across the Rocky Mountains
to the Beaverhead; thence to the summit of the Rocky Mountains and north
along them to the starting-point.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dog And The Stick](blt23.md)
