[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt22)  [Next](blt24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

### THE DOG AND THE STICK

This happened long ago. In those days the people were hungry. No buffalo
nor antelope were seen on the prairie. The deer and the elk trails were
covered with grass and leaves; not even a rabbit could be found in the
brush. Then the people prayed, saying: "Oh, Old Man, help us now, or we
shall die. The buffalo and deer are gone. Uselessly we kindle the
morning fires; useless are our arrows; our knives stick fast in the
sheaths."

Then Old Man started out to find the game, and he took with him a young
man, the son of a chief. For many days they travelled the prairies and
ate nothing but berries and roots. One day they climbed a high ridge,
and when they had reached the top, they saw, far off by a stream, a
single lodge.

"What kind of a person can it be," said the young man, "who camps there
all alone, far from friends?"

"That," said Old Man, "is the one who has hidden all the buffalo and
deer from the people. He has a wife and a little son."

Then they went close to the lodge, and Old Man changed himself into a
little dog, and he said, "That is I." Then the young man changed himself
into a root-digger, <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) and he said,
"That is I."

Now the little boy, playing about, found the dog, and he carried it to
his father, saying, "Look! See what a pretty little dog I have found."

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

"Throw it away," said his father; "it is not a dog." And the little boy
cried, but his father made him carry the dog away. Then the boy found
the root-digger; and, again picking up the dog, he carried them both to
the lodge, saying, "Look, mother! see the pretty root-digger I have
found!"

"Throw them both away," said his father; "that is not a stick, that is
not a dog."

"I want that stick," said the woman; "let our son have the little dog."

"Very well," said her husband, "but remember, if trouble comes, you
bring it on yourself and on our son." Then he sent his wife and son off
to pick berries; and when they were out of sight, he went out and killed
a buffalo cow, and brought the meat into the lodge and covered it up,
and the bones, skin and offal he threw in the creek. When his wife
returned, he gave her some of the meat to roast; and while they were
eating, the little boy fed the dog three times, and when he gave it
more, his father took the meat away, saying, "That is not a dog, you
shall not feed it more."

In the night, when all were asleep, Old Man and the young man arose in
their right shapes, and ate of the meat. "You were right," said the
young man; "this is surely the person who has hidden the buffalo from
us." "Wait," said Old Man; and when they had finished eating, they
changed themselves back into the stick and the dog.

In the morning the man sent his wife and son to dig roots, and the woman
took the stick with her. The dog followed the little boy. Now, as they
travelled along in search of roots, they came near a cave, and at its
mouth stood a buffalo cow. Then the dog ran into the cave, and the
stick, slipping from the woman's hand, followed, gliding along like a
snake. In this cave they found all the buffalo and other game, and they
began to drive them out; and soon the prairie

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

was covered with buffalo and deer. Never before were seen so many.

Pretty soon the man came running up, and he said to his wife, "Who now
drives out my animals?" and she replied, "The dog and the stick are now
in there." "Did I not tell you," said he, "that those were not what they
looked like? See now the trouble you have brought upon us," and he put
an arrow on his bow and waited for them to come out. But they were
cunning, for when the last animal—a big bull—was about to go out, the
stick grasped him by the hair under his neck, and coiled up in it, and
the dog held on by the hair beneath, until they were far out on the
prairie, when they changed into their true shapes, and drove the buffalo
toward camp.

When the people saw the buffalo coming, they drove a big band of them to
the pis´kun; but just as the leaders were about to jump off, a raven
came and flapped its wings in front of them and croaked, and they turned
off another way. Every time a band of buffalo was driven near the
pis´kun, this raven frightened them away. Then Old Man knew that the
raven was the one who had kept the buffalo cached.

So he went and changed himself into a beaver, and lay stretched out on
the bank of the river, as if dead; and the raven, which was very hungry,
flew down and began to pick at him. Then Old Man caught it by the legs
and ran with it to camp, and all the chiefs came together to decide what
should be done with it. Some said to kill it, but Old Man said, "No! I
will punish it," and he tied it over the lodge, right in the smoke hole.

As the days went by, the raven grew poor and weak, and his eyes were
blurred with the thick smoke, and he cried continually to Old Man to
pity him. One day Old Man untied him, and told him to take his right
shape, saying: "Why have you tried to fool Old Man? Look at me! I

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

cannot die. Look at me! Of all peoples and tribes I am the chief. I
cannot die. I made the mountains. They are standing yet. I made the
prairies and the rocks. You see them yet. Go home, then, to your wife
and your child, and when you are hungry hunt like any one else, or you
shall die."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[145:1](blt23.htm#fr_26) A carved and painted
stick about three feet long, shaped like a sacking needle, used by women
to unearth roots.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bears](blt24)
