[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](blt20)  [Next](blt22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

### THE GHOSTS’ BUFFALO

A long time ago there were four Blackfeet, who went to war against the
Crees. They travelled a long way, and at last their horses gave out, and
they started back toward their homes. As they were going along they came
to the Sand Hills; and while they were passing through them, they saw in
the sand a fresh travois trail, where people had been travelling.

One of the men said: "Let us follow this trail until we come up with
some of our people. Then we will camp with them." They followed the
trail for a long way, and at length one of the Blackfeet, named
E-kūs´-kini,—a very powerful person,—said to the others: "Why follow
this longer? It is just nothing." The others said: "Not so. These are
our people. We will go on and camp with them." They went on, and toward
evening, one of them found a stone maul and a dog travois. He said:
"Look at these things. I know this maul and this travois. They belonged
to my mother, who died. They were buried with her. This is strange." He
took the things. When night overtook the men, they camped.

Early in the morning, they heard, all about them, sounds as if a camp of
people were there. They heard a young man shouting a sort of war cry, as
young men do; women chopping wood; a man calling for a feast, asking
people to come to his lodge and smoke,—all the different sounds of the
camp. They looked about, but could see nothing; and then they were
frightened and covered their heads with

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

their robes. At last they took courage, and started to look around and
see what they could learn about this strange thing. For a little while
they saw nothing, but pretty soon one of them said: "Look over there.
See that pis´kun. Let us go over and look at it." As they were going
toward it, one of them picked up a stone pointed arrow. He said: "Look
at this. It belonged to my father. This is his place." They started to
go on toward the pis´kun, but suddenly they could see no pis´kun. It had
disappeared all at once.

A little while after this, one of them spoke up, and said: "Look over
there. There is my father running buffalo. There! he has killed. Let us
go over to him." They all looked where this man pointed, and they could
see a person on a white horse, running buffalo. While they were looking,
the person killed the buffalo, and got off his horse to butcher it. They
started to go over toward him, and saw him at work butchering, and saw
him turn the buffalo over on its back; but before they got to the place
where he was, the person got on his horse and rode off, and when they
got to where he had been skinning the buffalo, they saw lying on the
ground only a dead mouse. There was no buffalo there. By the side of the
mouse was a buffalo chip, and lying on it was an arrow painted red. The
man said: "That is my father's arrow. That is the way he painted them."
He took it up in his hands; and when he held it in his hands, he saw
that it was not an arrow but a blade of spear grass. Then he laid it
down, and it was an arrow again.

Another Blackfoot found a buffalo rock, I-nis´-kim.

Some time after this, the men got home to their camp. The man who had
taken the maul and the dog travois, when he got home and smelled the
smoke from the fire, died, and so did his horse. It seems that the
shadow of the person who owned the things was angry at him and followed
him home.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Two others of
these Blackfeet have since died, killed in war; but E-kūs´-kini is alive
yet. He took a stone and an iron arrow point that had belonged to his
father, and always carried them about with him. That is why he has lived
so long. The man who took the stone arrow point found near the pis´kun,
which had belonged to his father, took it home with him. This was his
medicine. After that he was badly wounded in two fights, but he was not
killed; he got well.

The one who took the buffalo rock, I-nis´-kim, it afterward made strong
to call the buffalo into the pis´kun. He would take the rock and put it
in his lodge close to the fire, where he could look at it, and would
pray over it and make medicine. Sometimes he would ask for a hundred
buffalo to jump into the pis´kun, and the next day a hundred would jump
in. He was powerful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Blackfoot Genesis](blt22.md)
