[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](blt34)  [Next](blt36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

### DAILY LIFE AND CUSTOMS

Indians are usually represented as being a silent, sullen race, seldom
speaking, and never laughing nor joking. However true this may be in
regard to some tribes, it certainly was not the case with most of those
who lived upon the great Plains. These people were generally talkative,
merry, and light-hearted; they delighted in fun, and were a race of
jokers. It is true that, in the presence of strangers, they were grave,
silent, and reserved, but this is nothing more than the shyness and
embarrassment felt by a child in the presence of strangers. As the
Indian becomes acquainted, this reserve wears off; he is at his ease
again and appears in his true colors, a light-hearted child. Certainly
the Blackfeet never were a taciturn and gloomy people. Before the
disappearance of the buffalo, they were happy and cheerful. Why should
they not have been? Food and clothing were to be had for the killing and
tanning. All fur animals were abundant, and thus the people were rich.
Meat, really the only food they cared for, was plenty and cost nothing.
Their robes and furs were exchanged with the traders for bright-colored
blankets and finery. So they wanted nothing.

It is but nine years since the buffalo disappeared from the land. Only
nine years have passed since these people gave up that wild, free life
which was natural to them, and ah! how dear! Let us go back in memory to
those happy days and see how they passed the time.

The sun is just rising. Thin columns of smoke are creeping from the
smoke holes of the lodges, and ascending in

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

the still morning air. Everywhere the women are busy, carrying water and
wood, and preparing the simple meal. And now we see the men come out,
and start for the river. Some are followed by their children; some are
even carrying those too small to walk. They have reached the water's
edge. Off drop their blankets, and with a plunge and a shivering
*ah-h-h* they dash into the icy waters. Winter and summer, storm or
shine, this was their daily custom. They said it made them tough and
healthy, and enabled them to endure the bitter cold while hunting on the
bare bleak prairie. By the time they have returned to the lodges, the
women have prepared the early meal. A dish of boiled meat—some three or
four pounds—is set before each man; the children are served as much as
they can eat, and the wives take the rest. The horses are now seen
coming in, hundreds and thousands of them, driven by boys and young men
who started out after them at daylight. If buffalo are close at hand,
and it has been decided to make a run, each hunter catches his favorite
buffalo horse, and they all start out together; they are followed by
women, on the travois or pack horses, who will do most of the
butchering, and transport the meat and hides to camp. If there is no
band of buffalo near by, they go off, singly or by twos and threes, to
still-hunt scattering buffalo, or deer, or elk, or such other game as
may be found. The women remaining in camp are not idle. All day long
they tan robes, dry meat, sew moccasins, and perform a thousand and one
other tasks. The young men who have stayed at home carefully comb and
braid their hair, paint their faces, and, if the weather is pleasant,
ride or walk around the camp so that the young women may look at them
and see how pretty they are.

Feasting began early in the morning, and will be carried on far into the
night. A man who gives a feast has his wives cook the choicest food they
have, and when all is

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

ready, he goes outside the lodge and shouts the invitation, calling out
each guest's name three times, saying that he is invited to eat, and
concludes by announcing that a certain number of pipes—generally
three—will be smoked. The guests having assembled, each one is served
with a dish of food. Be the quantity large or small, it is all that he
will get. If he does not eat it all, he may carry home what remains. The
host does not eat with his guests. He cuts up some tobacco, and
carefully mixes it with *l’herbe*, and when all have finished eating, he
fills and lights a pipe, which is smoked and passed from one to another,
beginning with the first man on his left. When the last person on the
left of the host has smoked, the pipe is passed back around the circle
to the one on the right of the door, and smoked to the left again. The
guests do not all talk at once. When a person begins to speak, he
expects every one to listen, and is never interrupted. During the day
the topics for conversation are about the hunting, war, stories of
strange adventures, besides a good deal of good-natured joking and
chaffing. When the third and last pipeful of tobacco has been smoked,
the host ostentatiously knocks out the ashes and says "*Kyi"* whereupon
all the guests rise and file out. Seldom a day passed but each
lodge-owner in camp gave from one to three feasts. In fact almost all a
man did, when in camp, was to go from one of these gatherings to
another.

A favorite pastime in the day was gambling with a small wheel called
*it-se´-wah.* This wheel was about four inches in diameter, and had five
spokes, on which were strung different-colored beads, made of bone or
horn. A level, smooth piece of ground was selected, at each end of which
was placed a log. At each end of the course were two men, who gambled
against each other. A crowd always surrounded them, betting on the
sides. The wheel was rolled along the course, and each man at the end
whence it started, darted an arrow at it. The cast was made just before
the

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

wheel reached the log at the opposite end of the track, and points were
counted according as the arrow passed between the spokes, or when the
wheel, stopped by the log, was in contact with the arrow, the position
and nearness of the different beads to the arrow representing a certain
number of points. The player who first scored ten points won. It was a
very difficult game, and one had to be very skilful to win.

Another popular game was what with more southern tribes is called
"hands"; it is like "Button, button, who's got the button?" Two small,
oblong bones were used, one of which had a black ring around it. Those
who participated in this game, numbering from two to a dozen, were
divided into two equal parties, ranged on either side of the lodge.
Wagers were made, each person betting with the one directly opposite
him. Then a man took the bones, and, by skilfully moving his hands and
changing the objects from one to the other, sought to make it impossible
for the person opposite him to decide which hand held the marked one.
Ten points were the game, counted by sticks, and the side which first
got the number took the stakes. A song always accompanied this game, a
weird, unearthly air,—if it can be so called,—but when heard at a little
distance, very pleasant and soothing. At first a scarcely audible
murmur, like the gentle soughing of an evening breeze, it gradually
increased in volume and reached a very high pitch, sank quickly to a low
bass sound, rose and fell, and gradually died away, to be again
repeated. The person concealing the bones swayed his body, arms, and
hands in time to the air, and went through all manner of graceful and
intricate movements for the purpose of confusing the guesser. The stakes
were sometimes very high, two or three horses or more, and men have been
known to lose everything they possessed, even to their clothing.

The children, at least the boys, played about and did as

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

they pleased. Not so with the girls. Their duties began at a very early
age. They carried wood and water for their mothers, sewed moccasins, and
as soon as they were strong enough, were taught to tan robes and furs,
make lodges, travois, and do all other woman's—and so menial—work. The
boys played at mimic warfare, hunted around in the brush with their bows
and arrows, made mud images of animals, and in summer spent about half
their time in the water. In winter, they spun tops on the ice, slid down
hill on a contrivance made of buffalo ribs, and hunted rabbits.

Shortly after noon, the hunters began to return, bringing in deer,
antelope, buffalo, elk, occasionally bear, and, sometimes, beaver which
they had trapped. The camp began to be more lively. In all directions
persons could be heard shouting out invitations to feasts. Here a man
was lying back on his couch singing and drumming; there a group of young
men were holding a war dance; everywhere the people were eating,
singing, talking, and joking. As the light faded from the western sky
and darkness spread over the camp, the noise and laughter increased. In
many lodges, the people held social dances, the women, dressed in their
best gowns, ranged on one side, the men on the other; all sung, and
three or four drummers furnished an accompaniment; the music was lively
if somewhat jerky. At intervals the people rose and danced, the "step"
being a bending of the knees and swinging of the body, the women holding
their arms and hands in various graceful positions.

With the night came the rehearsal of the wondrous doings of the gods.
These tales may not be told in the daytime. Old Man would not like that,
and would cause any one who narrated them while it was light to become
blind. All Indians are natural orators, but some far exceed others in
their powers of expression. Their attitudes, gestures, and signs are so
suggestive that they alone would enable one to

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

understand the stories they relate. I have seen these story-tellers so
much in earnest, so entirely carried away by the tale they were
relating, that they fairly trembled with excitement. They held their
little audiences spell-bound. The women dropped their half-sewn moccasin
from their listless hands, and the men let the pipe go out. These
stories for the most part were about the ancient gods and their
miraculous doings. They were generally related by the old men, warriors
who had seen their best days. Many of them are recorded in this book.
They are the explanations of the phenomena of life, and contain many a
moral for the instruction of youth.

The *I-kŭn-ŭh'-kah-tsi* contributed not a little to the entertainment of
every-day life. Frequent dances were held by the different bands of the
society, and the whole camp always turned out to see them. The
animal-head masks, brightly painted bodies, and queer performances were
dear to the Indian heart.

Such was the every-day life of the Blackfeet in the buffalo days. When
the camp moved, the women packed up their possessions, tore down the
lodges, and loaded everything on the backs of the ponies or on the
travois. Meantime the chiefs had started on, and the soldiers—the Brave
band of the *I-kun-uh´-kah-tsi*—followed after them. After these leaders
had gone a short distance, a halt was made to allow the column to close
up. The women, children, horses, and dogs of the camp marched in a
disorderly, straggling fashion, often strung out in a line a mile or two
long. Many of the men rode at a considerable distance ahead, and on each
side of the marching column, hunting for any game that might be found,
or looking over the country for signs of enemies.

Before the Blackfeet obtained horses in the very first years of the
present century, and when their only beasts of burden were dogs, their
possessions were transported by these animals or on men's backs. We may
imagine that in

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

those days the journeys made were short ones, the camp travelling but a
few miles.

In moving the camp in ancient days, the heaviest and bulkiest things to
be transported were the lodges. These were sometimes very large, often
consisting of thirty cow-skins, and, when set up, containing two or
three fires like this <span id="img_18700"></span> ![](img/18700.jpg) or
in ground plan like this <span id="img_18701"></span>
![](img/18701.jpg). The skins of these large lodges were sewn together
in strips, of which there would be sometimes as many as four; and, when
the lodge was set up, these strips were pinned together as the front of
a common lodge is pinned to-day. The dogs carried the provisions, tools,
and utensils, sometimes the lodge strips, if these were small enough, or
anything that was heavy, and yet could be packed in small compass; for
since dogs are small animals, and low standing, they cannot carry bulky
burdens. Still, some of the dogs were large enough to carry a load of
one hundred pounds. Dogs also hauled the travois, on which were bundles
and sometimes babies. This was not always a safe means of transportation
for infants, as is indicated by an incident related by John Monroe's
mother as having occurred in her father's time. The camp, on foot of
course, was crossing a strip of open prairie lying between two pieces of
timber, when a herd of buffalo, stampeding, rushed through the marching
column. The loaded dogs rushed after the buffalo, dragging the travois
after them and scattering their loads over the prairie. Among the lost
chattels were two babies, dropped off somewhere in the long grass, which
were never found.

There were certain special customs and beliefs which were a part of the
every-day life of the people.

In passing the pipe when smoking, it goes from the host, who takes the
first smoke, to the left, passing from hand to hand to the door. It may
not be passed across the door to the man on the other side, but must
come back,—no one smoking,—pass the host, and go round to the man

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

across the door from the last smoker. This man smokes and passes it to
the one on his left, and so it goes on until it reaches the host again.
A person entering a lodge where people are smoking must not pass in
front of them, that is, between the smokers and the fire.

A solemn form of affirmation, the equivalent of the civilized oath, is
connected with smoking, which, as is well known, is with many tribes of
Indians a sacred ceremony. If a man sitting in a lodge tells his
companions some very improbable story, something that they find it very
hard to believe, and they want to test him, to see if he is really
telling the truth, the pipe is given to a medicine man, who paints the
stem red and prays over it, asking that if the man's story is true he
may have long life, but if it is false his life may end in a short time.
The pipe is then filled and lighted, and passed to the man, who has seen
and overheard what has been done and said. The medicine man says to him:
"Accept this pipe, but remember that, if you smoke, your story must be
as sure as that there is a hole through this pipe, and as straight as
the hole through this stem. So your life shall be long and you shall
survive, but if you have spoken falsely your days are counted." The man
may refuse the pipe, saying, "I have told you the truth; it is useless
to smoke this pipe." If he declines to smoke, no one believes what he
has said; he is looked upon as having lied. If, however, he takes the
pipe and smokes, every one believes him. It is the most solemn form of
oath. The Blackfoot pipes are usually made of black or green slate or
sandstone.

The Blackfeet do not whip their children, but still they are not without
some training. Children must be taught, or they will not know anything;
if they do not know anything, they will have no sense; and if they have
no sense they will not know how to act. They are instructed in manners,
as well as in other more general and more important matters.

If a number of boys were in a lodge where older people

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

were sitting, very likely the young people would be talking and laughing
about their own concerns, and making so much noise that the elders could
say nothing. If this continued too long, one of the older men would be
likely to get up and go out and get a long stick and bring it in with
him. When he had seated himself, he would hold it up, so that the
children could see it and would repeat a cautionary formula, "I will
give you gum!" This was a warning to them to make less noise, and was
always heeded—for a time. After a little, however, the boys might forget
and begin to chatter again, and presently the man, without further
warning, would reach over and rap one of them on the head with the
stick, when quiet would again be had for a time.

In the same way, in winter, when the lodge was full of old and young
people, and through lack of attention the fire died down, some older
person would call out, "Look out for the skunk!" which would be a
warning to the boys to put some sticks on the fire. If this was not done
at once, the man who had called out might throw a stick of wood across
the lodge into the group of children, hitting and hurting one or more of
them. It was taught also that, if, when young and old were in the lodge
and the fire had burned low, an older person were to lay the unburned
ends of the sticks upon the fire, all the children in the lodge would
have the scab, or itch. So, at the call "Look out for the scab!" some
child would always jump to the fire, and lay up the sticks.

There were various ways of teaching and training the children. Men would
make long speeches to groups of boys, playing in the camps, telling them
what they ought to do to be successful in life. They would point out to
them that to accomplish anything they must be brave and untiring in war;
that long life was not desirable; that the old people always had a hard
time, were given the worst side of the lodge and generally neglected;
that when the camp was moved they suffered from cold; that their sight
was dim, so

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

that they could not see far; that their teeth were gone, so that they
could not chew their food. Only discomfort and misery await the old.
Much better, while the body is strong and in its prime, while the sight
is clear, the teeth sound, and the hair still black and long, to die in
battle fighting bravely. The example of successful warriors would be
held up to them, and the boys urged to emulate their brave deeds. To
such advice some boys would listen, while others would not heed it.

The girls also were instructed. All Indians like to see women more or
less sober and serious-minded, not giggling all the time, not silly. A
Blackfoot man who had two or three girls would, as they grew large,
often talk to them and give them good advice. After watching them, and
taking the measure of their characters, he would one day get a buffalo's
front foot and ornament it fantastically with feathers. When the time
came, he would call one of his daughters to him and say to her: "Now I
wish you to stand here in front of me and look me straight in the eye
without laughing. No matter what I may do, do not laugh." Then he would
sing a funny song, shaking the foot in the girl's face in time to the
song, and looking her steadily in the eye. Very likely before he had
finished, she would begin to giggle. If she did this, the father would
stop singing and tell her to finish laughing; and when she was serious
again, he would again warn her not to laugh, and then would repeat his
song. This time perhaps she would not laugh while he was singing. He
would go through with this same performance before all his daughters. To
such as seemed to have the steadiest characters, he would give good
advice. He would talk to each girl of the duties of a woman's life and
warn her against the dangers which she might expect to meet.

At the time of the Medicine Lodge, he would take her to the lodge and
point out to her the Medicine Lodge woman.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He would say:
"There is a good woman. She has built this Medicine Lodge, and is
greatly honored and respected by all the people. Once she was a girl
just like you; and you, if you are good and live a pure life, may some
day be as great as she is now. Remember this, and try to live a worthy
life."

At the time of the Medicine Lodge, the boys in the camp also gathered to
see the young men count their *coups*. A man would get up, holding in
one hand a bundle of small sticks, and, taking one stick from the
bundle, he would recount some brave deed, throwing away a stick as he
completed the narrative of each *coup*, until the sticks were all gone,
when he sat down, and another man stood up to begin his recital. As the
boys saw and heard all this, and saw how respected those men were who
had done the most and bravest things, they said to themselves, "That man
was once a boy like us, and we, if we have strong hearts, may do as much
as he has done." So even the very small boys used often to steal off
from the camp, and follow war parties. Often they went without the
knowledge of their parents, and poorly provided, without food or extra
moccasins. They would get to the enemy's camp, watch the ways of the
young men, and so learn about going to war, how to act when on the war
trail so as to be successful. Also they came to know the country.

The Blackfeet men often went off by themselves to fast and dream for
power. By no means every one did this, and, of those who attempted it,
only a few endured to the end,—that is, fasted the whole four days,—and
obtained the help sought. The attempt was not usually made by young boys
before they had gone on their first war journey. It was often undertaken
by men who were quite mature. Those who underwent this suffering were
obliged to abstain from food or drink for four days and four nights,
resting for two nights on the right side, and for two nights on the
left. It

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

was deemed essential that the place to which a man resorted for this
purpose should be unfrequented, where few or no persons had walked; and
it must also be a place that tried the nerve, where there was some
danger. Such situations were mountain peaks; or narrow ledges on cut
cliffs, where a careless movement might cause a man to fall to his death
on the rocks below; or islands in lakes, which could only be reached by
means of a raft, and where there was danger that a person might be
seized and carried off by the *Sū'-yē tŭp´-pi*, or Under Water People;
or places where the dead had been buried, and where there was much
danger from ghosts. Or a man might lie in a well-worn buffalo trail,
where the animals were frequently passing, and so he might be trodden on
by a travelling band of buffalo; or he might choose a locality where
bears were abundant and dangerous. Wherever he went, the man built
himself a little lodge of brush, moss, and leaves, to keep off the rain;
and, after making his prayers to the sun and singing his sacred songs,
he crept into the hut and began his fast. He was not allowed to take any
covering with him, nor to roof over his shelter with skins. He always
had with him a pipe, and this lay by him, filled, so that, when the
spirit, or dream, came, it could smoke. They did not appeal to any
special class of helpers, but prayed to all alike. Often by the end of
the fourth day, a secret helper—usually, but by no means always, in the
form of some animal—appeared to the man in a dream, and talked with him,
advising him, marking out his course through life, and giving him its
power. There were some, however, on whom the power would not work, and a
much greater number who gave up the fast, discouraged, before the
prescribed time had been completed, either not being able to endure the
lack of food and water, or being frightened by the strangeness or
loneliness of their surroundings, or by something that they thought they
saw or heard. It was no disgrace to fail, nor was the failure
necessarily known, for

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

the seeker after power did not always, nor perhaps often, tell any one
what he was going to do.

Three modes of burial were practised by the Blackfeet. They buried their
dead on platforms placed in trees, on platforms in lodges, and on the
ground in lodges. If a man dies in a lodge, it is never used again. The
people would be afraid of the man's ghost. The lodge is often used to
wrap the body in, or perhaps the man may be buried in it.

As soon as a person is dead, be it man, woman, or child, the body is
immediately prepared for burial, by the nearest female relations. Until
recently, the corpse was wrapped in a number of robes, then in a lodge
covering, laced with rawhide ropes, and placed on a platform of lodge
poles, arranged on the branches of some convenient tree. Some times the
outer wrapping—the lodge covering—was omitted. If the deceased was a
man, his weapons, and often his medicine, were buried with him. With
women a few cooking utensils and implements for tanning robes were
placed on the scaffolds. When a man was buried on a platform in a lodge,
the platform was usually suspended from the lodge poles.

Sometimes, when a great chief or noted warrior died, his lodge would be
moved some little distance from the camp, and set up in a patch of
brush. It would be carefully pegged down all around, and stones piled on
the edges to make it additionally firm. For still greater security, a
rope fastened to the lodge poles, where they come together at the smoke
hole, came down, and was securely tied to a peg in the ground in the
centre of the lodge, where the fireplace would ordinarily be. Then the
beds were made up all around the lodge, and on one of them was placed
the corpse, lying as if asleep. The man's weapons, pipe, war clothing,
and medicine were placed near him, and the door then closed. No one ever
again entered such a lodge. Outside the lodge, a number of his horses,
often twenty or more, were killed, so

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

that he might have plenty to ride on his journey to the Sand Hills, and
to use after arriving there. If a man had a favorite horse, he might
order it to be killed at his grave, and his order was always carried
out. In ancient times, it is said, dogs were killed at the grave.

Women mourn for deceased relations by cutting their hair short. For the
loss of a husband or son (but not a daughter), they not only cut their
hair, but often take off one or more joints of their fingers, and always
scarify the calves of their legs. Besides this, for a month or so, they
daily repair to some place near camp, generally a hill or little rise of
ground, and there cry and lament, calling the name of the deceased over
and over again. This may be called a chant or song, for there is a
certain tune to it. It is in a minor key and very doleful. Any one
hearing it for the first time, even though wholly unacquainted with
Indian customs, would at once know that it was a mourning song, or at
least was the utterance of one in deep distress. There is no fixed
period for the length of time one must mourn. Some keep up this daily
lament for a few weeks only, and others much longer. I once came across
an old wrinkled woman, who was crouched in the sage brush, crying and
lamenting for some one, as if her heart would break. On inquiring if any
one had lately died, I was told she was mourning for a son she had lost
more than twenty years before.

Men mourn by cutting a little of their hair, going without leggings, and
for the loss of a son, sometimes scarify their legs. This last, however,
is never done for the loss of a wife, daughter, or any relative except a
son.

Many Blackfeet change their names every season. Whenever a Blackfoot
counts a new *coup*, he is entitled to a new name. A Blackfoot will
never tell his name if he can avoid it. He believes that if he should
speak his name, he would be unfortunate in all his undertakings.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

It was considered a gross breach of propriety for a man to meet his
mother-in-law, and if by any mischance he did so, or what was worse, if
he spoke to her, she demanded a very heavy payment, which he was obliged
to make. The mother-in-law was equally anxious to avoid meeting or
speaking to her son-in-law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How The Blackfoot Lived](blt36.md)
