[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](blt35)  [Next](blt37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

### HOW THE BLACKFOOT LIVED

The primitive clothing of the Blackfeet was made of the dressed skins of
certain animals. Women seldom wore a head covering. Men, however, in
winter generally used a cap made of the skin of some small animal, such
as the antelope, wolf, badger, or coyote. As the skin from the head of
these animals often formed part of the cap, the ears being left on, it
made a very odd-looking head-dress. Sometimes a cap was made of the skin
of some large bird, such as the sage-hen, duck, owl, or swan.

The ancient dress of the women was a shirt of cowskin, with long sleeves
tied at the wrist, a skirt reaching half-way from knees to ankles, and
leggings tied above the knees, with sometimes a supporting string
running from the belt to the leggings. In more modern times, this was
modified, and a woman's dress consisted of a gown or smock, reaching
from the neck to below the knees. There were no sleeves, the armholes
being provided with top coverings, a sort of cape or flap, which reached
to the elbows. Leggings were of course still worn. They reached to the
knee, and were generally made, as was the gown, of the tanned skins of
elk, deer, sheep, or antelope. Moccasins for winter use were made of
buffalo robe, and of tanned buffalo cowskin for summer wear. The latter
were always made with parfleche soles, which greatly increased their
durability, and were often ornamented over the instep or toes with a
three-pronged figure, worked in porcupine quills or beads, the three
prongs representing, it is said, the three divisions or tribes of the

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

nation. The men wore a shirt, breech-clout, leggings which reached to
the thighs, and moccasins. In winter both men and women wore a robe of
tanned buffalo skin, and sometimes of beaver. In summer a lighter robe
was worn, made of cowskin or buckskin, from which the hair had been
removed. Both sexes wore belts, which supported and confined the
clothing, and to which were attached knife-sheaths and other useful
articles.

Necklaces and ear-rings were worn by all, and were made of shells, bone,
wood, and the teeth and claws of animals. Elk tushes were highly prized,
and were used for ornamenting women's dresses. A gown profusely
decorated with them was worth two good horses. Eagle feathers were used
by the men to make head-dresses and to ornament shields and also
weapons. Small bunches of owl or grouse feathers were sometimes tied to
the scalp locks. It is doubtful if the women ever took particular care
of their hair. The men, however, spent a great deal of time brushing,
braiding, and ornamenting their scalp locks. Their hair was usually worn
in two braids, one on each side of the head. Less frequently, four
braids were made, one behind and in front of each ear. Sometimes, the
hair of the forehead was cut off square, and brushed straight up; and
not infrequently it was made into a huge topknot and wound with otter
fur. Often a slender lock, wound with brass wire or braided, hung down
from one side of the forehead over the face.

As a rule, the men are tall, straight, and well formed. Their features
are regular, the eyes being large and well set, and the nose generally
moderately large, straight, and thin. Their chests are splendidly
developed. The women are quite tall for their sex, but, as a rule, not
so good-looking as the men. Their hands are large, coarse, and knotted
by hard labor; and they early become wrinkled and careworn. They
generally have splendid constitutions. I have known them to resume work
a day after childbirth; and once, when

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

travelling, I knew a woman to halt, give birth to a child, and catch up
with the camp inside of four hours.

As a rule, children are hardy and vigorous. They are allowed to do about
as they please from the time they are able to walk. I have often seen
them playing in winter in the snow, and spinning tops on the ice,
barefooted and half-naked. Under such conditions, those which have
feeble constitutions soon die. Only the hardiest reach maturity and old
age.

It is said that very long ago the people made houses of mud, sticks, and
stones. It is not known what was their size or shape, and no traces of
them are known to have been found. For a very long time, the lodge seems
to have been their only dwelling. In ancient times, before they had
knives of metal, stones were used to hold down the edges of the lodge,
to keep it from being blown away. These varied in size from six inches
to a foot or more in diameter. Everywhere on the prairie, one may now
see circles of these stones, and, within these circles, the smaller
ones, which surrounded the fireplace. Some of them have lain so long
that only the tops now project above the turf, and undoubtedly many of
them are buried out of sight.

Lodges were always made of tanned cowskin, nicely cut and sewn together,
so as to form an almost perfect cone. At the top were two large flaps,
called ears, which were kept extended or closed, according to the
direction and strength of the wind, to create a draft and keep the lodge
free from smoke. The lodge covering was supported by light, straight
pine or spruce poles, about eighteen of which were required. Twelve
cowskins made a lodge about fourteen feet in diameter at the base, and
ten feet high. I have heard of a modern one which contained forty skins.
It was over thirty feet in diameter, and was so heavy that the skins
were sewn in two pieces which buttoned together.

An average-sized dwelling of this kind contained eighteen

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

skins and was about sixteen feet in diameter. The lower edge of the
lodge proper was fastened, by wooden pegs, to within an inch or two of
the ground. Inside, a lining, made of brightly painted cowskin, reached
from the ground to a height of five or six feet. An air space of the
thickness of the lodge poles—two or three inches—was thus left between
the lining and the lodge covering, and the cold air, rushing up through
it from the outside, made a draft, which aided the ears in freeing the
lodge of smoke. The door was three or four feet high and was covered by
a flap of skin, which hung down on the outside. Thus made, with plenty
of buffalo robes for seats and bedding, and a good stock of firewood, a
lodge was very comfortable, even in the coldest weather.

It was not uncommon to decorate the outside of the lodge with buffalo
tails and brightly painted pictures of animals. Inside, the space around
was partitioned off into couches, or seats, each about six feet in
length. At the foot and head of every couch, a mat, made of straight,
peeled willow twigs, fastened side by side, was suspended on a tripod at
an angle of forty-five degrees, so that between the couches spaces were
left like an inverted V, making convenient places to store articles
which were not in use. The owner of the lodge always occupied the seat
or couch at the back of the lodge, directly opposite the door-way, the
places on his right being occupied by his wives and daughters; though
sometimes a Blackfoot had so many wives that they occupied the whole
lodge. The places on his left were reserved for his sons and visitors.
When a visitor entered a lodge, he was assigned a seat according to his
rank,—the nearer to the host, the greater the honor.

Bows were generally made of ash wood, which grows east of the mountains
toward the Sand Hills. When for any reason they could not obtain ash,
they used the wood of the choke-cherry tree, but this had not strength
nor spring

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

enough to be of much service. I have been told also that sometimes they
used hazle wood for bows.

Arrows were made of shoots of the sarvis berry wood, which was straight,
very heavy, and not brittle. They were smoothed and straightened by a
stone implement. The grooves were made by pushing the shafts through a
rib or other flat bone in which had been made a hole, circular except
for one or two projections on the inside. These projections worked out
the groove. The object of these grooves is said to have been to allow
the blood to flow freely. Each man marked his arrows by painting them,
or by some special combination of colored feathers. The arrow heads were
of two kinds,—barbed slender points for war, and barbless for hunting.
Knives were originally made of stone, as were also war clubs, mauls, and
some of the scrapers for fleshing and graining hides. Some of the flint
knives were long, others short. A stick was fitted to them, forming a
wooden handle. The handles of mauls and war clubs were usually made of
green sticks fitted as closely as possible into a groove made in the
stone, the whole being bound together by a covering of hide put on
green, tightly fitted and strongly sewed. This, as it shrunk in drying,
bound the different parts of the implement together in the strongest
possible manner. Short, heavy spears were used, the points being of
stone or bone, barbed.

I have heard no explanation among the Blackfeet of the origin of fire.
In ancient times, it was obtained by means of fire sticks, as described
elsewhere. The starting of the spark with these sticks is said to have
been hard work. At almost their first meeting with the whites, they
obtained flints and steels, and learned how to use them.

In ancient times,—in the days of fire sticks and even later, within the
memory of men now living,—fire used to be carried from place to place in
a "fire horn." This was a buffalo horn slung by a string over the
shoulder like a powder

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

horn. The horn was lined with moist, rotten wood, and the open end had a
wooden stopper or plug fitted to it. On leaving camp in the morning, the
man who carried the horn took from the fire a small live coal and put it
in the horn, and on this coal placed a piece of punk, and then plugged
up the horn with the stopper. The punk smouldered in this almost
air-tight chamber, and, in the course of two or three hours, the man
looked at it, and if it was nearly consumed, put another piece of punk
in the horn. The first young men who reached the appointed camping
ground would gather two or three large piles of wood in different
places, and as soon as some one who carried a fire horn reached camp, he
turned out his spark at one of these piles of wood, and a little blowing
and nursing gave a blaze which started the fire. The other fires were
kindled from this first one, and when the women reached camp and had put
the lodges up, they went to these fires, and got coals with which to
start those in their lodges. This custom of borrowing coals persisted up
to the last days of the buffalo, and indeed may even be noticed still.

The punk here mentioned is a fungus, which grows on the birch tree. The
Indians used to gather this in large quantities and dry it. It was very
abundant at the Touchwood Hills (whence the name) on Beaver Creek, a
tributary of the Saskatchewan from the south.

The Blackfeet made buckets, cups, basins, and dishes from the lining of
the buffalo's paunch. This was torn off in large pieces, and was
stretched over a flattened willow or cherry hoop at the bottom and top.
These hoops were sometimes inside and sometimes outside the bucket or
dish. In the latter case, the hoop at the bottom was often sewed to the
paunch, which came down over it, double on the outside, the needle holes
being pitched with gum or tallow. The hoop at the upper edge was also
sewed to the paunch, and a rawhide bail passed under it, to carry it by.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

These buckets were shaped somewhat like our wooden ones, and were of
different sizes, some of them holding four or five gallons. They were
more or less flexible, and when carried in a pack, they could be
flattened down like a crush hat, and so took up but little room. If set
on the ground when full, they would stand up for a while, but as they
soon softened and fell down, they were usually hung up by the bail on a
little tripod. Cups were made in the same way as buckets, but on a
smaller scale and without the bail. Of course, nothing hot could be
placed in these vessels.

It is doubtful if the Blackfeet ever made any pottery or basket ware.
They, however, made bowls and kettles of stone. There is an ancient
children's song which consists of a series of questions asked an elk,
and its replies to the same. In one place, the questioner sings, "Elk,
what is your bowl (or dish)?" and the elk answers, "*Ok-wi-tok-so-ka*,"
stone bowl. On this point, Wolf Calf, a very old man, states that in
early days the Blackfeet sometimes boiled their meat in a stone bowl
made out of a hard clayey rock. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)
Choosing a fragment of the right size and shape, they would pound it
with another heavier rock, dealing light blows until a hollow had been
made in the top. This hollow was made deeper by pounding and grinding;
and when it was deep enough, they put water in it, and set it on the
fire, and the water would boil. These pots were strong and would last a
long time. I do not remember that any other tribe of Plains Indians made
such stone bowls or mortars, though, of course, they were commonly made,
and in singular perfection, by the Pacific Coast tribes; and I have
known of rare cases in which basalt mortars and small soapstone ollas
have been found on the central plateau of the continent in southern
Wyoming. These articles, however, had no doubt been obtained by trade
from Western tribes.

Serviceable ladles and spoons were made of wood and of

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

buffalo and mountain sheep horn. Basins or flat dishes were sometimes
made of mountain sheep horn, boiled, split, and flattened, and also of
split buffalo horn, fitted and sewn together with sinew, making a
flaring, saucer-shaped dish. These were used as plates or eating dishes.
Of course, they leaked a little, for the joints were not tight. Wooden
bowls and dishes were made from knots and protuberances of trees, dug
out and smoothed by fire and the knife or by the latter alone.

It is not known that these people ever made spears, hooks, or other
implements for capturing fish. They appear never to have used boats of
any kind, not even "bull boats." Their highest idea of navigation was to
lash together a few sticks or logs, on which to transport their
possessions across a river.

Red, brown, yellow, and white paints were made by burning clays of these
colors, which were then pulverized and mixed with a little grease. Black
paint was made of charred wood.

Bags and sacks were made of parfleche, usually ornamented with buckskin
fringe, and painted with various designs in bright colors. Figures
having sharp angles are most common.

The diet of the Blackfeet was more varied than one would think. Large
quantities of sarvis berries (*Amelanchier alnifolia*) were gathered
whenever there was a crop (which occurs every other year), dried, and
stored for future use. These were gathered by women, who collected the
branches laden with ripe fruit, and beat them over a robe spread upon
the ground. Choke-cherries were also gathered when ripe, and pounded up,
stones and all. A bushel of the fruit, after being pounded up and dried,
was reduced to a very small quantity. This food was sometimes eaten by
itself, but more often was used to flavor soups and to mix with
pemmican. Bull berries (*Shepherdia argentea*) were a favorite

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

fruit, and were gathered in large quantities, as was also the white
berry of the red willow. This last is an exceedingly bitter, acrid
fruit, and to the taste of most white men wholly unpleasant and
repugnant. The Blackfeet, however, are very fond of it; perhaps because
it contains some property necessary to the nourishment of the body,
which is lacking in their every-day food.

The camas root, which grows abundantly in certain localities on the east
slope of the Rockies, was also dug, cooked, and dried. The bulbs were
roasted in pits, as by the Indians on the west side of the Rocky
Mountains, the Kalispels, and others. It is gathered while in the
bloom—June 15 to July 15. A large pit is dug in which a hot fire is
built, the bottom being first lined with flat stones. After keeping up
this fire for several hours, until the stones and earth are thoroughly
heated, the coals and ashes are removed. The pit is then lined with
grass, and is filled almost to the top with camas bulbs. Over these,
grass is laid, then twigs, and then earth to a depth of four inches. On
this a fire is built, which is kept up for from one to three days,
according to the quantity of the bulbs in the pit.

When the pit is opened, the small children gather about it to suck the
syrup, which has collected on the twigs and grass, and which is very
sweet. The fresh-roasted camas tastes something like a roasted chestnut,
with a little of the flavor of the sweet potato. After being cooked, the
roots are spread out in the sun to dry, and are then put in sacks to be
stored away. Sometimes a few are pounded up with sarvis berries, and
dried.

Bitter-root is gathered, dried, and boiled with a little sugar. It is a
slender root, an inch or two long and as thick as a goose quill, white
in color, and looking like short lengths of spaghetti. It is very
starchy.

In the spring, a certain root called *mats* was eaten in great
quantities. This plant was known to the early French

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

employees of the Hudson's Bay and American Fur Companies as *pomme
blanche* (*Psoralea esculenta*).

All parts of such animals as the buffalo, elk, deer, etc., were eaten,
save only the lungs, gall, and one or two other organs. A favorite way
of eating the paunch or stomach was in the raw state. Liver, too, was
sometimes eaten raw. The unborn calf of a fresh-killed animal,
especially buffalo, was considered a great delicacy. The meat of this,
when boiled, is white, tasteless, and insipid. The small intestines of
the buffalo were sometimes dried, but more often were stuffed with long,
thin strips of meat. During the stuffing process, the entrail was turned
inside out, thus confining with the meat the sweet white fat that covers
the intestine. The next step was to roast it a little, after which the
ends were tied to prevent the escape of the juices, and it was
thoroughly boiled in water. This is a very great delicacy, and when
properly prepared is equally appreciated by whites and Indians.

As a rule, there were but two ways of cooking meat,—boiling and
roasting. If roasted, it was thoroughly cooked; but if boiled, it was
only left in the water long enough to lose the red color, say five or
ten minutes. Before they got kettles from the whites, the Blackfeet
often boiled meat in a green hide. A hole was dug in the ground, and the
skin, flesh side up, was laid in it, being supported about the edges of
the hole by pegs. The meat and water having been placed in this hollow,
red-hot stones were dropped in the water until it became hot and the
meat was cooked.

In time of plenty, great quantities of dried meat were prepared for use
when fresh meat could not be obtained. In making dried meat, the thicker
parts of an animal were cut in large, thin sheets and hung in the sun to
dry. If the weather was not fine, the meat was often hung up on lines or
scaffolds in the upper part of the lodge. When properly cured and if of
good quality, the sheets were about one-fourth

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

of an inch thick and very brittle. The back fat of the buffalo was also
dried, and eaten with the meat as we eat butter with bread. Pemmican was
made of the flesh of the buffalo. The meat was dried in the usual way;
and, for this use, only lean meat, such as the hams, loin, and
shoulders, was chosen. When the time came for making the pemmican, two
large fires were built of dry quaking aspen wood, and these were allowed
to burn down to red coals. The old women brought the dried meat to these
fires, and the sheets of meat were thrown on the coals of one of them,
allowed to heat through, turned to keep them from burning, and then
thrown on the flesh side of a dry hide, that lay on the ground near by.
After a time, the roasting of this dried meat caused a smoke to rise
from the fire in use, which gave the meat a bitter taste, if cooked in
it. They then turned to the other fire, and used that until the first
one had burned clear again. After enough of the roasted meat had been
thrown on the hide, it was flailed out with sticks, and being very
brittle was easily broken up, and made small. It was constantly stirred
and pounded until it was all fine. Meantime, the tallow of the buffalo
had been melted in a large kettle, and the pemmican bags prepared. These
were made of bull's hide, and were in two pieces, cut oblong, and with
the corners rounded off. Two such pieces sewed together made a bag which
would hold one hundred pounds. The pounded meat and tallow—the latter
just beginning to cool—were put in a trough made of bull's hide, a
wooden spade being used to stir the mixture. After it was thoroughly
mixed, it was shovelled into one of the sacks, held open, and rammed
down and packed tight with a big stick, every effort being made to expel
all the air. When the bag was full and packed as tight as possible, it
was sewn up. It was then put on the ground, and the women jumped on it
to make it still more tight and solid. It was then laid away in the sun
to cool and dry. It usually took the meat of two cows to

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

make a bag of one hundred pounds; a very large bull might make a sack of
from eighty to one hundred pounds.

A much finer grade of pemmican was made from the choicest parts of the
buffalo with marrow fat. To this dried berries and pounded
choke-cherries were added, making a delicious food, which was extremely
nutritious. Pemmican was eaten either dry as it came from the sack, or
stewed with water.

In the spring, the people had great feasts of the eggs of ducks and
other water-fowl. A large quantity having been gathered, a hole was dug
in the ground, and a little water put in it. At short intervals above
the water, platforms of sticks were built, on which the eggs were laid.
A smaller hole was dug at one side of the large hole, slanting into the
bottom of it. When all was ready, the top of the larger hole was covered
with mud, laid upon cross sticks, and red-hot stones were dropped into
the slant, when they rolled down into the water, heating it, and so
cooking the eggs by steam.

Fish were seldom eaten by these people in early days, but now they seem
very fond of them. Turtles, frogs, and lizards are considered creatures
of evil, and are never eaten. Dogs, considered a great delicacy by the
Crees, Gros Ventres, Sioux, Assinaboines, and other surrounding tribes,
were never eaten by the Blackfeet. No religious motive is assigned for
this abstinence. I once heard a Piegan say that it was wrong to eat
dogs. "They are our true friends," he said. "Men say they are our
friends and then turn against us, but our dogs are always true. They
mourn when we are absent, and are always glad when we return. They keep
watch for us in the night when we sleep. So pity the poor dogs."

Snakes, grasshoppers, worms, and other insects were never eaten. Salt
was an unknown condiment. Many are now very fond of it, but I know a
number, especially old people, who never eat it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[202:1](blt36.htm#fr_30.md) See The Blackfoot
Genesis, [p. 141](blt22.htm#page_141.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Social Organization](blt37.md)
