[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt37)  [Next](blt39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

### HUNTING

The Blackfoot country probably contained more game and in greater
variety than any other part of the continent. Theirs was a land whose
physical characteristics presented sharp contrasts. There were
far-stretching grassy prairies, affording rich pasturage for the buffalo
and the antelope; rough breaks and bad lands for the climbing mountain
sheep; wooded buttes, loved by the mule deer; timbered river bottoms,
where the white-tailed deer and the elk could browse and hide; narrow,
swampy valleys for the moose; and snow-patched, glittering pinnacles of
rock, over which the sure-footed white goat took his deliberate way. The
climate varied from arid to humid; the game of the prairie, the timber,
and the rocks, found places suited to their habits. Fur-bearing animals
abounded. Noisy hordes of wild fowl passed north and south in their
migrations, and many stopped here to breed.

The Blackfoot country is especially favored by the warm chinook winds,
which insure mild winters with but little snow; and although on the
plains there is usually little rain in summer, the short prairie grasses
are sweet and rich. All over this vast domain, the buffalo were found in
countless herds. Elk, deer, antelope, mountain sheep, and bear without
number were there. In those days, sheep were to be found on every ridge,
and along the rough bad lands far from the mountains. Now, except a few
in the "breaks" of the Missouri, they occur only on the highest and most
inaccessible mountains, along with the white goats, which,

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

although pre-eminently mountain animals, were in early days sometimes
found far out on the prairie.

#### BUFFALO

The Blackfeet were a race of meat-eaters, and, while they killed large
quantities of other game, they still depended for subsistence on the
buffalo. This animal provided them with almost all that they needed in
the way of food, clothing, and shelter, and when they had an abundance
of the buffalo they lived in comfort.

Almost every part of the beast was utilized. The skin, dressed with the
hair on, protected them from the winter's cold; freed from the hair, it
was used for a summer sheet or blanket, for moccasins, leggings, shirts,
and women's dresses. The tanned cowskins made their lodges, the warmest
and most comfortable portable shelters ever devised. From the rawhide,
the hair having been shaved off, were made parfleches, or trunks, in
which to pack small articles. The tough, thick hide of the bull's neck,
spread out and allowed to shrink smooth, made a shield for war which
would stop an arrow, and turn a lance thrust or the ball from an
old-fashioned, smooth-bore gun. The green hide served as a kettle, in
which to boil meat. The skin of the hind leg, cut off above the pastern
and again some distance above the hock, was sometimes used as a moccasin
or boot, the lower opening being sewed up for the toe. A variety of
small articles, such as cradles, gun covers, whips, mittens, quivers,
bow cases, knife-sheaths, etc., were made from the hide. Braided strands
of hide furnished them with ropes and lines. The hair was used to stuff
cushions and, later, saddles, and parts of the long black flowing beard
to ornament wearing apparel and implements of war, such as shields and
quivers. The horns gave them spoons and ladles—sometimes used as small
dishes—and ornamented their war bonnets. From the hoofs they made a
glue, which they used in fastening the

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

heads and feathers on their arrows, and the sinew backs on their bows.
The sinews which lie along the back and on the belly were used as thread
and string, and as backing for bows to give them elasticity and
strength. From the ribs were made scrapers used in dressing hides, and
runners for small sledges drawn by dogs; and they were employed by the
children in coasting down hill on snow or ice. The shoulder-blades,
lashed to a wooden handle, formed axes, hoes, and fleshers. From the
cannon bones (metatarsals and metacarpals) were made scrapers for
dressing hides. The skin of the tail, fitted on a stick, was used as a
fly brush. These are but a few of the uses to which the product of the
buffalo was put. As has been said, almost every part of the flesh was
eaten.

Now it must be remembered that in early days the hunting weapons of this
people consisted only of stone-pointed arrows, and with such armament
the capture of game of the larger sorts must have been a matter of some
uncertainty. To drive a rude stone-headed arrow through the tough hide
and into the vitals of the buffalo, could not have been—even under the
most favorable circumstances—other than a difficult matter; and although
we may assume that, in those days, it was easy to steal up to within a
few yards of the unsuspicious animals, we can readily conceive that many
arrows must have been shot without effect, for one that brought down the
game.

Certain ingenious methods were therefore devised to insure the taking of
game in large numbers at one time. This was especially the case with the
buffalo, which were the food and raiment of the people. One of these
contrivances was called pis´kun, deep-kettle; or, since the termination
of the word seems to indicate the last syllable of the word *ah'-pun,*
blood, it is more likely deep-blood-kettle. This was a large corral, or
enclosure, built out from the foot of a perpendicular cliff or bluff,
and formed of natural banks, rocks, and

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

logs or brush,—anything in fact to make a close, high barrier. In some
places the enclosure might be only a fence of brush, but even here the
buffalo did not break it down, for they did not push against it, but ran
round and round within, looking for a clear space through which they
might pass. From the top of the bluff, directly over the pis´kun, two
long lines of rock piles and brush extended far out on the prairie, ever
diverging from each other like the arms of the letter V, the opening
over the pis´kun being at the angle.

In the evening of the day preceding a drive of buffalo into the pis´kun
a medicine man, usually one who was the possessor of a buffalo rock,
In-is'-kim, unrolled his pipe, and prayed to the Sun for success. Next
morning the man who was to call the buffalo arose very early, and told
his wives that they must not leave the lodge, nor even look out, until
he returned; that they should keep burning sweet grass, and should pray
to the Sun for his success and safety. Without eating or drinking, he
then went up on the prairie, and the people followed him, and concealed
themselves behind the rocks and bushes which formed the V, or chute. The
medicine man put on a head-dress made of the head of a buffalo, and a
robe, and then started out to approach the animals. When he had come
near to the herd, he moved about until he had attracted the attention of
some of the buffalo, and when they began to look at him, he walked
slowly away toward the entrance of the chute. Usually the buffalo
followed, and, as they did so, he gradually increased his pace. The
buffalo followed more rapidly, and the man continually went a little
faster. Finally, when the buffalo were fairly within the chute, the
people began to rise up from behind the rock piles which the herd had
passed, and to shout and wave their robes. This frightened the
hinder-most buffalo, which pushed forward on the others, and before long
the whole herd was running at headlong speed toward the precipice, the
rock piles directing them to the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

point over the enclosure. When they reached it, most of the animals were
pushed over, and usually even the last of the band plunged blindly down
into the pis´kun. Many were killed outright by the fall; others had
broken legs or broken backs, while some perhaps were uninjured. The
barricade, however, prevented them from escaping, and all were soon
killed by the arrows of the Indians.

It is said that there was another way to get the buffalo into this
chute. A man who was very skilful in arousing the buffalo's curiosity,
might go out without disguise, and by wheeling round and round in front
of the herd, appearing and disappearing, would induce them to move
toward him, when it was easy to entice them into the chute. Once there,
the people began to rise up behind them, shouting and waving their
robes, and the now terror-stricken animals rushed ahead, and were driven
over the cliff into the pis´kun, where all were quickly killed and
divided among the people, the chiefs and the leading warrior getting the
best and fattest animals.

The pis´kun was in use up to within thirty-five or forty years, and many
men are still living who have seen the buffalo driven over the cliff.
Such men even now speak with enthusiasm of the plenty that successful
drives brought to the camp.

The pis´kuns of the Sik'-si-kau, or Blackfoot tribe, differed in some
particulars from those constructed by the Bloods and the Piegans, who
live further to the south, nearer to the mountains, and so in a country
which is rougher and more broken. The Sik'-si-kau built their pis´kuns
like the Crees, on level ground and usually near timber. A large pen or
corral was made of heavy logs about eight feet high. On the side where
the wings of the chute come together, a bridge, or causeway, was built,
sloping gently up from the prairie to the walls of the corral, which at
this point were cut away to the height of the bridge above the
ground,—here about four

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

feet,—so that the animals running up the causeway could jump down into
the corral. The causeway was fenced in on either side by logs, so that
the buffalo could not run off it. After they had been lured within the
wings of the chute, they were driven toward the corral as already
described. When they reached the end of the &gt;, they ran up the
bridge, and jumped down into the pen. When it was full, or all had
entered, Indians, who had lain hidden near by, ran upon the bridge, and
placed poles, prepared beforehand, across the opening through which the
animals had entered, and over these poles hung robes, so as entirely to
close the opening. The buffalo will not dash themselves against a
barrier which is entirely closed, even though it be very frail; but if
they can see through it to the outside, they will rush against it, and
their great weight and strength make it easy for them to break down any
but a heavy wall. Mr. Hugh Monroe tells me that he has seen a pis´kun
built of willow brush; and the Cheyennes have stated to me that their
buffalo corrals were often built of brush. Sometimes, if the walls of
the pis´kun were not high, the buffalo tried to jump or climb over them,
and, in doing this, might break them down, and some or all escape. As
soon, however, as the animals were in the corral, the people—women and
children included—ran up and showed themselves all about the walls, and
by their cries kept the buffalo from pressing against the walls. The
animals ran round and round within, and the men standing on the walls
shot them down as they passed. The butchering was done in the pis´kun,
and after this was over, the place was cleaned out, the heads, feet, and
least perishable offal being removed. Wolves, foxes, badgers, and other
small carnivorous animals visited the pis´kun, and soon made away with
the entrails.

In winter, when the snow was on the ground, and the buffalo were to be
led to the pis´kun, the following method was adopted to keep the herd
travelling in the desired

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

direction after they had got between the wings of the chute. A line of
buffalo chips, each one supported on three small sticks, so that it
stood a few inches above the snow, was carried from the mouth of the
pis´kun straight out toward the prairie. The chips were about thirty
feet apart, and ran midway between the wings of the chute. This line
was, of course, conspicuous against the white snow, and when the buffalo
were running down the chute, they always followed it, never turning to
the right nor to the left. In the latter days of the pis´kun, the man
who led the buffalo was often mounted on a white horse.

Often, when they drove the buffalo over a high vertical cliff, no corral
was built beneath. Most of those driven over were killed or disabled by
the fall, and only a few got away. The pis´kuns, as a rule, were built
under low-cut bluffs, and sometimes the buffalo were driven in by
moonlight.

In connection with the subject of leading or decoying the buffalo,
another matter not generally known may be mentioned. Sometimes, as a
matter of convenience, a herd was brought from a long distance close up
to the camp. This was usually done in the spring of the year, when the
horses were thin in flesh and not in condition to stand a long chase. I
myself have never seen this; but my friend, William Jackson, was once
present at such a drive by the Red River half-breeds, and has described
to me the way in which it was done.

The camp was on Box Elder Creek near the Musselshell River. It was in
the spring of 1881, and the horses were all pretty well run down and
thin, so that their owners wished to spare them as much as possible. The
buffalo were seven or eight miles distant, and two men were sent out to
bring them to the camp. Other men, leading fresh horses, went with them,
and hid themselves among the hills at different points along the course
that the buffalo were

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

expected to take, at intervals of a mile and a half. They watched the
herd, and were on hand to supply the fresh horses to the men who were
bringing it.

The buffalo were on a wide flat, and the men rode over the hill and
advanced toward the herd at a walk. At length the buffalo noticed them,
and began to huddle up together and to walk about, and at length to walk
away. Then the men turned, and rode along parallel to the buffalo's
course, and at the same gait that these were taking. When the buffalo
began to trot, the men trotted, and when the herd began to lope, the men
loped, and at length they were all running pretty fast. The men kept
about half a mile from the herd, and up even with the leaders. As they
ran, the herd kept constantly edging a little toward the riders, as if
trying to cross in front of them. This inclination toward the men was
least when they were far off, and greatest when they drew nearer to
them. At no time were the men nearer to the herd than four hundred
yards. If the buffalo edged too much toward the riders, so that the
course they were taking would lead them away from camp, the men would
drop back and cross over behind the herd to the other side, and then,
pushing their horses hard, would come up with the leaders,—but still at
a distance from them,—and then the buffalo would begin to edge toward
them, and the herd would be brought back again to the desired course. If
necessary, this was repeated, and so the buffalo were kept travelling in
a course approximately straight.

By the time the buffalo had got pretty near to the camp, they were
pretty well winded, and the tongues of many of them were hanging out.
This herd was led up among the rolling hills about a mile from the camp,
and there the people were waiting for them, and charged them, when the
herd broke up, the animals running in every direction.

Occasionally it would happen that for a long time the

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

buffalo would not be found in a place favorable for driving over the
cliff or into a pen. In such cases, the Indians would steal out on foot,
and, on a day when there was no wind, would stealthily surround the
herd. Then they would startle the buffalo, and yet would keep them from
breaking through the circle. The buffalo would "mill" around until
exhausted, and at length, when worn out, would be shot down by the
Indians. This corresponds almost exactly with one of the methods
employed in killing buffalo by the Pawnees in early days before they had
horses. <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) In those days the Pi-kŭn´-i
were very numerous, and sometimes when a lot of buffalo were found in a
favorable position, and there was no wind, the people would surround
them, and set up their lodges about them, thus practically building a
corral of lodges. After all preparations had been made, they would
frighten the buffalo, which, being afraid to pass through between the
lodges, would run round and round in a great circle, and when they were
exhausted the people would kill them.

Then they always had plenty of buffalo—if not fresh meat, that which
they had dried. For in winter they would kill large numbers of buffalo,
and would prepare great stores of dried meat. As spring opened, the
buffalo would move down to the more flat prairie country away from the
pis´kuns. Then the Blackfeet would also move away. As winter drew near,
the buffalo would again move up close to the mountains, and the Indians,
as food began to become scarce, would follow them toward the pis´kuns.
In the last of the summer and early autumn, they always had runners out,
looking for the buffalo, to find where they were, and which way they
were moving. In the early autumn, all the pis´kuns were repaired and
strengthened, so as to be in good order for winter.

In the days before they had horses, and even in later

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

times when the ground was of such a character as to prevent running the
buffalo, an ingenious method of still-hunting them was practised. A
story told by Hugh Monroe illustrates it. He said: "I was often detailed
by the Hudson's Bay Company to go out in charge of a number of men, to
kill meat for the fort. When the ground was full of holes and wash-outs,
so that running was dangerous, I used to put on a big timber wolf's
skin, which I carried for the purpose, tying it at my neck and waist,
and then to sneak up to the buffalo. I used a bow and arrows, and
generally shot a number without alarming them. If one looked
suspiciously at me, I would howl like a wolf. Sometimes the smell of the
blood from the wounded and dying would set the bulls crazy. They would
run up and lick the blood, and sometimes toss the dead ones clear from
the ground. Then they would bellow and fight each other, sometimes
goring one another so badly that they died. The great bulls, their
tongues covered with blood, their eyes flashing, and tails sticking out
straight, roaring and fighting, were terrible to see; and it was a
little dangerous for me, because the commotion would attract buffalo
from all directions to see what was going on. At such times, I would
signal to my men, and they would ride up and scare the buffalo away."

In more modern times, the height of pleasure to a Blackfoot was to ride
a good horse and run buffalo. When bows and arrows, and, later,
muzzle-loading "fukes" were the only weapons, no more buffalo were
killed than could actually be utilized. But after the Winchester
repeater came in use, it seemed as if the different tribes vied with
each other in wanton slaughter. Provided with one of these weapons and a
couple of belts of cartridges, the hunters would run as long as their
horses could keep up with the band, and literally cover the prairie with
carcasses, many of which were never even skinned.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

#### ANTELOPE

It is said that once in early times the men determined that they would
use antelope skins for their women's dresses, instead of cowskins. So
they found a place where antelope were plenty, and set up on the prairie
long lines of rock piles, or of bushes, so as to form a chute like a
&gt;. Near the point where the lines joined, they dug deep pits, which
they roofed with slender poles, and covered these with grass and a
little dirt. Then the people scattered out, and while most of them hid
behind the rock piles and bushes, a few started the antelope toward the
mouth of the chute. As they ran by them, the people showed themselves
and yelled, and the antelope ran down the chute and finally reached the
pits, and falling into them were taken, when they were killed and
divided among the hunters. Afterward, this was the common method of
securing antelopes up to the coming of the whites.

#### EAGLES

Before the whites came to the Blackfoot country, the Indian standard of
value was eagle tail-feathers. They were used to make war head-dresses,
to tie on the head, and to ornament shields, lances, and other weapons.
Besides this, the wings were used for fans, and the body feathers for
arrow-making. Always a wary bird, the eagle could seldom be approached
near enough for killing with the bow and arrow; and, in fact, it seems
as if it was considered improper to kill it in that way. The capture of
these birds appears to have had about it something of a sacred nature,
and, as was always the case among wild Indians when anything important
was to be undertaken, it was invariably preceded by earnest prayers to
the Deity for help and for success.

There are still living many men who have caught eagles in the ancient
method, and, from several of these, accounts have been received, which,
while essentially similar, yet differ

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

in certain particulars, especially in the explanations of certain
features of the ceremony.

Wolf Calf's account of this ceremony is as follows:—

"A man who started out to catch eagles moved his lodge and his family
away from the main camp, to some place where the birds were abundant. A
spot was chosen on top of a mound or butte within a few miles of his
lodge, and here he dug a pit in the ground as long as his body and
somewhat deeper. The earth removed was carried away to a distance, and
scattered about so as to make no show. When the pit had been made large
enough, it was roofed over with small willow sticks, on which grass was
scattered, and over the grass a little earth and stones were laid, so as
to give the place a natural look, like the prairie all about it.

"The bait was a piece of bloody neck of a buffalo. This, of course,
could be seen a long way off, and by the meat a stuffed wolf skin was
often placed, standing up, as if the animal were eating. To the piece of
neck was tied a rope, which passed down through the roof of the pit and
was held in the watcher's hand.

"After all had been made ready, the next day the man rose very early,
before it was light, and, after smoking and praying, left his camp,
telling his wives and children not to use an awl while he was gone. He
endeavored to reach the pit early in the morning, before it became
light, and lay down in it, taking with him a slender stick about six
feet long, a human skull, and a little pemmican. Then he waited.

"When the morning came, and the eagles were flying, one of them would
see the meat and descend to take it away from the wolf. Finding it held
fast by the rope, the bird began to feed on it; and while it was pecking
at the bait, the watcher seized it by the legs, and drew it into the
pit, where he killed it, either by twisting its neck, or by crushing it
with his knees. Then he laid it to one side, first opening

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

the bill and putting a little piece of pemmican in its mouth. This was
done to make the other eagles hungry. While he was in the pit, the man
neither ate, drank, nor slept. He had a sleeping-place not far off, to
which he repaired each night after dark, and there he ate and drank.

"The reason for taking the skull into the hole with the catcher was, in
part, for his protection. It was believed that the ghost of the person
to whom the skull had belonged would protect the watcher against harm
from the eagle, and besides that, the skull, or ghost, would make the
watcher invisible, like a ghost. The eagle would not see him.

"The stick was used to poke or drive away smaller birds, such as
magpies, crows, and ravens, which might alight on the roof of the pit,
and try to feed on the bait. It was used, also, to drive away the
white-headed eagle, which they did not care to catch. These are powerful
birds; they could almost kill a person.

"There are two sacred things connected with the catching of eagles,—two
things which must be observed if the eagle-catcher is to have good luck.
The man who is watching must not eat rosebuds. If he does, the eagle,
when he comes down and alights by the bait, will begin to scratch
himself and will not attack the bait. The rosebuds will make him itch.
Neither the man nor his wife must use an awl while he is absent from his
lodge, and is trying to catch the birds. If this is done, the eagles
will scratch the catcher. Sometimes one man would catch a great many
eagles."

In his day, John Monroe was a famous eagle-catcher, and he has given me
the following account of the method as he has practised it. The pit is
dug, six feet long, three wide, and four deep, on top of the highest
knoll that can be found near a stream. The earth taken out is carried a
long way off. Over the pit they put two long poles, one on each side,
running lengthwise of the pit, and other smaller sticks are laid across,
resting on the poles. The smaller sticks are

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

covered with juniper twigs and long grass. The skin of a wolf, coyote,
or fox, is stuffed with grass, and made to look as natural as possible.
A hole is cut in the wolf skin and a rope is passed through it, one end
being tied to a large piece of meat which lies by the skin, and the
other passing through the roof down into the pit. The bait is now
covered with grass, and the man returns to his lodge for the night.

During the night, he sings his eagle songs and burns sweet grass for the
eagles, rubbing the smoke over his own body to purify himself, so that
on the morrow he will give out no scent. Before day he leaves his lodge
without eating or drinking, goes to the pit and lies down in it. He
uncovers the bait, arranges the roof, and sits there all day holding the
rope. Crows and other birds alight by the bait and peck at it, but he
pays no attention to them.

The eagle, sailing about high in air, sees the bait, and settles down
slowly. It takes it a long time to make up its mind to come to the bait.
In the pit, the man can hear the sound of the eagle coming. When the
bird settles on the ground, it does not alight on the bait, but at one
side of it, striking the ground with a thud—heavily. The man never
mistakes anything else for that sound. The eagle walks toward the bait,
and all the other birds fly away. It walks on to the roof; and, through
the crevices that have been left between the sticks, the man can see in
which direction the bird's head is. He carefully pushes the stick aside
and, reaching out, grasps the eagle by the two feet. The bird does not
struggle much. It is drawn down into the pit, and the man wrings its
neck. Then the opening is closed, and the roof arranged as before. So
the man waits and catches the eagles that come through the day.
Sometimes he sits all day and gets nothing; again he may get eight or
ten in a day.

When darkness comes, the man leaves his hiding-place,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

takes his eagles, and goes home. He carries the birds to a special
lodge, prepared outside of the camp, which is called the eagles' lodge.
He places them on the ground in a row, and raises their heads, resting
them on a stick laid in front of the row. In the mouth of each one is
put a piece of pemmican, so that they may not be afraid of the people.
The object of feeding the eagles is that their spirits may tell other
eagles how they are being treated—that they are being fed by the people.
In the lodge is a human skull, and they pray to it, asking the ghost to
help them get the eagles.

It is said that in one pit, once, forty eagles were killed in a day. The
larger hawks were caught, as well as eagles, though the latter were the
most highly valued. Five eagles used to be worth a good horse, a
valuation which shows that, in the Blackfoot country, eagles were more
plenty, or horses more valuable, than farther south, where, in old
times, two eagles would purchase a horse.

#### OTHER GAME

They had no special means of capturing deer in any numbers. These were
usually killed singly. The hunters used to creep up on elk and deer in
the brush, and when they had come close to them, they could drive even
their stone-pointed arrows deep in the flesh. Often their game was
killed dead on the spot, but if not, they left it alone until the next
day, when, on going back to the place, it was usually found near by,
either dead or so desperately wounded that they could secure it.

Deadfalls were used to catch wolves, foxes, and other fur animals, and
small apertures in the pis´kun walls were provided with nooses and
snares for the same purpose.

Another way to catch wolves and coyotes was to set heavy stakes in the
ground in a circle, about the carcasses

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

of one or two dead buffalo. The stakes were placed at an angle of about
forty-five degrees, a few inches apart, and all pointing toward the
centre of the circle. At one place, dirt was piled up against the stakes
from the outside, and the wolves, climbing up on this, jumped down into
the enclosure, but were unable to jump out. Hugh Monroe tells me that,
about thirty years ago, he and his sons made a trap like this, and in
one night caught eighty-three wolves and coyotes.

In early times, beaver were very abundant and very tame, and were shot
with bows and arrows.

The Blackfeet were splendid prairie hunters. They had no superiors in
the art of stalking and killing such wary animals as the antelope.
Sometimes they wore hats made of the skin and horns of an antelope head,
which were very useful when approaching the game. Although the prairie
was pre-eminently their hunting-ground, they were also skilful in
climbing mountains and killing sheep and goats. On the other hand, the
northern Crees, who also are a prairie people, are poor mountain
hunters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[234:1](blt38.htm#fr_32) Pawnee Hero Stories and
Folk-Tales, p. 250.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Blackfoot In War](blt39)
