[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dow07)  [Next](dow09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

# HOW AH-HA'-LE STOLE THE SUN FOR THE VALLEY PEOPLE

A TALE OF THE SOUTHERN MEWUK

A long time ago there were two countries, the Valley Country and the
Foothills Country, and each had its own kind of people. The Valley
Country was the big flat land which the white people call the San
Joaquin Plain; it had no trees and no Sun but was always enveloped in
fog and was always cold and dark. The Foothills Country began on the
east side of the valley and reached up into the mountains; it was
covered with trees and had the Sun.

Two versions of the story have been obtained: (1) How *Ah-ha'-le* stole
the Sun, told by the Mariposa Mewuk; and (2) How *Ah-ha'-le* stole the
Morning, told by the Chowchilla Mewuk.

How AH-HA'-LE STOLE THE SUN

As told by the MARIPOSA MEWUK

PERSONAGES

*Ah-hā'-le* the Coyote-man

*To-to'-kan-no* Chief of the Valley People, who became the Sandhill
Crane

*Ah-wahn'-dah* Keeper of the Sun, who became the Turtle.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### HOW AH-HA'-LE STOLE THE SUN FOR THE VALLEY PEOPLE

As told by the Mariposa Mewuk

TO'-TO'-KAN-NO the Sandhill Crane was chief of the Valley People and
*Ah-hā'-le*, the Coyote-man lived with him. Their country was cold and
dark and full of fog.

*Ah-hā'-le* was discontented and traveled all about, trying to find a
better place for the people. After a while he came to the Foothills
Country where it began to be light. He went on a little farther and for
the first time in his life saw trees, and found the country dry and
warm, and good to look at. Soon he saw the Foothills People and found
their village. He was himself a magician or witch doctor, so he turned
into one of the Foothills People and mingled with them to see what they
had and what they were doing. He saw that they had fire, which made
light and became *Wut'-too* the Sun. He saw also that there were both
men and women, that the women pounded acorns and cooked acorn mush in
baskets, and that everybody ate food. He ate with them and learned that
food was good.

When his belly was full he went home and told the chief *To-to'-kan-no*
that he had found a good

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

place where there were people who had the sun and moon and stars, and
women, and things to eat. He then asked *To-to'-kan-no*, "What are we
going to do? Are we going to stay down here in the dark and never eat?
The people up there have wives and children; the women make acorn soup
and other things; the men have light and can see to hunt and kill deer.
We live down here in the dark and have no women and nothing to eat. What
are we going to do?"

Chief *To-to'-kan-no* answered; "Those things are not worth having. I
don't want the Sun, nor the light, nor any of those things. Go back up
there if you want to."

*Ah-hā'-le* went back to the foothills and did as he had done before,
and liked the country and the people. Then he returned and told
*To-to'-kan-no* what he had told him before, and again asked, "What are
we going to do? Can't we buy the Sun? The people up there send the Sun
away nights so they can sleep, and it comes back every day so they can
see to hunt and get things to eat and have a good time. I like the Sun.
Let us buy him."

*To-to'-kan-no* answered, "What is the matter with you? What would you
do with the Sun; how would you use it?" But *Ah-hā'-le* was not
satisfied. He went back to the Foothills People several times, and the
more he saw of the Sun the more he wanted it. But *To-to'-kan-no* always
said

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

 

<span id="img_03700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The Foothills
Country. ''&lt;i&gt;Ah-ha'-le&lt;/i&gt; went on a little farther and for
the first time in his life saw trees, and found the country dry and good
to look at.''](tn/03700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03700.jpg)  
The Foothills Country. ''*Ah-ha'-le* went on a little farther and for
the first time in his life saw trees, and found the country dry and good
to look at.''  
</span>

 

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

he did not want it. Finally however he told *Ah-hā'-le* that he might go
and find out what it would cost.

*Ah-hā'-le* went and found that the people would not sell it; that if he
got it he would have to steal it. And this would be very difficult, for
*Ah-wahn'-dah* the Turtle, keeper of the Sun, was most watchful; he
slept only a few minutes at a time and then stood up and looked around;
besides, when he slept he always kept one eye open. If *Ah-hā'-le* moved
his foot *Ah-wahn'-dah* would pick up his bow and arrow. *Ah-hā'-le*
felt discouraged and did not know what to do. He feared that in order to
get the Sun he would have to take *Ah-wahn'-dah* also.

But he decided to try once more, so he went again and turned into a man
of the Foothills People. About four o'clock in the afternoon all the
hunters went off to hunt deer. Then *Ah-hā'-le* turned into a big oak
limb and fell down on the trail, and wished that *Ah-wahn'-dah* the
Sun's keeper would come along first. And so it happened, for soon
*Ah-wahn'-dah* came along the trail, saw the crooked limb, picked it up,
carried it home on his shoulder, and threw it down on the ground. After
supper he picked it up again and threw it against the fire, but it would
not lay flat for it was very crooked and always turned up. Finally
*Ah-wahn'-dah* threw it right into the middle of the fire. Then he
looked all around, but could not see anybody. *Ah-hā'-le* who was now in
the fire did

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

not burn, but kept perfectly still and wished the keeper,
*Ah-wahn'-dah*, would go to sleep.

Soon this happened and *Ah-wahn'-dah* fell fast asleep. Then *Ah-hā'-le*
changed back into his own form and seized the Sun and ran quickly away
with it.

*Ah-wahn'-dah* awoke and saw that the Sun was gone and called everybody
to come quick and find it, but they could not for *Ah-hā'-le* had taken
it down through the fog to the Valley People.

But when the Valley People saw it they were afraid and turned away from
it, for it was too bright and hurt their eyes, and they said they could
never sleep.

*Ah-hā'-le* took it to the chief, *To-to'-kan-no*, but *To-to'-kan-no*
would not have it; he said he didn't understand it; that *Ah-hā'-le*
must make it go, for he had seen how the Foothills People did it.

When *To-to'-kan-no* refused to have anything to do with the Sun,
*Ah-hā'-le* was disappointed, for he had worked very hard to get it.

Still he said, "Well, I'll make it go."

So he carried the Sun west to the place where the sky comes down to the
earth, and found the west hole in the sky, and told *Wut'-too* to go
through the hole and down under the earth and come up on the east side
and climb up through the east bole in the sky, and work in two
places--to make light over the Foothills People first, then come on down
and make light over the Valley People, and then go

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

 

<span id="img_04100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The Valley People
shrinking from the Light. ''&lt;i&gt;Ah-ha-le&lt;/i&gt; stole the Sun
and brought it down through the fog and darkness to the Valley People,
but they were afraid and turned from it.''](tn/04100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04100.jpg)  
The Valley People shrinking from the Light. ''*Ah-ha-le* stole the Sun
and brought it down through the fog and darkness to the Valley People,
but they were afraid and turned from it.''  
</span>

 

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

through the west hole again and back under the earth so the people could
sleep, and to keep on doing this, traveling all the time.

*Wut'-too* the Sun did as he was told. Then *To-to'-kan-no* and all the
Valley People were glad, because they could see to hunt, and the
Foothills People were satisfied too, for they had the light in the
daytime so they could see, and at night the Sun went away so all the
people could sleep.

After this, when the Sun was in the sky as it is now, all the FIRST
PEOPLE turned into animals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How *Ah-ha'-le* Stole The Morning](dow09)
