[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dow33)  [Next](dow35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

### Wek'-wek's Search for his Father

AH-HA'-LE the Coyote-man told the people that there were four holes in
the sky--one in the north, one in the south, one in the east, and one in
the west. In those days *Tim-me-lā'-le* the Thunder came out of the
north hole in winter and went back about May, just as he does now.

At this time *Wek'-wek* the Falcon was not yet born. His father,
*Yi-'yil*, had gone far away to the south, where he had been killed
before *Wek'-wek's* birth.

When *Wek'-wek* was fourteen years old he already had two or three
wives, one of whom was *Yow'-hah* the Mallard Duck. He asked her if she
was old enough to have seen his father. She replied, "No."

He then traveled all about and asked all the people who his father was
and where he had gone, but no one could tell him. Then he went out to
search; he traveled north, south, east, and west, but could find no
trace of his father and no one could tell him where he had gone.

Then *Wek'-wek* transformed himself into a witch doctor and said, "Now I
know where my father went, I smell him."

At sundown he came home to *Yow'-hah* his wife,

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

and when she had fallen asleep he took a forked limb of a tree and put
it in the bed beside her. Then he went down into a hole in the ground
and came up near the village \[thus leaving no tracks\]. Then he went
south.

In the morning *Yow'-hah* awoke and found the forked limb and pushed it
away saying, "What's the matter with my husband?" She asked his other
wives if they had seen which way he went--"Which way did our husband
go?" she asked.

They replied, "Go away, you live with him, we don't."

Then *Yow'-hah* went away and cried. She cried for a day or so, but no
one could tell her which way *Wek'-wek* had gone.

She then took a crooked acorn stick and stuck it in the ground and the
stick sprang south. Then she knew the way he had gone, and quickly
prepared some baskets of food and set out to follow him.

After a while she overtook him, bringing him the food. By this time
*Wek'-wek* was very tired and had fallen down on the side of the trail.
He had a partner, *Hoo-loo'-e* the Dove, who accompanied him. He said to
*Hoo-loo'-e*, "The old woman is coming behind; I am going to shoot her."
But when she came he could not pull the arrow. She went to him and said,
"You are hungry; I've brought you food."

He was angry and would not answer. He said

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

to *Hoo-loo'-e* his partner, "You are hungry, you had better eat."

*Hoo-loo'-e* replied, "Yes, I think I am hungry."

"Well, eat," said *Wek'-wek*, and *Hoo-loo'-e* ate.

*Wek'-wek* was angry and would not eat. He told his wife to go home and
not follow him. He said: "I go to a bad place; I follow my father;
nobody can get through the hole in the sky; you go home."

She answered, "No, I'll not go home, I'll follow you."

Then *Wek'-wek* continued on the trail of his father.

*Wek'-wek* had an aunt, *Ol'-lus* *muk-ki'-e* the Toad-woman. Her
husband was *O-wah'-to*, the big-headed Fire Lizard. He had a fire which
he could send to burn people.

*Wek'-wek* told *Hoo-loo'-e* his partner to go around another way with
*Yow'-hah* his wife while he stopped to talk to his aunt's husband,
*O-wah'-to*. Again he told his wife to go home, but she would not. Then
*Wek'-wek* went to the place where *O-wah'-to* lived. He saw his aunt
*Ol'-lus muk-ki'-e* outside, cracking acorns, and went to her to get
something to eat.

*O-wah'-to*, who was inside the house, called out "Who's there?" and his
wife answered, "Nobody." Then he heard *Wek'-wek* take another step, and
called out again, "Who's there?" and again his wife answered, "Nobody,
only *Oo'-choom* the Fly." She whispered to *Wek'-wek* to step very

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

softly and to eat very quickly--to hurry and eat and go.

But *O-wah'-to* heard him and exclaimed, "Somebody is out there sure,"
and he came out and saw *Wek'-wek*, and sent his fire to burn him.

*Wek'-wek* ran and ran as fast as he could and caught up with
*Hoo-loo'-e* and *Yow'-hah*, but the fire chased them and burnt so
quickly and came so fast that they had not time to reach the hole in the
sky. So they turned and ran down to the low country and climbed up on a
high rock; but the fire kept on and burned the rock. Then they rushed to
the ocean, but the fire dashed after them and made the water boil. Then
they hastened north to another big rock, as high as a hill, and climbed
on top; but the fire pursued and burnt that rock also. Then they climbed
up into the sky, but the fire pressed on and came so close that it
singed the tail of *Wek'-wek's* quiver. Then they ran down into the low
country again and found a crack in the ground and all three crawled into
it. But the fire came and burnt down into the crack and drove them out.

By this time *Wek'-wek's* wife, *Yow'-hah*, had become very tired from
so much running, and gave out. She said to her husband, "You are of no
account. Why don't you put out that fire? I would like to see you make a
pond half a mile wide."

"I'll try," he answered and shot an arrow of the *kow'-woo* wood (the
buttonball bush) into the

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

ground and water came up through the hole and continued to rise until
they all stood in water, but still the fire beset them and made the
water boil. *Yow'-hah* said she thought she would die. Then *Wek'-wek*
shot an arrow into the ground in another place and a spring of water
came and green stuff grew around the edges; but the fire continued and
made the water boil as before.

Again *Yow'-hah* said, "You are of no account; you would die if I had
not followed you."

*Wek'-wek* answered, "All right, you try."

*Yow'-hah* took a tule and threw it, and a big spring burst out,
bordered all around with a broad belt of green tules; and they stepped
into the spring and the fire could not reach them-it could not burn the
green tules. So the fire went out and there was no more fire. *Yow'-hah*
the old woman had stopped the fire. She was proud of this and said, "You
see, if I had stayed at home you would be dead; if I go you will be all
right." And the three continued on together.

By and by they came to the hole--the south hole in the sky. Then
*Wek'-wek* said, "You two had better go home, you can't get through the
hole."

His wife answered "No," and tried to go through but failed.

*Wek'-wek* shot an arrow through, but the hole closed so quickly that it
caught the arrow and broke it. He again said to the others, "You can't
get through." Then he tried and jumped so quickly

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

that he went through. Then *Hoo-loo'-e* his partner tried, and likewise
jumped very quickly and got through, and the sky did not catch him. Then
*Yow'-hah* had to try again. *Wek'-wek* told her she must go through or
go back. But she was too big and too slow. She said, "You will have to
take me through." So he went back and got her and put her into his
dog-skin quiver and jumped through with her. As they passed through, the
hole closed and caught her feet and crushed them flat-that is why all
ducks have flat feet.

Now all three were through.

In the south, beyond the hole in the sky, were other people. They had
two chiefs, *Ho'-ho* the Turkey Buzzard, and *Koo'-choo* a huge shaggy
beast of great strength and fierceness. *Tap-pitch'-koo-doot* the
Kingbird lived there, and *Hok'-ke-hok'-ke* also.

Before *Wek'-wek* arrived, Captain *Ho'-ho* the Buzzard said to the
people, "I dreamed that a north Indian is coming--the son of *Yi'-yil*,
the man we burned. Everybody watch; maybe we shall have a good time
again." So everybody watched.

After a while the watchers saw *Wek'-wek* coming. They saw him come
through the hole. Then they ran back and told the people. This made the
people happy, and they made ready to play the ball game.

When *Wek'-wek* reached the village he saw his father's widow there
crying, with her hair cut short

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

in mourning. He asked her, "Did my father die here?"

"Yes," she answered, and added, "Your father had plenty of money when he
lost the game, but the chiefs *Koo'-choo* and *Ho'-ho* would not take
the money; they were playing for his life; they wanted to burn him. Old
*Koo'-choo* made a circle around the fire and made your father stand in
the middle, and told him not to die too soon. After he had been burning
a little while *Koo'-choo* asked how far the fire had burned, and
*Yi'-yil* answered, 'to my knees, I'm going to die.'

"'No, don't die yet,' said *Koo'-choo*; and he asked again, 'How far has
the fire burned now?'

"*Yi'-Yil* answered, 'to my belly, and I'm going to die now.'

"'No, don't die yet,' said *Koo'-choo*, and he asked again, 'How far has
the fire burned now?'

"'To my heart,' replied *Yi'-yil*, 'and I'm going to die now.'

"'No, no,' again said *Koo'-choo*, 'don't die yet; how far has the fire
burned now?'

"'To my shoulders and I'm going to die,' said *Yi'yil*.

"'No, don't die yet; how far has the fire burned now?'

"'To my mouth, and I'm going to die,' answered *Yi'-yil*.

"'No, not yet, there's plenty of time yet,' said *Koo'-choo*; 'how far
has it burned now?'

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

"'To my eyes, it's burning my eyes now and I'm going to die,' replied
*Yi'-yil*.

"'No, no,' said *Koo'-choo*, 'don't die yet;' and when he saw that the
fire had reached the top of *Yi'-yil's* head he asked again and for the
last time, 'How far has it burned now?'

"There was no reply, and he knew, and all the people knew, that
*Yi'-yil* was burned to death and was dead."

This is what *Yi'-yil's* widow, who had seen the burning, told
*Wek'-wek*.

*Wek'-wek* was very angry; he knew that the people wanted to burn him as
they had burned *Yi'-yil* his father; and he made up his mind what he
would do. He left his wife *Yow'-hah* with *Koo'-choo* and the others
and told her to entertain them. He then, asked his father's widow which
way they had taken his father to play the ball game. She told him, and
he followed his father's trail. He found gopher holes in the trail, and
holes the people had made for the ball to fall into so he would lose the
game, and he filled them up. He came back over *Koo'-choo's* trail by
daylight and found it all right-all the holes filled up and no holes
left.

When he returned he found that the two firemen, *Lol'-luk* the Woodrat
and *No-put'-kul-lol* the Screech Owl, had the fire all ready to burn
him, but he said nothing.

Early next morning they all set out down the trail to play the ball
game. *Wek'-wek* played so

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

fast that old *Koo'-choo* became very tired and nearly gave out. He shot
out a terrible skunk-like smell to make *Wek'-wek* sick, but *Wek'-wek*
kept ahead and was not harmed.

*Wek'-wek* won the game and came back first; all the others were tired
and *Koo'-choo* came in half dead.

When they had returned, *Yow'-hah*, *Wek'-wek's* wife, told *Wek'-wek*
to burn *Koo'-choo* first.

*Koo'-choo* said to *Wek'-wek*: "You have won the game; everybody will
bring you money; here is the money; you take it."

*Wek'-wek* answered, "No, I'll not take it. You would not take my
father's money; you took his life."

Then they brought two more sacks full of money, but *Wek'-wek* pushed it
away. He seized the two wicked chiefs, *Koo'-choo* and *Ho'ho*; he
seized them by their arms and threw them into the fire that had been
prepared for him, and took the others in the same way and threw them all
in the fire. Some ran away and tried to hide, but *Wek'-wek* went after
them and brought them back and threw them in the fire-men, women, and
children--and burned them all. He then called the firemen to
come--*Lol'-luk* the Woodrat and *No-put'-kul-lol* the Screech Owl--but
they cried and refused to come. Then he took his bow and arrow and shot
them and pitched them into the fire and they were burned like the rest.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

The only people not burned were two witch doctors--*Pel-pel'-nah* the
Nuthatch and *Choo-ta-tok'-kwe-lah* the Red-headed Sapsucker. They lived
in the big ceremonial house and never came out; they never ate and never
drank. *Wek'-wek* asked them, "Shall I come in?"

They answered "Yes."

*Wek'-wek* went inside and said: "You two are witch doctors; you never
eat and never drink and never see people. Do you think you can make my
father live again? I'll pay you. I want to see my father. I want to see
what he is like."

They answered that they would try. One said to the other: "We will try;
yes, we must try; but how shall we do it?" Then they took a jointed rod
of *la'-hah* (the wild cane) and put *Yi'-yil's* burnt bones in the
hollow inside, and put three or four feathers on the outside, like an
arrow. Then *Choo-ta-tok'-kwe-lah* asked *Wek'-wek* for his bow, and
took it and shot the cane arrow high up into the air; and when it was
way up, *Yi'-yil* came slowly out of the hole in the end and sailed
around and around, coming lower and lower, till he came down where the
others were.

Then *Wek'-wek* asked him, "Are you my father? You don't look as I
supposed."

*Yi'-yil* answered, "Yes, I'm *Yi'-yil* your father."

*Wek'-wek* said, "I've burned all the people here. Will you go home with
me? Are you sure you are my father?"

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

"Yes," answered *Yi'-yil*, "I'm your father and I'll go home with you."

"All right," said *Wek'-wek*, "Let's go."

After a while, when they had gone a little way, *Wek'-wek* turned and
said, "I think you had better not go with me. You look queer--only half
like us. You go to the other side of the mountain down on the coast"
(meaning *Oo'-yum-bel'-le*, Mount Diablo). Then *Yi'-yil* went back into
the cane arrow, and *Wek'-wek*, his wife *Yow'-hah*, and his partner
*Hoo-loo'-e* returned through the hole in the sky that they had gone
through on their way south.

When they were on the other side, *Wek'-wek* said to his wife: "Old
woman, you may have to run again. I'm going to kill *O-wah'-to*, my
uncle-in-law, who chased us with fire and tried to destroy us when we
were here before." So he sent *Yow'-hah* and *Hoo-loo'-e* ahead and told
them to wait for him while he proceeded to *O-wah'-to's* place. He went
there and shot *O-wah'-to* with an arrow and killed him dead the first
shot.

Then they continued on, and when they had gone a few miles, they came to
another fireman, whose name was *Hos-sok'-kil-wah*. *Wek'-wek* sent his
wife and partner ahead as before while he went alone to fight
*Hos-sok'-kil-wah*. He took an arrow with a point of white flint stone,
and shot and killed *Hos-sok'-kil-wah*, who at once turned into the
white flint fire rock. And so they continued, *Wek'wek* killing all the
bad people on the way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: *Wek-wek's* Search for his Sister](dow35)
