[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dow31)  [Next](dow33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

### O-wel'-lin the Rock Giant

THERE was a great Giant who lived in the north. His name was
*Oo-wel'-lin*, and he was as big as a pine tree. When he saw the country
full of people he said they looked good to eat, and came and carried
them off and ate them. He could catch ten men at a time and hold them
between his fingers, and put more in a net on his back, and carry them
off. He would visit a village and after eating all the people would move
on to another, going southward from his home in the north. When he had
gone to the south end of the world and had visited all the villages and
eaten nearly all the people--not quite all, for a few had escaped--he
turned back toward the north. He crossed the *Wah-kal'-mut-ta* (Merced
River) at a narrow place in the canyon about six miles above *Op'-lah*
(Merced Falls) where his huge footprints may still be seen in the rocks)
showing the exact place where he stepped from Ang-e'-sa-wā'-pah on the
south side to *Hik-kā'-nah* on the north side. When night came he went
into a cave in the side of a round-topped hill over the ridge from
*Se-saw-che* \[a little south of the present town of Coulterville\].

The people who had escaped found his sleeping

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

place in the cave and shot their arrows at him but were not able to hurt
him, for he was a rock giant.

When he awoke he was hungry and took the trail to go hunting. Then the
people said to *Oo'-choom* the Fly: "Go follow *Oo-wel'-lin* and when he
is hot bite him all over, on his head, on his eyes and ears, and all
over his body, everywhere, all the way down to the bottoms of his feet,
and find out where he can be hurt.

"All right," answered *Oo'-choom* the Fly, and he did as he was told. He
followed *Oo-wel'-lin* and bit him everywhere from the top of his head,
all the way down to his feet without hurting him, till finally he bit
him under the heel. This made *Oo-wel'-lin* kick. *Oo'-choom* waited,
and when the giant had fallen asleep bit him under the heel of the other
foot, and he kicked again. Then *Oo'-choom* told the people.

When the people heard this they took sharp sticks and long sharp
splinters of stone and set them up firmly in the trail, and hid nearby
and watched. After a while *Oo-wel'-lin* came back and stepped on the
sharp points till the bottoms of his feet were stuck full of them. This
hurt him dreadfully, and he fell down and died.

When he was dead the people asked, "Now he is dead, what are we to do
with him?"

And they all answered that they did not know.

But a wise man said, "We will pack wood and make a big fire and burn
him."

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

Then everyone said, "All right, let's burn him," and they brought a
great quantity of dry wood and made a big fire and burned *Oo-wel'-lin*
the Giant. When he began to burn, the wise man told everybody to watch
closely all the time to see if any part should fly off to live again,
and particularly to watch the whites of his eyes. So all the people
watched closely all the time he was burning. His flesh did not fly off;
his feet did not fly off; his hands did not fly off; but by and by the
whites of his eyes flew off quickly*--*so quickly indeed that no one but
*Chik'-chik* saw them go. *Chik'-chik* was a small bird whose eyes
looked sore, but his sight was keen and quick. He was watching from a
branch about twenty feet above the Giant's head and saw the whites of
the eyes fly out. He saw them fly out and saw where they went and
quickly darted after them and brought them back and put them in the fire
again, and put on more wood and burnt them until they were completely
consumed.

The people now made a hole and put *Oo-wel'lin's* ashes in it and piled
rocks on the place and watched for two or three days. But *Oo-wel'-lin*
was dead and never came out.

Then the wise man asked each person what he would like to be, and called
their names. Each answered what animal he would be, and forthwith turned
into that animal and has remained the same to this day.

This was the beginning of the animals as they

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

are now-the deer, the ground squirrel, the bear, and other furry
animals; the bluejay, the quail, and other birds of all kinds, and
snakes and frogs and the yellowjacket wasp and so on.

Before that they were *Hoi-ah'-ko*-the FIRST PEOPLE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: *Tim-me-la'-le* the Thunder](dow33)
