[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psc03)  [Next](psc05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 3: Tracts Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*,
tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

###### OF

### VOLUME V.--TRACT PESACHIM. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

### CHAPTER I.

MISHNA I. What is meant by Or? The explanation of the phrase(Job xiv.
14), "with the earliest light." At no time should a man allow an ill
sounding word to escape from his mouth. What the two disciples of Rabh
and R. Johanan b. Zakkai said: Go and report it to the horses. If a
house was rented and it is not known whether the leavened bread had been
searched for. If a man leave his house and intend to return on the Pass
over. Two things are without the province of man. If musty bread was
found in a chest. By what light search for leavened bread must be made.
Whether wine-cellars have to be searched,
[1](psc05.htm#page_1)-[14](psc05.htm#page_14)

MISHNAS II., III., IV., V. If a man leaves ten pieces of bread and finds
nine, or nine heaps of Matzoth, and one heap of Chometz, and finds ten.
When search for Chometz must be made. The reason why Chometz must be
removed on the fourteenth of Nissan. If a Gentile came into the court of
an Israelite on Passover. Of the Gentile who stored a basketful of
Chometz with Johanan Hakuka. The two thanksgiving-offering cakes laid on
the benches. What R. Hanina the Sagan of the priests said. If there were
doubtful beverages, [14](psc05.htm#page_14)-[29](psc05.htm#page_29)

### CHAPTER II.

MISHNA I. What one may do as long as it is lawful to eat unleavened
bread. Why the Mishna enumerates domestic and wild animals. Whence we
know that no benefit may be derived from leaven on Passover. Wherever it
is written, "Ye shall not eat," the object in question must not even be
used. By means of what a man is permitted to cure himself when in
danger. A man must rather permit himself to be slain than to slay
another. According to whom the Halakha prevails when Rabbi differs with
an individual or tile Majority,
[30](psc06.htm#page_30)-[41](psc06.htm#page_41)

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

MISHNAS II., III., IV., V., VI. Concerning leaven belonging to a
Gentile. Whether a man may eat the leaven of a Gentile. Whether
earthenware pots used during the year must be destroyed before Passover.
About an oven greased with fat immediately after it had been heated. If
a Gentile lent money to an Israelite, taking as security leavened
articles, and *vice versa*. About leaven covered by ruins. About
leavened heave-offering. Whether leavened articles have a pecuniary
value on Passover. With which articles a person acquits himself of the
duty of eating unleavened bread on Passover. Whether one can acquit
himself of the duty with bread kneaded with wine, oil, or honey. What is
meant by bread of affliction. Why it is not allowed to prepare figured
cakes on Passover, [41](psc06.htm#page_41)-[59](psc06.htm#page_59)

MISHNAS VII. to IX. The duty of eating bitter herbs on the Passover.
Whether lettuce is to be preferred to other bitter herbs. About soaking
bran on Passover to feed fowls. Where the mother of Mar b. Rabhina
bought her wheat for her son. Whether it is lawful to put flour into
sauce or mustard. Whether it is lawful to cook the paschal lamb after it
has been roasted. With which kind of water may a woman knead the dough,
[59](psc06.htm#page_59)-[67](psc06.htm#page_67)

### CHAPTER III.

MISHNAS I. to V. Whether Babylonian Kuthach, Median beer, etc., may be
used on Passover. About the paste used by scribes. Whether women are
held to be equal to men in regard to prohibitory laws. About dough in
the holes or crevices of a kneading-trough. About dull dough. How the
first of the dough due to the priest can be separated on the Passover.
About the three women who may knead dough for Passover,
[68](psc07.htm#page_68)-[77](psc07.htm#page_77)

MISHNAS VI., VII., VIII. About dough which commences to become leavened.
If the fourteenth of Nissan fall on the Sabbath, what must be done. When
one going to fulfil a religious duty on the eve of Passover recollects
that he has Chometz left at home. In which case may a scholar enjoy his
meal. For what meritorious purpose a man should sell all his
possessions. What R. Aqiba said about a scholar when he was ignorant.
What sentiment a man who occupies himself with study of the law evokes
in the heart of a common person. Why it is written that the Lord will be
one and His name will be one on that day, and not at present,
[77](psc07.htm#page_77)-[83](psc07.htm#page_83)

### CHAPTER IV.

MISHNAS I., II., III., IV. How a man should conduct himself who removes
from a place where a thing is allowed to a place where it is not
allowed, or *vice versa*. If one depends on the earnings of his wife.
Those who write scrolls, etc., or sell them, etc., do not perceive any
blessing for their work. What Rabba bar bar Hana said to his son. What
R. Johanan b. Elazar related. May we, being versed in the calendar, do
work on the second day of a festival in exile? Whether roasted meat may
be eaten on the night of Passover. What justified Hananiah, Mishaël, and
Azariah to permit themselves to be thrown into the fiery furnace. When
the fire of Gehenna was created. In what respect every man should
consider himself a scholar. What it is permitted to do on the eve and
intermediate days of a festival. What are the six things done by the
inhabitants of Jericho and King Hezekiah, and which met with the rabbis'
approval. Four shouts

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

sent up in the court of the Temple. What happened to Issachar, the man
of the village of Barkai,
[84](psc08.htm#page_84)-[105](psc08.htm#page_105)

### CHAPTER V.

MISHNAS I., II., III., IV., V. The time of offering the paschal lamb. If
the Passover-sacrifice had not been slaughtered for its purpose. If the
paschal lamb was slaughtered for those who will not partake thereof The
inhabitants of what places must not be taught the contents of the book
of ancestry. Since the book of ancestry was concealed, the power of our
sages was on the wane, etc. If a man offers the Passover-sacrifice while
still having leaven in his possession. For how many divisions the
paschal lamb was offered, etc.,
[106](psc09.htm#page_106)-[124](psc09.htm#page_124)

### CHAPTER VI.

MISHNA I. 'Which acts necessary for the sacrifice of the paschal
offering supersede Sabbath. How Hiellel the Elder became Nassi, and what
happened subsequently. What befalls him who is arrogant, and him who
becomes angry. In the future the righteous would have the power to
arouse the dead. How pleasing the fulfilment of a religious duty at its
proper time was to our ancestors,
[125](psc10.htm#page_125)-[133](psc10.htm#page_133)

MISHNAS II., III. Under what circumstances it is allowed to bring a
festal offering in addition to the paschal sacrifice. What is meant by
Abhin Thekla? (See note.) If a person brought a paschal sacrifice on the
Sabbath not for its proper purpose. What R. Hyya of Abel Arab declared,
[133](psc10.htm#page_133)-[142](psc10.htm#page_142)

### CHAPTER VII.

MISHNAS I., II., III., IV., V. How the paschal lamb should be roasted.
About diluted vinegar, whether it may be used. If any part of the
roasted lamb had touched the earthenware oven on which it was roasted.
The five kinds of sacrifices that may be brought by those who are in a
state of ritual uncleanness. If the flesh of the paschal sacrifice has
become ritually defiled. If the whole or the greater part of the
congregation had become defiled. If one half of the congregation be
clean, and the other half unclean,
[143](psc11.htm#page_143)-[172](psc11.htm#page_172)

MISHNAS VI., VII., VIII., IX., X. For what defilements the golden plate
of the high-priest atones. When, and with which wood, must the Iamb be
burned, if defiled. If a slaughtered Passover-sacrifice had been carried
beyond the walls of Jerusalem. When the bones, sinews, etc., must be
burned. Which part of the paschal kid or lamb may be eaten,
[156](psc11.htm#page_156)-[165](psc11.htm#page_165)

MISHNAS XI., XII., XIII. What penalty is due for breaking any bones of
the clean paschal lamb. If a part of a member of the paschal sacrifice
protrude beyond the Temple, etc. If two companies eat their paschal
sacrifice in one room, and if there is among them a bride, what they and
she must do. What was said and done when R. Ishmael b. R. Jose happened
to be a guest of R. Simeon b. R. Jose b. Lakunia,
[165](psc11.htm#page_165)-[172](psc11.htm#page_172)

### CHAPTER VIII.

MISHNAS I., II., III., IV., V. If two paschal lambs were slaughtered for
a lying-in woman by her relatives. The Hagadic explanation of the verses

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

in Solomon's Song viii. 8, and viii. 10, etc. The legend of what the
Holy One, blessed be He, said to Prophet Hosea, what he answered Him,
and what befell subsequently. Woe is to a dominion that overwhelms its
own master. For what purpose Israel was sent into exile. The reason why
the Romans did not destroy all Israelites. Why Israel was exiled to
Babylon. The day on which all the children of Israel will be recalled
from exile will be as great as that on which the world was created. If a
person order his slave to go and slaughter for him the paschal
sacrifice. If a man say to his sons, I slaughter the paschal sacrifice
for whichever one of you shall arrive first in Jerusalem. The size of an
olive of the paschal lamb suffices for those who partake of it. If a
person had appointed others to partake with him of his share,
[173](psc12.htm#page_173)-[185](psc12.htm#page_185)

MISHNAS VI., VII., VIII., IX. Whether one whose seventh day of
sprinkling fall on the eve of Passover may partake of the paschal lamb.
A mourner who has lost a relative on the 14th of Nissan. A prisoner who
has the assurance of a release. Whether the paschal sacrifice must be
slaughtered for a single individual. Whether a mourner for a near
relative, not yet interred, may eat of the paschal sacrifice. When a
Gentile proselyte may partake of it,
[185](psc12.htm#page_185)-[190](psc12.htm#page_190)

### CHAPTER IX.

MISHNAS I., II., III. Who must observe the second Passover. Must a woman
bring a second Passover-offering? Concerning neglecting to sacrifice.
What must be considered a distant journey? How much the entire world
measures, What the disciples of Elijah taught. The difference between
the sages of Israel and of the Gentiles. The difference between the
first and second Passover. Concerning the Hallel at the slaughtering of
sacrifices, [191](psc13.htm#page_191)-[201](psc13.htm#page_201)

MISHNAS IV., V., VI., VII., VIII., IX. When the paschal sacrifice was
brought in a state of defilement. Was it prohibited at the Egyptian
Passover to eat leaven on that one night? What R. Jehoshua heard from
his teachers and could not explain, R. Aqiba explained. When the animal
must be left to graze. If a paschal sacrifice had become mixed with
other animals. If a company has lost their paschal sacrifice. When a
paschal offering of two individuals has become mixed,
[201](psc13.htm#page_201)-[209](psc13.htm#page_209)

### CHAPTER X.

MISHNA I. When and what must be eaten on the eve of Passover, and how
many cups of wine must be partaken during the night. R. Simeon b.
Gamaliel, R. Jehudah, R. Jose were partaking a meal on the eve of
Sabbath in the city of Achu. Once Rabba b. R. Huna came to the house of
the Exilarch. Whether one who has heard the Kiddush in the synagogue
must repeat it at home. If Sabbath had set during the course of a meal
at which a company were sitting. Concerning the order of the
benedictions. Concerning the holiday prayers, what must be said. What
should be the conclusion of the Habdalah. How R. Itz'hak sent his son to
Ula, and his answer. Whether the honor of the Sabbath is more important
than that of the eve preceding it. The eight things about the Habdalah
prayer. How R. Ashi recited the

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

great Kiddush when he came to Mehuzza. If one had thoughtlessly eaten
before Kiddush or Habdalah, may he say these prayers? May the Kiddush be
made over beer? What is meant by the time of Min'hah, and when King
Agrippa usually took his meal. Whether women must also drink the four
cups. What taste and color must the wine have. It is the duty of every
man to cause his household and his children to rejoice on a festival.
About the even numbers (see note, p. 229). The seven things R. Aqiba
commanded his son R. Jehoshua. The five things R. Aqiba, while in
prison, commanded R. Simeon b. Jochai. The four things our holy Rabbi
commanded his children. The three things R. Jose b. R. Jehudah commanded
Rabbi. Why a man should not go out alone at night. What Rabbi said to
Aibo, his son. The three things R. Jehoshua b. Levi said in the name of
the great men of Jerusalem. Three kinds of men shall inherit the world
to come. How R. Hanina and R. Oshiya made shoes for the prostitutes. The
three kinds of men whom the Holy One, blessed be He, loves. The three
kinds of men who do not live a life worth living. The three species who
hate others of their own kind. The three kinds of beings who love others
of their kind. Five things which Canaan commanded his children. Six
things said of a horse,
[210](psc14.htm#page_210)-[236](psc14.htm#page_236)

MISHNAS II., III., IV., V. When the first cup is poured out. Herbs and
vegetables are to be brought. The benediction of the bitter herbs. Why
the bitter herbs should not be placed between unleavened cakes. If a man
swallowed unleavened bread. When the table on which the food is served
should be removed. What serves as a remembrance of the apple-trees. A
second cup of wine is poured out. What Rabbon Gamaliel used to say,
"Hallelujah." How far is the Hallel to be said? Why a blind man is
exempt from the recital of the Haggada. With ten different expressions
of praise the entire Book of Psalms was composed. Who said the Hallel?
What the Karaites add to these verses, Is Hallelujah the beginning or
the end of the chapters? What Rabba discovered that the sages of
Pumbaditha once proclaimed,
[236](psc14.htm#page_236)-[249](psc14.htm#page_249)

MISHNAS VI., VII., VIII. A third cup of wine is poured out. Why is this
called the great Hallel? The laboriousness of a man's earning his daily
bread. Why the small Hallel must be recited at the Passover-meal. What
occurred when Nebuchadnezzar threw Hananiah, Mishaël, and Azariah into
the furnace. Who said: "The truth of the Lord endureth for ever"? What
R. Ishmael sent to Rabbi in the name of his father. Who will get the cup
of benediction. Is it unlawful to conclude the eating of the paschal
sacrifice with a dessert? Is it obligatory to eat Matzoth during all the
seven days? If any of the company fall asleep during the meal. About the
blessing of the paschal and festal offerings. R. Simlai at the
redemption of a first-born son,
[249](psc14.htm#page_249)-[259](psc14.htm#page_259)

APPENDIX A. Explanatory of the first Mishna. APPENDIX B. Supplementary
to the second note, [p. 66](psc06.htm#page_66), <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)
[250](psc14.htm#page_250)-[264](psc16.htm#page_264)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vii:1](psc04.htm#fr_0) See introduction to the
synopsis in Tract Sabbath, Vol. I., p. ix.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xi:1](psc04.htm#fr_1) We were told that some
readers made reference to the synopsis instead of to the text. We have
therefore, in the synopsis of this tract, omitted all conclusions. We
will do so, likewise, in the future.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Concerning the Removal of Leaven from the
House](psc05)
