[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](yom06)  [Next](yom08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 3: Tracts Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*,
tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

# CHAPTER II.

CONCERNING THE LOTS THE PRIESTS DREW, WHAT PRIESTS SHOULD GO TO THE
ALTAR, AND HOW MANY PRIESTS WERE NEEDED FOR EACH SACRIFICE.

MISHNA: Formerly, whoever desired to clear the altar of the ashes did
so. When there were many of them (priests), they ran on the staircase
(leading to the top of altar). Whoever first came within four ells,
merited it. When two were on a par, the superintendent said to them (all
priests): Put forth your fingers. Which did they put forth? One or two,
but not the thumb in the Temple (which were counted instead of the
persons they belonged to, and the service was given to the last).

Once an accident happened: one of two who were running up the staircase
pushed his companion, so that he fell, and broke his foot. Seeing that
it is attended by accidents, the Beth Din made the reform, that the
altar should be cleared by lot. There were four lots: this is the first
lot.

GEMARA: Why had not lots been used formerly? Previously it was thought
that since it is done by night and not considered an important service
by the priests, they would not come in considerable number, but when it
was seen that the case was otherwise, this reform was made.

Was this reform only for this purpose? We know that he who cleared the
ashes also arranged the pieces of wood on the altar, and brought the two
measures of wood, and that was considered an important service? Said R.
Ashi: Two reforms were made: at first, when it had been thought they
would not come in considerable numbers, no lot was used at all; then,
when it was observed that they came and accidents happened, the use of
the lot was introduced. Then the priests ceased to come, since they were
not sure of drawing the lot at all. It was then reformed, that he who
clears the ashes should arrange the pieces of wood and bring the two
measures also, that the priests might come to draw the lot, since it
would be for important services.

"*Put forth your fingers*." We have learned in a Boraitha:

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "He said to them
thus. Put out your fingers, that they be counted." Why did he not count
the persons themselves? This can be a support to what R. Itz'hak has
said: "Israel must not be counted, even for religious duties." As it is
written \[1 Sam. xv. 4\]: "And Saul ordered the people to assemble, and
he numbered them by means of lambs." <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13)
Said R. Elazar: Whoever numbers Israel, trespasses a negative
commandment, because it is written \[Hosea ii. 1\]: "Yet shall the
number of the children of Israel be like the sand of the sea, which may
not be numbered." R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak says: He trespasses two
commandments, as it is written, which cannot be measured nor numbered.
R. Samuel b. Na'hman, in the name of R. Jonathan, found a contradiction
in the same passage: It is written that the number of Israel will be
like that of the sand (then a definite number is given), and then it is
said, it cannot be counted--that is, has no number. It presents no
difficulty: When Israel shall do the will of God, they will be without
number; but when they do not do God's will, they will be of a definite
number. Rabbi in the name of Abbi Joseph b. Dustai says: There is no
contradiction in it. Men cannot count the sand, but in Heaven they can
count it.

R. Huna. said: How secure and careless should the man feet that knows
that the Lord helps him: Saul committed only one sin; he lost his
royalty: David committed two sins, and yet retained it. Saul's sin was,
that he spared Agag. But he massacred the priests of Nob? That which is
written \[1 Sam. xv. 11\], "I repent that I have set up Saul as king,"
was said already an the occasion of the sin of Agag \[which was the
first, chronologically\]. What are David's two sins? That of Uriah and
his numbering of Israel. But there is a third one? That of Bath-Sheba?
For that of Bath-Sheba he was punished, as it is written \[2 Sam. xii.
6\]: "For the ewe he shall pay fourfold." What were the four
punishments? The death of Bath-Sheba's child, the death of Amnon, the
misfortune of Tamar, and Absalom. But for numbering Israel he was also
chastised? As it is written \[2 Sam. xxiv. 15\]: "And the Lord sent a
pestilence in Israel from the morning even to the time appointed." In
that case all Israel was chastised, but not he himself. But in those
instances it was also his children on whom the wrath was visited) not on

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

himself? Nay, he was personally punished, too. As R. Jehudah says in the
name of Rabh: For six months David became leprous, and the Sanhedrin
separated themselves from him, and the Shekhina. As it is written \[Ps.
cxix. 79\]: "Let those that fear thee return unto me, and those that
know thy testimonies." And it is written \[ibid. li. 14\]: "Restore unto
me the gladness of thy salvation." (The first refers to the Sanhedrin,
and the second to the Shekhina.) But did not David also believe
calumnies? (of Ziba). For this he was also punished, for R. Jehudah said
in the name of Rabh, when David said to Mephibosheth \[2 Sam. xix. 30\],
"I have said, Thou and Ziba shall divide the field," a heavenly voice
was heard, proclaiming that Rehoboam and Jeroboam should divide the
kingdom.

It is written \[1 Sam. xii. i\]: "One year old was Saul in his
reign." <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) Said R. Huna: That means, he
was innocent of sin as a child of one year. R. Jehudah said in the name
of Samuel: Why did not Saul's dynasty last long? Because there was no
stain on his whole family. And R. Johanan in the name of R. Simeon b.
Jehozadak said: A man must not be made the head of a congregation unless
he has a whole heap of reptiles (family disgraces) at his back, in order
that, if he should become haughty, people should be able to say to him:
Look around, behind your back. R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh said: Why
was Saul punished? Because he was willing to dispense with honors. As it
is written \[1 Sam. x. 27\]: "But the worthless men said, in what can
this one help us? And they despised him, and brought him no presents.
But he acted as though he were deaf." And soon after this is written:
"Then came up Nachash the Ammonite," etc.

R. Johanan in the name of R. Simeon b. Jehozadak said again: A scholar
who is not revengeful and remembers not injuries as a serpent, cannot be
called "Talmud Hakham" (a teacher). But it is written \[Lev. xix. 18\]:
"Thou shalt not avenge nor bear any grudge"? There precautionary matters
are spoken of (but in regard to bodily pain or honor it is different).
As we have learned in the following Boraitha: "What is called revenge,
and what is called bearing a grudge? Revenge is such a case: When one
comes to the other, and asks him to lend a sickle to him, he says: Nay.
On the morrow, the second comes to the first, and wants to borrow an
axe. He answers:

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I do not wish to
lend to you, as you have not lent to me. This is called revenge. What is
bearing a grudge? When one comes to another, and asks him to loan him an
axe, and does not get it. On the morrow the second comes to the first,
and wants to borrow a shirt. He answers: I lend it to you, because I am
not like you, who did not want to lend me yesterday. This is called
bearing a grudge." But in case of bodily pain, has not the Torah
forbidden vengeance? Have we not learned in the following Boraitha:
"Those who are wronged and not wronging, bear their shame and do not
reply, do good deeds out of love, and rejoice not at afflictions, of
them says the verse \[Judges v. 31\]: 'Those that love him are as the
rising sun in his might.'"

Reply they should not bear a grudge in their hearts they may (and if
*another* party avenges them, they need not interfere). Is that so? Did
not Rabha say: He who leaves his injuries unavenged, will have his sins
forgiven in Heaven? That means, if the offender comes to propitiate him,
he should pardon.

"*Which? One, or two?*" If two, why is it said at all, one (or two)?
This applies to those who have a disease, that they cannot stretch forth
one finger, without stretching out the other also. We have learned in
the following Boraitha: They used to put out one finger when healthy,
but when diseased, they could stretch out two.

"*Once an accident*," etc. The rabbis taught: It once happened two
priests were running, and were on a par. When they came to the top, one
outstripped the other by four ells; he took a knife and stuck it into
the other one's breast. R. Zadok stood on the staircase of the porch,
and said: Brethren of Israel, hear! It is written \[Deut. xxi. i\]: "If
there be found a slain person in the land . . . shall take a heifer."
For whom shall we bring the heifer? For the city, or for the Temple? The
whole people began to weep. Then the father of the young man arrived,
and found him yet agonizing. He said: "May he (the dead) be an atonement
for your sins; and as he shows yet signs of life, the knife has not
become unclean (since he still lived)." We may infer from this, that the
defilement of the knife was considered by them as a yet greater
misfortune than bloodshed.

The rabbis taught: It is written \[Lev. vi. 4\] . "He shall put off his
garments, and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes." We
might think that, as on the Day of Atonement, he should strip himself of
his holy garments and put on profane

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

garments, for removing the ashes. Therefore it is written in both cases
"garments," that from the analogy of expression we should understand
that both are holy garments. And by "other," older ones are meant. R.
Eliezer, however, said: From the expression "other garments, and carry
forth," we can infer that even a blemished priest may carry forth the
ashes. Said Resh Lakish: As R. Eliezer and the first Tana differ about
the carrying forth of ashes, so do they differ about the lifting up of
the ashes from the altar. R. Johanan, however, said: They differ only
about the carrying forth of the ashes, but about the lifting up all
agree that it is a respectable service, which only an unblemished priest
may perform. What is the reason of Resh Lakish, who says they differ on
this point too? The reason of Resh Lakish is: If it were a real service,
could it be performed only in two garments \[ibid. 3\]? And what will R.
Johanan say to this? He says: The Torah only specifies these two, but
all four are meant.

Rabh said: For performing the following four services a lay. man
deserves capital punishment: namely, sprinkling, offering of incense
officiating at the water-offering and the wine-offering. And so also
Levi taught in his Boraitha; also as to the lifting of the ashes. What
is the reason of Rabh's decree? Because it is written \[Num. xviii. 7\]:
"And thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priesthood concerning
every matter of the altar, and for that within the vail, where ye shall
serve; as a service of gift do I give you your priesthood; and the
stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death." Service of gift, but
not of removing. Levi says: It is written, "Every matter of the altar,"
which includes all things. Rabha pro. pounded a question: How about a
service of removing from an altar in the Temple (inner)? Is this
considered by Rabh like a service of gift, or like a service of removal?
Rabha decided later, it is written \[ibid.\], "and for that within the
vail"; but it is written, "and within the vail": that makes the service
like to a service of removing. We have learned in one Boraitha according
to Rabh, and in another according to Levi. According to Rabh we have
learned as follows: "The services for which the layman is guilty of
death are: Sprinkling of blood, inside or in the Holy of Holies (on the
Day of Atonement); sprinkling the blood of a sin-offering of a bird;
wringing-out of a bird's blood which is a burnt-offering \[Lev. i. 15\];
and officiating at the offering of three *lugs* of water or three lugs
of wine." We

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

have learned according to Levi as follows: "The services for which a
layman is guilty of capital punishment are: Removing the ashes;
performing the seven sprinklings within, and on a leper; and offering on
the altar something either fit or unfit."

Wherefore was the drawing of lots repeated? Said R. Johanan: To cause
more excitement in the Temple, as it is written \[Ps. xv. 15\]: "So that
we took sweet secret counsel together, and walked unto the house of God
in a great company."

In what garments were the lots drawn? R. Na'hman says, in ordinary
garments; R. Shesheth says, in holy ones. R. Na'hman says, in ordinary
clothes, because some of the priests being strong men, they could snatch
the lot by force, and go to perform the service, if they had the holy
garments on. R. Shesheth says, in holy garments, because, if they had
the ordinary ones on, they might by absence of mind perform the service
in them, since they were very eager to perform the service.

MISHNA: The second lot (determined) who should slaughter, who sprinkle,
who should clear of ashes the inner altar and who care for the lamp, who
should take up members to the staircase of the altar: the head, the leg,
the two forelegs, the tail (tip of tail), the (left) leg (hind), the
chest, the windpipe, the two flanks, the entrails, the fine flour, the
things made in pans \[1 Chron. ix. 31\], and the wine.

Thirteen priests are privileged to do all this. Ben Azai, however, said,
in the presence of R. Aqiba, in the name of R. Joshua: It (the animal)
was offered as it had walked. (See Gemara.)

GEMARA: The schoolmen propounded a question: Were the lots drawn for
each service separately, or at once for all services? Come and hear: R.
Hiya taught, the lots were not drawn for each service separately; but
the priest who had drawn the lot of the daily offering, obtained the
service for the other twelve following him.

"*The second lot*," etc. The schoolmen propounded a question: Who
received the blood into the basin, the priest that slaughtered or the
priest that sprinkled? Come and hear! We have learned that Ben Katin
made twelve cocks for the laver, that twelve priests might sanctify
their hands at once. If the priest that slaughtered received the blood,
then thirteen cocks would have been needed. Hence infer that the
sprinkler did it.

"*Ben Azai said*," etc. The rabbis taught: What is meant

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

by "it had walked"? In the following order: The head and the leg, the
chest, the stomach, the windpipe, the two forelegs, the two flanks, the
tip of the tail, and the other hind leg. R. Jose says: As it has been
stripped, so it was offered. How had it been stripped? The head, the
leg, the tail, the other leg, the two flanks, the two forelegs, the
chest, the windpipe.

R. Aqiba says: As it has been cut to pieces. How had it then, been cut
to pieces? The head, the leg, the two forelegs, the chest, the windpipe,
the two flanks, the tail, and the other leg. R. Joseph the Galilean
says: According to the excellence of the members. How is that? The head,
the leg, the chest, the windpipe, the two flanks, the tail, the other
leg, and the two forelegs. Said Rabba: Our Tana and R. Jose both agree
that the members are to be offered in the order of their excellence.
One, however, says, according to the size of the members; the other,
according to the fatness. Why the head and leg together, according to
all? Because the head contains too many bones, the leg, which contains
more flesh, is added.

MISHNA: The third lot was drawn by new (priests) who had not yet fumed
incense; the fourth, by new and old ones, (to determine) who should take
up the members (parts) from the staircase to the altar.

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha: No man has repeatedly offered
incense. What is the reason? Said R. Hanina: Because the offering of
incense renders rich. Said R. Papa to Abayi: Whence do we deduce this?
Shall we assume this, because it is written \[Deut. xxxiii. 10\], "They
shall put incense before thee," and in the next verse, "Bless, O Lord,
his substance"? Then it should not be due to incense alone, since at the
end of the tenth verse it is also written, "and whole burnt sacrifice
upon thy altar." He answered him: A burnt-offering is frequent (besides
being a daily sacrifice, it was offered by many individuals, and all
could not get rich), but incense is not frequent.

Rabba said: You will not find a young scholar who decides questions in
Law, who should not be of the tribe of Levi or Issachar. Levi, as it is
written \[ibid.\]: "They (the tribe of Levi) shall teach thy ordinances
unto Jacob; and Issachar, because it is written \[1 Chron. xii. 32\]:
"And of the children of Issachar, those who had understanding of the
times." But why not also Jehudah? As it is written \[Ps. Ix. 9\]: "Judah
is my lawgiver." I mean, to deduce the traditional

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

sayings from the written Law (this can only do those of Levi and
Issachar).

R. Johanan said: For the evening daily offering, lots were never drawn;
he who had drawn the lot for that of the morning performed this service
also.

MISHNA: \[The parts of\] the daily sacrifice are offered \[according to
circumstances\] by nine, ten, eleven, twelve--no less and no more. How
so? Itself by nine. During the Feast \[of Booths\] one carries a pitcher
of water; thus it is ten. Toward evening by eleven, itself by nine, and
two carrying two measures <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) of wood.
On Sabbath by eleven, itself by nine, and two having in their hands two
spoonfuls of frankincense for the showbread. On the Sabbath which occurs
in the middle of the Feast \[of Booths\], one carrying a pitcher of
water \[added to the eleven\].

GEMARA: Said R. Abba, according to others Rami b. Hama or R. Johanan:
Water must be offered during the Feast of Tabernacles only with the
morning daily offering, but not with that of evening. This we deduce
from the Mishna which states: When the Sabbath occurs during the
festival, one is added for carrying water. If water had to be offered
with the evening offering also, then it would occur on another day of
the festival than a Sabbath, as two carry measures of wood, and a third
would be needed for carrying the water (and twelve were needed).

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Simeon b. Jochai said: Whence do we
deduce that the daily evening offering requires two measures of wood,
carried by two priests? Since it is written \[Lev. i. 7\], "And (they
shall) lay the wood in order," and as this cannot occur in case of the
morning daily offering, as it is written \[ibid. vi. 5\], "The priest
shall burn wood upon it every morning, and he shall lay in order upon it
the burnt-offering," we must suppose, then, that what has been said
before, applies to the daily evening offering.

R. Hiya taught: The lots amounted sometimes to thirteen, sometimes to
fourteen, or fifteen, or sixteen (fourteen on the Feast of Tabernacles,
for the pitcher of water; fifteen on the Sabbath; sixteen for the
Sabbath during the Feast of Tabernacles).

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But did we not
learn, seventeen? That Boraitha is not according to R. Eliezer b. Jacob,
but according to R. Jehudah.

MISHNA: A ram was offered by eleven: the flesh by five; the entrails,
fine flour, and wine by two, respectively. A bull is offered by
twenty-four: the head by one, the hind leg by two, the tail by two, and
the \[left\] hind leg by two; the chest by one, the windpipe by three,
the two forelegs by two, the two flanks by two; the entrails, fine
flour, and wine by three, respectively. This refers to public
sacrifices. A private sacrifice could be offered, if one chose, by one.
In respect of skinning and cutting to pieces, both \[sacrifices\] are
equal \[private or public, both may be skinned, etc., by a stranger\].

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha: The flaying and cutting into
pieces may be performed by a layman. Said Hezkiah: Whence do we deduce
this? Because it is written \[Lev. i. 7\]: "And the sons of Aaron the
priest shall put fire upon the altar." Hence only the fire must be put
by priests, but the flaying may be done by others. But this verse is
needful for its own sake, how can it be deduced from it? Said R. Simeon
b. Ashi: I once heard how Abayi explained it to his son as follows: It
is written \[ibid. 5\]: "*He* shall kill." A layman is meant. How is
this known? Because it is written \[Num. xviii. 7\], "And thou and thy
sons with thee shall keep your priesthood," one might say, that the
slaughtering is also meant. Therefore it is written: "And he shall kill
the young steer before the Lord and the sons of Aaron the priest shall
bring near the blood." From this we see that all that precedes the
bringing near of the blood may be done by a layman. And it is also
written \[Lev. iii. 2\]: "And he shall lay his hand . . . and kill it."
From this it can be deduced that the layman who has laid his hand upon
it may kill it.

\[Rashi explains, that all this is stated in a Mishna elsewhere, and
Abayi explained to his son that what Hezkiah had said is in accordance
with that Mishna.\] Now let us see: We have concluded that from the
sprinkling of the blood onwards all must be performed by priests; and
the fire is put upon the altar later. Why is it then necessary to say
that Aaron's sons should do it? This is to exclude the flaying and
cutting into pieces, which, though they come after the sprinkling of the
blood, may be done by a layman.

It was taught: R. Assi in the name of R. Johanan said: If a layman has
put the two measures of wood on the altar, he is

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

liable to capital punishment, as it is a service belonging to the
following day (and not the final service of the night). Rabba opposed:
According to this supposition (that it is a service of the day), a lot
had to be drawn? Rabba has forgotten what we have learned above, that he
who drew the lot to lift the ashes, also obtained the privilege to
arrange the measures of wood. Said Mar Zutra, according to others R.
Ashi: How can it be said it is a service of the next day? Did we not
learn further in the Mishna: "Go and see whether it is time to
slaughter"? If the arranging of the wood was also a service of the next
day, why was not this mentioned likewise (for if it were done when it
was yet night it would be invalid)? This is no difficulty.

If the animal was slaughtered before the time, it was invalid, but if
the wood was put on before the time, it could be removed and replaced by
a priest after daybreak. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[31:1](yom07.htm#fr_13) The Talmud translates
*Telaim* lambs, but the ordinary versions regard it as a proper name.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[32:1](yom07.htm#fr_14) Literally it is thus,
but translators have it, "When he had reigned one year."

<span id="fn_15"></span>[37:1](yom07.htm#fr_15) The Hebrew term is
Gizrin--‏גזרין‎. After Jost, we have translated it in Shekalim, VI.,
*f*., p. 28, "cords"; but as it is too heavy for two men to carry two
cords of wood, we have here translated only "measures," and according to
all commentators on the Mishna it is a certain measure of wood for the
altar, unknown to us.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[39:1](yom07.htm#fr_16) In the text there is
still another interpretation, that R. Johanan means to say that the
service in question is but the final service of the night and does not
belong to the day; and again, questions and answers are raised and made,
and it is so complicated that both Rashi and Tosaphoth could not explain
it without additions and omissions, and the result seems to be, after
all, that the service belongs to the day. We have therefore, contrary to
our method, omitted it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Time of the Daily Offering; Entry of a Layman into
the Temple Court; Order of High-Priests' Service on Day of
Atonement](yom08)
