[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](yom10)  [Next](yom12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 3: Tracts Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*,
tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE HE-GOATS OF THE DAY OF ATONEMENT AND THE
SENDING TO THE DESERT, AND THE CONFESSION THEREAT.

MISHNA: It is a merit that the two he-goats for the Day of Atonement
should be equal in color, stature, and price, and both (bought) at the
same time; but if they are not equal, they may still be used. If one was
bought to-day, and the other on the morrow, they are valid. If one of
them died, then if this occurs before the lots are drawn, another is
purchased to make up the pair; but if later, then a new pair should be
acquired. Lots should be drawn again, and this should be said: If the
Lord's he-goat has died, "The one on which the lot has fallen for the
Lord may substitute him"; and if that of Azazel has died, "The one on
which the lot has fallen for Azazel may substitute him." And the
remaining one of the previous pair should be allowed to feed (graze)
till it chance to get a blemish, when it is sold, and the money goes as
a gift-offering, since an animal designed to atone for the congregation
is not put to death. R. Jehudah says, it is (put to death). Also said R.
Jehudah: If the blood \[of the Lord's he-goat, when slaughtered\] had
already been spilled, the scapegoat should be put to death; if the
scapegoat had died, the other one's blood should be poured out \[and a
new pair purchased\].

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: It is written \[Lev. xvi. 5\]: "He shall take
two goats." Why is it mentioned, *two*? If it were in the plural, we
would know, not less than two. It is meant, then, the two should be
equals. How, then, do we know that when they were unlike they were still
valid? Because it is written twice "goats" \[ibid. 9, 10\], That shows,
that if they were not alike they were still valid. But if "goat" were
not repeated twice, they would have been, according to you, invalid?
Whence would you deduce this? At the first glance, we would say, because
it is written thrice "two" \[ibid. 5, 7, 8\]; but if the repetition of
"goat" makes it valid, wherefore is this 87

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

repeated thrice? Infer from this, it is a merit that they be, first,
equal in color; secondly, in stature; thirdly, in price. We have also
learned thus in a Boraitha of sheep offered by lepers: It is written
"two sheep." *Sheep* would suffice? From this it is also inferred they
should be like each other, as stated above. But how do we know that if
they are unlike each other they are valid? Because it is written "one
sheep." The same Boraitha states in relation to the burnt-offering of a
leper; there it is also written "two birds." The *two* could be
dispensed with; and from the word *two* it is inferred that they should
be alike. If it is so, why should we not say the same of the daily
offerings, about which it is also written "*two* sheep"? This *two* is
needed for what is stated in the following Boraitha: It is written
\[Num. xxviii. 3\]: "Two on every day." From this we infer that it must
be before the day's arrival (daybreak). (This is explained in Tract
Tamid.)

The rabbis taught: Should the two he-goats of the Day of Atonement have
been slaughtered outside of the Temple, if this was done before the
drawing of the lots, he is culpable for both; but if later, he is
culpable only for that designed for the Lord (not that for Azazel. Why
should he be culpable?) Before the lots have been drawn, what are as yet
these simple. he-goats fit for? Said R. Hisda: Because they are fit for
the additional sacrifices of the Day of Atonement, which are sacrificed
outside of the Temple. (But how is this to be understood?) Why are they
not fit to be sacrificed inside? Because the lots have not been drawn.
The same is the case with the additional sacrifices; since all the
services preceding these have not yet been performed they are not fit
for additional sacrifices either?

R. Hisda holds: The inappropriate time is not to be compared with the
unfitness of the goat itself (before the lots are drawn).

"*If the Lord's he-goat dies*." Said Rabh: The second of the first pair
must be sacrificed, but the second of the second pair must be left to
graze. R. Johanan says conversely. On what point do they differ? Rabh
says: A living thing is not postponed. (The second goat of the first
pair, being fit, should not be postponed in favor of another goat to be
sought out), and R. Johanan says, that such are postponed. What is
Rabh's reason? Because he deduces it from the too early time; as he was
unfit only as long as he had no fellow, he is fit henceforth. What
comparison is this? In that case the he-goat was not yet

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

fit for anything, but here he has been already postponed. Why not
continue to be postponed? Therefore we must say: Rabh deduces it from a
temporary blemish. After the blemish has passed away, he is fit; so
here, his unfitness is considered temporary.

According to Rabh's theory (that a living thing is not postponed), why
only the second of the first pair and not as well of the second pair,
say, then, he can choose which he likes? Said Rabha: Rabh holds as R.
Jose that it is a merit to use the first (as mentioned at the end of the
preceding chapter). Rabha said: It seems to us, that our Mishna is in
accordance with Rabh, and a Boraitha is in accordance with R. Johanan.
In our Mishna, it is stated: If the Lord's he-goat dies, the one on
which the lot has fallen for the Lord shall substitute him; from this we
infer that the other one continues to be as it has been. A Boraitha is
according to R. Johanan, as we have learned: It is said in the
Mishna <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20): The second should be allowed
to graze. We do not know whether the second of the first or second pair.
As it is written \[Lev. xvi. 10\]: "Shall be placed alive." Placed
*alive*, not the one whose fellow is dead. How can that be inferred?
"*Shall be* placed alive," signifies that it shall be placed alive
*now*. But the one whose fellow had died has been left alive already. An
objection was raised from the following sentence in our Mishna: "R.
Jehudah said also: If the blood of the Lord's he-goat had been spilled,
the scapegoat should be put to death; if the scapegoat had died, the
other one's blood should be poured out." It is right according to Rabh,
who says that, according to the first Tana, living things are not
postponed, and the second of the second pair is to be left to graze; and
what R. Jehudah says of its being put to death refers to the second of
the first pair. It is right according to Rabh, who says that according
to the first Tana a living thing is not postponed, as it is said in the
Mishna, "also said R. Jehudah." That is to say, he differs on two
points: first, whether a sin-offering for the congregation is put to
death (he says, it shall be put to death), and whether a living thing is
postponed. R. Jehudah says, it is postponed, and shall be put to death,
and the second of the first pair shall be put to death. But according to
R. Johanan, who explains that the first Tana means to say the second of
the second pair

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

(shall be sacrificed), but of the first shall be put to death, because a
living thing can be postponed, consequently R. Jehudah differs from the
first Tana only on one point, on the congregational offering. Why does
the Mishna say, "and also"? This difficulty remains. (From this we see,
the Mishna is according to Rabh, not R. Johanan.)

"*If the blood has been spilled, the scapegoat should be put to death*."
It is right that if the blood has been spilled, the scapegoat should be
put to death, because the duty with the blood has not been fulfilled
yet; but if the scapegoat has died, why should the blood be poured out?
The duty (of drawing the lots, and of slaughtering the first) has been
fulfilled already. Why need the blood be poured out? Said the disciples
of R. Janai: Because it is written \[ibid.\]: "Shall be placed alive
before the Lord, to make an atonement for him." That means he (the
scapegoat) shall be alive till the atonement with the blood (of the
other goat) has been made (and when he has died before, the blood must
be poured out).

We have learned in a Boraitha about the Mishna in Shekalim, II., *a*.
"If the inhabitants of a town sent their Shekalim," etc., as far as,
"and nothing is credited to next year's account" (pp. 7, 8). R. Jehudah,
however, said, they may be credited to next year's account. What is the
reason of R. Jehudah? Said Rabba: R. Jehudah holds, the duties to be
paid this year may be paid the next year. Abayi objected: From the
following Tosephtha: The bullock and the he-goat of the Day of
Atonement, if lost, and the he-goats offered for idolatry, if lost, and
substituted by others and then recovered, then all should be put to
death. So says R. Jehudah. If the duties of this year can be paid the
next year, they could be left for the next year? Rabh answered: You want
to compare the he-goats for idolatry to congregational sacrifices. The
latter are quite different. This is as R. Tebi said in the name of R.
Joshiah: It is written \[Num. xxviii. 14\]: "This is the burnt-offering
of the new moon for every month throughout the months of the year." The
Torah says: Proclaim it a new month, and also bring a sacrifice from
*the new products* (Rosh Hashana, p. 9). This would be right in case of
the he-goat, for it comes from the congregational funds; but the
bullock, which is from the high-priest's, what can be said to it? And,
secondly, what R. Tebi said in the name of R. Joshiah is only a merit,
but not a duty, as R. Jehudah said in the name of Samuel \[ibid.,
ibid.\], that if it was done it is acceptable?

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

Therefore says R. Zerah: The reason is, that the lot cannot determine
during this year for the next year. Let him draw lots the next year? It
is a precautionary measure, lest it be said that the lot does determine
during one year for the next year. All this is right of the he-goat? But
why should the bullock, for which no lots are drawn, be put to death? It
is a precautionary measure, lest one should deal with the he-goat as one
would with the bullock.

Shall he then be put to death for a precautionary measure against what
itself is a precautionary measure? Therefore, says Rabha: It is a
precautionary measure, lest there should be a mistake. What mistake can
be made? That of sacrificing them (if left to graze). Then this
apprehension ought to exist in all cases where animals are left to graze
(till they get a blemish and are sold)? If that of shearing their wool,
or using them for work, the same fear ought to exist in all cases where
invalid sacrifices are left to graze? The mistake of sacrificing them is
meant, but for others there is no intention to sacrifice them at any
time, as they are left to graze until they get a blemish; therefore a
mistake cannot come to pass. But here, as the he-goat must be kept until
the Day of Atonement of the next year, and it may be sacrificed by
mistake before (the owner will take care it should not get a blemish).
And whether a precautionary measure is taken against a mistake or not,
the Tanaim of the two following Boraithas differ: one states, that a
paschal sacrifice that has not been sacrificed during Passover may be
sacrificed during the second Passover (the succeeding month, when those
unclean before, celebrate it); and when not during the second Passover,
it may be reserved for the Passover of the next year. And in another
Boraitha we have learned: It may not be sacrificed at all. They differ,
then, about the apprehension of a mistake; the Tana of the last Boraitha
fears a mistake, and that of the first does not.

MISHNA: He comes to the scapegoat, and puts both hands on him, and
confesses, using the following expression: I beseech Thee, Jehovah, they
have committed iniquities, transgressed, sinned before Thee, Thy people
the House of Israel. I beseech Thee, for the sake of Jehovah, forgive
the iniquities, transgressions, and sins that they have committed,
transgressed, and sinned before Thee, Thy people the House of Israel, as
it is written in the Torah of Moses Thy servant, thus: "For on that day
shall he make an atonement for you, to cleanse you,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

that ye may be clean from all your sins before Jehovah." And the priests
and people who stood in the forecourt, hearing the expressed name \[of
God, *i.e.*, *Jehovah*\] issuing from the mouth of the high-priest, used
to kneel, prostrate themselves, and fall on their faces, and say:
"Blessed be the name of His kingdom's glory for ever." They delivered
him \[the scapegoat\] to the man who was his conductor. All were fit to
perform this function. Only the high-priests fixed a usage, that
Israelites should not be permitted to do it. Said R. Jose: It happened
the conductor was Arsala of Tsipore, who was an Israelite \[not a
priest\]. An elevated walk had been constructed for him \[the he-goat\],
on account of the Babylonians \[Babylonian Jews; according to the
Gemara, Alexandrian Jews\], who used to pull him \[the he-goat\] by the
hair, saying: "Take \[the sins\] and go, take and go."

GEMARA: We see that in this confession the children of Aaron are not
mentioned. According to whom is it? Said R. Jeremiah: This is not in
accordance with R. Jehudah; as he said, the priests are also atoned for
by the scapegoat. Abayi, however, said: This may be according to R.
Jehudah. Are not the priests included in the general phrase, "Thy people
Israel"?

"*They delivered him to his conductor*." The rabbis taught: It is
written \[Lev. xvi. 21\]: "A man appointed thereto." From the word
"man," it is inferred a layman is also fit. "Appointed" means, appointed
from the day before, even when the Day of Atonement falls on a Sabbath,
and even if he is unclean. Wherefore does he tell us, even a Sabbath? If
the he-goat has become sick, and cannot walk, he may take him on his
shoulder, and carry him. Said Raphram: From this it is inferred, that
the law of Erub and carrying applies to Sabbath only, but not to the Day
of Atonement (else what difference between a Day of Atonement falling on
a week-day and a Sabbath?) <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

Why is it mentioned, even when unclean? What case of uncleanness can be
here? Said R. Shesheth: Even if the conductor became unclean, he may
enter the Temple and take the he-goat.

R. Eliezer was asked: When the he-goat had become sick, might he be
taken on the shoulders? He replied: The he-goat was so healthy that it
could bear away you and me together. They asked him again: When the
conductor had become sick, may another be appointed? He replied: Let us
be healthy; do not

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

ask us about a case of sickness. They asked him again: If after having
been pushed down he did not die, shall he go down and kill him? He gave
them as answer the verse in Judges v. 31: "Thus may perish all Thy
enemies, O Lord." The sages, however, said: If he had become sick, he
must be taken on the shoulders; if the conductor is sick, another should
be appointed; if he had been pushed and has not died, he should go down
and put him to death.

R. Eliezer was asked whether a certain man would enjoy the world to
come. He replied: You inquire of me concerning that man (he named a
different man). <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) They asked of him
again: May a shepherd rescue a sheep carried away by a lion? He replied:
Do you ask me of a sheep? They asked him again: May the shepherd be
rescued from the lion's mouth? He answered again: You ask me only of the
shepherd. They asked him again: May a bastard be heir of his father? He
asked them: May he espouse his dead and childless brother's wife? They
asked him: If he possesses a house, must a memorial of the Temple's
destruction be left, when his house is whitewashed (an ell is left
bare)? He answered: I think you ask me whether his sepulchre is to be
whitewashed? He answered thus, not because he wanted to repel them, but
he never decided what he had not heard from his Master.

A wise woman asked R. Eliezer. What was done with the golden calf being
equally forbidden, why were the penalties different, some being
slaughtered with the sword, some dying by water, or by a plague? He
answered: The wisdom of a woman relates only to the spindle, as it is
written \[Ex. xxxv. 25\]: "All the wise women spun with their hands." It
was taught: Rabh and Levi said--the one, that he who slaughtered to the
golden calf and offered incense was slain by the sword; he who embraced
and kissed it, died by the plague; and he who rejoiced in his heart
thereat, died from dropsy. And the other says: They who did it in spite
of warning by witnesses, were slain; they who were not warned but only
witnessed, by the pest; and those whom witnesses had not seen, died by
dropsy.

R. Jehudah said: The tribe of Levi was not idolatrous (in relation to
the golden calf), as it is written \[ibid. xxxii. 26\]: Whoever is on
the Lord's side let him come unto me. And

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

there assembled themselves unto him all the sons of Levi." Rabhina was
sitting and repeating this saying. The children of R. Papa b. Abba
objected to him: It is written \[Deut. xxxiii. 9\]: "Who said of his
father and his mother, I have not seen him." <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) By this is meant, those who slew for
worshipping the calf, inflicted penalty on their relatives. Whence we
see some of the Levites were guilty. Rabhina replied: By father is meant
the maternal grandfather, who was of Israel, by brother a half-brother
of the mother, and by children, the daughter's children, whose father
was an Israelite.

"*An elevated walk had been constructed*," etc. We have learned in a
Boraitha: R. Jehudah says: They were not Babylonian, but Alexandrian
(Jews). Said R. Jose to him: May thy mind be appeased, as thou hast
appeased mine (for he was a Babylonian himself).

"*Take and go*." We have learned in a Boraitha: They used to say:
Wherefore are they detaining the goat, the sins being so great?

MISHNA: Some of the prominent men of Jerusalem used to accompany him
\[the goat\] as far as the first booth \[of the ten, supplied with
provisions for the conductor\]. There were ten booths between Jerusalem
and Tsuk \[the rock of its destination\], a distance of 90 Ris \[7½ Ris
are equal to one mile\]. At each booth they said to him \[to the
conductor\]: "Here is food, and here is water." And they \[persons of
the booth\] accompanied him from booth to booth, excepting the last of
them, for the rock was not reached by them; but they stood at some
distance looking on what he \[the conductor\] did \[to the scapegoat\].
What did he do? He divided the tongue of crimson wool: the half of it he
tied to the rock, and the second half between his \[the scapegoat's\]
horns; he pushed him down backward. He went rolling and falling down; he
did not reach halfway of the mountain before he became separated limb
from limb. He \[the conductor\] returned to sit down under the last
booth, till dark. And since when became his clothes unclean? After he
had issued from the walls of Jerusalem. R. Simeon says: After he had
pushed it down from the rock.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: There were ten booths, and twelve *miles*: so
says R. Meir. R. Jebudah says: There were nine booths, and ten miles. R.
Jose says: Five booths, and

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

ten miles. All were combined by an Erub. Said R. Jose: Elazar my son
told me, if there were an Erub, two booths at ten miles would have been
sufficient. Who is the Tana according to whom is what we have learned in
our Mishna, that the last stood at a distance and looked? This is
according to R. Meir, who says there were ten booths, and twelve miles.

"*At each booth they said to him*," etc. We have learned in a Boraitha:
They never made use of it, but they were cheered by the consciousness
that they could have it?

"*The half of it he tied to the rock*," etc. Why not the whole of it?
Because he had not yet fulfilled the duty of pushing down the goat, and
as soon as he had tied it to the rock, it might have become white: he
would have rejoiced so much at the thought of the sins having been
pardoned, that he might not have attended to the pushing him down. Why
did he not tie it wholly to the horns? Because it might happen that the
goat bent his head, so as to make him unable to perceive whether it had
become white or not.

The rabbis taught: Formerly the tongue of crimson wool used to be tied
to the door of the porch, outside (that all should see). When it became
white, all were rejoiced; when not, all became out of spirits and
ashamed. Therefore it has been reformed that it should be tied to the
door of the porch inside. However, they used to take a look at it even
then. It was then reformed that half should be tied to the rock, another
half to the horns.

"*Before he attained half way of the mountain*," etc. The rabbis taught:
It is written \[Lev. xviii. 4\]: "My ordinances shall ye do." This
signifies, such things as, even were they not written, it would be wrong
to do, as idolatry, adultery, bloodshed, robbery, and blasphemy. "And my
statutes shall ye keep" \[ibid.\]. There are things that Satan laughs
at, as abstaining from pork, from wearing mixed stuffs \[Deut. xxii.
11\], the taking off of the shoe of the husband's brother, purification
of a leper, and the despatching of the he-goat. Lest it be said, they
are nonsense, it is therefore written \[Lev. xviii. "I am the Lord your
God." I have commanded it; you have no right to question.

"*Since when became his clothes unclean*," etc. The rabbis taught: The
conductor defiles his clothes, but not the person that sends him (the
conductor). Shall we assume that as soon as

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

be comes out from the walls of the Temple court he becomes unclean?
Therefore it is written \[Lev. xvi. 26\]: "He that takes away the goat
to Azazel shall wash his clothes." What is meant by taking away? He who
pushes him head downward, and he defiles his clothes.

MISHNA: He \[the high-priest\] went to the bull and to the he-goat
destined to be burned. He ripped them, and tore out the parts to be
burned upon the altar. He placed them on a charger (Magis), and kindled
(for kindling) them upon the altar. He intermingled the limbs of the two
animals, and they were removed to the place for burning. Since when are
the clothes \[of the porters\] made unclean? When they came out behind
the wall of the forecourt. R. Simeon says: When the fire is consuming
most parts \[of the animals\].

GEMARA: *He intermingled*. Said R. Johanan, a sort of mingling. What is
meant? We have learned in a Boraitha: He did not cut them as all
burnt-offerings, in which the hide is flayed; but the bullock and
he-goat, he cut the hide and flesh together. Whence do we deduce this?
Because it is further written \[Lev. iv. 11\]: "His inwards, and his
dung." How is it to be inferred from this? Said R. Papa: As the dung was
in the inwards, so the flesh in the hide.

"*Since when are the clothes made unclean*?" The rabbis taught: It is
written \[ibid. xvi. 28\]: "He that burneth them shall wash his
clothes." He that burns, but not he who kindles, or he who lays the wood
for the fire. Who is considered as the one that burns? He who assists at
the burning, his clothes become unclean. Shall we say, that when it has
been burned to ashes they still defile the clothes? Therefore it is
written "them": he who burns *them*, but not the ashes. R. Eliezer b. R.
Simeon says: When the flesh is still called flesh, it defiles; but when
it has been dissolved, it no longer defiles. What is the difference
between them? According to R. Eliezer, singed flesh ceases to be flesh,
and does not defile; but according to the first Tana it is, and does.

MISHNA: The high-priest was told: "The goat has reached the desert." How
was the fact known? Watches were stationed on high towers \[meaning
doubtful\], who lifted up flags \[to give signals\]. Said R. Jehudah:
They could have excellent evidence \[by calculating the time\]. From
Jerusalem to Beth Hadudo was three miles. The prominent men had walked
one mile, went back one mile, and had tarried as long as a mile is

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

gone over. Thus they could calculate that the he-goat had reached the
desert.

R. Ishmael says: Why, they had another sign. A tongue of crimson wool
used to be tied to the gate of the Temple, and as the he-goat had
reached the desert, the wool used to become \[by miracle\] white; as it
is said: "Though your sins be scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;
though they be red as crimson, they shall become like wool" \[Isaiah i.
18\].

GEMARA: Said Abayi: From this we see that the Beth Hadudo was in the
desert.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[89:1](yom11.htm#fr_20) This is according to
Rashi's explanation, although it is unusual for a Boraitha to mention a
Mishna.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[92:1](yom11.htm#fr_21) What Raphram said is
declared in Tract Tamid to be unfounded.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[93:1](yom11.htm#fr_22) Rashi and Tosphath say,
the question was about Solomon, and he answered, "Do they mean Absalom?"
But it does not seem probable to them.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[94:1](yom11.htm#fr_23) We follow Leeser's
translation in all our biblical quotations, which see.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: The Passages Read by the High-Priest and his
Garments](yom12)
