[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index.md)  [Carmina
Gadelica](../cg)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cg1001)  [Next](cg1003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88YQ/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Carmina Gadelica, Volume 1*, by Alexander Carmicheal, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

# INTRODUCTION

THIS work consists of old lore collected during the last forty-four
years. It forms a small part of a large mass of oral literature written
down from the recital of men and women throughout the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland, from Arran to Caithness, from Perth to St Kilda.

The greater portion of the collection has been made in the Western
Isles, variously called 'Eileana Bride,' Hebrid Isles, Outer Hebrides,
Outer Isles, 'Eilean Fada,' 'Innis Fada,' Long Island, and anciently
'Iniscead,' 'Innis Cat.' Isle of the Cat, Isle of the Catey. Probably
the Catey were the people who gave the name 'Cataibh,' Cat Country, to
Sutherland, and 'Caitnis,' Cat Ness, to Caithness.

The Long Island is composed of a series of islands, separately known as
Barra, South Uist, Benbecula, North Uist, and Harris and Lewis. This
chain is one hundred and nineteen miles in length, varying from a few
yards to twenty-five miles in width. Viewed from the summit of its
highest link, the Long Island chain resembles a huge artificial kite
stretched along the green Atlantic Ocean, Lewis forming the body, the
disjointed tail trending away in the blue haze and terminating in
Bearnarey of Barra.

This long series of islands is evidently the backbone of a large island,
perhaps of a great continent, that extended westward beyond the Isle of
the Nuns, beyond the Isle of the Monks, beyond the Isle of St Flann,
beyond the Isle of St Kilda, beyond the Isle of Rockal, probably beyond
the storied Isle of Rocabarraidh, and possibly beyond the historic Isle
of Atlantis.

This backbone is now disarticulated like the vertebra of some huge
fossil fish, each section having a life of its own. These joints are
separated by rills and channels varying from a few feet to eight miles
in width.

The Atlantic rushes through these straits and narrows into the Minch,
and the Minch rushes through the straits and narrows into the Atlantic,
four times every twenty-four hours. The constant rushing to and fro of
these mighty waters is very striking.

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

Many of the countless islands comprising the Outer Hebrides are indented
with arms of the sea studded with rocks and islands dividing and
ramifying into endless mazes, giving in some cases a coast-line of over
four hundred miles within their one-mile entrance. No mind could
conceive, no imagination could realise, the disorderly distribution of
land and water that is to be seen in those Outer Islands, where mountain
and moor, sand and peat, rock and morass, reef and shoal, fresh-water
lake and salt-water loch, in wildest confusion strive for mastery.
Viewing this bewildering scene from the summit of Ruaival in Benbecula,
Professor Blackie exclaimed:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">O God-forsaken, God-detested land!  
  Of bogs and blasts, of moors and mists and rain;  
Where ducks with men contest the doubtful strand,  
  And shirts when washed are straightway soiled again! <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)</span>

</div>

The formation of the Long Island is Laurentian gneiss, with some
outcrops of Cambrian at Aoi, Lewis, and four examples of trap at
Lochmaddy, Uist. The rocks everywhere show ice action, being smoothed
and polished, grooved and striated from hill to sea--the grooves and
striæ lying east and west or thereby.

There are no trees in the Long Island except some at Rodail, Harris, and
a few at Stornoway, Lewis. The wind and spray of the Atlantic are
inimical to trees under present climatic conditions. There are
evidences, however, that there were trees in historic and prehistoric
times.

It is said that a prince of Lewis forsook a Norse princess and married a
native girl. The princess vowed by Odin, Thor, and Frea, and by all the
other gods and goddesses of her fathers, to avenge the insult, and she
sent her witch to burn the woods of Lewis. The tradition of the burning
of these woods is countenanced by the presence of charred trees in
peat-moss in many places. It is on record that a Norse prince married a
native Barra girl, but whether or not this was the prince of Lewis is
uncertain.

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

There are many evidences that the sea has gained upon the land in the
Long Island. In the shore and in the sea, peat-moss, tree-roots, sessile
reeds, stone dykes, dwellings and temples may be seen, while pieces of
moss, trees and masonry have been brought up from time to time by hooks
and anchors in from ten to twenty fathoms of water. I do not know
anything more touching yet more fascinating than these submerged
memorials of bygone times and of bygone men.

Immense stretches of sandy plains run along the Atlantic border of the
Outer Hebrides. These long reaches of sessile sand are locally called
machairs--plains. They are singularly bleak, barren, and shelterless in
winter, giving rise to the saying:--

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">'Is luath fear na droch mhnatha<br />
Air a mhachair Uibhistich.'</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">Fast goes the man of the thriftless wife<br />
Upon the machair of Uist.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

The inference is that the man is ill clad. In summer, however, these
'machairs' are green and grassy, comforting to the foot, pleasing to the
eye, and deliciously fragrant, being covered with strongly aromatic
plants and flowers.

But the charm of these islands lies in their people--goodly to see,
brave to endure, and pleasing to know.

The population of the Long Island is about forty-four thousand. Of
these, about forty-four families occupy two-thirds of the whole land,
the crofters, cottars, and the poor who exist upon the poor, being
confined to the remaining third. These are crowded upon one another like
sheep in a pen:--

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">Na biasta mar ag itheadh nam biasta beag,<br />
Na biasta beag a deanamh mar dh’fhaodas iad.'</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">The big beasts eating the little beasts,<br />
The little beasts doing as best they may.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

There are no intermediate farms, no gradation holdings, to which the
industrious crofter might aspire, and become a benefit to himself, an
example to his neighbour, and a lever to his country.

The people of the Outer Isles, like the people of the Highlands and
Islands generally, are simple and law-abiding, common crime being rare
and serious crime unknown among them. They are good to the poor, kind to
the stranger, and courteous to all. During all the years that I lived
and travelled among them, night and day, I never met with incivility,
never with rudeness, never with vulgarity, never with aught but
courtesy. I never entered a house without the inmates offering me food
or apologising for their want of it. I never was asked for charity in
the West, a striking contrast to my

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

experience in England, where I was frequently asked for food, for drink,
for money, and that by persons whose incomes would have been wealth to
the poor men and women of the West. After long experience of his
tenants, the late Mr John Gordon said:--'The Uist people are born
gentlemen--Nature's noblemen.'

Gaelic oral literature was widely diffused, greatly abundant, and
excellent in quality--in the opinion of scholars, unsurpassed by
anything similar in the ancient classics of Greece or Rome.

Many causes contributed towards these attainments--the crofting system,
the social customs, and the evening 'ceilidh.' In a crofting community
the people work in unison in the field during the day, and discuss
together in the house at night. This meeting is called 'ceilidh'--a word
that throbs the heart of the Highlander wherever he be. The 'ceilidh' is
a literary entertainment where stories and tales, poems and ballads, are
rehearsed and recited, and songs are sung, conundrums are put, proverbs
are quoted, and many other literary matters are related and discussed.
This institution is admirably adapted to cultivate the heads and to warm
the hearts of an intelligent, generous people. Let me briefly describe
the 'ceilidh' as I have seen it.

In a crofting townland there are several story-tellers who recite the
oral literature of their predecessors. The story-tellers of the
Highlands are as varied in their subjects as are literary men and women
elsewhere. One is a historian narrating events simply and concisely;
another is a historian with a bias, colouring his narrative according to
his leanings. One is an inventor, building fiction upon fact, mingling
his materials, and investing the whole with the charm of novelty and the
halo of romance. Another is a reciter of heroic poems and ballads,
bringing the different characters before the mind as clearly as the
sculptor brings the figure before the eye. One gives the songs of the
chief poets, with interesting accounts of their authors, while another,
generally a woman, sings, to weird airs, beautiful old songs, some of
them Arthurian. There are various other narrators, singers, and
speakers, but I have never heard aught that should not be said nor sung.

The romance school has the largest following, and I go there, joining
others on the way. The house of the story-teller is already full, and it
is difficult to get inside and away from the cold wind and soft sleet
without. But with that politeness native to the people, the stranger is
pressed to come forward and occupy the seat vacated for him beside the
houseman. The house is roomy and clean, if homely,

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

with its bright peat fire in the middle of the floor. There are many
present--men and women, boys and girls. All the women are seated, and
most of the men. Girls are crouched between the knees of fathers or
brothers or friends, while boys are perched wherever--boy-like--they can
climb.

The houseman is twisting twigs of heather into ropes to hold down
thatch, a neighbour crofter is twining quicken roots into cords to tie
cows, while another is plaiting bent grass into baskets to hold meal.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">'Ith aran, sniamh murari,<br />
Is bi thu am bliadhn mar him thu’n uraidh.'</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">Eat bread and twist bent,<br />
And thou this year shalt be as thou wert last.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

The housewife is spinning, a daughter is carding, another daughter is
teazing, while a third daughter, supposed to be working, is away in the
background conversing in low whispers with the son of a neighbouring
crofter. Neighbour wives and neighbour daughters are knitting, sewing,
or embroidering, The conversation is general: the local news, the
weather, the price of cattle, these leading up to higher themes--the
clearing of the glens (a sore subject), the war, the parliament, the
effects of the sun upon the earth and the moon upon the tides. The
speaker is eagerly listened to, and is urged to tell more. But he pleads
that he came to hear and not to speak, saying:--

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">'A chiad sgial air fear an taighe,<br />
Sgial gu la air an aoidh.'</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">The first story from the host,<br />
Story till day from the guest.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

The stranger asks the houseman to tell a story, and after a pause the
man complies. The tale is full of incident, action, and pathos. It is
told simply yet graphically, and at times dramatically--compelling the
undivided attention of the listener. At the pathetic scenes and
distressful events the bosoms of the women may be seen to heave and
their silent tears to fall. Truth overcomes craft, skill conquers
strength, and bravery is rewarded. Occasionally a momentary excitement
occurs when heat and sleep overpower a boy and he tumbles down among the
people below, to be trounced out and sent home. When the story is ended
it is discussed and commented upon, and the different characters praised
or blamed according to their merits and the views of the critics.

If not late, proverbs, riddles, conundrums, and songs follow. Some of
the tales, however, are long, occupying a night or even several nights
in recital. 'Sgeul Coise Cein,' the story of the foot of Clan, for
example, was in twenty-four parts, each part occupying a night

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

in telling. The story is mentioned by Macnicol in his *Remarks* on
Johnson's *Tour*.

The hut of Hector Macisaac, Ceannlangavat, South Uist, stood in a
peat-moss. The walls were of 'riasg,' turf, and the thatch of 'cuilc,'
reeds, to the grief of the occupants, who looked upon the reed as
banned, because it was used on Calvary to convey the sponge with the
vinegar. The hut was about fifteen feet long, ten feet broad, and five
feet high. There was nothing in it that the vilest thief in the lowest
slum would condescend to steal. It were strange if the inmates of this
turf hut in the peat-morass had been other than ailing. Hector Macisaac
and his wife were the only occupants, their daughter being at service
trying to prolong existence in' her parents. Both had been highly
endowed physically, and were still endowed mentally, though now advanced
in years. The wife knew many secular runes, sacred hymns, and fairy
songs; while the husband had numerous heroic tales, poems, and ballads.

I had visited these people before, and in September 1871 Iain E.
Campbell of Islay and I went to see them. Hector Macisaac, the
unlettered cottar who knew no language but his own, who came into
contact with no one but those of his own class, his neighbours of the
peat-bog, and who had never been out of his native island, was as polite
and well-mannered and courteous as Iain Campbell, the learned barrister,
the world-wide traveller, and the honoured guest of every court in
Europe. Both were at ease and at home with one another, there being
neither servility on the one side nor condescension on the other.

The stories and poems which Hector Macisaac went over during our visits
to him would have filled several volumes. Mr Campbell now and then put a
leading question which brought out the story-teller's marvellous memory
and extensive knowledge of folklore.

It was similar with blind old Hector Macleod, cottar, Lianacuithe, South
Uist, and with old Roderick Macneill, cottar, Miunghlaidh, Barra. Each
of those men repeated stories and poems, tales and ballads, that would
have filled many books. Yet neither of them told more than a small part
of what he knew. None of the three men knew any letters, nor any
language but Gaelic, nor had ever been out of his native island. All
expressed regret in well-chosen words that they had not a better place
in which to receive their visitors, and all thanked them in polite terms
for coming to see them and for taking an interest in their decried and
derided old lore. And all were courteous as the courtier.

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

During his visit to us, Mr Campbell expressed to my wife and to myself
his admiration of these and other men with whom we had come in contact.
He said that in no other race had he observed so many noble traits and
high qualities as in the unlettered, untravelled, unspoiled Highlander.

In 1860, 1861, and 1862, I took down much folk-lore from Kenneth
Morrison, cottar, Trithion, Skye. Kenneth Morrison had been a mason, but
was now old, blind, and poor. Though wholly unlettered, he was highly
intelligent. He mentioned the names of many old men in the extensive but
now desolate parish of Minngnis, who had been famous story-tellers in
his boyhood--men who had been born in the first decade of the eighteenth
century. Several of these, he said, could recite stories and poems
during many nights in succession--some of the tales requiring several
nights to relate. He repeated fragments of many of these. Some of them
were pieces of poems and stories published by Macpherson, Smith, the
Stewarts, the MacCallums, the Campbells, and others.

Kenneth Morrison told me that the old men, from whom he heard the poems
and stories, said that they had heard them from old men in their
boyhood. That would carry these old men back to the first half of the
seventeenth century. Certainly they could not have learnt their stories
or poems from books, for neither stories nor poems were printed in their
time, and even had they been, those men could not have read them.

Gaelic oral literature has been disappearing during the last three
centuries. It is now becoming meagre in quantity, inferior in quality,
and greatly isolated.

Several causes have contributed towards this decadence--principally the
Reformation, the Risings, the evictions, the Disruption, the schools,
and the spirit of the age. Converts in religion, in politics, or in
aught else, are apt to be intemperate in speech and rash in action. The
Reformation movement condemned the beliefs and cults tolerated and
assimilated by the Celtic Church and the Latin Church. Nor did sculpture
and architecture escape their intemperate zeal. The risings harried and
harassed the people, while the evictions impoverished, dispirited, and
scattered them over the world. Ignorant school-teaching and clerical
narrowness have been painfully detrimental to the expressive language,
wholesome literature, manly sports, and interesting amusements of the
Highland people. Innumerable examples occur.

A young lady said:--'When we came to Islay I was sent to the

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

parish school to obtain a proper grounding in arithmetic. I was charmed
with the schoolgirls and their Gaelic songs. But the schoolmaster--an
alien like myself--denounced Gaelic speech and Gaelic songs. On getting
out of school one evening the girls resumed a song they had been singing
the previous evening. I joined willingly, if timidly, my knowledge of
Gaelic being small. The schoolmaster heard us, however, and called us
back. He punished us till the blood trickled from our fingers, although
we were big girls, with the dawn of womanhood upon us. The thought of
that scene thrills me with indignation.'

I was taking down a story from a man, describing how twin giants
detached a huge stone from the parent rock, and how the two carried the
enormous block of many tons upon their broad shoulders to lay it over a
deep gully in order that their white-maned steeds might cross. Their
enemy, however, came upon them in the night-time when thus engaged, and
threw a magic mist around them, lessening their strength and causing
them to fail beneath their burden. In the midst of the graphic
description the grandson of the narrator, himself an aspirant teacher,
called out tone: of superior authority, 'Grandfather, the teacher says
that you ought to be placed upon the stool for your lying Gaelic
stories.' The old man stopped and gasped in pained surprise. It required
time and sympathy to soothe his feelings and to obtain the rest of the
tale, which was wise, beautiful, and poetic, for the big, strong giants
were Frost and Ice, and their subtle enemy was Thaw. The enormous stone
torn from the parent rock is called 'Clach Mhor Leum nan Caorach,' the
big stone of the leap of the sheep. Truly 'a little learning is a
dangerous thing'! This myth was afterwards appreciated by the Royal
Society of Edinburgh.

After many failures, and after going far to reach him, I induced a man
to come to the lee of a knoll to tell me a tale. We were well into the
spirit of the story when two men from the hill passed us. The
story-teller hesitated, then stopped, saying that he would be reproved
by his family, bantered by his friends, and censured by his minister.
The story, so inauspiciously interrupted and never resumed, was the
famous 'Sgeul Coise Cein,' already mentioned.

Having made many attempts, I at last succeeded in getting a shepherd to
come to me, in order to be away from his surroundings. The man travelled
fifty-five miles, eight of these being across a stormy strait of the
Atlantic. We had reached the middle of a tale when the sheriff of the
district came to call on me in my rooms.

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The reciter fled,
and after going more than a mile on his way home he met a man who asked
him why he looked so scared, and why without his bonnet. The shepherd
discovered that he had left his bonnet, his plaid, and his staff behind
him in his flight. The remaining half of that fine story, as well as
much other valuable Gaelic lore, died with the shepherd in Australia.

Ministers of Lewis used to say that the people of Lewis were little
better than pagans till the Reformation, perhaps till the Disruption. If
they were not, they have atoned since, being now the most rigid
Christians in the British Isles.

When Dr William Forbes Skene was preparing the third volume of *Celtic
Scotland*, he asked me to write him a paper on the native system of
holding the land, tilling the soil, and apportioning the stock in the
Outer Hebrides. Being less familiar with Lewis than with the other
portions of the Long Island, I visited Lewis again. It was with extreme
difficulty that I could obtain any information on the subject of my
inquiry, because it related to the foolish past rather than to the
sedate present, to the secular affairs rather than to the religious life
of the people. When I asked about old customs and old modes of working,
I was answered, 'Good man, old things are passed away, all things are
become new'; for the people of Lewis, like the people of the Highlands
and Islands generally, carry the Scriptures in their minds and apply
them in their speech as no other people do. It was extremely
disconcerting to be met in this manner on a mission so desirable.

During my quest I went into a house near Ness. The house was clean and
comfortable if plain and unpretending, most things in it being
home-made. There were three girls in the house, young, comely, and shy,
and four women, middle-aged, handsome, and picturesque in their homespun
gowns and high-crowned mutches. Three of the women had been to the
moorland pastures with their cattle, and had turned in here to rest on
their way home.

'Hail to the house and household,' said I, greeting the inmates in the
salutation of our fathers. 'Hail to you, kindly stranger,' replied the
housewife. 'Come forward and take this seat. If it be not ill-mannered,
may we ask whence you have come to-day? You are tired and
travel-stained, and probably hungry?' 'I have come from Gress,' said I,
'round by Tolasta to the south, and Tolasta to the north, taking a look
at the ruins of the Church of St Aula, at Gress, and at the ruins of the
fort of Dunothail, and then across the moorland.' 'May the Possessor
keep you in His own keeping, good

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

man! You left early and have travelled far, and must be hungry.' With
this the woman raised her eyes towards her daughters standing demurely
silent, and motionless as Greek statues, in the background. In a moment
the three fair girls became active and animated. One ran to the stack
and brought in an armful of hard, black peats, another ran to the well
and brought in a pail of clear spring water, while the third quickly
spread a cloth, white as snow, upon the table in the inner room. The
three neighbour women rose to leave, and I rose to do the same. 'Where
are you going, good man?' asked the housewife in injured surprise,
moving between me and the door. 'You must not go till you eat a bit and
drink a sip. That indeed would be a reproach to us that we would not
soon get over. These slips of lassies and I would not hear the end of it
from the men at the sea, were we to allow a wayfarer to go from our door
hungry, thirsty, and weary. No! no! you must not go till you eat a bite.
Food will be ready presently, and in the meantime you will bathe your
feet and dry your stockings, which are wet after coming through the
marshes of the moorland.' Then the woman went down upon her knees, and
washed and dried the feet of the stranger as gently and tenderly as a
mother would those of her child. 'We have no stockings to suit the
kilt,' said the woman in a tone of evident regret, 'but here is a pair
of stockings of the houseman's which he has never had on, and perhaps
you would put them on till your own are dry.'

One of the girls had already washed out my stockings, and they were
presently drying before the bright fire on the middle of the floor. I
deprecated all this trouble, but to no purpose. In an incredibly short
time I was asked to go 'ben' and break bread.

Through the pressure of the housewife and of myself the other three
women had resumed their seats, uneasily it is true. But immediately
before food was announced the three women rose together and quietly
walked away, no urging detaining them.

The table was laden with wholesome food sufficient for several persons,
There were fried herrings and boiled turbot fresh from the sea, and eggs
fresh from the yard. There were fresh butter and salt butter, wheaten
scones, barley bannocks, and oat cakes, with excellent tea, and cream.
The woman apologised that she had no 'aran coinnich'--moss bread, that
is, loaf bread--and no biscuits, they being simple crofter people far
away from the big town.

'This,' said I, taking my seat, looks like the table for a "reiteach,"
betrothal, rather than for one man. Have you betrothals in Lewis?'

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

I asked, turning my eyes towards the other room where we had left the
three comely maidens. 'Oh, indeed, yes, the Lewis people are very good
at marrying. Foolish young creatures, they often marry before they know
their responsibilities or realise their difficulties,' and her eyes
followed mine in the direction of her own young daughters. 'I suppose
there is much fun and rejoicing at your marriages--music, dancing,
singing, and, merry-making of many kinds?' 'Oh, indeed, no, our weddings
are now quiet and becoming, not the foolish things they were in my young
days. In my memory weddings were great events, with singing and piping,
dancing and amusements all night through, and generally for two and
three nights in succession. Indeed, the feast of the "bord breid,"
kertch table, was almost as great as the feast of the marriage table,
all the young men and maidens struggling to get to it, On the morning
after the marriage the mother of the bride, and failing her the mother
of the bridegroom, placed the "breid tri chearnach," three-cornered
kertch, on the head of the bride before she rose from her bed. And the
mother did this "all ainm na Teoire Beannaichte," in name of the Sacred
Three, under whose guidance the young wife was to walk. Then the bride
arose and her maidens dressed her, and she came forth with the "breid
beannach," pointed kertch, on her head, and all the people present
saluted her and shook hands with her, and the bards sang songs to her,
and recited "rannaghail mhora," great rigmaroles, and there was much
rejoicing and merrymaking all day long and all night through. "Gu dearbh
mar a b’e fleadh na bord breid a b’fhearr, chan e gearr bu
mheasa"--Indeed, if the feast of the kertch table was not better, it was
not a whit worse.

'There were many sad things done then, for those were the days of
foolish doings and of foolish people. Perhaps, on the day of the Lord,
when they came out of church, if indeed they went into church, the young
men would go to throw the stone, or to toss the cabar, or to play
shinty, or to run races, or to race horses on the strand, the young
maidens looking on the while, ay, and the old men and women.' 'And have
you no music, no singing, no dancing now at your marriages?' 'May the
Possessor keep you! I see that you are a stranger in Lewis, or you would
not ask such a question,' the woman exclaimed with grief and surprise in
her tone. 'It is long since we abandoned those foolish ways in Ness,
and, indeed, throughout Lewis. In my young days there was hardly a house
in Ness in which there was not one or two or three who could play the
pipe, or the fiddle, or the trump. And I have heard it said that there
were men, and

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

women too, who could play things they called harps, and lyres, and
bellow-pipes, but I do not know what those things were.' 'And why were
those discontinued?' 'A blessed change came over the place and the
people,' the woman replied in earnestness, 'and the good men and the
good ministers who arose did away with the songs and the stories, the
music and the dancing, the sports and the games, that were perverting
the minds and ruining the souls of the people, leading them to folly and
stumbling.' 'But how did the people themselves come to discard their
sports and pastimes?' 'Oh, the good ministers and the good elders
preached against them and went among the people, and besought them to
forsake their follies and to return to wisdom. They made the people
break and burn their pipes and fiddles. If there was a foolish man here
and there who demurred, the good ministers and the good elders
themselves broke and burnt their instruments, saying:--

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">"Is fearr an teine beag a gharas la beag na sithe,<br />
Na’n teine mor a loisgeas la mor na feirge."</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">Better is the small fire that warms on the little day of peace,<br />
Than the big fire that burns on the great day of wrath.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The people have
forsaken their follies and their Sabbath-breaking, and there is no pipe,
no fiddle here now,' said the woman in evident satisfaction. 'And what
have you now instead of the racing, the stone-throwing, and the
cabar-tossing, the song, the pipe, and the dance?' 'Oh, we have now the
blessed Bible preached and explained to us faithfully and earnestly, if
we sinful people would only walk in the right path and use our
opportunities.'

'But what have you at your weddings? How do you pass the time?' 'Oh! the
carles are on one side of the house talking of their crops and their
nowt, and mayhap of the days when they were young and when things were
different. And the young men are on the other side of the house talking
about boats, and sailing, and militia, and naval reserve, perhaps of
their own strength, and of many foolish matters besides.

'And where are the girls? What are they doing?' 'Oh, they, silly things!
are in the "culaist," back-house, perhaps trying to croon over some
foolish song under their breath, perhaps trying to amble through some
awkward steps of dancing on the points of their toes, or, shame to tell,
perhaps speaking of what dress this or that girl had on at this or that
marriage, or worse still, what hat this girl or that girl had on on the
Day of the Lord, perhaps even no the Day of the Holy Communion, showing
that their minds were

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

on the vain things of the world instead of on the wise things of
salvation.'

'But why are the girls in the "culaist"? What do they fear?'

'May the Good Being keep you, good man! They are in the "culaist" for
concealment, "ages eagal am beatha agus am bais orra gun cluinnear no
gum faicear iad"--and the fear of their life and of their death upon
them, that they may be heard or seen should the good elder happen to be
passing the way.' 'And should he, what then?' 'Oh, the elder will tell
the minister, and the good minister will scold them from the pulpit,
mentioning the girls by name. But the girls have a blanket on the door
and another blanket on the window to deafen the sound and to obscure the
light.'

'Do the young maidens allow the young men to join them in the
"culaist"?' 'Indeed, truth to tell, the maidens would be glad enough to
admit the young men were it not the fear of exposure. But the young men
are so loud of voice, and so heavy of foot, and make so much noise, that
they would betray the retreat of the girls, who would get rebuked, while
the young men would escape. The girls would then be ashamed and
downcast, and would not lift a head for a year and a day after their
well-deserved scolding. They suffer most, for, sad to say, the young men
are becoming less afraid of being admonished than they used to be.'

'And do the people have spirits at their marriages?' 'Oh yes, the
minister is not so hard as that upon them at all. He does not interfere
with them in that way unless they take too much, and talk loudly and
quarrel. Then he is grieved and angry, and scolds them severely.
Occasionally, indeed, some of the carles have a nice "frogan,"
liveliness, upon them and are very happy together. But oh, they never
quarrel, nor fight, nor get angry with one another. They are always nice
to one another and civil to all around them.'

'Perhaps were the minister to allow the people less drink and more music
and dancing, singing and merry-making, they would enjoy it as much. I am
sure the young girls would sing better, and dance better, with the help
of the young men. And the young men themselves would be less loud of
voice and less heavy of heel, among the maidens. Perhaps the happiness
of the old people too, would be none the less real nor less lasting at
seeing the joyousness of the young people.'

To this the woman promptly and loyally replied: 'The man of the Lord is
untiring in work and unfailing in example for our good, and in guiding
us to our heavenly home, constantly reminding us of

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

the littleness of time and the greatness of eternity, and he knows best,
and we must do our best to follow his counsel and to imitate his
example.'

A famous violin-player died in the island of Eigg a few years ago. He
was known for his old style playing and his old-world airs which died
with him. A preacher denounced him, saying:--'Tha thu shios an sin cul
na comhla, a dhuine thruaigh le do chiabhan liath, a cluich do sheann
fhiodhla, le laimh fhuair a mach agus le teine an diabhoil a
steach'--Thou art down there behind the door, thou miserable man with
thy grey hair, playing thine old fiddle with the cold hand without, and
the devil's fire within. His family pressed the man to burn his fiddle
and never to play again. A pedlar came round and offered ten shillings
for the violin. The instrument had been made by a pupil of Stradivarius,
and was famed for its tone. 'Cha b’e idir an rud a fhuaradh na dail a
ghoirtich mo chridhe cho cruaidh ach an dealachadh lithe! an dealachadh
rithe! agus gun tug mi fhein a bho a b’fhearr am buaile m’athar air a
son, an uair a bha mi og'--It was not at all the thing that was got for
it that grieved my heart so sorely, but the parting with it! the parting
with it! and that I myself gave the best cow in my father's fold for it
when I was young. The voice of the old man faltered and a tear fell. He
was never again seen to smile.

The reciters of religious lore were more rare and more reticent than the
reciters of secular lore. Men and women whom I knew had hymns and
incantations, but I did not know of this in time. The fragments recalled
by their families, like the fragments of Greek or Etruscan vases,
indicated the originals.

Before dictating, the reciter went over the tale or poem, the writer
making mental notes the while. This was helpful when, in the slow
process of dictating, the narrator lost his thread and omitted passages.
The poems were generally intoned in a low recitative manner, rising and
falling in slow modulated cadences charming to hear but difficult to
follow.

The music of the hymns had a distinct individuality, in some respects
resembling and in many respects differing from the old Gregorian chants
of the Church. I greatly regret that I was not able to record this
peculiar and beautiful music, probably the music of the old Celtic
Church.

Perhaps no people had a fuller ritual of song and story, of secular rite
and religious ceremony, than the Highlanders. Mirth and music, song and
dance, tale and poem, pervaded their lives, as

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

electricity pervades the air. Religion, pagan or Christian, or both
combined, permeated everything--blending and shading into one another
like the iridescent colours of the rainbow. The people were sympathetic
and synthetic, unable to see and careless to know where the secular
began and the religious ended--an admirable union of elements in life
for those who have lived it so truly and intensely as the Celtic races
everywhere have done, and none more truly or more intensely than the
ill-understood and so-called illiterate Highlanders of Scotland.

If this work does nothing else, it affords incontestable proof that the
Northern Celts were endowed, as Renan justly claims for Celts
everywhere, with 'profound feeling and adorable delicacy' in their
religious instincts. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)

The Celtic missionaries allowed the pagan stock to stand, grafting their
Christian cult thereon. Hence the blending of the pagan and the
Christian religions in these poems, which to many minds will constitute
their chief charm. Gaelic lore is full of this blending and
grafting--nor are they confined to the literature of the people, but
extend indeed to their music, sculpture, and architecture. At Rodail,
Harris, is a cruciform church of the thirteenth century. The church
abuts upon a broad square tower of no great height. The tower is called
'Tur Chliamain,' tower of Clement, 'Cliaman Mor Rodail,' Great Clement
of Rodail. Tradition says that the tower is older than the church, and
the masonry confirms the tradition.

There are sculptures within the church of much originality of design and
of great beauty of execution, but the sculptures without are still more
original and interesting. Round the sides of the square tower are the
figures of birds and beasts, reptiles and fishes, and of men and women
representing phallic worship. Here pagan cult joins with Christian
faith, the East with the West, the past with the present. The traveller
from India to Scotland can here see, on the cold, sterile rocks of
Harris, the petrified symbols of a faith left living behind him on the
hot, fertile plains of Hindustan. He can thus in his own person bridge
over a space of eight thousand miles and a period of two thousand years.

There are observances and expressions current in the West which savour
of the East, such as sun, moon, star, and fire worship, once prevalent,
nor yet obsolete.

Highland divinities are full of life and action, local colour and
individuality. These divinities filled the hearts and minds of the

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

people of the Highlands, as their deities filled the hearts and minds of
the people of Greece and Rome. The subject of these genii of the
Highlands ought to be investigated and compared with those of other
lands. Even yet, on the verge of disappearance, they would yield
interesting results. Though loving their haunts and tenacious of their
habitats, the genii of the Highlands are disappearing before the spirit
of modernism, as the Red Indian, once bold and courageous, disappears
before the white man. Once intrusive, they are now become timid as the
mullet of the sea, the shrew of the grass, or the swift of the air--a
glimpse, a glint, and gone for ever. They are startled at the crack of
the rifle, the whistle of the steamer, the shriek of the train, and the
click of the telegraph. Their homes are invaded and their repose is
disturbed, so that they find no rest for their weary feet nor sleep for
their heavy eyes; and their native land, so full of their love, so
congenial to their hearts, will all too soon know them no more. Let an
attempt be made even yet to preserve their memories ere they disappear
for ever.

Whatever be the value of this work, it is genuine folk-lore, taken down
from the lips of men and women, no part being copied from books. It is
the product of far-away thinking, come down on the long stream of time.
Who the thinkers and whence the stream, who can tell? Some of the hymns
may have been composed within the cloistered cells of Derry and Iona,
and some of the incantations among the cromlechs of Stonehenge and the
standing-stones of Callarnis. These poems were composed by the learned,
but they have not come down through the learned, but through the
unlearned--not through the lettered few, but through the unlettered
many--through the crofters and cottars, the herdsmen and shepherds, of
the Highlands and Islands.

Although these compositions have been rescued chiefly among Roman
Catholics and in the islands, they have been equally common among
Protestants and on the mainland.

From one to ten versions have been taken down, differing more or less.
It has been difficult to select. Some examples of these variants are
given. Several poems and many notes are wholly withheld, while a few of
the poems and all the notes have been abbreviated for want of space.

I had the privilege of being acquainted with Iain F. Campbell of Islay
during a quarter of a century, and I have followed his counsel and
imitated his example in giving the words and in recording the names of
the reciters. Some localisms are given for the sake of

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gaelic scholars.
Hence the same word may be spelt in different ways through the influence
of assonance and other characteristics of Gaelic compositions.

With each succeeding generation Gaelic speech becomes more limited and
Gaelic phraseology more obscure. Both reciter and writer felt this when
words and phrases occurred which neither knew. These have been rendered
tentatively or left untranslated. I can only hope that in the near or
distant future some competent scholar may compare these gleanings of
mine with Celtic writings at home and abroad, and that light may be shed
upon what is to me obscure.

I have tried to translate literally yet satisfactorily, but I am
painfully conscious of failure. Although in decay, these poems are in
verse of a high order, with metre, rhythm, assonance, alliteration, and
every quality to please the ear and to instruct the mind, The
translation lacks these and the simple dignity, the charming grace, and
the passionate devotion of the original.

I see faults that I would willingly mend, but it is easier to point to
blemishes than to avoid them--

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">'Is furasda dh’an fhear eisdeachd<br />
Beum a thoir dh’an fhear labhairt.'</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">It is easy for the listening roan<br />
To give taunt to the speaking man.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

Again and again I laid down my self-imposed task, feeling unable to
render the intense power and supreme beauty of the original Gaelic into
adequate English. But I resumed under the inspiring influence of my
wife, to whose unfailing sympathy and cultured ear this work owes much.

My daughter has transcribed the manuscripts and corrected the proofs for
press, and has acted as amanuensis throughout; while my three sons have
helped in various ways.

The Celtic letters in the work have been copied by my wife from Celtic
MSS., chiefly in the Advocates' Library. This has been a task of extreme
difficulty, needing great skill and patient care owing to the defaced
condition of the originals. The letters have been prepared for the
engraver with feeling and insight by Mr John Athel Lovegrove, of H.M.
Ordnance Survey.

The Rev. Father Allan Macdonald, Eriskey, South Uist, generously placed
at my disposal a collection of religious folk-lore made by himself. For
this I am very grateful though unable to use the manuscript, having so
much material of my own.

Mr John Henry Dixon, Inveran, Lochmaree, offered to publish the work at
his own expense. That I have not availed myself of his

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

generous appreciation does not lessen my gratitude for Mr Dixon's
characteristic liberality.

The portrait is the friendly work and generous gift of Mr W. Skeoch
Cumming, and is inserted at the request of friends outside my family.

My dear friend Mr George Henderson, M.A. Edin., Ph.D. Leipsic, B.Litt.
Oxon., has helped and encouraged me throughout.

These, and the many others whose names I am unable to mention through
want of space, I ask to accept my warm, abiding thanks.

Three sacrifices have been made--the sacrifice of time, the sacrifice of
toil, and the sacrifice of means. These I do not regret. I have three
regrets--that I had not been earlier collecting, that I have not been
more diligent in collecting, and that I am not better qualified to treat
what I have collected.

These notes and poems have been an education to me. And so have been the
men and women reciters from whose dictation I wrote them down. They are
almost all dead now, leaving no successors. With reverent hand and
grateful heart I place this stone upon the cairn of those who composed
and of those who transmitted the work.

ALEXANDER CARMICHAEL.

    EDINBURGH,  
*St Michael's Day*, 1899.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xxvi:1](cg1002.htm#fr_0.md) On Sunday, the 21st
July 1875, Professor Blackie, Mr William Jolly, and I ascended the hill
of Ruaival, in Benbecula. From the summit of this hill, 409 feet high,
we had an extensive view of our extraordinary surroundings, striking to
the eye and instructive to the mind. On returning home to Creagorry,
where we then lived, Professor Blackie wrote the lines composed on
Ruaival on the flyleaf of *Burt's Letters*, which he gave to me. The day
that Professor Blackie and Mr Jolly were to have left our house some
mishap befell their linens, and these had to be rewashed. Mr Jolly
alleged that I had bribed the servant in charge of the linens to bring
about the accident in order to prolong the stay of our well-beloved
guests!

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xxxix:1](cg1002.htm#fr_1.md) *Poetry of the Celtic
Races, and Other Studies*. By Ernest Renan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Header](cg1003.md)
