[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont03)  [Next](ont05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

### CHAPTER I

#### MY INTRODUCTION TO THE BLACKFEET

<span class="small">Visit North-Western Montana as member of a Forestry
Expedition under Gifford Pinchot, Chief of the Forest Service of the
United States.—Meet with Siksikakoan, an Indian Scout.—He invites me to
go with him to his home among the Blackfeet.—Our journey eastward
through the forests up the western slope of the Rocky Mountains.—We
cross the Continental Divide by the Cutbank Pass.—Flora, birds and Fauna
of the mountains.—Magnificent scenery.—Many glaciers and snowcapped
peaks.—Enter the Blackfeet Country by an old Indian war-trail.—First
glimpse of the tribal camp of the Blackfeet on the plains.—Siksikakoan
introduces me to the leaders of the Blackfeet.—Meeting with Chief Mad
Wolf.—Novel experiences in the big camp.—Accompany Siksikakoan to his
home on Cutbank River.—My first summer among the Blackfeet.</span>

I FIRST visited the country of the Blackfeet as a member of a Government
expedition under Gifford Pinchot, Chief of the Forest Service of the
United States, which had been sent into the north-west by the National
Forest Commission, to report upon the advisability of forming certain
national forest reserves.

Siksikakoan (Blackfoot-Man), also known as William Jackson, was a noted
Indian. scout, who had served in the Indian campaigns under Generals
Miles and Custer. He related to me the thrilling story of his escape
through the Sioux lines, at the time of the disastrous battle of the
Little Big Horn, June 25th, 1876, when General Custer and his battalion
of the 7th U. S. cavalry were annihilated by the Sioux. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Siksikakoan was attached

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

as a scout to Major Reno's battalion, co-operating with General
Custer's. During the first confusion of Major Reno's attack and repulse
in the first day's fighting, First Lieutenant De Rudio, Interpreter
Girard, Private O'Neal and Siksikakoan were cut off. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) Under cover of darkness, Siksikakoan
ventured upon the battle-field and stripped from the dead Sioux
sufficient leggings, moccasins and blankets to disguise themselves.
Then, in the dead of night, on the 26th, he led his companions safely
through their sleeping enemies, to the bluffs north of the river, to
which Major Reno had retreated for safety. During the movement
Siksikakoan answered the challenges of the Sioux by giving satisfactory
replies in the Sioux language.

Siksikakoan continued his scouting service until the close of the Indian
wars on the northern plains, when he returned to his tribe on the
Blackfeet Reservation. He erected a cabin on Cutbank River, at the foot
of the Rocky Mountains. He gradually built up a well-equipped ranch, and
owned large herds of cattle and horses. He lived there till the winter
of 1899, when he died, as the final result of injuries received during
his life of adventure and hardship as a scout.

When the forestry work was completed and my Government associates had
departed, Siksikakoan and I were camped together in the forest country
of the Flathead Indians, on the western slope of the Rocky Mountains.
One evening, by our camp-fire, I agreed to his proposal that we should
return to the Blackfeet Reservation on the eastern side of the range;
"for

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

there," said he, "I have many horses and cattle. The mountains are not
far distant, where the hunting is good, and the lakes and streams are
full of fish. We

<span id="img_00800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CAMP ON WESTERN
SLOPE.](tn/00800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00800.jpg)  
CAMP ON WESTERN SLOPE.  
</span>

shall be in the midst of my people, and I will introduce you to the
leading chiefs of the Blackfeet."

It was at the beginning of summer, when we started on our journey across
the Rocky Mountains, toward the country of the Blackfeet. Our outfit was
carried on

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

the backs of pack horses. The trail was difficult and overgrown and
frequently blocked by windfalls. Siksikakoan led the way with his axe,
while I followed driving the pack horses. On the western slope of the
Rockies the forests are very dense, because of the mild climate and
abundant rainfall. The trees grow to a large size and the undergrowth is
luxuriant. We rode

<span id="img_00900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![RIVER ON WESTERN
SLOPE.](tn/00900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00900.jpg)  
RIVER ON WESTERN SLOPE.  
</span>

through glades, where the rank masses of weeds and grasses were shoulder
high, and passed chains of beautiful lakes, hidden in the gloomy
recesses of the forest, where huge tamaracks, firs and spruces grew to
the water's edge, and extended high up on the sides of the mountains
This was the haunt of deer, wapiti and moose, many of their tracks being
visible in the soft ground along the lake shores.

A botanist would have been delighted with the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

great numbers of wild flowers in full bloom. I saw magnificent specimens
of bear grass (Xerophyllum Douglasii), growing to the height of five
feet. Their stalks were surmounted by dense caps of white flowers, each
flower on an ascending pedicel an inch or more long. The leaves at the
base of the stem were narrow and stiff. The root is used by the
Blackfeet as a

<span id="img_01000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ADDERS'
TONGUES.](tn/01000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01000.jpg)  
ADDERS' TONGUES.  
</span>

remedy for fractures and sprains. The leaves of a similar species are
used by other Indian tribes in making baskets. There was also a great
profusion of pink twin flowers (Linnaeus borealis), with its vine of
shiny dark green leaves, also bishop's caps, light yellow adders’
tongues and flowering dogwood (Cornus canadensis).

During our forest journey I recognised many birds

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

native to my home in the east. When passing lonely lakes, I heard the
wild, laughing cry of the loon, and olive-backed thrushes singing along
the shores. In the lofty pines were chicadees, winter wrens, hermit
thrushes, and myrtle warblers. In the open glades were robins, doves,
ruffed grouse, chipping sparrows, flickers, juncos, and tree swallows.
Here I first became acquainted with the Macgillivray warbler, his little
gray

<span id="img_01100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A MOUNTAIN
LAKE.](tn/01100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01100.jpg)  
A MOUNTAIN LAKE.  
</span>

head frequently peering out shyly from the willows along the streams. I
found the nest, with four eggs, hidden away in some blackberry bushes,
close to a lake. In the bushes were vireos, fly-catchers, and yellow
warblers, and, in the deep woods, woodpeckers, red-breasted nuthatches,
and golden-crown kinglets.

We surprised a large bear sunning himself in the trail, but he quietly
and quickly disappeared into the

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

forest. The trail led through a broad valley and along the bank of a
swift mountain stream, climbing continually upwards towards the
Continental Divide. When we reached a high altitude, the trees became
gnarled and stunted, and we were frequently enveloped in heavy clouds.
Here were many tracks of big-horn, and we saw a band of Rocky Mountain
goats high

<span id="img_01200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![“WE ENTERED A HUGE
BASIN SURROUNDED BY TOWERING PEAKS.”](tn/01200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01200.jpg)  
“WE ENTERED A HUGE BASIN SURROUNDED BY TOWERING PEAKS.”  
</span>

up on the mountain side. Hoary marmots, or whistlers greeted us from the
cliffs with their shrill calls, but they were so timid that they quickly
disappeared on our approach. We entered a huge basin, surrounded by
towering peaks—a superb and vast amphitheatre about four miles wide from
side to side. At the bottom was a sparkling lake, with wooded shores,
surmounted by a circular mountain wall with a sheer

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

height of 3,000 feet. It was fed by many streams, which had their
sources in the glaciers and fell over precipitous cliffs with a constant
roar, reverberating like thunder from the surrounding walls of rock.

<span id="img_01300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE
PASS.](tn/01300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01300.jpg)  
THE PASS.  
</span>

The Indians have given to the main range of the Rocky Mountains the
appropriate name "Backbone-of-the-World." Standing on the summit of the
Cutbank Pass (7,861 feet), we were surrounded by dazzling

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

glaciers and stupendous mountains mantled with snow. The intense
brightness of the snow-fields was relieved by the dark green covering of
forests, which lined the valleys far below. Four miles to the north lay
the Triple Divide—the Crown of the Continent, where the water-shed
divides between the Pacific Ocean, Hudson Bay, and the Gulf of Mexico.
Directly south was the sharply-pointed Flinch's peak, which lifted its
towering mass like a cathedral spire 5,000 feet above the valley. It is
impossible from the illustration to realise the sheer precipitousness of
this peak.

On the west were Mt. James (10,155 feet), Mt. Pinchot (9,332 feet), and
Ram Mountain, so called because frequented by many Rocky Mountain rams.
To the north-west was Mt. Blackfoot (9,591), and the magnificent
Blackfoot Glacier, a vast expanse of ice and snow. Beyond rose the
summit of Mt. Jackson <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) (10,023), and
under its shoulder the Harrison Glacier, with its wonderful ice
cascades. Turning farther to the north, we could see a multitude of
peaks. Among them were Mt. Siyeh <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) (or
Mad Wolf, 10,004); Little Chief <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_3)
(9,542); Going-to-the-Sun (9,594); Four Bears <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_3); Almost-a-Dog <span
id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_3) (8,911); Mt. Grinnell (8,838), and the
Grinnell Glacier; Mt. Red Eagle, <span id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_3) and
the Red Eagle Glacier, which is the source of Red Eagle Creek. The
Grinnell Glacier is fenced on the west by a remarkable, serrated ridge
of the Continental Divide known as "The Garden Wall."

In close proximity are the Gun-sight Pass (its contour resembling a
gun-sight), and the Sperry Glacier; the Sexton Glacier, with its half
mile of ice front, and the Swift Current Pass. Words fail to describe
the

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

magnificence of the glaciers and waterfalls, and the majesty and
impressive beauty of the numerous high peaks and stupendous mountain
ranges. Although this country is practically unknown, the difficult
trails being frequented only by hunters, trappers, and Indians, its
scenic wonders are probably unsurpassed by any within the United States.
The region should be

<span id="img_01500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FLINCH'S
PEAK.&lt;br&gt; “A mass of rock towering 5,000 feet above the
valley.”](tn/01500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01500.jpg)  
FLINCH'S PEAK.  
“A mass of rock towering 5,000 feet above the valley.”  
</span>

reserved by the Government as a National Park and Game Preserve. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_4)

From the summit of the Pass, Siksikakoan pointed out the course of our
trail eastward, following the Cutbank River through a long, winding
valley, with high, snow-covered mountain ranges on either side. Beyond
stretched the tawny plains—the country of the Blackfeet, resembling a
distant ocean in its level

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

expanse, and extending eastward many hundreds of miles into the dim and
hazy horizon. We descended from the summit of Cutbank Pass between two
small

<span id="img_01600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE CUTBANK
TRAIL.&lt;br&gt; (Ancient Indian route of travel.)](tn/01600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01600.jpg)  
THE CUTBANK TRAIL.  
(Ancient Indian route of travel.)  
</span>

glacier lakes. In their dark and still waters, the surrounding crags and
mountain walls were clearly reflected and many miniature icebergs were
floating,

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

having fallen from the fronts of the overhanging glaciers.

The travelling on the eastern side of the Rockies was much easier and in
marked contrast with our difficult ascent of the western side. We now
followed a trail, worn deep into the ground by generations of Blackfeet
and other Indian tribes, when they crossed and recrossed the Rocky
Mountains on their war and hunting expeditions. We entered a forest at
the head of the canyon,

<span id="img_01700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![EAST CUT-BANK
CANYON.](tn/01700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01700.jpg)  
EAST CUT-BANK CANYON.  
</span>

where the snow clung heavily to the balsams and pines. As we descended,
the snow disappeared and the air became balmy.

The climate east of the mountains is more severe, because subject to
extreme changes of temperature. Hailstorms are frequent, and snowstorms
often occur in midsummer. In winter there are terrible blizzards, during
which the thermometer drops to 50° below zero, (Fahrenheit).

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

We camped after sunset in a beautiful, natural park of luxuriant
bunch-grass, fragrant with wild flowers and surrounded by forests of
spruce and pine.

Early next morning—our last day in the mountains—we again took up the
trail through the canyon of the Cutbank River. As the sun's rays entered
the canyon, the massive walls of rock, towering overhead, became a
brilliant red, while the high peaks glistened with colours as varied as
the rainbow's. In crossing the summit of a high rocky ridge, we had an
extended view of the forest-covered valley below, and the course of the
river winding through open glades and grassy meadows, until it passed
through the entrance of the canyon. Beyond were the foothills, or high,
grass-covered ridges, lying in front of the canyon entrance, like a
mighty barrier. Here the luxuriant vegetation of the mountains abruptly
ended and the dry grass of the prairies began.

After riding through the foothills, we crossed an old trail, running
north and south, now overgrown with grass. Siksikakoan explained that it
was the Old North Trail. It is no longer used by the Indians, its course
having been broken in many places by the fences and towns of the white
man's advancing civilisation. Yet the old horse trail and travois tracks
were still plainly visible, having been worn deep by many generations of
travelling Indians.

We rode out over the treeless plains until, from the crest of a ridge,
about twenty miles from the main range of the Rockies, we looked down
upon a scene, which I will never forget because of its novel and
exceeding beauty. In a luxuriant tract of meadow, and on the shore of a
lake, lay the tribal camp of the Blackfeet, pitched in the form of an
enormous circle.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The undulating
ridges, which surrounded it were brilliant with blue lupines and
velvet-leaf sun-flowers: Great herds of horses were contentedly feeding
on the rich bunch grass. Smoke from the evening fires was rising from
the lodges. A faint breeze, laden with a pleasant fragrance from the
meadows, brought distinctly

<span id="img_01900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![VELVET LEAF
SUNFLOWERS ON PRAIRIE.](tn/01900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01900.jpg)  
VELVET LEAF SUNFLOWERS ON PRAIRIE.  
</span>

the sounds of an Indian camp, the shouts of men and women, the crying of
children, the barking of many dogs and the slow, measured beating of
Indian tom-toms in dances and ceremonial gatherings.

After entering the Blackfeet camp, I accompanied Siksikakoan while he
visited the lodges of the different chiefs. As we sat smoking a friendly
pipe together. he

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

explained to them that I had come from the Great Father (President of
the United States), for the purpose of protecting the forests of their
country, that they might be preserved for future generations. In this
way I first met Chief Mad Wolf (Siyeh), their greatest orator, the high
priest of their Sun-dance and the owner of the Beaver Medicine Bundle
(an important ceremonial). This was the beginning of a mutual bond of
sympathy and attachment, unusual between an Indian and a

<span id="img_02000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TRIBAL CAMP OF THE
BLACKFEET.](tn/02000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02000.jpg)  
TRIBAL CAMP OF THE BLACKFEET.  
</span>

white man, which developed gradually into a strong and lasting
friendship.

On my first night in the Blackfeet camp, I chose to sleep outside the
camp circle in a meadow, not far from Mad Wolf's lodge, because the
weather was clear and warm and I had no fear of being molested by the
Indians. I was within hearing of any ceremonials that would take place
in Mad Wolf's lodge and nothing of moment could occur in the encampment
without my knowledge.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span id="img_02100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MY OWN DECORATED
TIPI IN THE BLACKFEET CAMP](tn/02100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02100.jpg)  
MY OWN DECORATED TIPI IN THE BLACKFEET CAMP  
</span>

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

I placed my blanket-bed on the prairie-grass, and, instead of the lodge
covering for a roof, I had the magnificent canopy of the night-sky,
spangled with an innumerable multitude of stars. On account of the
clearness of the atmosphere over the plains, these sparkling orbs of
light shone with a rare brilliance and splendour, and appeared lower
down in the horizon than I had ever seen elsewhere. Lying on my back and
gazing up into the wonderful beauty of the heavens gave me an
overwhelming sense of the infinity of God's universe and my own
littleness by comparison.

I was not, however, to be entirely free from disturbance. While lying
upon my blankets, my attention was attracted by two wandering Indian
boys, who had been startled by the weird and ghostly appearance of my
bed. They were standing at a short distance conversing together in awed
whispers. When I gave a sudden jump and rattled the white canvas
covering, they took to their heels, believing that I was a ghost. During
the night, I was again aroused by the hot breath of a large animal upon
my face. Being awakened from a deep slumber, I imagined that it was a
grizzly bear standing over me. Jumping from my blankets with a yell, I
found that it was an Indian horse, which had been standing quietly, with
lowered head, over my bed. My outfit had aroused his curiosity, but my
actions were so precipitate and my appearance, clad in white, so
startling, that he quickly stampeded with frightened snorts.

At first I was at a loss to know how to secure suitable board and
lodging in the Blackfoot camp. Their diet of dried meat and meat stews
was to me neither appetising nor sufficiently nourishing. The difficult
problem was, however, solved for me in a very satisfactory

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

way by my friend Big Eyes. I had gained the good will of himself and
wife through the interest I had taken in their children. To show their
appreciation, his wife, Ips-e-nik-ki, who was skilled in the making of
lodges, presented me with an Indian tipi, decorated with pictographs of
interesting events in her husband's life. With the acquisition of a
tipi, I had my own home in the camp, but it was necessary to do my own
cooking and to care for my own Horses and outfit, for the Blackfeet have
no servants, and I had not taken a wife.

I soon discovered that my diet of bacon, cereals, and dried fruits was
no more pleasing to the Blackfeet than theirs was to me. After Spotted
Eagle, the medicine man, had dined with me, he said that he had never
been able to understand how people could live on the food eaten by white
men. He told me of a journey he had once taken with some officers of the
United States Army, "with whom he could stay no longer than a week,
because of the strange food they ate."

When the Sun festival was finished and the Indians separated, I
accompanied Siksikakoan to live on his Blackfoot ranch, not far from Mad
Wolf's home on Cutbank River. I found him to be a man of fine mind and
practical common sense, resourceful and fearless in emergencies and
thoroughly equipped in all that goes to make an ideal guide and
companion in the wilds. Under him I learned woodcraft, the handling of
the broncho, the mysteries of the "diamond hitch" and the location of
the old Indian trails leading across the plains and through the
mountains. He was a natural orator and had standing and influence in the
councils of his tribe. He spoke English fluently as well as the
Blackfoot and Sioux tongues, and was thoroughly

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

familiar with the ancient customs and traditions of his people. It was
under his influence that I became deeply interested in the Blackfeet,
and through his friendship that I was gradually brought into an intimate
association with their leaders.

During my first summer among the Blackfeet, I rode over the reservation,
visiting them in their camps and in their homes. Many interesting
subjects crowded themselves upon my mind and enlisted my energies. I
carried a medicine case containing simple remedies with which I was
sometimes able to relieve the sick and help the injured. I endeavoured
in every way to aid their advancement towards the white man's
civilisation, helping in the cultivation of the ground, herding horses
and cattle, and cutting timber in the mountains for building their
cabins, fences, and corrals. When the sun was hot in midsummer, I helped
them to make hay in the luxuriant meadows of the river bottoms. Although
that kind of work was hard, it never seemed to dull my mind to the
wonderful and ever-changing beauty of prairie, river, and distant
mountains. In the clear days of autumn, when the bite of frost was in
the air, I joined their hunting expeditions across the broad plains and
into the Rocky Mountains.

I now look back with the deepest pleasure upon the freedom of that life,
the delight of living and of working in that exhilarating mountain
atmosphere. Those who spend sleepless nights, because of the absorbing
and nerve-racking occupations of modern civilisation, may well envy my
nights of refreshing sleep, while wrapped in my blankets beside some
swiftly flowing mountain stream, or on the plains under the open sky.
The life of the Indian, so close to the heart of nature, the
companionship with inspiring mountains, sunlit

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

plains, lakes and rivers, the ceaseless, but ever beautiful succession
of lights and colourings, while day waned into night and night gave
place to day, and the wonderful colour transformations, which came and
went with the changing seasons, all these fascinated and held me with an
irresistible grip.

It required, however, a long period of cordial relations to overcome the
natural prejudice of the Indians against a white man, but I gradually
gained their confidence, which I was careful never to abuse. I lived
with them, not merely for pleasure and adventure, but chiefly for the
purpose of gaining as full a knowledge as possible of their
characteristics and customs, their traditions and religion. I realised
that I had an unusual opportunity of studying a remarkable race of
people, who properly belonged to the Stone Age, whose religion and
social organisation had come down from a distant past, free from contact
with any other religion, or culture. The younger generation were
indifferent to their ancient customs and religion and it seemed that
this primitive and most interesting people must soon lose their identity
and disappear for ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[6:1](ont04.htm#fr_0) The Blackfeet tribe of
Montana and Alberta should not be confused with the Sioux Blackfeet of
Dakota who fought against General Custer in the battle of The Little Big
Horn.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[7:1](ont04.htm#fr_1) "During the night
Lieutenant De Rudio, Private O'Neal, Mr. Girard, the interpreter, and
Jackson, a scout, came to our line. They had been left in the river
bottom when Major Reno made his retreat." (Extract from Capt. E. S.
Godfrey's "Custer's Last Battle," *Century Magazine*, volume 43, p. 379,
Jan. 1892.) The same incident is referred to in the report of Gen. W. T.
Sherman, Secretary of War, 1876, p. 33.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[14:1](ont04.htm#fr_2) Named after Wm. Jackson
(Siksikakoan).

<span id="fn_3"></span>[14:2](ont04.htm#fr_7) Name of a Blackfoot chief.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[15:1](ont04.htm#fr_8) See
[Appendix](ont44.htm#an_15).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. My Adoption By Mad Wolf](ont05)
