[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont09)  [Next](ont11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### MY ROCKY MOUNTAIN GOAT HUNT

<span class="small">The St. Mary's Lakes.—Magnificent mountain
scenery.—My mountain camp—Home of the mountain sheep and goat.—Stalking
a herd of five goats.—An exciting climb.—One goat killed.—Pursuit of a
wounded goat.—Laborious task of skinning a goat on a dangerous ledge.—A
mountain storm.—The back trail.—Ideal camp on the prairie.—Return to Mad
Wolf's winter home on Cutbank River.</span>

EARLY on a clear October morning, when the air was peculiarly
exhilarating, I threw the "diamond hitch" upon my pack, taking care that
the ropes were taut throughout, and headed north-west for the St. Mary's
Lakes. The ride across the plains seemed short, for my saddle horse was
in fine condition, after his long rest, and Baldy, my pack horse,
followed readily.

From the crest of St. Mary's Ridge (the divide running east and west), I
saw a beautiful lake country spread out before me, and, towards the
west, the magnificent snowy peaks "Almost-a-Dog," "Citadel," "Four
Bears," "Little Chief," "Red Eagle," and "Going-to-the-Sun"; while a
host of other peaks continued the imposing procession, until they lost
themselves in the blue sky of both northern and southern horizons.

Amid such magnificent surroundings, mounted upon my own saddle horse,
and followed by Baldy carrying all my possessions, I experienced a
delightful feeling

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

of independence and exhilaration, which only those who have had a
similar experience can fully appreciate. Having crossed the ridge, I
rode through rich

<span id="img_11400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MY ROCKY MOUNTAIN
OUTFIT.](tn/11400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11400.jpg)  
MY ROCKY MOUNTAIN OUTFIT.  
</span>

meadows of long bunch grass along the shore of upper St. Mary's Lake.
After climbing well up on the side of "Goat Mountain," where the trail
became rough and dangerous, I approached the towering and inaccessible

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

peak of Going-to-the-Sun. It is so called because of the large glacier
that lies just under its summit. In winter, it is an unbroken expanse of
ice and snow, but, under the melting of the midsummer sun, it takes the
outline of a turbaned head, facing the south-west. It is more correctly
named by the Indians, "Looking-towards-the-setting-Sun." After sunset I
came to Baring's Creek in the dense forest, a large swift stream roaring
and plunging down towards the lake. Following the stream, I climbed
rapidly upwards, passing many beautiful falls. Near nightfall, I passed
from the forest into a large basin. It was surrounded by lofty and
jagged peaks, which looked dark and gloomy in the fading twilight. My
lodge was pitched at the edge of the forest, on the grassy shore of a
beautiful lake, whose waters, fed by the surrounding glaciers, were
clear as crystal and cold as ice. The falls of Baring's Creek, not far
distant, sent forth a constant roar. Soon the moon rose over the summit
of Red Eagle, transforming the scene into one of enchanting and
fairy-like beauty. In the clear atmosphere of the high altitude the
moonlight was intensely bright, flooding the basin with its silvery
light, illuminating the glaciers and snowfields, the peaks and
pinnacles, towering above the camp, and making visible the contrasting
darkness of the gorge beneath.

Upon waking the next morning, and while still under my blankets, I
looked across the gorge and up at the high ledges of Going-to-the-Sun,
fully expecting to see a goat, or a mountain sheep gazing down at my
camp. The clouds were lifting along the mountains, and the morning mists
were fast dissolving before the warm rays of the sun. After breakfast, I
saddled Baldy, my sure-footed pack horse, and, with my rifle,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

started up the basin, watching carefully through my glasses for goats
and sheep on the rock shelves, high on the side of Going-to-the-Sun.

At the head of the basin the climbing became so rough and difficult,
that I picketed my horse in a convenient place and continued afoot. Many
beautiful flowers were blooming by the side of snow-drifts, and I passed
through patches of huckleberries of very large size and delicious
flavour. At noon I stopped for lunch beside a noisy little stream
flowing from beneath a large snow-drift. The day was warm and bright,
and the view from my lofty position magnificent. To the north rose the
twin peaks of Mt. Siyeh (Mad Wolf), also Mt. Allen and Mt. Grinnell.
After the long and fatiguing climb it was a luxury to lie in the warm
sun. Several times I was startled by large masses of ice, crashing over
precipices with a thundering roar, having been detached by the sun's
rays from the glacier high above me.

From behind a clump of gnarled and twisted pines, I looked carefully
through my glasses for fresh tracks of sheep and goats in the snow, and
examined their well-worn trails on the mountain opposite. The width and
depth of many of these trails indicate the large numbers of game
formerly inhabiting these mountains. The constant tread of their hoofs
through many ages has worn deep paths in the solid granite. As long as
the buffalo and antelope were in vast numbers upon the plains and easy
of capture, supplying almost all the wants of the Indians, mountain
sheep and goats were hunted but little, and their numbers were limited
only by the food supply.

In the Northern Rockies, the mountain goat is to be found only among the
most inaccessible peaks.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ordinarily he must
be approached from beneath. He is generally found either standing on the
edge of a high precipice, or lying upon one of the narrow shelves, or
ledges, so numerous among the higher summits. From his lofty perch, he
commands a view of the mountain side beneath him, and, if he detects the
hunter's pursuit, quickly disappears from sight, or reach. While the
"big horn," or mountain sheep, is more keen of scent and sight, the
almost inaccessible haunts of the goat make his hunting more difficult
and dangerous, and account for the value of his head as a hunter's
trophy.

It was now growing so late in the afternoon, that I was fast losing hope
of seeing any game that day. After a final examination through my
glasses of the side of Goat Mountain, I turned them upon the mountain at
the end of the basin. Far up on its slope there was a herd of five goats
with fur as white as snow. Had it not been for their jet black horns it
would have been impossible to distinguish them from the snow-bank across
which they were rapidly moving. Having crossed the summit at the head of
the basin, they were headed for a grassy knoll high up on the side of
Going-to-the-Sun, and there was a chance that they might delay to feed.
My only hope of getting within rifle-shot was to reach the knoll first
and to lie in ambush. I waited until they were hidden from view by an
intervening shoulder of the mountain. Crawling from my ambush, I climbed
with all my strength. The goats were travelling rapidly, and, if I had
correctly estimated their course, it would take them but a short time to
reach the knoll. Although speed was necessary, I had to take into
account that, if I lost my wind, and had to shoot in an exhausted
condition, there would be small chance

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

of hitting them. When I reached the knoll, I hid behind a thick patch of
grass. Before I had time to get my rifle in position, the head of a goat
appeared above the edge of the slope. He took a bite of grass and then
stepped into full view. I carefully raised my rifle and cocked it, but
the click attracted his attention. He stopped and gazed suspiciously
towards me. I lay perfectly still, which apparently satisfied him, for
he lowered his head and continued feeding. Then I fired, hitting him
directly behind the shoulder, and gave another shot to a large billy
which was following, seriously wounding him.

By this time, the first goat had struggled to a snowdrift, where I
killed him. In the meantime the wounded billy and a nanny, with her two
kids, had disappeared. It did not seem possible that the billy could go
far. I started in pursuit, climbing with difficulty through the deep
snow. I came upon the nanny with her two kids standing within short
range at the edge of a precipice. The kids were beautiful little
animals, and though large enough to care for themselves, I had not the
heart to shoot them or their mother. I left them to hunt for the tracks
of the large billy. While I was following his trail, he started for a
precipitous part of the mountain, where I feared I might lose him, for
wounded goats frequently go off to die in such inaccessible places, that
it is impossible to reach them. He ran along a series of shelves made by
the out-croppings of the horizontal rock strata. As he jumped from one
to another of these I got another shot. This last bullet slackened his
pace, but, with vitality equal to that of a grizzly bear, he still
crawled on. The climbing became difficult and dangerous. The goat jumped
to a lower shelf, and seeing that if he went farther, he would escape, I

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

leaned over and fired. Fortunately he sank in his tracks, although I
fully expected to see him roll from the narrow ledge. Returning to the
snow-drift where the first goat had fallen, I quickly skinned him and
un-jointed his head. Turning next to the task of passing along the
ledges to reach the second goat, I found that, what had been done before
with comparative ease, and without any feeling of danger, because of the
excitement of the chase, now tested to the utmost my strength and
self-control. Carefully refraining from looking at the heights above, or
the rocks far below, I dropped safely to the lower shelf, which was
scarcely wide enough to hold the body of the goat. The natural smell of
a goat is offensive, but with the hide partly off it was extremely so.
However, there was no escape. Behind was a wall of rock sloping outward,
so that I could not stand erect; in front yawned the precipice, over
which I dared not look. While skinning in such narrow quarters, it was a
difficult problem to turn the carcass of the goat over, for it was very
heavy, weighing as much as a large sheep. When I had unjointed the head
and finished my work, I crawled to the end of the shelf farthest from
the carcass, and sat down to recuperate. While absorbed in the
excitement of the hunt, I had not noticed the signs of an approaching
snowstorm, which would make my descent difficult and even hazardous. The
clouds were lowering upon the mountains, and on some of the peaks the
storm had already begun.

There still remained the dangerous and laborious task of removing the
head and hide away from the ledge. Fortunately I carried my lariat.
Wrapping the head inside the hide, I lashed them with the rope, and
throwing the end of it to the shelf above, climbed up, pulling the
bundle after me. A projecting rock blockaded the

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

way at a point, where the ledge was narrow and the slope steep. While
endeavouring to shove the pack across, it began to slide. Fearing that,
in such a dangerous place, I might be drawn over the precipice, I let
the rope go. The pack rolled from the ledge and fell upon the rocks far
below. It seemed as if all my labour had been in vain for, even if I
were able to reach the pack, I feared that the head had been ruined by
the fall. But, after discovering a way of approach from below, I was
delighted to find the head had been saved from serious injury by the
thick fur of the pelt. Returning to my first goat I made a new pack of
both heads and pelts which, with my rifle, was a heavy load for the
return trip. When I reached Baldy, picketed far down the mountain-side,
I was very tired. Gathering together sufficient material for making a
small fire, I toasted some dry bread and bacon. With an appetite
sharpened by hard climbing at a high altitude, they seemed the most
delicious morsels I had ever eaten. When I reached camp at dusk the
timbered mountain slopes were white with snow and the surrounding peaks
hidden from view.

In the morning when I opened my lodge door, I looked out upon a dazzling
scene. Over the peak of Red Eagle the sun was shining in a clear sky.
Meadow, forest and mountains were covered with a white mantle of snow.
It hung heavily upon the balsams and pines and many icicles flashed like
diamonds in the sunlight. The deep blue sky and clear images of the high
peaks were mirrored in the quiet lake beneath. As if this lovely
lake-picture had not enough of beauty, the snowstorm of the night had
added a framing of white the brown trunks and dark foliage of the firs
and pines serving to soften its dazzling whiteness.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

I was delayed in breaking camp by the pranks of my mischievous pack
horse Baldy. In roping him, he put his front feet through the noose of
the lariat, which then became fastened around his belly instead of his
neck. He ran around the camp bucking and kicking until, becoming
thoroughly frightened, he galloped away and I had great difficulty in
catching him.

<span id="img_12100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MY MOUNTAIN CAMP
AFTER THE SNOWSTORM.](tn/12100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12100.jpg)  
MY MOUNTAIN CAMP AFTER THE SNOWSTORM.  
</span>

The sun was high when the horses were at last saddled and all my
belongings were finally packed upon their backs. As I descended, the
snow rapidly disappeared and in the lower canyons it had vanished
entirely. I travelled rapidly, for the horses were headed towards home
and were eager for a better grazing range. While leading Baldy, my pack
horse, across a dangerous piece of trail, where the way was

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

narrow, and its side sloped downward towards the edge of a precipice,
overhanging the stream, his pack overbalanced and he staggered. For an
instant, it seemed as if he must tumble into the river far below.
Throwing my whole weight upon the neck rope, I held him fast, until he
recovered himself, and in a few moments we were again upon safe ground.
My camp for the night was made on the prairie beyond the eastern shore
of Lower St. Mary's Lake.

In the evening I stood on the summit of a high ridge to take a last view
of the wonderful mountain scenery, unsurpassed by any along the entire
Rocky Mountain chain. As the sinking sun slowly disappeared behind the
summit of Red Eagle, the forests of pine on the mountain slopes changed
from dark green to black, and the heavy cloud masses projected their
long shadows upon the prairies and foothills still bathed in sunlight.
Far to the east over the plains were the hazy and rounded outlines of
the Sweet Pine Hills. The broad prairie surrounding me, with its flowers
and long waving grass, bright in the evening sunlight, had never seemed
more beautiful, for its openness and brightness were in strong contrast
with the deep canyons and gloomy forests from which I had just returned.
The all-pervading stillness was occasionally broken by the distant roar
of the rapids of St. Mary's River, borne upwards on the light south
wind, and by the howling of a pack of prairie wolves. The heavy clouds
behind the mountains were lighted up with a glorious colouring that
slowly deepened into red until even the clouds overhead glowed like a
sea of fire. In the darkening twilight Venus appeared high in the golden
after-glow of the western sky. She seemed like a radiant spirit of the
heavenly world, gazing down upon the snowy

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span id="img_12300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SUNSET ON THE
PRAIRIES (ROCKIES IN THE DISTANCE).&lt;br&gt; “The broad prairie, with
its flowers and long waving grass, had never seemed more
beautiful.”](tn/12300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12300.jpg)  
SUNSET ON THE PRAIRIES (ROCKIES IN THE DISTANCE).  
“The broad prairie, with its flowers and long waving grass, had never
seemed more beautiful.”  
</span>

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

mountains, an unfailing source of inspiration for the many legends which
the Indian imagination has woven about the personality of the "Evening
Star."

The following day I crossed the brown plains and rode down into the
Cutbank Valley, in search of Mad Wolf's camp. Fording the swift river, I
followed a beaten trail, leading up the valley towards his winter home.
Ice was beginning to form along the edges of the running stream, and the
air was fragrant with the odour of fallen leaves. Towards the west the
perennial green of the forests of pine and fir on the foothills stood
out clearly in the strong sunlight, while towards the north the
table-like summit of the Milk River Ridge formed an unbroken and level
line against the horizon. The way led through meadows of long bunch
grass and groves of stately cottonwoods. Their foliage, now fast turning
to yellow, was in striking contrast with the brilliant scarlet of the
sarvis berry and wild rose. Many leaves had already fallen, exposing the
silver-grey of the cottonwood trunks, and revealing the delicate purple
of the alder bushes and the bright red branches of the thickets of
willows. Beneath the large cottonwood tree, marking from afar the home
of Mad Wolf, I recognised his large lodge covered with picture
paintings. It was after sunset and Mad Wolf was about to close a
ceremonial, which he had been conducting on behalf of a mother, who had
made a vow to the Beaver Medicine for the recovery of her sick child.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Winter On the Plains](ont11)
