[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont15)  [Next](ont17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

### CHAPTER XIII

#### MARRIAGE CUSTOMS

<span class="small">Immorality rare among Blackfeet women.—Sanctity of
marriage religiously taught.—Severe penalty for marital
infidelity.—Purity of family life contributed to a high moral and
physical development.—Curious marriage customs.—Wedding gifts and
preparations.—Considerations influencing the choice of a husband.—Rules
observed by the father-in-law and mother-in-law.—Strange mother-in-law
customs.—Relations of a husband to his father-in-law.—Feast at the birth
of a child.—Position of the first wife.—Polygamy a necessity of the
social organisation.—Expedient to marry several sisters.—The use of
love-charms to win the affection of others and of anti-love-charms to
resist their effect.</span>

IN former times immorality was rare among Blackfeet women. Chastity was
held of supreme importance in their family life. It is remarkable how
constantly the greatness of this sin was impressed upon women, both by
the teaching of their religion and the severity of the punishment
involved. Women's prayers uniformly began with the declaration of their
purity. They believed that, without it, their prayers were in vain, and
brought only a curse, if the declaration was false. Their most important
ceremonial, the Sun-dance, began with the vow of a virtuous woman, made
for the recovery of the sick. If the patient died, or if disaster came
during the ceremonial, as in the case of Good Hunter, the sacred woman
killed by lightning, the woman who made the vow was suspected of
unchastity. Consequently an unchaste woman would have a superstitious

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

dread of making a vow, or of assuming the part of a sacred woman in a
ceremonial. Sickness and death were believed to be the penalties for
false vows, visited either upon the woman herself, or upon her
relatives. If a married woman was unfaithful, her husband had the right
to kill her, or cut off her nose himself, or he could call a council of
the head men to pass judgment. Immediately following a verdict of
guilty, a powerful law-and-order society inflicted the punishment, by
cutting off her nose. The woman generally chose death in preference to
carrying such a hideous life-brand of disgrace. As in civilised society,
so among the Blackfeet, the woman suffered, but the man went free. There
are, to-day, some women without noses among the Blackfeet. They,
however, live secluded lives and are seldom seen by strangers.

Besides the fear of punishment, there were other considerations for a
Blackfoot mother's chastity. If her children were sick, she could then
make the vow to give the Sun-dance and thus secure their recovery. She
could become the sacred woman in that great ceremonial and be entitled
to the respect and veneration of the tribe. Parents pointed to the
sacred woman as a notable example for their daughters to imitate, that,
like her, they might be esteemed as above reproach.

The sacredness of marriage and the purity of family life among the
Blackfeet, before contact with the white race, doubtless contributed
largely to the high average of mental, moral, and physical development,
which characterised so many of their former leaders.

Marriage generally took place when a girl became about fourteen years of
age, and sometimes as young as eight. When she attained a marriageable
age, her

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

parents selected a husband for her. If it happened that a young man fell
in love with her, the proposal came from his parents. This, however, was
unusual. It was not customary for unmarried girls to associate with men.

When a girl's parents decided upon a son-in-law, the father made the
proposal by saying that his daughter would carry food to the young man's
lodge. If he was favourable she carried food to him daily for a moon.
Everyone would know of the girl's actions and the engagement would be
talked of throughout the camp. During this period it was customary for
the father, realising that his daughter would soon leave his control, to
admonish her as to how she should conduct herself after marriage. When
she became engaged, her parents were expected to give a pair of
moccasins, ornamented with porcupine quills, to each member of her
intended husband's family. They also arranged for a feast to be given at
the lodge of their future son-in-law, to which his relatives only were
invited. When everything was in readiness, the mother and daughter
carried the food and moccasins to his lodge. The girl then entered
alone. Without a word being spoken she took her seat on his right and
distributed the moccasins and food. During the feast her mother remained
outside. It was not proper for her to enter the lodge of her prospective
son-in-law. After the feast the man gave to his prospective wife many
presents, bidding her to distribute them among her relatives, who had
given presents to his family. The girl's mother made a new lodge for the
young people, preparing the poles and furnishing it with blankets,
buffalo robes, lodge backs, parfleches, mountain lion skins, a buckskin
dress for the girl and a buckskin suit, trimmed with

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

ermine, for the young man. The mother waited until the tribe moved to a
new camping ground, when she pitched the new lodge for the first time,
and, with her daughter's assistance, completed the necessary
preparations. When the first lodge was worn out, it was customary for
the mother-in-law to make a new one for the young couple. If by this
time they did not own a lodge decoration, the father-in-law, if able,
might purchase one for them. When a girl married, she left the clan of
her parents and lived among her husband's relatives, with whom she and
her children became identified. It was not customary to marry within the
same clan because of blood relationship. After their marriage, as long
as their lodge remained beside her father's, he was expected to build
their fire in the morning, and the mother-in-law to carry food to them.
But, under no circumstances, could she enter the lodge of her
son-in-law, or have any dealings with him. Even if he appeared
unintentionally in her presence, it was a breach of etiquette and placed
her in such an embarrassing position, that he must make amends by
presenting her with a horse. It was proper for a mother to visit her
married daughter, only during her son-in-law's absence. A man never
spoke to his mother-in-law nor to her sisters. He must be careful of his
conversation before his own sisters, not to offend their modesty, but he
might talk as unreservedly before his cousins, or his sister-in-law as
before his own wife.

It was the custom for a man and his father-in-law to have many dealings
with each other and to be on the best of terms. At the marriage of his
daughter, a father gave from thirty to forty horses as a present, but
they were promptly repaid by a like number from the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

son-in-law, together with his best buffalo-horse, saddle and war bonnet.
Whenever a son-in-law went on a hunt, he was expected to share the
proceeds with his father-in-law. If he brought in three horses laden
with meat and hides it was proper for him to direct his wife to take one
of them to her father.

During the period of childbirth, when the young couple were usually
camped beside her parents, the father-in-law recognised the event by
inviting to a feast at his daughter's lodge his friends and relatives,
whom he desired to make acquainted with his son-in-law. He furnished the
food, also the pipe and tobacco. If the company remained long enough to
smoke twice round, they were said to have enjoyed themselves. If,
however, they were inclined to continue talking and joking, or became so
interested in story-telling, that the pipe circulated three times, they
were said to have had an exceptionally good time. When the host decided
it was time for the feast to end, he rapped with the pipe saying, "It is
burned out." The guests were then expected to depart.

The first wife sat on her husbands’ right—the position of honour—and was
called his "sits-beside-him-wife." She stood higher in his affection
than his other wives and she was expected to direct them in their work.

The practice of polygamy by the Blackfeet may seem to the reader
inconsistent with the spirit, which maintained their strict regulations
upholding the integrity of the family. But it should be remembered that
polygamy was a natural and necessary expedient, growing out of their
tribal organisation.

The Indian division of occupations, between men and women, always made
the men the providers and defenders against the enemy, and imposed upon
the

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

women a wide range of drudgery and manual labour, which included the
rearing of children, the care and cooking of food, the tanning of skins,
and the making of clothes and lodges.

All were joint owners of the resources of the tribal domain. All stood
on an equality as to personal rights and the acquisition of wealth by
hunting and warfare. There was no such thing as hired servants, their
free and independent life making them too proud to serve.

Although a chief or successful warrior might secure orphan boys to look
after their horses in return for their keeping, and could engage young
men to hunt for them by furnishing their mounts, these were incidental
and not a part of their system.

Of necessity women took the place of servants in the capacity of wives.
Their number in each family would naturally be regulated by the
husband's means and the requirements of his station. All his wives were
under the direction of his first, or "sits-beside-him" wife.

A chief must be kind-hearted and open-handed, ever ready to share his
food supply with the poorest of his tribe. His tipi must always welcome
the stranger, and it devolved upon him to entertain generously the
visiting chiefs and delegations from other tribes. One can readily see
that such responsibilities required a family organisation that was not
possible to the Blackfeet, excepting through polygamy.

Another condition, that operated strongly in favour of polygamy, was the
preponderance of women over men, caused chiefly by the death losses
sustained in the constant wars waged with surrounding tribes.

It was considered desirable for a girl to marry a chief with several
wives, because the work would be divided among them. If a girl married a
poor man,

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

who could afford but one wife, her life would probably be filled with
drudgery and hard labour. Frequently an Indian would marry several
sisters. In such an alliance, there was not likely to be much friction,
because sisters were already accustomed to living together. Parents
naturally preferred such an arrangement, if they were satisfied with a
son-in-law, because they would thus avoid the many complications
involved in having several sons-in-law.

The Blackfeet had a Love medicine, which they called
Ito-wa-mami-wa-natsi (Cree medicine), because it was generally obtained
from the Crees, who were specialists in its manufacture. In talking with
E-kum-makon about the Cree medicine, he said that he had used it to
regain the affection of his young wife. When she left him and returned
to her father's lodge, he made a long journey north, to visit a Cree
medicine man, from whom he purchased some of the Love medicine. It
consisted of a small beaded buckskin bag containing a sweet-smelling
powder. As the Cree magician had directed, he secured one of his wife's
hairs and, winding it with one of his own, placed them together in the
medicine bag. He carried it with him everywhere, fastened around his
neck by a buckskin string and wore it beneath his shirt. He firmly
believed in its power, because his wife had returned and became so much
attached to him, that she was unwilling to leave his side and they went
everywhere together. Soon after this E-kum-makon had a severe illness,
lasting so long he thought he must he bewitched by Little Plume, who
owned a Porcupine-Quill medicine. It consisted of a small stone, or
wooden image of a person, a porcupine quill and some red paint, by which
the owner was able to cast an evil spell over people.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If he placed the
red paint between the eyes of the image, the one whom he desired to
injure became ill; if over the lungs, he had a hemorrhage; if on the top
of the head, he became crazy; if over the heart, it caused death.
E-kum-makon became so worried over his health, that he again sought the
advice of the Cree medicine man, who informed him that his sickness was
caused by the improper use of the Love medicine. It should not have been
carried around with him, but left inside his tipi, tied to one of the
lodge poles, where it properly belonged. The medicine man also
explained, that it was wrong to put the hairs into the bag without the
burning of incense, which was necessary to ward off the Evil Power.

There was also a medicine for counteracting the Love Power. This was
employed, whenever it was discovered that the Love medicine was used by
anyone who was unacceptable and therefore to be resisted.

The Blackfeet have always been ready purchasers of Love medicine, for
which they paid the Crees a horse, or even more. They have also secured
it from the Flatheads and Pend d’Oreilles. The Blackfeet say that the
Sioux and Assiniboines also made a love medicine, but that the Crows and
Cheyennes bought theirs from other tribes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Forming the Sun-Dance Camp](ont17)
