[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont36)  [Next](ont38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIV

#### BLACKFEET SOCIETIES

<span class="small">A practical joke at my expense.—Irregularity in time
of meals.—How women bake camass roots.—Brings-down-the-Sun receives
present of medicinal plants. He asks for my family history.—In return he
gives the origins of the Blackfeet Societies.—The Sinopaix (Kit-foxes)
and their society dance.—He describes Tsin-ksi-six (Mosquitoes).—Kuko
(Doves).—Muto-ka-iks (Buffaloes).—Knut-some-taix (Mad Dogs).</span>

OUR camping ground had once been the old bed of the river and was
covered with a plentiful deposit of loamy sand. When the grass and
undergrowth were tramped down, the ground became very dusty and the fine
sand, carried by the wind, penetrated our food and everything we had.
The South Piegans noticed that I was frequently scratching myself and
seized the opportunity for a joke at my expense. Menake said to Onesta,
so that I could overhear, "During the past few days I have been feeling
itchy. I believe we have become lousy from sitting on the blankets and
robes of the North Piegans." Onesta replied without a smile, "I have had
the same trouble, but got rid of them by bathing in the river." I had
had my own suspicions of the cause of our discomfort, but, after this
conversation, I imagined that lice were crawling in my hair and all over
my body. To the great amusement of the entire camp, I hastened to the
river, where I soon discovered that sand was the real cause of my
affliction. Onesta told me afterwards,

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

that few of the Blackfeet were troubled with vermin, but, that it was a
common thing among the Crees, Gros Ventres and Assinniboines. The
Blackfeet say that this fact made them feel uncomfortable, even to go
near the Crees, or Assinniboines and because of it they disliked to
fight with them, or use their spoils.

It is the custom of the Blackfeet to cook but two meals a day; one in
the morning and the other late in the afternoon. The hours are very
irregular, meal time coming when the women happened to feel hungry, or
thought it convenient. When we were travelling, the morning meal was
eaten very early, generally before sunrise. But, in a permanent camp, it
sometimes did not come until noon, and if the women were not in the mood
for cooking, they omitted it entirely. The evening meal varied from five
o'clock until nine. Sometimes almost a day elapsed between meals, and I
became so ravenously hungry that I resorted to the dried meats and
pemmican, which the Indians ate at all times of the day, and which I
finally acquired a liking for.

For baking the Mississa (camass roots, Camassia esculenta), Menake and
Nitana dug a hole about three feet deep. They placed hot stones at the
bottom of the hole, covering them over with long grass and leaves of the
A-pono-kauki (Paper Leaves), Balsamorrhiza sagittata. The camass roots
were placed in layers, with the grass and leaves between each layer.
When the hole was filled, it was covered over and a fire built on the
top. In this way the camass was thoroughly baked. Menake said that it
required two days and two nights to prepare it properly for food. In
former times, when the women were baking camass, it was contrary to
their custom for men to come near the place. The

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

camass roots, that Menake dug, were in size like a small potato, and had
a very delicate sweet flavour. The women generally secured them in the
mountains, where they grew in great abundance. It was at its best for
eating after the blossoms had fallen.

Menake chose a day, when Brings-down-the-Sun came alone to our camp, to
present him with a supply of roots she had brought from the south. The
old chief was a doctor with much skill and reputation. Very few of her
medicinal plants grew along the Crow Lodge River, so that Menake's
collection was of great value to him. She first handed him a large plant
called Eksisoke (Sharp Vine) by the Blackfeet (Bear Grass or Yucca
glauca), which she had found when travelling along Sun River, 250 miles
to the south. Brings-down-the-Sun was greatly pleased by this rare plant
and, as he took it, uttered a prayer and chanted a sacred song. He said
to Menake, "I am glad to get the Sharp Vine, because of its great
healing properties. I prefer it above all other remedies for fractures,
or sprains. I first grind the root up and then put it in boiling water.
For a broken leg, or arm, or sprain I use it with thin willow sticks for
splints and then hold the part in the rising steam to allay the
inflammation."

Brings-down-the-Sun having carefully stowed the precious gift of roots
in his medicine sack, came over to the big log and sat down by my side.
He smoked awhile in silence, as was his custom, and then addressed me,

<span class="small">"From the time when you first came into my camp, I
have been doing all the talking, while you have listened. I do not as
yet know very much about you, but I want to know you better, and to come
closer to you, because you are now my son. I now ask that you will talk
to me. Tell me your age, and in what moon you were born, the ages of
your father and mother, and what the country is</span>

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

<span class="small">like where you live." When I told him my age and
that of my father and mother, he looked at me in surprise, saying, "You
look like a mere youth, and have the voice of a young man. You were born
in the year of the last great scourge of small-pox (Apicksosin, Great
Sickness, 1869-70). It came during the winter, while you arrived in the
spring. I have recorded three of these Great Sicknesses. The first was
sixty years ago (1845). Twelve years intervened until the second (in
1857). The third and last came during the winter of 1870. I hope there
will never be another. Your father was born in the year when Big Lodge,
head chief of the Blackfeet, was killed. Your mother during the hard
winter, when the snows lay so deep that many of our horses
perished."</span>

He inquired if I lived beyond the Big River (Mississippi). I endeavoured
in my reply to use words and ideas he could easily understand, and said,

<span class="small">"My home (Pittsburg) is far away toward the rising
Sun. It is beyond the Big River and not far from the Great Water
(Ocean). There are many people where I live, more than the leaves on
these trees. The sun seldom shines clearly there, for it is hidden by
heavy clouds of smoke, like that from a great prairie fire. Great
fire-places light up the night skies like a burning forest. We make the
trails for the Iron Horse (Locomotive) in these fires. When the iron
trails come first from the fires, they are red hot and glide around like
huge snakes. The houses are built of stone, and some of them are so
large and high they look like the peaks of the Rocky Mountains. My
father lives down there now, and his heart feels warm towards the
Indians."</span>

During my talk, Brings-down-the-Sun sat, closely watching my every
movement. My remarks brought forth exclamations of surprise and wonder,
and, when I had finished, he said simply, "I would like to go to your
home, that I may meet that new friend of mine, your father. If you can
arrange it for me, I will go back with you." Then slowly shaking his
head he said, "The white man does very wonderful things and does not
seem to realise it." He sat smoking and musing, until I broke the long
silence by asking that he would tell me about their different societies,
or brotherhoods, which he described as follows:

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

#### SINOPAIX (SOCIETY OF KIT-FOXES).

"None of the dances of this society have been given in the last
twenty-five years. It was one of our old societies and had this origin:
The Blackfeet once went on a war expedition against the Snakes. When
they reached the Yellowstone country a man named Elk Tongue decided to
turn back. After he left the expedition, he came to a prairie-dog
village, where he saw two Kit-foxes run ahead of him for a short
distance and then disappear in a hole. He sat down near the hole to
rest, for he was very tired after his long, hard journey, and fell
asleep. He dreamed that a Kit-fox came out and invited him to go inside.
In his vision, he followed the little fox into a den, where he found the
chief of the foxes with his mate seated beside him. They were kind to
him, and finally explained to him their dance, and showed him how to
dress for it. They instructed him to get a fox-skin and to carry it with
him as his medicine, always wearing it on his back. On the right side of
their lodge, Elk Tongue saw two spears covered with other skins and
fringed with feathers, while on the left side, were two spears decorated
with white swan's down, and fringed with bells and plumes, and bent into
a circle at one end. Before Elk Tongue left the hole, the Fox Chief
said: 'When you return to your people, gather some of the young men
together, and form the society of Kit-foxes. Instruct the members to
dress and to dance, just as we have taught you. If you will do these
things; and not kill any more foxes, all of your members will have good
fortune and long life. If any of you should harm a fox, it will surely
bring misfortune.' When Elk Tongue

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

returned to camp, he did just as the fox had directed. He wore the
fox-skin for his medicine, and founded the society of Kit-foxes. He was
the only one, who could explain the mysteries of the society. He
directed the other members, but they did not understand the significance
of the dances. When he died, the Fox-skin Medicine and the story were
given to his son. From that time, they have been handed down from father
to son. The Blackfeet used to trap foxes, but after this society was
formed, the members did not allow their children to injure a fox."

#### DANCE OF THE SINOPAIX.

"When the Kit-foxes gave a dance, they opened up two large lodges and
made them into one. For four days and four nights they sat inside,
painting and dressing themselves, singing and making ready for the
dance, only appearing at night, outside of the dance lodge. On the fifth
day they marched through the camp. Their chief wore the fox-skin, with
the head made into the form of a hood. The nose was in front, the ears
on the top and the skin, with hells fastened to the tail, hung down his
back. The face of the leader was painted green to look as frightful as
possible and inspire the spectators with awe. The second in rank, called
the White-Circle-Man, carried a spear, with one end bent into a circle.
It had bells attached, and was covered with white swan's down and white
plumes. The third held a spear of the same shape, covered with white
feathers, but fringed with black and red plumes. The rest of the members
carried pointed spears, covered with otter skins ornamented with
feathers and bells.

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Kit-foxes all
painted their faces. They wore, for garters around their legs, wide
bands of otter skins, with bells attached, and an eagle feather,
decorated with red, green and yellow, in their back hair. White
weasel-skins were also attached to either end of this feather, while a
strip of otter skin was suspended from its centre. When they marched
through the camp they formed in the shape of a fox head. The chief went
first standing for the nose. Behind him were the second and third men
for the eyes, and then came the rest of the society in a group, all
together representing a fox head. The two second-men, as the eyes,
watched the chief, who was the nose, or leader, and acted just as he
directed, the rest following after. When they were ready to dance, they
sat in lines. In the first line were the regular members. If there were
men withdrawing from the society, or giving their spears to new
candidates, they sat in the second line, while the wives of the members
sat behind. As soon as the drum began, the chief started the dance. The
two circle men with the white spears followed. After them came the other
members, with otter spears. They danced in pairs,—the same way that
Kit-foxes run together. They gave short regular jumps with their feet
close together, imitating the movements of a fox, barking and moving
about, first in one direction, and then in another, just as a fox does.
The two second-men (eyes) danced between the two lines, barking and
swinging their spears. They did not move in straight lines, because the
fox never goes straight. His tail always seems to guide him. When the
white-circle men shouted, 'That is enough,' the dance ceased and they
all seated themselves. After a short rest the dance was continued."

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

#### TSIN-KSI-SIX (SOCIETY OF MOSQUITOES)

"There was once a man who was thickly surrounded by mosquitoes. They
stung him so badly that he wondered if they could kill him. Removing his
clothes he lay upon the ground. The mosquitoes quickly covered him and
bit him so severely, that he lost all feeling. In this condition, he
dreamed that a mosquito came to him saying, 'because you have been
generous and have allowed us to drink our fill from your body, we give
you the Mosquito society and dance, and we make you its chief.' The
Mosquito society wore bracelets of eagle-claws, and also buffalo robes,
with the hair-side out. They painted themselves, and tied a plume in
their back hair. When they danced, they sat in a circle, with the
drummers in the centre. They jumped up, waving their robes like wings,
dancing in a stooping posture, hovering close together and pushing each
other, imitating the movements of mosquitoes. Whenever they were making
ready to light, or sit down, they made a singing noise, like a mosquito.
They danced four times. After the fourth dance, they scattered
throughout the camp, some going on foot, others on horseback. Anyone
whom they met, whether a chief, or Medicine Pipe man, they attacked and
scratched with their eagle-claws. They were always specially delighted
to catch a man without clothes. If anyone resisted, or ran away, the
Mosquitoes followed, even into the lodges, just as real mosquitoes do,
and scratched them hard. But, if a man bared himself and offered himself
freely, they did not wound him, but passed on. If they caught a woman on
the way to the river for water, and she held forth her hand saying, 'It
is yours, fill yourselves up,' they did not hurt her, because, if

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

you let a mosquito alone, until he fills up, the sting does not pain. If
the Mosquitoes came to a lodge and decided to enter, one of their
members, who had at some time entered the lodge of an enemy, opened the
door, saying, 'I come in, because I was brave and once entered the lodge
of an enemy.' If the women, and even the children, endeavoured to hide
under the robes, or behind the lodge lining, he scratched them with his
eagle-claws. If they resisted, the entire society followed, and all
scratched them, until they yielded."

#### KUKO (SOCIETY OF DOVES).

"This society was originated in recent years among the South Piegans.
When an expedition of our people went to visit them, they brought it
back and started the dance over here. The Bloods afterwards borrowed it
from us. There is a high hill, just north of here, where the society
once went to feast and prepare for their dance. It was then named Dove
Hill. The society originated in the dream of an old man named Change
Camp. When the doves gave him the dance, they said to him: 'Gather
together a band of people of all sizes, both young men and boys, that
have no power in the tribe. If they band together, they will become
strong and every one else will fear them.' They carried bows and arrows
made of sarvis berry wood. Their quivers were made of the yellow skins
of buffalo calves. They stripped and painted their bodies for their
dance. The doves did many mean and cowardly acts and had no regard for
anyone. They molested no one who obeyed their orders. If a prominent
chief did not do as they said, they continually annoyed him. They played
many mean tricks. In

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

those days we did not have buckets, but used buffalo paunches for water
bags. Sometimes the Doves lay in ambush, and, when they saw a woman
returning from the river with her water bags filled, they shot their
arrows into them and let the water run out. If she became angry, or if
they could not pierce the skin, they sometimes destroyed the bags. If a
woman was starting off to pick berries, and they ordered her not to go,
and she disobeyed, they awaited her return and spilled her berries, or
they took long willow sticks and beat the berries from the bushes where
she was picking. They always took one woman into their society, who
liked to dig roots and to pick berries, so that they could have an
abundance for their feasts. She always followed them through the camp,
carrying a bow and arrow just as they did, calling out, 'the Doves are
now out. It will be better for everyone to stay inside.' All feared
them. The head chief, and even the powerful societies, overlooked their
mean actions and excused them, saying: 'the Doves are young and foolish
and will go to any extreme to have their own way. It is dangerous to
oppose them.'''

#### MUTO KA-IKS (BUFFALO SOCIETY).

"The Muto-ka-iks is composed entirely of women. Their dances are
continued even to this day among the Bloods. A large lodge is erected,
having a centre pole, to which is tied the sacred 'root digger,' as a
cross piece. The women assemble clothed in the costumes of their
society. They wear robes and headdresses of soft tanned buckskin. There
are four leaders, called 'Snake Medicine Hats,' with bonnets of eagle
feathers. One of these, 'Lodge-Pole' by

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

name, is chief. Four more, wearing bonnets of hawk feathers, are called
'Hawk Medicine Hats.' Two others, called 'Old Bulls,' wear head-dresses
with red plumes fastened to the horns. Old women and young children come
before them and are painted on their foreheads with a red cross,
symbolical of the 'centre pole' and the 'root digger.' A young boy, son
of a prominent chief, is chosen to take part in the ceremonies. He is
elaborately dressed and rides a horse to the lodge of the society,
followed by his father and mother bearing presents in return for the
honour conferred upon their son. When the dancers come forth from their
main lodge, they walk slowly to a lake, or stream, like a herd of
buffalo going to water. They lie down upon the shore and wait for the
two bulls which follow slowly. When they too lie down, the boy rides to
windward with a lighted buffalo chip, allowing the smoke to blow towards
the dancers. They rise slowly to their feet. After sniffing at the wind
and tossing their heads, in imitation of buffaloes, they start towards
their lodge. The boy on horseback follows, imitating the call formerly
used by Indians in driving buffalo. When the women reach the lodge, they
run about the centre pole, until they fall exhausted. The old bulls do
not join in the stampede, but walk slowly and deliberately, with heavy
tread and bellowing, sometimes lowering their heads and running at each
other like bulls fighting. Finally, they too enter the lodge and join
those about the pole. The actions of the dancers, after smelling the
smoke, are in imitation of buffalo driven by Indians to a piskun. When
they enter the lodge, they are supposed to be driven over a cliff. When
they run around the pole, their

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

motions are in imitation of buffalo wounded by their fall, and caught in
the corral at the bottom of the cliff."

#### KNUT-SOME-TAIX SOCIETY OF MAD DOGS).

"This society is sometimes also called Crazy Dogs. Two prominent Gros
Ventre chiefs, Big Road and

<span id="img_45200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAD DOG SOCIETY
WAITING FOR EXPECTED FEAST.](tn/45200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/45200.jpg)  
MAD DOG SOCIETY WAITING FOR EXPECTED FEAST.  
</span>

Wolf-skin-around-his-neck, who killed enemies in battle, by riding over
them with their horses, were the founders. The society of Mad Dogs was
secured from the Gros Ventres by the Blackfeet, through
O-mis-tai-po-kah. One of the most influential of the Gros Ventre
societies had refused to accept Wolf-skin-around-his-neck as a member,
and he was so angry with them that, in retaliation, he disclosed the
secrets and

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

mysteries of the Mad Dog society, of which he was one of the founders,
to O-mis-tai-po-kah, head chief of the Blackfeet. Many members of the
Mad Dog society are living to-day, and they still give their dances in
our big camps. They dress and prepare for their ceremonial together, in
a large lodge. Before beginning to dance, they notify the camp of their
readiness, by first marching around and singing their society song.
There

<span id="img_45300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAD DOGS MARCHING
THROUGH CAMP.](tn/45300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/45300.jpg)  
MAD DOGS MARCHING THROUGH CAMP.  
</span>

are two head men, or leaders on horseback, who are said to be braver
than the other members, and represent the two Gros Ventre chiefs,
founders of the society, The two leaders must see that the big dance
lodge is erected, and their wives must cook food for the society feast.
While marching through camp, the Mad Dogs stop beside the lodges of
chiefs, who are under obligations to them for favours, and dance until
they are given a feast, or suitable reward. If there should be

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

no response, the society seat themselves in a circle and wait,
attracting the attention of the entire camp, by drumming and by singing
their songs. The mounted leaders move slowly along the line, riding in
opposite directions, and making the others rise when it is time to begin
the dance. The Mad Dogs formerly had great power, because they were
composed of chiefs who had earned a reputation for bravery and everyone
feared to act in opposition to them."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV. The Mutsaix (Society of Brave Dogs)](ont38)
