[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont44)  [Next](ont46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Appendix II (continued): Catalog of Botanical Collection

Page [364](ont29.htm#page_364)<span id="an_364"></span>.—"My botanical
collection."

This collection of herbs and plants, with a description of their Indian
names, uses and methods of preparation by the Blackfeet, is deposited in
the Carnegie Institute of Pittsburg. The specimens were identified by
Mr. O. E. Jennings, Assistant Curator of Botany.

The same list was published by the Berlin Society for Anthropology,
Ethnology and History (Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, Heft 2, 1909), after
a lecture by the author in the Imperial Museum for Ethnography, March 6,
1909.

#### 1. MATERIA MEDICA OF THE BLACKFEET.

KATOYA. Sweet Pine.—Balsam Fir. *Abies lasiocarpa*. Burned for incense
in ceremonials. It was used in poultices for fevers and colds in the
chest, also for hair oil by mixing with grease and for

<span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

perfume. It is more fragrant than ordinary balsam. When it grows in dry
places it has a more concentrated and sweet odour.

SE-PAT-SEMO. Sweet Grass. Vanilla Grass.—*Savastana odorata*. After
drying, Sweet Grass was generally kept by plaiting several strands. It
was burned for incense and used also for making hair tonic by soaking in
water. In northern Europe and Sweden it is called Holy Grass, because,
with other sweet scented grasses, it is strewn before the churches. It
is found throughout the world in the cold north temperate zone, northern
Europe, and Asia, Newfoundland to Alaska, south to New Jersey and
Wisconsin to Colorado.

EK-SISO-KE. Sharp Vine.—Bear Grass. *Yucca glauca*. The roots were
boiled in water and used as a tonic for falling hair. The Blackfeet
thought there was no better remedy than the Ek-siso-ke for breaks and
sprains. The roots were grated and placed in boiling water. The
inflammation was reduced by holding the injured member in the rising
steam. The roots were also placed upon cuts to stop bleeding and to
allay inflammation.

NITS-IK-OPA. Double Root.—Squaw Root. *Carum Gairdneri*. Used for sore
throat and placed on swellings to draw out inflammation. It was also
eaten raw or boiled as a vegetable and used for flavouring stews.

OKS-PI-POKU. Sticky Root, also called AP-AKS-IBOKU. Wide Leaves.—Tufted
Primrose or Alkali Lily. *Pachylobus caespitosus*. The root was pounded
up and applied wet to sores and swellings to allay inflammation. It
grows in alkali soil and is generally found in gravel beds.

APOS-IPOCO. Tastes Dry.—Alum Root. *Heuchera parvifolia*. It was pounded
up and used wet as an application for sores and swellings. It grows on
gravel bottoms and alkali flats.

MATOA-KOA-KSI. Yellow Root or Swamp Root.—Willow Leaved Dock. *Rumex
salicifolius*. It was boiled and used for many complaints but generally
for swellings. It grows in swamps.

MAIS-TO-NATA. Crow Root.—Dotted Blazing Star, named because of the
brilliant scarlet of its flowers. *Lacinaria punctata*. It was called
Crow Root by the Blackfeet because it was eaten by crows and ravens in
the autumn. The root was boiled and applied to swellings. A tea was also
made with it for stomach-ache. It was sometimes eaten raw.

O-MUCK-KAS. Big Turnip.—Parsnip. *Leptotaenia multifida*. Belonging to
the carrot family, the Big Turnip is found on the sides of hills,
growing in sandy loamy soil. It was gathered in the fall. The root was
used to make a hot drink as a tonic for people in a weakened condition,
and to make them fat. The root was also pounded up and burned for
incense. When horses had the distemper

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

they were made to inhale smoke from this root. It was also mixed with
brains and used in soft tanning.

PA-KITO-KI. Gray Leaves.—Double Bladder Pod. *Physaria didymocarpa*. It
is to be found growing on gravel bottoms. The Blackfeet chewed the plant
for sore throats, also for cramps and stomach trouble. It was also
placed in water with hot stones and used to allay swelling.

A-SAT-CHIOT-AKE. Rattle Weed.—Purple Loco Weed, Crazy Weed. *Aragallus
lagopus*. Some of the flowers are purple, others blue, yellow and white.
It grows on gravel bottoms. The Blackfeet chewed it for sore throats to
allay swellings.

A-SA-PO-PINATS. Looks-like-a-plume.—Windflower or Round Fruited Anemone.
*Anemone globosa*. It is adapted for a windy place and is found growing
on hillsides where the wind strikes it, either on the plains, or in the
mountains. In midsummer the flower turns into cotton which the Blackfeet
burn on a hot coal for headache.

ET-AWA-AST. Makes-you-sneeze (Snuff). American White Hellebore.
*Veratrum speciosum*. The plant grows to be about six feet high and is
found in the mountain forests. The root is poisonous for eating. It was
gathered by the Blackfeet both in the fall and in the spring and was
used for head-ache. They broke off a small piece of the root which was
very dry and snuffed it up the nose.

SIXA-WA-KASIM. Black Root.—Red Bane Berry. *Actaea arguta*. The berries
are both red and white. It is found near the mountains in the underbrush
along rivers. The roots were boiled and used for coughs and colds.

SIXIMAS. Black Root.—White Bane Berry. *Actaea eburnea*. The root was
boiled and used for coughs and colds.

SIX-OCASIM. (Indian Horehound). It is not found on the prairies but in
the mountains along streams. It was generally used after compounding
with other plants, for babies’ colds.

KAKSAMIS. She Sage.—Sweet Sage, Old Man, Pasturage Sage Brush.
*Artemisia frigida*. The roots or tops were boiled and used as a drink
for mountain fever. It was also chewed for heartburn. Sage was generally
tied to articles that were offered as sacrifices to the Sun.

OTSQUE-EINA. Blue Berry.—Oregon Grape. *Berberis aquifolium*. The roots
were boiled and used for stomach trouble, also for hemorrhages. It grew
in the forest on the mountains.

APOKS-IKIM. Smell Foot.—Northern Valerian. *Valeriana septentrionalis*.
A hot drink was made from the roots for stomach trouble.

A-MUCH-KO-IYATSIS. Red Mouth Bush.—Paper Leaf Alder. *Alnus tenuifolia*.
A hot drink was made of the bark and taken

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

for scrofula. The bark split readily and was also used for making
stirrups, which were covered with raw-hide. The Blackfeet name
originated because the bark when chewed made their mouths red.

MA-NE-KA-PE. Young Man.—Horse Mint. *Monarda scabra*. An eye wash was
made by placing the blossoms in warm water and was used to allay
inflammation.

SO-YA-ITS. Lies-on-his-belly.—Long Plumed Avens. *Sieversia ciliata*. It
grows on the plains and in the mountains. The Blackfeet boiled it in
water and used for sore and inflamed eyes.

KINE. Rose Berries or APIS-IS-KITSA-WA.—Tomato Flower. Says Rose. *Rosa
Sayi*. A drink was made of the root and given to children for diarrhœa.
The berries were sometimes eaten raw.

OMAKA-KA-TANE-WAN. Gopher Berries.—Wild potato, Ground Cherry, Cut
Leaved Night Shade. *Solanum triflorum*. The berries were boiled and
given to children for diarrhœa. The plants grow on prairie-dog hills.

KITA-KOP-SIM. Garter Root or Pachsi, Dry Root.—Silver Weed. *Argentina
anserina*. The root was used for diarrhœa.

NUXAPIST. Little Blanket.—Indian Kemp, Dog Bane. *Apocynum cannabinum*.
A drink was made by boiling the root in water and taken for a laxative.
It was also used as a wash to prevent hair falling out. It grows on high
cliffs and was gathered at all times of year.

A-PO-PIK-A-TISS. Makes-your-hair-gray.—Pore Fungus. *Polyporus*. A small
quantity was used as a purgative. It was said to make the hair gray if
too large a dose was taken. It was also used for cleaning buckskin.

AT-SI-PO-KOA. Fire Taste.—Sharp Leaved Beard Tongue. *Pentstemon
acuminatus*. The Blackfeet named it At-si-po-koa because of its biting
flavour. It was boiled in water and taken internally for cramps and
pains in the stomach. It was also used to stop vomiting.

SIX-IN-OKO. Juniper.—Red Cedar. *Juniperus scopulorum*. The berries were
made into a tea to stop vomiting. The Juniper was used ceremonially on
the altar of the sacred woman at the Sun-dance.

AKS-PEIS. Sticky Weed.—Gum Plant. *Grindelia squarrosa*. The root was
boiled and taken internally for liver trouble. It grows on the prairies.

OPET-AT-SAPIA. *Gutierrezia diversifolia*. Grows on the prairies in the
foothills to the mountains. The roots were used by medicine men in
doctoring. They placed red hot stones in water with the roots and made
the patient inhale the steam.

E-SIMATCH-SIS. Dye.—*Evernia vulpina*. A lichen that grows on pine
trees. It was used as a yellow dye for porcupine quills.

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The quills were
placed with the dye in boiling water. It was also used for head-ache.

E-SIMATCH-SIS. Dye.—The Yellow Orthocarpus. *Orthocarpus luteus*. Used
for dyeing gopher skins red. The plant was first pounded up and then
pressed firmly upon the skin. It grows on the prairies.

ANA-WAWA-TOKS-TIMA. Buffalo Food.—Yellow Cancer Root. *Thalesia
fasciculata*. Used by Buffalo medicine men in doctoring wounds. They
chewed and blew it upon the wound.

SA-PO-TUN-A-KIO-TOI-YIS. Joint Grass.—Scouring Rush. *Equisetum
hiemale*. The grass was boiled in water and used as a drink, for horse
medicine.

PACH-CO-I-AU-SAUKAS. Smell Mouth.—Western Sweet Cicely. *Washingtonia
divaricata*. It was given to mares in winter. The Blackfeet say that it
put them in good condition for foaling. They placed it in the mares’
mouths and made them chew it. A pleasant drink was made with a small
piece of the Western Sweet Cicely root, a little more of the Sixocasim
(Indian Horehound) to three cups of water. It was taken hot for colds or
tickling in the throat.

##### TOBACCO.

KA-KA-SIN. Larb or Kinnekinick.—Bear Berry. *Arctostaphylus uva ursi*.
The leaves which are thick and evergreen were dried and used for
smoking. The berries were eaten raw and also used mashed in fat and
fried. It grows in northern North America also northern Europe and Asia.

O-MAKSE-KA-KA-SIN. Big Larb.—Pipsissewa, Princess Pine. *Chimaphila
umbellata*. It flourishes among decaying leaves in a sandy soil in the
mountain forests of Northern North America. The dried leaves were used
for tobacco by all the Mountain Indians. The Blackfeet had a special
preference for the Big Larb in smoking.

#### 2. PLANTS FOR CEREMONIALS.

PONO-KAU-SINNI. Turnip Elk Food.—Narrow Leaved Puccoon. *Lithospermum
linearifolium*. The tops were dried and used for burning as incense in
ceremonials.

SO-YO-TOI-YIS. Spring Grass or I-TA-PAT-ANIS, Cut-your-finger.—Slough
Grass Sledge. *Carex nebrascensis praevia*. The Blackfeet said it was
the favourite grass of the buffalo and for this reason the medicine men
tied it around the horns of the sacred buffalo head used in the
Sun-dance ceremonials. It grows in marshy places on the prairies.

A-PONO-KAUKI. Paper Leaves or O-TO-KAP-ATSIS. Yellow Flower.—Arrow
Leaved Balsam Root. *Balsamorrhiza sagittata*. The

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

large leaves were used in a ceremonial, while roasting Camass roots.

#### 3. BERRIES AND WILD VEGETABLES USED FOR EATING.

OK-KUN-OKIN. Berry.—Sarvis Berry, June Berry, Service Berry, Shad, May
Cherry. *Amelanchier oblongifolia*. A tall shrub or small tree growing
on the prairies, along side hills and in river bottoms. The berries
ripen in midsummer generally about the middle of July. The Blackfeet
used them in great quantities with stews, soups and meat. They also
dried them for winter use. Violent pains often followed the eating of
raw Sarvis Berries.

PUKKEEP. Choke Cherry.—Western Wild Cherry. *Prunus demissa*. The
Blackfeet say it does not ripen till later than the Sarvis Berry,
generally September or even October. They were used for soups, eaten
raw, and pounded up and mixed with meat. The bark was boiled and used
internally in combination with roots of the Western Sweet Cicely,
Northern Valerian, and Sixocasim (Indian Horehound).

MISS-IS-A-MISOI. Stink Wood.—Buffalo Berry, Silver Berry. *Elaeagnus
argentea*. The Blackfeet gave it the name of Stink Wood because of the
bad smell of the smoke. In gathering firewood a person was ridiculed if
he brought in Stink Wood. The berries were used for soup. The bark was
very tough and made strong rope for tying skins and parfleches when
raw-hide was not at hand.

IM-A-TOCH-KOT. Dog Feet.—*Disporum trachycarpum*. It bears yellow
berries which are eaten raw.

PO-KINT-SOMO. Wild Rhubarb.—Cow Parsnip. *Heracleum lanatum*. In the
spring the stalks were eaten after being roasted over hot coals. The
Blackfeet say the stalks are of two kinds which they designate by Napim
(He) and Skim (She). They peeled and split the stalk of the Skim before
roasting but only peeled the Napim. A stalk of the PO-KINT-SOMO was
placed on the altar of the Sun-dance ceremonial.

PACH-OP-IT-SKINNI. Lumpy Head.—Wild Potato, Spring Beauty. *Claytonia
lanceolata*. The Wild Potato grew on the prairies and in the foothills
of the mountains. The Blackfeet dug them in spring for eating, preparing
them for eating by boiling.

EK-SIK-A-PATO-API. Looks Back.—Smart Weed. *Polygonum bistortoides*. The
root was used in soups and stews.

PESAT-SE-NEKIM. Funny Vine.—Wild Onion. *Allium recurvatum*. Eaten raw
and also used for flavouring.

KACH-A-TAN. Tender Root.—Carolina Milk Vetch. *Astragalus carolinianus*.
The root was gathered in the spring or fall and

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

eaten raw or cooked by boiling in water. It grows on the gravel bottoms,
or side-hills of the prairies.

EKS-IX-IX. White Root.—Bitter Root, State Flower of Montana, Red Head
Louisa. *Lewisia rediviva*. The Blackfeet believed it was healthy food.
They prepared it by boiling in water. It grows plentifully in the
mountains.

SAX-IKA-KITSIM. (Quick Smell).—American Wild Mint. *Mentha canadensis*.
The leaves were placed in parfleches to flavour dried meat. It was also
used to make tea.

MASS. Wild Turnip.—Elk Food. *Lithospermum linearifolium*. The roots
were prepared for eating by boiling or roasting. It grows on the
prairies.

O-MUCK-AI-IX-IXI. Big White Root.—Evening Primrose, Alkali Lily.
*Musenium divaricatum*. The Blackfeet say the root has no flavour until
dried. It was gathered in the fall and eaten raw. It grows on the
prairies.

MISS-ISSA. Camass.—*Camassia esculenta*. The roots were generally dug in
the fall after the blossoms had fallen. They were baked by placing in a
deep hole with heated stones and a covering of leaves and grass. A fire
was also kept burning on top of the ground. It was said to require two
days and two nights to cook them thoroughly in this way.

#### 4. PERFUMES.

AT-SINA-MO. Gros Ventre Scent.—Meadow Rue. *Thalictrum occidentale*. The
berries were dried and placed in small buckskin bags.

KATOYA. Sweet Pine.—Balsam Fir. Abies lasiocarpa. The leaves had a
delightful odour when confined in a buckskin bag. Sweet Pine was also
mixed with grease in making hair oil to add fragrance.

MAT-O-AT-SIM. Perfumed Plant.—Rayless Camomile, Oregon Dog Root, Dog
Fennel. *Matricaria matricarioides*. The blossoms were dried and used
for perfumery.

SE-PAT-SEMO. Sweet Grass.—Vanilla Grass. *Sevastana odorata*. Sweet
Grass was the most popular perfumery among the Blackfeet. It was made
into braids and placed with their clothes or carried around in small
bags. It was also used for a hair-wash and as incense.

Pieces of punk from the Cottonwood Tree, leaves of the Balsam Poplar,
and the Ring-bone from a horse's leg were also used for perfumes.

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

#### 5. BLACK FEET NAMES FOR FLOWERS.

SIK-A-PIS-CHIS. White Flower.—*Aster commutatus*.

OTA-KAP-IS-CHIS-KIT-SIMA. Yellow Flower.—Clasping-leaved Arnica. *Arnica
amplexifolia*.

A-PIS-IS-KIT-SA-WA. Tomato Flower.—Red Rose. *Rosa Sayi*.

OT-SKA-A-PIS-IS-KIT-SA. Blue Flower.—Oblong Leaved Gentian. *Gentiana
affinis*.

A-SA-PO-PIN-ATS. Looks-like-a-plume.—Round Fruited Anemone. *Anemone
globosa*. Its name was derived from the appearance of the flower when it
turns into cotton and resembles a soft, downy feather.

A-PO-NO-KAU-KI. Paper Leaves.—Arrow-leaved Balsam Root. *Balsamorrhiza
sagittata*. In the hot weather its large leaves become very dry and
resemble paper.

STO-O-KAT-SIS. Ghost's Lariat.—Columbian Virgins Bower. Atragene
columbiana. A vine, with a beautiful light blue flower that trails along
the ground and also climbs trees. The Blackfeet have named it Ghost's
Lariat because it catches people and trips them up unexpectedly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II (continued): Genealogical Table of
Brings-down-the-Sun's Family](ont46)
