[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kog15)  [Next](kog17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

# 13

# THE WATERNICK

ONCE upon a time there were two children, a boy and a girl. They only
had a mother, who was a widow. One day their mother sent them to get
some wood for the fire. Off they went. The girl was just learning to
knit, so she put a ball of wool in her pocket. They went on as far as
they knew the way. Then suddenly they began to wonder whether they could
find their way home.

The girl said: "I will bind the end of the thread to a tree, and so we
shall be able to find our way back."

So they went on till the thread had all run out. Then they turned back,
but they found that wild creatures had broken the thread. What were they
to do? They wandered on till night fell, and then they saw that they
would have to spend the night in the forest. They came to a pond, and
they found that they could not go any farther. So they

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

walked round the pond till the Waternick got hold of them. He took them
with him, and there they were.

When he got home with them, his wife was waiting for him. Round the
stove there were some shelves for vessels that they used for catching
poor souls in. The Waternick and his wife were delighted with the
children; they decided that they would employ them as servants, so Mrs.
Waternick took charge of them. The children spent some years in this way
and learned about everything under the water.

One day the Waternick went away to catch some human souls, and he gave
orders to Mrs. Waternick not to leave the children alone. But the old
hag fell asleep, and the children walked some distance from the hut,
till they thought she would scold them, and so they returned home. But
they meant to go farther the next day, if only the old hag went to sleep
again. As soon as they were sure that she was asleep they ran out of the
hut and went as far as they could.

The old hag woke up and cried out: "Where are you, children?"

She jumped to her feet and ran after them. They were within a few steps
of getting safe

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

away, when, alas! she overtook them. She took them back and forced them
to work, and they had to stay at home besides.

When the Waternick came home, she told him all about it, and the
Waternick said "Never mind, I'll set them to work, and they won't have
time to think about making their way home."

So in the morning he took them to the forest and gave them a wooden
hatchet and a wooden saw and bade them, fell the trees.

"When they are all cut down, you shall go back again."

So the Waternick left them, and the children began the work at once.
They took the saw and tried to cut down a tree. But the saw soon broke
and they were done for. So they took the hatchet, and the hatchet split
in two after one stroke. They began to cry.

"Things look bad for us," they said.

Since they saw that they could not help themselves, they stayed where
they were, and presently they fell asleep. I don't know how long they
had been sleeping. But it was already time to go back.

The Waternick came and asked: "Have you finished?"

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

They said that the hatchet and saw were only made of wood, and that both
were broken. He took them home.

Next day the Waternick went about his work, while Mrs. Waternick was
busy outside the hut. The children looked at the cups on the shelves.
The cups were tilted up. So the girl lifted one of them. And she heard
the words: "God speed you!" She lifted another, and the same greeting
came again. So she kept on lifting the cups till she had lifted all of
them. Human souls had been imprisoned under those cups. Now the hag came
into the room and she saw that all the cups had been lifted. She began
to curse, and she said that the children would certainly get a good
thrashing when the old man came home.

The children often felt lonely; they thought of their mother and
wondered if she were still alive, and what they could do to get away. So
they decided that the next day, when the hag was sleeping, they would
try how far they could get.

"If only we could get as far as home, it would be all right then."

In the morning the girl had to comb Mrs.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Waternick's hair and dress her in her smart
dress. When she had finished, Mrs. Waternick had a sleep. Now the
children took to their heels; they were as quick as ravens, trying to
get away before Mrs. Waternick should wake. Being swift of foot, they
reached the shore. They leapt out and ran straight on again. Of course
they heard the hag screeching behind them, but they were on dry land, so
they thought: "We needn't care for anything now."

The hag soon stopped her pursuit. The children were tired, so they lay
down under a tree in the forest and fell asleep. As they were sleeping,
somebody woke them up. It was the forester. They told him that they were
afraid of falling into the Waternick's hands again. But the forester
told them not to be afraid, and asked how they came there. The children
told him everything just as it had happened.

Now, the forester remembered that he had heard of a widow who had lost
her children. So he thought that these must be the children. He said
nothing, but he told his wife to get them some food, and asked the
children to sit down and eat. The children thought the food

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

was very nice, so he asked them what they were accustomed to eat. They
said they were accustomed to eat flowers. So they ate plenty.

The forester decided to do all he could to get the children home. At
last it was discovered where their mother lived, and so the children
came back to her, and they lived with her until they died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. The Man Who Met Misery](kog17)
