[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kog12)  [Next](kog14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

# 10

# THE THREE ROSES

ONCE upon a time there was a mother who had three daughters. There was
to be a market in the next town, and she said she would go to it. She
asked the daughters what she should bring them back. Two of them named a
great number of things; she must buy all of them, they said. You know
the sort of women, and the sort of things they would want. Well, when
they had asked for more than enough, the mother asked the third
daughter:

"And you, don't you want anything?" "No, I don't want anything; but, if
you like, you can bring me three roses, please."

If she wanted no more than that, her mother was ready to bring them.

When the mother knew all she wanted, she went off to market. She bought
all she could, piled it all on her back, and started for home. But she
was overtaken by nightfall, and the

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

poor mother completely lost her way and could go no farther. She
wandered through the forest till she was quite worn out, and at last she
came to a palace, though she had never before heard of any palace there.
There was a large garden full of roses, so beautiful that no painter
alive could paint them, and all the roses were smiling at her. So she
remembered her youngest daughter, who had wished for just such roses.
She had forgotten it entirely till then. Surely that was because she was
so old! Now she thought: "There are plenty of roses here, so I will take
these three."

So she went into the garden and took the roses. At once a basilisk came
and demanded her daughter in exchange for the roses. The mother was
terrified and wanted to throw the flowers away. But the basilisk said
that wouldn't be any use, and he threatened to tear her to pieces. So
she had to promise him her daughter. There was no help for it, and so
she went home.

She took the three roses to her daughter and said: "Here are the roses,
but I had to pay dearly for them. You must go to yonder castle in
payment for them, and I don't even know whether you will ever come
back."

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

But Mary seemed as though she didn't mind at all, and she said she would
go. So the mother took her to the castle. There was everything she
wanted there. Soon the basilisk appeared and told Mary that she must
nurse him in her lap for three hours every day. There was no way out, do
it she must, and so the basilisk came and she nursed him for three
hours. Then he went out, but he came next day and the day after that. On
the third day he brought a sword and told poor Mary to cut his head off.

She protested that she wasn't used to doing things like that, and do it
she could not. But the basilisk said in a rage that, if that was so, he
would tear her to pieces. As there was no choice, she went up to him and
cut his head off. And as the basilisk's head rolled on the ground, there
came forth from his body a long serpent, hissing horribly. He asked her
to cut his head off again. Mary did not hesitate this time, but cut his
head off at once.

The serpent (by the way, he held the golden keys of that palace in his
mouth) was immediately changed into a beautiful youth, and he said in a
pleasant voice: "This

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

castle belongs to me, and, as you have delivered me, there is no help
for it: I must marry you."

So there was a great wedding, the castle was full of their attendants,
and they all had to play and dance. But the floor was of paper, so I
fell through it, and here I am now.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

 

<span id="img_12300"></span>

[![](tn/12300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12300.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. The Enchanted Princesses](kog14)
