<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hau07)  [Next](hau09) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hausa Folk-Lore*, by Maalam Shaihua, tr. by R. Sutherland Rattray,
\[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 4. The story about a beautiful maiden, and how the hartebeest got the marks under its eyes like teardrops

This is a story about an alliance. A story, a story. Let it go, let it
come.

A chief begat a beautiful daughter; she had no equal in the town. And he
said, 'He who hoes on the day the people come together and whose area
hoed surpasses every one else's he marries the chief's daughter. So on
the day the chief calls his neighbours to hoe (*gayaa*), let them come
(the suitors) and hoe for him. But he who hoes and surpasses every one
else, to him a wife.'

Now of a truth the chameleon had heard (about this) for a long time
past, (and) he came along. He was eating hoeing medicine. Now when the
day of the hoeing came round the chameleon was at home. He did not come
out until those hoeing were at work and were far away; then the
chameleon came. When he struck one blow on the ground with the hoe, then
he climbed on the hoe and sat down, and the hoe started to hoe, and
fairly flew until it had done as much as the hoers. It passed them, and
reached the boundary of the furrow.

The chameleon got off, sat down, and rested, and later on the (other)
hoers got to where he was. Then the chief would not consent, but now
(said) he who ran and passed every one, he should marry his daughter.
Then the hartebeest said he surpassed every one in running. So they had
a race. But the chameleon turned into a needle; he leaped (and) stuck
fast to the tail of the hartebeest, and the hartebeest ran until he
passed every one, until he came to the entrance of the house of the
chief. He passed it.

Then the chameleon let go the hartebeest's tail; of a truth the
chameleon had seen the maiden. So he embraced her, and when the
hartebeest came along he met the chameleon embracing the girl. Thereupon
the hartebeest began to shed tears, and that was the origin of what you
see like tears in a hartebeest's eyes. From that day he has wept and not
dried his tears.

Off with the rat's head.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. How the whip and the 'maara' spoon (a broken bit of calabash)
came to the haunts of men](hau09)

</div>
