<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hau10)  [Next](hau12) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hausa Folk-Lore*, by Maalam Shaihua, tr. by R. Sutherland Rattray,
\[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 7. A story about an orphan, showing that 'he who sows evil, it comes forth in his own garden'

This is the story about orphans. A story, a story. Let it go, let it
come.

A certain man had wives, two in number. He died and left them. One among
the wives fell ill. She saw she was near to death, so she said to the
second wife, 'Now you have seen this illness will not leave me. There is
my daughter, I have left her as a trust to you; for the sake of Allah
and the prophets look after her well for me.'

So the woman died and was buried, and they were left with the maid (her
child). Now always they were showing her cruelty, until one day a
sickness took hold of the maiden. She was lying down. Her stepmother
said, 'Get up, (and) go to the stream.'

The maid got up, she was groaning, she lifted a small calabash, (and)
took the road. She went to the stream (and) drew water; she took it back
(and) said, 'Mother, lift the calabash down for me.' But her step-mother
said, 'Do you not see I am pounding? Not now, when I have finished.'

She finished husking the grain, she was winnowing, the maiden was
standing by. The maiden said, 'Mother, lift down the calabash for me.'
But her step-mother said, 'Do you not see I am winnowing? (Not now),
when I have finished.'

The maiden stood by till she had finished, until she had washed; she
paid no attention to the maiden. The maiden said, 'Mother, help me down
(with the water-pot).' She said, 'Do you not see I am pouring grain into
the mortar? (Not now), but when I have finished pounding.' The maiden
kept standing by till she finished pounding; she re-pounded, she
winnowed, she finished, the maiden was still standing.

The maiden said, 'Mother, help me down,' but she said, 'Do you not see I
am putting porridge in the pot? When I have finished.' The maiden kept
standing by till she (the step-mother) had finished putting the porridge
(in the pot). The maiden said, 'Mother, help me down,' but she said, 'If
(I) come to help you down the porridge will get burned; (wait) till the
porridge boils.' The porridge boiled, she took it out of the water, till
(then) she pounded it, squeezed it, and finished.

She did not say anything to the maid, till the wind came like a
whirlwind; it lifted the maiden and went off with her (and) she was not
seen. The wind took her to the forest (bush), there was no one but she
alone. She was roaming in the forest till she saw a grass hut. Then she
went (up to it). She peeped in, (and) met a thigh-bone and a dog inside.

Then she drew back, but the thigh-bone said, 'Us! us!', and the dog
said, 'He says you are to come back.' The maiden came back, and the
thigh-bone said, 'Us! us!', and the dog said, 'He says you a , to
enter.' The maiden entered the hut, and bowed down and prostrated
herself, and the thighbone said, 'Us! us!', and the dog said, 'He says,
Can you cook food?' And the maiden said, 'Yes.'

So they gave her rice, one grain, and said she was to cook it. She
picked up the single grain of rice. She did not grumble, she put it in
the mortar and pounded, and when she had finished pounding, the rice
filled the mortar. She dry pounded the rice and finished, and poured it
from a height to let the wind blow away the chaff (*sheke*).

She went to the stream and washed (it) ; she brought (it) back home, she
set (the pot) on the fire, she poured in the rice and in a short time
the rice filled the pot. Then the thigh-bone said, 'Us! us!', and the
dog said, He says are you able (to make) soup?' The maiden said, Yes, I
can.' The thighbone said, 'Us! us!', so the dog got up and went to a
small refuse heap, (and) scraped up an old bone, and gave it to the
maiden. She received it and put it in the pot.

When a little while had passed, the meat filled the pot. When the meat
was ready, she poured in salt and (*daudawa*) spice, (and) she put in
all kinds of soup spices. When the soup was ready she took the pot off
the fire, she served out the food and divided it up. Ten helpings she
set aside for the thigh-bone, for the dog she set aside nine helpings,
(and) she set out for herself two.

They ate (and) were filled. So it is, because of this, if a stranger has
come to you, honour him, give him food to eat. Meanwhile you study his
nature, you see if (it) is bad or good. To return to the story. They
went to sleep. At dawn the thigh-bone said, 'Us! us!', and the dog said
to the maiden, 'He says, Can you make "*fura*" cakes?' She said, 'Yes.'
The thigh-bone said, 'Us! us!' Then the dog got up (and) came (and)
lifted one grain of corn; he brought it and gave her. She received it
(and) put it in the mortar; she poured in water, she lifted the pestle,
she was pounding; as she (wet) pounded, the corn became much.

She took it out, she winnowed, she took it to the water, she washed it,
she returned, she pounded, she took it out, she winnowed, she returned,
(and) poured (it in again). She pounded it very finely, she took it out,
rolled it into cakes, and put it in the pot until it boiled. She took it
off (the fire), set it down, poured it into the mortar, pounded, took it
out, rolled it up into balls, and gave to the thigh-bone three balls, to
the dog she gave two.

When it was dawn the thigh-bone said, 'Us! us!', and the dog said, 'He
says, Are you going home?' She said, 'I will go, but I do not know the
way.' Then the thigh-bone said, 'Us! us! ', and the dog rose up; he went
and brought slaves, beautiful ones, he brought cattle and sheep, horses
and fowls, camels and war-horses, and ostriches, and robes, everything
in the world, the dog brought and gave to the maiden.

He said, 'There they are, the thigh-bone says I must give you (them);
you will make them the provision for your journey. And he says he gives
you leave to set out, and go to your home.' But the maiden said, 'I do
not know the way.' So the dog told the thigh-bone, and the thigh-bone
said, 'Us! Us!' And the dog said, 'He says let us set out, (and) I must
show you the way.' So the dog passed on in front, the maiden mounted a
camel, the camel was led.

They were going along. The dog brought them till (they reached) close to
(her) home. The dog turned back, but she herself sent into the town; she
said, let the chief be told it was she who was come. The chief said,
'Let them go and meet her.' They went and met her. They drew up at the
chief's doorway, the chief gave them permission to alight, they
alighted, She took out one tenth and gave the chief. She stayed there
until the chief said he wished her in marriage. They were married. She
also, that step-mother of hers, (her late father's second wife) was
envious, so she told her own daughter to go to the stream to draw water
for her. But the little girl said, 'Mother, I am not going.'

But she (the mother) lifted a reed and drove her, (and) she went to the
stream by compulsion. Now the girl went to the stream, drew water, and
took (it) home. She came across her mother as she was pounding; she
said, 'Mother, help me down (with the pot).' But her mother said, 'I am
pounding, (wait) till I have finished.' She finished pounding, and the
girl said, 'Mother, help me down.' But she answered, 'I am about to
winnow, (wait) till I have finished.' She finished winnowing (and) the
girl said, 'Mother, help me down (with the pot).' She replied, I am just
going to pound-when I have finished.' When she had finished pounding
then she sought the girl low and high; she did not see her, the wind has
(had) lifted her (and) taken her to the bush.

It cast her there, she was roaming in the forest, when she saw a grass
hut. She went and peeped in the hut, and she saw a thigh-bone and a dog.
Then she drew back, and the thigh-bone said, 'Us! Us!' The dog said, 'He
says you are to come.' So she came and said, 'Here I am.' The thigh-bone
said, 'Us! us!' The dog said, 'He says you are to sit down.' So she sat
down, (and) said, 'Mercy on us, a thighbone that talks. What sort of a
thing is Us! us?' But they gave no answer.

A short time after the thigh-bone said, 'Us! us!' Then the dog said, 'He
says, Can you (cook) food?' And she said, 'Ah, it's a bad year when the
partridge has seen them planting out the young trees (instead of sowing,
when it could eat the seed). A thigh-bone, too, even it has an
interpreter. I am able, you, I suppose, have the grain, when you are
asking if people can cook food.'

They gave no answer, (but) the dog got up; he lifted one single grain of
rice (and) gave her. 'What's this?' she said, 'to-day I am about to see
how one single grain of rice makes food.' The dog replied, 'As for you,
make it thus.' She lifted the rice and put it in the mortar, she was
pounding, and after a little while the rice became much. She dry pounded
it, took it out, poured it out so as to blow away the chaff, poured on
water, cooked it.

By the time she had finished cooking it the rice filled the pot. She was
amazed. The dog lifted up a year-old bone, brought it, and gave her.
Then she said, 'What am I to do with it, this is a year-old bone?' The
dog replied, 'As for you, make it thus.' She said, 'Are you supposed to
be conjurers? I warn you; it is not my business that wizards should eat
me.'The dog remained silent; not a thing did he say.

She washed the bone and put it in the pot, and in a short time the pot
was full of meat. The girl was amazed, but she stirred the food, she
took it out (and) set the soup down. She put aside for the thigh-bone
three helpings, for the dog two. But the dog was angry because he saw
her share was large, theirs very small, and he said, 'What's this?' When
he would have said, 'Haba,' he could only say, 'Hab hab,' because he had
not told the thigh-bone first before he spoke.

Formerly the dog was a minister at court and used to talk like a person,
when (on this day) he got in a temper in front of the king, he condemned
him to say 'Hab! hab!' if he rose up to quarrel. And the moral of this
is, a youth must not lose his temper in the presence of an elder.

Now they had eaten their food and slept. At dawn the thigh-bone said,
'Us! us!' Then the dog was not able to speak, but he went and brought
blind men, and lepers, and blind horses, and lame asses, and sheep,
robes and trousers were brought to her, (and) the dog showed her the
way. He brought her to near (her) home and turned back.

But the thigh-bone drove him away, so he came back very quickly and
joined them, and followed them until they reached the house. That is the
first time the dog came to the house, formerly he was in the bush. Well,
to continue, when they had got near the house, then she (the girl) sent
one leper from among her retinue. He sat on a blind horse and his
message was to tell the chief she has come. The chief allowed her to be
met.

The chief made the galadima and many people to go and meet them. When
they reached the open space in front of the chief's house, then a stink
filled the town. Then the chief said they were to be taken far back to a
distance behind the town. They were led behind the town, far away they
were to make their houses. When the mother of this maiden saw all this,
then she became black of heart, (and) died.

That was the first appearance of wickedness, (which) is not a beautiful
thing. Whoever commits a sin against another it comes back on himself,
as a certain learned man sung, may Allah dispense mercy on him, he says,
'Whosoever sows evil it comes forth in his own garden. That is true
without a doubt, have you heard?'

That is all.

Off with the rat's head.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. A story about a witch, and how the baby of the family
outwitted her, and invented the first walled town](hau12)

</div>
