<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hau11)  [Next](hau13) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hausa Folk-Lore*, by Maalam Shaihua, tr. by R. Sutherland Rattray,
\[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 8. A story about a witch, and how the baby of the family outwitted her, and invented the first walled town

This is a story about a witch. A story, a story. Let it go, let it come.

A certain old woman had children, nine girls, and she went far into the
bush and lived (there). Now some boys, youths, there were nine of them
too, set out from their village and went to the house of the witch,
where the girls were. They came. The girls gave them water, each had a
maid who gave him water to drink.

Now the youngest (among the boys) the youngest maid brought water to
(him) and gave him, but he refused to drink. When night came each of
(the young men's) maids made food and gave him; (and) they ate. The
youngest of the maidens made food and brought it to the youngest of the
youths, but he refused to eat. They said, 'How is it when you come every
one eats food, but you alone refuse to eat?' He said, 'If young men come
to the house of maidens and eat food, then they have become worthless
young men.' And they said, 'That is true.'

The time for sleep came, when for each and all his maiden prepared his
couch, and they lay down and were sleeping. The youngest of the boys got
up and unfastened the others' waist-cloths and tied them on the maidens.
He took off their cloaks and put them on the maidens, he lifted the
kerchiefs of the maidens and. tied them on the boys. He took away the
dresses of the girls and tied them on (the boys).

A short time passed, they were asleep, when this old woman came. When
she felt about with her hand, she discovered who had cloaks and who
waist-cloths. Then she cut (their throats), and thus she did till she
had cut off (the heads) of all her daughters; (then) she returned and
lay down.

But the baby of the family also had seen her, he had not slept. He got
up, dug a hole from the house where they were lying to their mother's
house. Then the baby of the family wakened the others from sleep. They
entered the hole and went home and left her daughters lying (with their
throats) cut.

When day dawned the old woman came. She was rejoicing (because) she was
about to eat meat, then she came across her daughters (with their
throats) cut; then she ate her hand from vexation. Then she left off,
and said, 'I shall be revenged.'

Another day she went into the town (of the young men). (And) she turned
herself into a *magaria* tree, then the boys, fifteen in number, climbed
up and were sitting there. But she tore up (the tree) with them and went
off to her house with them. The boys' parents were lamenting. The baby
of the family came and said, 'Leave off crying, I shall bring you your
children.' He went off to the bush, (and) he saw this old woman's cow,
then he went inside its belly.

When the cow came home, it was as if in calf And the old woman said (to)
this cow of hers, 'If you give birth to a son, I shall cut your throat;
if you give birth to a daughter I shall leave you alone.' And it came to
pass that one day the cow gave birth to a daughter. Now of a truth it
was the baby of the family, he had turned into the child of a cow.

They were living like this, when the baby of the family (who was now a
calf), if the old woman washed her calabashes, jumped and fell among
them and smashed them. One day she washed her calabashes and put them in
the sun to dry, then the cow's calf jumped and fell on them and smashed
them. And the old woman got in a rage, and said to these boys that they
must all rise up, and go and catch and bring it, and cut (its throat).
So the boys rose up (and) followed the calf.

The calf ran off till (it came) right into the town; the boys followed
it. Then the calf turned into a person, truly it was (he who was) the
baby of the family. And he said, 'Let each come and catch his son.' So
each one came out and caught his son, and the baby of the family he also
went home. Now she (the old witch) said, 'I will catch him again.'

So she turned into a Fulani woman, (and) took some milk, (and) brought
it into the town. It was said that no one was to look into the milk. But
one of the baby of the family's elder brothers looked in, and his eyes
fell out. Then she took her milk, turned into a whirlwind, (and) went
off with him.

Then he (the baby of the family) came early, (and found his elder
brother) was not at home. And they said, 'A certain Fulani woman came
with milk and lifted the eyes of our elder brother and went off with
them.' And the baby of the family said, 'I shall get them back.' So he
fastened on a (girl's) dress and head kerchief, (and) went to the old
woman's house. When she saw him, he was like her (own) youngest
daughter, and she said, 'Welcome, welcome.' And the baby of the family
he also began to cry, he was weeping and said, 'Bad boys came and sinned
against me, they killed my elder sisters.' The old woman too was saying,
'It is the youngest of my daughters.' And she said,' Cease crying,
youngest of my children, as for us, we shall be revenged.'

She said, 'As for me, see the eyes of the eldest of them I have
brought.' And the baby of the family said, 'Give me that I may see,
mother, the meat (eyes), (and) that I may play with them.' So the old
woman took them, and gave him, she did not know it was he. He was
playing with them, when she said, 'Sit and look after the house; I am
going to the stream and shall return.' She lifted up the water-pot (and)
turned her back.

Then the baby of the family rose up, and ran off with his brother's
eyes; he went with it (them) (and) gave his elder brother. Then the old
woman returned (from the stream) (and) said, 'Where is (my) youngest
child?' She did not see her youngest child, and she set down the water.
After a little while then the maiden came, and the old woman said,
'Bring the eyes that we may cook (them).' The maiden said, 'No, you did
not give me any eyes.' And she said, '*La Ila* it is the youngest of
their family, he came and deceived me; I said (thought) it was you, but
it cannot be helped, I shall catch him.' She ceased.

Another day the baby of the family went to the bush. He was hunting when
he met the old woman. She caught him, (and) took him to her house, put
him in a hole, (and) covered (him) up, while she went to the stream. She
left her youngest daughter and told her to wait and watch the baby of
the family lest he ran away.

Then she went off to the stream. Then her (the witch's) youngest
daughter came to the place where the baby of the family was in the pit
(and) she said, 'Oh, baby of the family, what are you eating.' And he
said, 'Stretch out your hand and I will give you what I am eating.' So
she put out her hand, but the baby of the family seized her hand, (and)
pulled her, (and) cast her into the pit ; she was inside, she was
crying.

The baby of the family covered her up as her mother had covered him. He
took (her) dress and kerchief and tied them on. He remained there, and
was playing about until the old woman came. She said, 'Let me hear that
the baby of the family has not run away,' and he replied, 'He is here,
he has not run away.' She boiled hot water, it boiled, she took it up,
and she said, 'Son of a profligate, to-day he will see.' Then she went
to the hole and poured in (the water), and the maiden, when she felt the
heat kept shouting out, and saying, 'Mother, it is I, mother, it is I.'

He, the baby of the family, said, 'It is a lie you are telling. May
Allah guard mother from giving birth to such as you, may Allah guard her
from giving birth to such as you,' and so on till she died. She (the old
woman) lifted her out, cut (her) up in small pieces, put her in a pot
and cooked her.

When the girl was cooked she put in *daudawa* spice and salt, took the
pot off the fire, took out the meat and said, 'Youngest daughter, come
forward. You alone will eat the son of the profligate woman.' But he
said, 'No, as for me I shall not eat, now you yourself eat and be
filled.' She was crunching, crunch! crunch! until she had almost eaten
(all) the meat. Then she ceased, and said, 'There is your share, little
daughter.' The baby of the family replied, 'Mother, if you are not full
eat up all,' and she (the old woman) took up what was left and ate. She
left a small piece, put it aside, and said, 'There is yours.'

And he who was the youngest of the family said, 'To-day you have eaten
up all your daughters, and there only remains for you to eat yourself.'
Then he threw aside the cloak (and) said, 'Do you see it is I, the baby
of my family, you did not eat me.' Then he ran off, and went home and
told the people of his town (saying) 'Flee'. And the whole town rose up
and fled.

When they had gone, then their elder brother said he has dropped his
slipper; he said he would turn back and get it. The baby of the family
said, 'Do not go back,' (but) he said he would return (for it). The baby
of the family said, 'Allow me to return.' The baby of the family
returned, he went and entered the house. And she (the old woman) came
and closed (the door); he climbed on to the top of the house and caught
hold of a beam. Then he said to her (the old witch), 'If you are wanting
to eat me up, you have only to open your eyes at me when I shall be
afraid and fall down (on you) (and) you will catch me.'

Then she raised her head, and opened very widely eyes at him. As for
him, he had ground peppers with him, so he cast (them) at her eyes, and
she closed (them) the eyes. He came down, and as he was about to go
outside, she caught his foot. But he said, 'Fool, you have caught a
stick, and you think it is my foot.' Then she let go his foot and caught
hold of a post; and he came out, seized the door, shut it (and) set fire
to the house. The old woman was burned.

Then he went and told the chief what they (he) had done with the old
woman, (and) he said, 'Let us return home.' So they returned home. And
the chief said, 'Let the drums be beaten in town and village and let
them assemble.' Drums were beaten in town and village and every one
assembled.

And the chief brought one hundred cloaks, one hundred trousers, one
hundred cattle, one hundred horses, of everything in the world one
hundred of each. He said he gave him half his town (and) all the things
which had been brought, the chief said he gave to the baby of the
family.

And the baby of the family said, 'Chief, a town, if it has not a
protection, is worthless. Let a wall be built before the people have
dispersed.' And the chief said, 'There is no one able to build a walled
town.' And the baby of the family said, 'I shall build it; do you only
give me assistance with the men.' The chief consented, so the baby of
the family built a walled town.

And that was the origin of walled towns, the baby of the family began
that every one might see.

Off with the rat's head.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. The doctor who went a pilgrimage to Mecca on a hyena](hau13)

</div>
