[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](efl04)  [Next](efl06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

# CHAPTER III.

### THE "GODS" OF THE EGYPTIANS.

THROUGHOUT this book we have had to refer frequently to the "gods" of
Egypt; it is now time to explain who and what they were. We have already
shown how much the monotheistic side of the Egyptian religion resembles
that of modern Christian nations, and it will have come as a surprise to
some that a people, possessing such exalted ideas of God as the
Egyptians, could ever have become the byword they did through their
alleged worship of a multitude of "gods" in various forms. It is quite
true that the Egyptians paid honour to a number of gods, a number so
large that the list of their mere names would fill a volume, but it is
equally true that the educated classes in Egypt at all times never
placed the "gods" on the same high level as God, and they never imagined
that their views on this point could be mistaken. In prehistoric times
every little village or town, every district and province, and every
great city, had its own particular god; we may go a step farther, and

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

say that every family of any wealth and position had its own god. The
wealthy family selected some one to attend to its god, and to minister
unto his wants, and the poor family contributed, according to its means,
towards a common fund for providing a dwelling-house for the god, and
for vestments, etc. But the god was an integral part of the family,
whether rich or poor, and its destiny was practically locked up with
that of the family. The overthrow of the family included the overthrow
of the god, and seasons of prosperity resulted in abundant offerings,
new vestments, perhaps a new shrine, and the like. The god of the
village, although he was a more important being, might be led into
captivity along with the people of the village, but the victory of his
followers in a raid or fight caused the honours paid to him to be
magnified and enhanced his renown.

The gods of provinces or of great cities were, of course, greater than
those of villages and private families, and in the large houses
dedicated to them, *i.e.*, temples, a considerable number of them,
represented by statues, would be found. Sometimes the attributes of one
god would be ascribed to another, sometimes two or more gods would be
"fused" or united and form one, sometimes gods were imported from remote
villages and towns and even from foreign countries, and occasionally a
community or town would repudiate its god or gods, and adopt a brand new
set from some

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

neighbouring district. Thus the number of the gods was always changing,
and the relative position of individual gods was always changing; an
obscure, and almost unknown, local god to-day might through a victory in
war become the chief god of a city, and on the other hand, a god
worshipped with abundant offerings and great ceremony one month might
sink into insignificance and become to all intents and purposes a dead
god the next. But besides family and village gods there were national
gods, and gods of rivers and mountains, and gods of earth and sky, all
of which taken to-ether made a formidable number of "divine" beings
whose good-will had to be secured, and whose ill-will must be appeased.
Besides these, a number of animals as being sacred to the gods were also
considered to be "divine," and fear as well as love made the Egyptians
add to their numerous classes of gods.

The gods of Egypt whose names are known to us do not represent all those
that have been conceived by the Egyptian imagination, for with them as
with much else, the law of the survival of the fittest holds good. Of
the gods of the prehistoric man we know nothing but it is more than
probable that some of the gods who were worshipped in dynastic times
represent, in a modified form, the deities of the savage, or
semi-savage, Egyptian that held their influence on his mind the longest.
A typical example of such a

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

god will suffice, namely Thoth, whose original emblem was the dog-headed
ape. In very early times great respect was paid to this animal on
account of his sagacity, intelligence, and cunning; and the
simple-minded Egyptian, when he heard him chattering just before the
sunrise and sunset, assumed that he was in some way holding converse or
was intimately connected with the sun. This idea clung to his mind, and
we find in dynastic times, in the vignette representing the rising sun,
that the apes, who are said to be the transformed openers of the portals
of heaven, form a veritable company of the gods, and at the same time
one of the most striking features of the scene. Thus an idea which came
into being in the most remote times passed on from generation to
generation until it became crystallized in the best copies of the Book
of the Dead, at a period when Egypt was at its zenith of power and
glory. The peculiar species of the dog-headed ape which is represented
in statues and on papyri is famous for its cunning, and it was the words
which it supplied to Thoth, who in turn transmitted them to Osiris, that
enabled Osiris to be "true of voice," or triumphant, over his enemies.
It is probably in this capacity, *i.e.*, as the friend of the dead, that
the dog-headed ape appears seated upon the top of the standard of the
Balance in which the heart of the deceased is being weighed against the
feather symbolic of Maât; for the commonest titles

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

of the god are "lord of divine books," "lord of divine words," *i.e.*,
the formulæ which make the deceased to be obeyed by friend and foe alike
in the next world. In later times, when Thoth came to be represented by
the ibis bird, his attributes were multiplied, and he became the god of
letters, science, mathematics, etc.; at the creation he seems to have
played a part not unlike that of "wisdom" which is so beautifully
described by the writer of Proverbs (see Chap. VIII. vv. 23-31).

Whenever and wherever the Egyptians attempted to set up a system of gods
they always found that the old local gods had to be taken into
consideration, and a place had to be found for them in the system. This
might be done by making them members of triads, or of groups of nine
gods, now commonly called "enneads"; but in one form or other they had
to appear. The researches made during the last few years have shown that
there must have been several large schools of theological thought in
Egypt, and of each of these the priests did their utmost to proclaim the
superiority of their gods. In dynastic times there must have been great
colleges at Heliopolis, Memphis, Abydos, and one or more places in the
Delta, not to mention the smaller schools of priests which probably
existed at places on both sides of the Nile from Memphis to the south.
Of the theories and doctrines of all such schools and colleges, those of
Heliopolis have survived in the completest form, and by careful

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

examination of the funeral texts which were inscribed on the monuments
of the kings of Egypt of the Vth and VIth dynasties we can say what
views they held about many of the gods. At the outset we see that the
great god of Heliopolis was Temu or Atmu, the setting sun, and to him
the priests of that place ascribed the attributes which rightly belong
to Râ, the Sun-god of the day-time. For some reason or other they
formulated the idea of a company of the gods, nine in number, which was
called the "great company (*paut*) of the gods," and at the head of this
company they placed the god Temu. In. Chapter XVII of the Book of the
Dead <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) we find the following
passage:--

"I am the god Temu in his rising; I am. the only One. I came into being
in Nu. I am Râ, who rose in the beginning "

Next comes the question, "But who is this?" And the answer is: "It is Râ
when at the beginning he rose in the city of Suten-henen (Heracleopolis
Magna) crowned like a king in rising. The pillars of the god Shu were
not as yet created when he was upon the staircase of him that dwelleth
in Khemennu (Hermopolis Magna)." From these statements we learn that
Temu and Râ were one and the same god, and that he was the first
offspring of the god Nu, the primeval watery mass, out of which all the
gods

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

came into being. The text continues: "I am the great god Nu who gave
birth to himself, and who made his names to come, into being and to form
the company of the gods. But who is this? It is Râ, the creator of the
names of his members which came into being in the form of the gods who
are in the train of Râ." And again: "I am he who is not driven back
among the gods. But who is this? It is Tem, the dweller in his disk, or
as others say, it is Râ in his rising in the eastern horizon of heaven."
Thus we learn further that Nu was self-produced, and that the gods are
simply the names of his limbs; but then Râ is Nu, and the gods who are
in his train or following are merely personifications of the names of
his own members. He who cannot be driven back among the gods is either
Temu or Râ, and so we find that Nu, Temu, and Râ are one and the same
god. The priests of Heliopolis in setting Temu at the head of their
company of the gods thus gave Râ, and Nu also, a place of high honour;
they cleverly succeeded in making their own local god chief of the
company, but at the same time they provided the older gods with
positions of importance. In this way worshippers of Râ, who had regarded
their god as the oldest of the gods, would have little cause to complain
of the introduction of Temu into the company of the gods, and the local
vanity of Heliopolis would be gratified.

But besides the nine gods who were supposed to

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

form the "great company" of gods of the city of Heliopolis, there was a
second group of nine gods called the "little company" of the gods, and
yet a third group of nine gods, which formed the least company. Now
although the paut or company of nine gods might be expected to contain
nine always, this was not the case, and the number nine thus applied is
sometimes misleading. There are several passages extant in texts in
which the gods of a *paut* are enumerated, but the total number is
sometimes ten and sometimes eleven. This fact is easily explained when
we remember that the Egyptians deified the various forms or aspects of a
god, or the various phases in his life. Thus the setting sun, called
Temu or Atmu, and the rising sun, called Khepera, and the mid-day sun,
called Râ, were three forms of the same god; and if any one of these
three forms was included in a *paut* or company of nine gods, the other
two forms were also included by implication, even though the *paut* then
contained eleven instead of nine gods. Similarly, the various forms of
each god or goddess of the *paut* were understood to be included in it,
however large the total number of gods might become. We are not,
therefore, to imagine that the three companies of the gods were limited
in number to 9 x 3, or twenty-seven, even though the symbol for god be
given twenty-seven times in the texts.

We have already alluded to the great number of

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

gods who were known to the Egyptians, but it will be readily imagined
that it was only those who were thought to deal with man's destiny, here
and hereafter, who obtained the worship and reverence of the people of
Egypt. These were, comparatively, limited in number, and in fact may be
said to consist of the members of the great company of the gods of
Heliopolis, that is to say, of the gods who belonged to the cycle of
Osiris. These may be briefly described as follows:--

1\. TEMU or ATMU, *i.e.*, the "closer" of the day, just as Ptah was the
"opener" of the day. In the story of the creation he declares that he
evolved himself under the form of the god Khepera, and in hymns he is
said to be the "maker of the gods," "the creator of men," etc., and he
usurped the position of Râ, among the gods of Egypt. His worship must
have been already very ancient at the time of the kings of the Vth
dynasty, for his traditional form is that of a man at that time.

2\. SHU was the firstborn son of Temu. According to one legend he sprang
direct from the god, and according to another the goddess Hathor was his
mother; yet a third legend makes him the son of Temu by the goddess
Iusâset. He it was who made his way between the gods Seb and Nut and
raised up the latter to form the sky, and this belief is commemorated by
the figures of this god in which he is represented as a god raising
himself up from the earth with the sun's disk on his shoulders. As a

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span id="img_11700"></span> ![](img/11700.jpg)

Osiris being embraced by Isis and Nephthys. The four mummy figures are
the Children of Horus, A<u>k</u>eset, <u>H</u>ap, <u>T</u>uamutef, and
Qebhsenuf. The deities in the circles are Amen and Râ, Shu and Tefnut,
<u>K</u>eb and Nut, Hathor and Maât.

From a bas-relief at Philae.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span id="img_11800"></span> ![](img/11800.jpg)

Isis and Nephthys bewailing the death of Osiris.

From a bas-relief at Philae.

<span id="img_11801"></span> ![](img/11801.jpg)

Thoth, the advocate of Osiris, bearing life and serenity.

<span id="img_11802"></span> ![](img/11802.jpg)

Thoth, the advocate of Osiris, writing on his palette.

From the Papyrus of Hunefer.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

power of nature he typified the light, and, standing on the top of a
staircase at Hermopolis Magna, he raised up the sky and held it up
during each day. To assist him in this work he placed a pillar at each
of the cardinal points, and the "supports of Shu" are thus the props of
the sky.

3\. TEFNUT was the twin-sister of Shu; as a power of nature she typified
moisture or some aspect of the sun's heat, but as a god of the dead she
seems to have been, in some way, connected with the supply of drink to
the deceased. Her brother Shu was the right eye of Temu, and she was the
left, *i.e.*, Shu represented an aspect of the Sun, and Tefnut of the
Moon. The gods Temu, Shu, and Tefnut thus formed a trinity, and in the
story of the creation the god Temu says, after describing how Shu and
Tefnut proceeded from himself, "thus from being one god I became three."

4\. SEB was the son of the god Shu. He is called the "Erpâ," *i.e.*, the
"hereditary chief" of the gods, and the "father of the gods," these
being, of course, Osiris, Isis, Set, and Nephthys. He was originally the
god of the earth, but later he became a god of the dead as representing
the earth wherein the deceased was laid. One legend identifies him with
the goose, the bird which in later times was sacred to him, and he is
often called the "Great Cackler," in allusion

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

to the idea that he made the primeval egg from which the world came into
being.

5\. NUT was the wife of Seb and the mother of Osiris, Isis, Set, and
Nephthys. Originally she was the personification of the sky, and
represented the feminine principle which was active at the creation of
the universe. According to an old view, Seb and Nut existed in the
primeval watery abyss side by side with Shu and Tefnut; and later Seb
became the earth and Nut the sky. These deities were supposed to unite
every evening, and to remain embraced until the morning, when the god
Shu separated them, and set the goddess of the sky upon his four pillars
until the evening. Nut was, naturally, regarded as the mother of the
gods and of all things living, and she and her husband Seb were
considered to be the givers of food, not only to the living but also to
the dead. Though different views were current in Egypt as to the exact
location of the heaven of the beatified dead, yet all schools of thought
in all periods assigned it to some region in the sky and the abundant
allusions in the texts to the heavenly bodies--that is, the sun, moon,
and stars--which the deceased dwells with, prove that the final abode of
the souls of the righteous was not upon earth. The goddess Nut is
sometimes represented as a female alone, whose body the sun travels, and
sometimes as a cow; the tree sacred to her was the sycamore.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

6\. OSIRIS was the son of Seb and Nut, the husband of Isis and the
father of Horus. The history of this god is given elsewhere in this book
so fully that it is only necessary to refer briefly to him. He was held
to be a man although of divine origin; he lived and reigned as a king on
this earth; be was treacherously murdered by his brother Set, and his
body was cut up into fourteen pieces, which were scattered about Egypt;
after his death, Isis, by the use of magical formulæ supplied to her by
Thoth, succeeded in raising him to life, and he begot a son called
Horus; when Horus was grown up, he engaged in combat with Set, and
overcame him, and thus "avenged his father"; by means of magical
formulæ, supplied to him by Thoth, Osiris reconstituted and revivified
his body, and became the type of the resurrection and the symbol of
immortality; he was also the hope, the judge, and the god of the dead,
probably even in pre-dynastic times. Osiris was in one aspect a solar
deity, and originally he seems to have represented the sun after it had
set; but he is also identified with the moon. In the XVIIIth dynasty,
however, he is already the equal of Râ, and later the attributes of God
and of all the "gods" were ascribed to him.

7\. ISIS was the wife of Osiris and mother of Horus; as a nature goddess
she had a place in the boat of the sun at the creation, when she
probably typified the dawn. By reason of her success in revivifying her

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

husband's body by means of the utterance of magical formulæ, she is
called the "lady of enchantments." Her wanderings in search of her
husband's body, and the sorrow which she endured in bringing forth and
rearing her child in the papyrus swamps of the Delta, and the
persecution which she suffered at the hands of her husband's enemies,
form the subject of many allusions in texts of all periods. She has
various aspects, but the one which appealed most to the imagination of
the Egyptians, was that of "divine mother"; in this character thousands
of statues represent her seated and suckling her child Horus whom she
holds upon her knees.

8, SET was the son of Seb and Nut, and the husband of Nephthys. At a
very early period he was regarded as the brother and friend of "Horus
the Elder," the Aroueris of the Greeks, and Set represented the night
whilst Horus represented the day. Each of these gods performed many
offices of a friendly nature for the dead, and among others they set up
and held the ladder by which the deceased made his way from this earth
to heaven, and helped him to ascend it. But, at a later period, the
views of the Egyptians concerning Set changed, and soon after the reign
of the kings called "Seti," *i.e.*, those whose names were based upon
that of the god, he became the personification of all evil, and of all
that is horrible and terrible in nature, such as the desert in its most
desolate form, the storm and the

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

tempest, etc. Set, as a power of nature, was always waging war with
Horus the Elder, *i.e.*, the night did battle with the day for
supremacy; both gods, however, sprang from the same source, for the
heads of both are, in one scene, made to belong to one body. When Horus,
the son of Isis, had grown up, he did battle with Set, who had murdered
Horus's father Osiris, and vanquished him; in many texts these two
originally distinct fights are confused, and the two Horus gods also.
The conquest of Set by Horus in the first conflict typified only the
defeat of the night by the day, but the defeat of Set in the second
seems to have been understood as the victory of life over death, and of
good over evil. The symbol of Set was an animal with a head something
like that of a camel, but it has not yet been satisfactorily identified;
figures of the god are uncommon, for most of them were destroyed by the
Egyptians when they changed their views about him.

9\. NEPHTHYS was the sister of Isis and her companion in all her
wanderings and troubles; like her she had a place in the boat of the Sun
at creation, when she probably typified the twilight or very early
night. She was, according to one legend, the mother of Anubis by Osiris,
but in the texts his father is declared to be Râ. In funeral papyri,
stelæ, etc., she always accompanies Isis in her ministrations to the
dead, and as she assisted Osiris and Isis to defeat the wickedness

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

of her own husband (Set), so she helped the deceased to overcome the
powers of death and the grave.

Here then we have the nine gods of the divine company of Heliopolis, but
no mention is made of Horus, the son of Isis, who played such an
important part in the history of his father Osiris, and nothing is said
about Thoth; both gods are, however, included in the company in various
passages of the text, and it may be that their omission from it is the
result of an error of the scribe. We have already given the chief
details of the history of the gods Horus and Thoth, and the principal
gods of the other companies may now be briefly named.

NU was the "father of the gods," and progenitor of the "great company of
the gods"; he was the primeval watery mass out of which all things came.

PTAH was one of the most active of the three great gods who carried out
the commands of Thoth, who gave expression in words to the will of the
primeval, creative Power; he was self-created, and was a form of the
Sun-god Râ as the "Opener" of the day. From certain allusions in the
Book of the Dead he is known to have "opened the mouth" <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md) of the gods, and it is in this capacity
that he became a god of the cycle of Osiris. His feminine counterpart
was the goddess

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

\[paragraph continues\] SEKHET, and the third member of the triad of
which he was the chief was NEFER-TEMU.

PTAH-SEKER is the dual god formed by fusing Seker, the Egyptian name of
the incarnation of the Apis Bull of Memphis, with Ptah.

PTAH-SEKER-AUSAR was a triune god who, in brief, symbolized life, death,
and the resurrection.

KHNEMU was one of the old cosmic gods who assisted Ptah in carrying out
the commands of Thoth, who gave expression in words to the will of the
primeval, creative Power, he is described as "the maker of things which
are, the creator of things which shall be, the source of created things,
the father of fathers, and the mother of mothers." It was he who,
according to one legend, fashioned man upon a potter's wheel.

KHEPERA was an old primeval god, and the type of matter which contains
within itself the germ of life which is about to spring into a new
existence; thus he represented the dead body from which the spiritual
body was about to rise. He is depicted in the form of a man having a
beetle for a head, and this insect became his emblem because it was
supposed to be self-begotten and self-produced. To the present day
certain of the inhabitants of the Sûdân pound the dried scarabæus or
beetle and drink it in water, believing that it will insure them a
numerous progeny The name "Khepera" means "he who rolls," and

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

when the insect's habit of rolling along its ball filled with eggs is
taken into consideration, the appropriateness of the name is apparent.
As the ball of eggs rolls along the germs mature and burst into life;
and as the sun rolls across the sky emitting light and heat and with
them life, so earthly things are produced and have their being by virtue
thereof.

Râ was probably the oldest of the gods worshipped in Egypt, and his name
belongs to such a remote period that its meaning is unknown. He was in
all periods the visible emblem of God, and was the god of this earth to
whom offerings and sacrifices were made daily; time began when Râ
appeared above the horizon at creation in the form of the Sun, and the
life of a man was compared to his daily course at a very early date. Râ
was supposed to sail over heaven in two boats, the ÂTET or MÂTET boat in
which he journeyed from sunrise until noon, and the SEKTET boat in which
he journeyed from noon until sunset. At his rising he was attacked by
Âpep, a mighty "dragon" or serpent, the type of evil and darkness, and
with this monster he did battle until the fiery darts which he
discharged into the body of Âpep scorched and burnt him up; the fiends
that were in attendance upon this terrible foe were also destroyed by
fire, and their bodies were hacked in pieces. A repetition of this story
is given in the legend of the fight between Horus and Set, and in both
forms it

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

represented originally the fight which was supposed to go on daily
between light and darkness. Later, however, when Osiris had usurped the
position of Râ, and Horus represented a divine power who was about to
avenge the cruel murder of his father, and the wrong which had been done
to him, the moral conceptions of right and wrong, good and evil, truth
and falsehood were applied to light and darkness, that is to say, to
Horus and Set.

As Râ was the "father of the gods," it was natural that every god should
represent some phase of him, and that he should represent every god. A
good illustration of this fact is afforded by a Hymn to Râ, a fine copy
of which is found inscribed on the walls of the sloping corridor in the
tomb of Seti I., about B.C. 1370, from which we quote the following:--

11\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, who dost enter into
the habitations of Ament, behold \[thy\] body is Temu.

12\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, who dost enter into
the hidden place of Anubis, behold \[thy\] body is Khepera.

13\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, whose duration of
life is greater than that of the hidden forms, behold \[thy\] body is
Shu.

14\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, . . . behold
\[thy\] body is Tefnut.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

15\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, who bringest forth
green things in their season, behold \[thy\] body is Seb.

16\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, thou mighty being
who dost judge, . . . behold \[thy\] body is Nut.

17\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, the lord . . .
behold \[thy\] body is Isis.

18\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, whose head giveth
light to that which is in front of thee, behold \[thy\] body is
Nephthys.

19\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, thou source of the
divine members, thou One, who bringest into being that which hath been
begotten, behold \[thy\] body is Horus.

20\. "Praise be unto thee, O Râ, thou exalted Power, who dost dwell in
and illumine the celestial deep, behold \[thy\] body is Nu." <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md)

In the paragraphs which follow Râ, is identified with a large number of
gods and divine personages whose names are not of such common occurrence
in the texts as those given above, and in one way or another the
attributes of all the gods are ascribed to him. At the time when the
hymn was written it is clear that polytheism, not pantheism as some
would have it, was in the ascendant, and notwithstanding the fact

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

that the Theban god Amen was gradually being forced to the headship of
the companies of the gods of Egypt, we find everywhere the attempt being
made to emphasize the view that every god, whether foreign or native,
was an aspect or form of Râ.

The god Amen just referred to was originally a local god of Thebes,
whose shrine was either founded or rebuilt as far back as the XIIth
dynasty, about B.C. 2500. This "hidden" god, for such is the meaning of
the name Amen, was essentially a god of the south of Egypt, but when the
Theban kings vanquished their foes in the north, and so became masters
of the whole country, Amen became a god of the first importance, and the
kings of the XVIIIth, XIXth, and XXth dynasties endowed his temples on a
lavish scale. The priests of the god called Amen "the kin, of the gods,"
and they endeavoured to make all Egypt accept him as such, but in spite
of their power they saw that they could not bring this result about
unless they identified him with the oldest gods of the land. They
declared that be represented the hidden and mysterious power which
created and sustains the universe, and that the sun was the symbol of
this power; they therefore added his name to that of Pg., and in this
form he gradually usurped the attributes and powers of Nu, Khnemu, Ptah,
Hâpi, and other great gods. A revolt headed by Amen-hetep, or Amenophis
IV. (about B.C. 1500), took place against

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

the supremacy of Amen in the middle of the XVIIIth dynasty, but it was
unsuccessful. This king hated the god and his name so strongly that he
changed his own name into that of "Khu-en-Aten," *i.e.*, "the glory of
the solar Disk," and ordered the name of Amen to be obliterated,
wherever possible, on temples and other great monuments; and this was
actually done in many places. It is impossible to say exactly what the
religious views of the king were, but it is certain that he wished to
substitute the cult of Aten, a form of the Sun-god worshipped at Annu
(*i.e.*, On or Heliopolis) in very ancient times, for that of Amen.
"Aten" means literally the "Disk of the Sun," and though it is difficult
to understand at this distance of time in what the difference between
the worship of Râ, and the worship of "Râ, in his Disk" consisted, we
may be certain that there must have been some subtle, theological
distinction between them. But whatever the difference may have been, it
was sufficient to make Amenophis forsake the old capital Thebes and
withdraw to a place <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) some distance to
the north of that city, where he carried on the worship of his beloved
god Aten. In the pictures of the Aten worship which have come down to us
the god appears in the form of a disk from which proceed a number of
arms and hands that bestow life upon his worshippers. After the death of
Amenophis the cult of Aten

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

declined, and Amen resumed his sway over the minds of the Egyptians.

Want of space forbids the insertion here of a full list of the titles of
Amen, and a brief extract from the Papyrus of the Princess
Nesi-Khensu <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78.md) must suffice to describe
the estimation in which the god was held about B.C. 1000. In this Amen
is addressed as "the holy god, the lord of all the gods, Amen-Râ, the
lord of the thrones of the world, the prince of Apt (*i.e.*, Karnak),
the holy soul who came into being in the beginning, the great god who
liveth by right and truth, the first ennead who gave birth unto the
other two enneads, <span id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79.md) the being in whom
every god existeth, the One of One, the creator of the things which came
into being when the earth took form in the beginning, whose births are
hidden, whose forms are manifold, and whose growth cannot be known. The
holy Form, beloved and terrible and mighty . . . the lord of space, the
mighty One of the form of Khepera, who came into existence through
Khepera, the lord of the form of Khepera; when he came into being
nothing existed except himself He shone upon the earth from primeval
time, he the Disk, the prince of light and radiance....When this holy
god moulded himself, the heavens and the earth were made by his heart
(*or* mind). . . . He

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

is the Disk of the Moon, the beauties whereof pervade the heavens and
the earth, the untiring and beneficent king whose will germinateth from
rising to setting, from whose divine eyes men and women come forth, and
from whose mouth the gods do come, and \[by whom\] food and meat and
drink are made and provided, and \[by whom\] the things which exist are
created. He is the lord of time, and he traverseth eternity; he is the
aged one who reneweth his youth. . . . He is the Being who cannot be
known, and he is more hidden than all the gods. He giveth long life and
multiplieth the years of those who are favoured by him, he is the
gracious protector of him whom he setteth in his heart, and he is the
fashioner of eternity and everlastingness. He is the king of the North
and of the South, Amen-Râ, king of the gods, the lord of heaven, and of
earth, and of the waters and of the mountains, with whose coming into
being the earth began its existence, the mighty one, more princely than
all the gods of the first company.

In the above extract, it will be noticed that Amen is called the "One of
One," or the "One One," a title which has been explained as having no
reference whatever to the unity of God as understood in modern times:
but unless these words are intended to express the idea of unity, what
is their meaning? It is also said that he is "without second," and thus
there is no doubt

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

whatever that when the Egyptians declared their god to be One, and
without a second, they meant precisely what the Hebrews and Arabs meant
when they declared their God to be One. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md) Such a God was an entirely different Being
from the personifications of the powers of nature and the existences
which, for want of a better name, have been called "gods."

But, besides Râ, there existed in very early times a god called Horus,
whose symbol was the hawk, which, it seems, was the first living thing
worshipped by the Egyptians; Horus was the Sun-god, like Râ, and in
later times was confounded with Horus the son of Isis. The chief forms
of Horus given in the texts are: (1) HERU-UR (Aroueris), (2) HERU-MERTI,
(, 4) HERU-NUB, (4) HERU-KHENT-KHAT, (5) HERU-KHENT-AN-MAA, (6)
HERU-KHUTI, (7) HERU-SAM-TAUI, (8) HERU-HEKENNU, (9) HERU-BEHUTET.
Connected with one of the forms of Horus, originally, were the four gods
of the cardinal points, or the "four spirits of Horus," who supported
heaven at its four corners; their names were HÂPI, TUAMUTEF, AMSET, and
QEBHSENNUF, and they represented the north, east, south, and west
respectively. The intestines of the dead were embalmed and placed in
four jars, each being under the protection of one of these four gods.
Other important gods of the dead are: (1) ANUBIS, the son of Râ or
Osiris, who presided over the abode of the dead, and with AP-UAT

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

shared the dominion of the "funeral mountain" the symbol of each of
these gods is a jackal. (2) HU and SA, the children of Temu or Râ, who
appear in the boat of the sun at the creation, and later in the Judgment
Scene. (3) The goddess MAÂT, who was associated with Thoth, Ptah, and
Khnemu in the work of creation; the name means "straight," hence what is
right, true, truth, real, genuine, upright, righteous, just, steadfast,
unalterable, and the like. (4) The goddess HET-HERT (Hathor), *i.e.*,
the "house of Horus," which was that part of the sky where the sun rose
and set. The sycamore tree was sacred to her, and the deceased prays to
be fed by her with celestial food from out of it (5) The goddess
MEH-URT, who represented that portion of the sky in which the sun takes
his daily course; here it was, according to the view held at one period
at least, that the judgment of the deceased was supposed to take place.
(6) NEITH, the mother of SEBEK, who was also a goddess of the eastern
portion of the sky. (7) SEKHET and BAST, who are represented with the
heads of a lion and a cat, and who were symbols of the destroying,
scorching power of the sun, and of the gentle heat thereof,
respectively. (8) SERQ, who was a form of Isis. (9) TA-URT (Thoueris),
who was the genetrix of the gods. (10) UATCHET, who was a form of
Hathor, and who had dominion over the northern sky, just as NEKHEBET was
mistress of the southern sky. (11) NEHEB-KA, who was a goddess who
possessed

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

magical powers, and in some respects resembled Isis in her attributes.
(12) SEBAK, who was a form of the Sun-god, and was in later times
confounded with Sebak, or Sebek, the friend of Set. (13) Amsu (or MIN or
KHEM), who was the personification of the generative and reproductive
powers of nature. (14) BEB or BABA, who was the "firstborn son of
Osiris." (15) HÂPI, who was the god of the Nile, and with whom most of
the great gods were identified.

The names of the beings who at one time or another were called "gods" in
Egypt are so numerous that a mere list of them would fill scores of
pages, and in a work of this kind would be out of place. The reader is,
therefore, referred to Lanzone's *Mitologia Egizia*, where a
considerable number are enumerated and described.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[113:1](efl05.htm#fr_74.md) See *Chapters of Coming
Forth by Day*, p. 49.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[124:1](efl05.htm#fr_75.md) "May the god Ptah open
my mouth"; "may the god Shu open my mouth with his implement of iron
wherewith he opened the mouth of the gods" (Chap. XXIII.)

<span id="fn_76"></span>[128:1](efl05.htm#fr_76.md) For the text see
*Annales de Musée Guimet: Le Tombeau de Seti. I.* (ed. Lefébure), Paris,
1886, pl. v.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[130:1](efl05.htm#fr_77.md) The site is marked by
the ruins of Tell el-Amarna.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[131:1](efl05.htm#fr_78.md) For a hieroglyphic
transcript of the hieratic text, see Maspero, *Mémoires*, tom. i., p.
594 ff.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[131:2](efl05.htm#fr_79.md) *I.e.*, the great, the
little, and the least companies of the gods; each company (*paut*)
contained nine gods.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[133:1](efl05.htm#fr_80.md) See Deut, vi. 4; and
*Koran*, chapter cxii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: The Judgment of the Dead](efl06.md)
