[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](efl03)  [Next](efl05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

# CHAPTER II.

### OSIRIS THE GOD OF THE RESURRECTION.

THE Egyptians of every period in which they are known to us believed
that Osiris was of divine origin, that he suffered death and mutilation
at the hands of the powers of evil, that after a great struggle with
these powers he rose again, that he became henceforth the king of the
underworld and judge of the dead, and that because he had conquered
death the righteous also might conquer death; and they raised Osiris to
such an exalted position in heaven that he became the equal and, in
certain cases, the superior of Râ, the Sun-god, and ascribed to him the
attributes which belong unto God. However far back we go, we find that
these views about Osiris are assumed to be known to the reader of
religious texts and accepted by him, and in the earliest funeral book
the position of Osiris in respect of the other gods is identical with
that which he is made to hold in the latest copies of the Book of the
Dead. The first writers of the ancient hieroglyphic funeral texts and
their later editors have

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

assumed so completely that the history of Osiris was known unto all men,
that none of them, as far as we know, thought it necessary to write down
a connected narrative of the life and sufferings upon earth of this god,
or if they did, it has not come down to us. Even in the Vth dynasty we
find Osiris and the gods of his cycle, or company, occupying a peculiar
and special place in the compositions written for the benefit of the
dead, and the stone and other monuments which belong to still earlier
periods mention ceremonies the performance of which assumed the
substantial accuracy of the history of Osiris as made known to us by
later writers. But we have a connected history of Osiris which, though
not written in Egyptian, contains so much that is of Egyptian origin
that we may be sure that its author drew his information from Egyptian
sources: I refer to the work, *De Iside et Osiride*, of the Greek
writer, Plutarch, who flourished about the middle of the first century
of our era. In it, unfortunately, Plutarch identifies certain of the
Egyptian gods with the gods of the Greeks, and he adds a number of
statements which rest either upon his own imagination, or are the
results of misinformation. The translation <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md) by Squire runs as follows:--

Rhea <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41.md) say they, having accompanied
Saturn <span id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42.md) by

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

stealth, was discovered by the Sun, <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)
who hereupon denounced a curse upon her, 'that she should not be
delivered in any month or year'--Mercury, however, being likewise in
love with the same goddess, in recompense of the favours which he had
received from her, plays at tables with the Moon, and wins from her the
seventieth part of each of her illuminations; these several parts,
making in the whole five days, he afterwards joined together, and added
to the three hundred and sixty, of which the year formerly consisted,
which days therefore are even yet called by the Egyptians the Epact or
superadded, and observed by them as the birthdays of their gods. For
upon the first of them, say they, was Osiris born, just at whose
entrance into the world a voice was heard, saying, 'The lord of all the
earth is born.' There are some indeed who relate this circumstance in a
different manner, as that a certain person, named Pamyles, as he was
fetching water from the temple of Jupiter at Thebes, heard a voice
commanding him to proclaim aloud that 'the good and great king Osiris
was then born'; and that for this reason Saturn committed the education
of the child to him, and that in memory of this event the Pamylia were
afterwards instituted, a festival much resembling the Phalliphoria or
Priapeia of the Greeks. Upon the second of these days was AROUERIS <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44.md) born, whom some call Apollo, and others
distinguish by the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

name of the elder Orus. Upon the third Typho <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) came into the world, being born neither at
the proper time, nor by the proper place, but forcing his way through a
wound which he had made in his mother's side. Isis was born upon the
fourth of them in the marshes of Egypt, as NEPTHYS was upon the last,
whom some call Teleute and Aphrodite, and others Nike--Now as to the
fathers of these children, the two first of them are said to have been
begotten by the Sun, Isis by Mercury, Typho and Nepthys by Saturn; and
accordingly, the third of these superadded days, because it was looked
upon as the birthday of Typho, was regarded by the kings as
inauspicious, and consequently they neither transacted any business on
it, or even suffered themselves to take any refreshment until the
evening. They further add, that Typho married Nepthys; and that Isis and
Osiris, having a mutual affection, loved each other in their mother's
womb before they were born, and that from this commerce sprang Aroueris,
whom the Egyptians likewise call the elder Orus, and the Greeks Apollo.

Osiris, being now become king of Egypt, applied himself towards
civilizing his countrymen, by turning them from their former indigent
and barbarous course of life; he moreover taught them how to cultivate
and improve the fruits of the earth; he gave them a body of laws to
regulate their conduct by, and instructed

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

them in that reverence and worship which they were to pay to the gods.
With the same good disposition he afterwards travelled over the rest of
the world inducing the people everywhere to submit to his discipline;
not indeed compelling them by force of arms, but persuading them to
yield to the strength of his reasons, which were conveyed to them in the
most agreeable manner, in hymns and songs, accompanied by instruments of
music: from which last circumstance the Greeks conclude him to have been
the same with their Dionysius or Bacchus--During Osiris' absence from
his kingdom, Typho had no opportunity of making any innovations in the
state, Isis being extremely vigilant in the government, and always upon
her guard. After his return, however, having first persuaded seventy-two
other persons to join with him in the conspiracy, together with a
certain queen of Ethiopia named Aso, who chanced to be in Egypt at that
time, he contrived a proper stratagem to execute his base designs. For
having privily taken the measure of Osiris' body, he caused a chest to
be made exactly of the same size with it, as beautiful as may be, and
set off with all the ornaments of art. This chest he brought into his
banqueting-room; where, after it had been much admired by all who were
present, Typho, as it were in jest, promised to give it to any one of
them whose body upon trial it might be found to fit. Upon this the whole
company,

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

one after another, go into it; but as it did not fit any of them, last
of all Osiris lays himself down in it, upon which the conspirators
immediately ran together, clapped the cover upon it, and then fastened
it down on the outside with nails, pouring likewise melted lead over it.
After this they carried it away to the river side, and conveyed it to
the sea by the Tanaïtic mouth of the Nile; which, for this reason, is
still held in the utmost abomination by the Egyptians, and never named
by them but with proper marks of detestation. These things, say they,
were thus executed upon the 17th <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md) day
of the month Athyr, when the sun was in Scorpio, in the 28th year of
Osiris' reign; though there are others who tell us that he was no more
than 28 years old at this time.

"The first who knew the accident which had befallen their king were the
Pans and Satyrs who inhabited the country about Chemmis (Panopolis); and
they immediately acquainting the people with the news gave the first
occasion to the name Panic Terrors, which has ever since been made use
of to signify any sudden affright or amazement of a multitude. As to
Isis, as soon as the report reached her she immediately cut off one of
the locks of her hair <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47.md) and put on
mourning apparel upon the very spot where she then happened to be, which
accordingly from this accident

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

has ever since been called Koptis, or *the city of mourning*, though
some are of opinion that this word rather signifies *deprivation*. After
this she wandered everywhere about the country full of disquietude and
perplexity in search of the chest, inquiring of every person she met
with, even of some children whom she chanced to see, whether they knew
what was become of it. Now it happened that these children had seen what
Typho's accomplices had done with the body, and accordingly acquainted
her by what mouth of the Nile it had been conveyed into the sea--For
this reason therefore the Egyptians look upon children as endued with a
kind of faculty of divining, and in consequence of this notion are very
curious in observing the accidental prattle which they have with one
another whilst they are at play (especially if it be in a sacred place),
forming omens and presages from it--Isis, during this interval, having
been informed that Osiris, deceived by her sister Nepthys who was in
love with him, had unwittingly united with her instead of herself, as
she concluded from the melilot-garland, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_48.md) which he had left with her, made it her
business likewise to search out the child, the fruit of this unlawful
commerce (for her sister, dreading the anger of her husband Typho, had
exposed it as soon as it was born), and accordingly, after much pains
and difficulty, by means of some dogs that conducted her to the place

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

where it was, she found it and bred it up; so that in process of time it
became her constant guard and attendant, and from hence obtained the
name of Anubis, being thought to watch and guard the gods, as dogs to
mankind.

"At length she receives more particular news of the chest, that it had
been carried by the waves of the sea to the coast of Byblos, <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md) and there gently lodged in the branches of
a bush of Tamarisk, which, in a short time, had shot up into a large and
beautiful tree, growing round the chest and enclosing it on every side,
so that it was not to be seen; and farther, that the king of the
country, amazed at its unusual size, had cut the tree down, and made
that part of the trunk wherein the chest was concealed, a pillar to
support the roof of his house. These things, say they, being made known
to Isis in an extraordinary manner by the report of Demons, she
immediately went to Byblos; where, setting herself down by the side of a
fountain, she refused to speak to anybody, excepting only to the queen's
women who chanced to be there; these indeed she saluted and caressed in
the kindest manner possible, plaiting their hair for them, and
transmitting into them part of that wonderfully grateful odour which
issued from her own body. This raised a great desire in the queen their
mistress to see the stranger who had this

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span id="img_06900"></span> ![](img/06900.jpg)

Osiris of Hermopolis of Lower Egypt rising from his bier at the command
of Horus.

Mariette, *Dendérah*, IV, 72.

<span id="img_06901"></span> ![](img/06901.jpg)

Setting up the <u>T</u>et. From a bas-relief at Abydos.

<span id="img_06902"></span> ![](img/06902.jpg)

The king handing the <u>T</u>et to Isis. From a bas-relief at Abydos.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span id="img_07000"></span> ![](img/07000.jpg)

The <u>T</u>et of Osiris, with the plumes, horns, disk, breastplate and
pectoral of the god. From a bas-relief at Abydos.

<span id="img_07001"></span> ![](img/07001.jpg)

The <u>T</u>et from which proceed "Life" and a pair of arms supporting
the solar disk.

From the Papyrus of Ani.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

admirable faculty of transfusing so fragrant a smell from herself into
the hair and skin of other people. She therefore sent for her to court,
and, after a further acquaintance with her, made her nurse to one of her
sons. Now the name of the king who reigned at this time at Byblos, was
Melcarthus, as that of his queen was Astarte, or, according to others,
Saosis, though some call her Nemanoun, which answers to the Greek name
Athenais.

"Isis fed the child by giving it her finger to suck instead of the
breast; she likewise put him every night into the fire in order to
consume his mortal part, whilst transforming herself into a swallow, she
hovered round the pillar and bemoaned her sad fate. Thus continued she
to do for some time, till the queen, who stood watching her, observing
the child to be all in a flame, cryed out, and thereby deprived him of
that immortality which would otherwise have been conferred upon him. The
Goddess upon this, discovering herself, requested that the pillar, which
supported the roof, might be given her; which she accordingly took down,
and then easily cutting it open, after she had taken out what she
wanted, she wrapped up the remainder of the trunk in fine linnen, and
pouring perfumed oil upon it, delivered it again into the hands of the
king and queen (which piece of wood is to this day preserved in the
temple of Isis, and worshipped by the people of Byblos). When this was
done, she threw

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

herself upon the chest, making at the same time such a loud and terrible
lamentation over it, as frightened the younger of the king's sons, who
heard her, out of his life. But the elder of them she took with her and
set sail with the chest for Egypt; and it being now about morning, the
river Phædrus sending forth a rough and sharp air, she in her anger
dried up its current.

"No sooner was she arrived at a desart place, where she imagined herself
to be alone, but she presently opened the chest, and laying her face
upon her dead husband's, embraced his corpse, and wept bitterly, but
perceiving that the little boy had silently stolen behind her, and found
out the occasion of her grief, she turned herself about on the sudden,
and in her anger gave him so fierce and stern a look that he immediately
died of the affright. Others indeed say that his death did not happen.
in this manner, but, as was hinted above, that he fell into the sea, and
afterwards received the greatest honours on account of the Goddess; for
that the Maneros, <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md) whom the Egyptians
so frequently call upon in their banquets, is none other than this very
boy. This relation is again contradicted by such as tell us thalt the
true name of the child was Palæstinus, or Pelusius, and that the city of
this name was built by the Goddess in memory of

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

him; adding farther, that the Maneros above mentioned is thus honoured
by the Egyptians at their feasts, because he was the first who invented
music. There are others, again, who affirm that Maneros is not the name
of any particular person, but a mere customary form, and complimental
manner of greeting made use of by the Egyptians one towards another at
their more solemn feasts and banquets, meaning no more by it, than to
wish, that what they were then about might prove fortunate and happy to
them, for that this is the true import, of the word. In like manner, say
they, the human skeleton, which at these times of jollity is carried
about in a box, and shewn to all the guests, is not designed, as some
imagine, to represent the particular misfortunes of Osiris, but rather
to remind them of their mortality, and thereby to excite them freely to
make use of and to enjoy the good things which are set before them,
seeing they must quickly become such as they there saw; and that this is
the true reason of introducing it at their banquets--but to proceed in
the narration.

"Isis intending a visit to her son Orus, who was brought up at Butus,
deposited the chest in the meanwhile in a remote and unfrequented place:
Typho however, as he was one night bunting by the light of the moon,
accidentally met with it; and knowing the body which was enclosed in it,
tore it into several pieces, fourteen in all, dispersing them up and
down

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

in different parts of the country--Upon being made acquainted with this
event, Isis once more sets out in search of the scattered fragments of
her husband's body, making use of a boat made of the reed Papyrus in
order the more easily to pass thro' the lower and fenny parts of the
country--For which reason, say they, the crocodile never touches any
persons, who sail in this sort of vessels, as either fearing the anger
of the goddess, or else respecting it on account of its having once
carried her. To this occasion therefore is it to be imputed, that there
are so many different sepulchres of Osiris shewn in Egypt; for we are
told, that wherever Isis met with any of the scattered limbs of her
husband, she there buried it. There are others however who contradict
this relation, and tell us, that this variety of Sepulchres was owing
rather to the policy of the queen, who, instead of the real body, as was
pretended, presented these several cities with the image only of her
husband: and that she did this, not only to render the honours, which
would by this means be paid to his memory, more extensive, but likewise
that she might hereby elude the malicious search of Typho; who, if he
got the better of Orus in the war wherein they were going to be engaged,
distracted by this multiplicity of Sepulchres, might despair of being
able to find the true one--we are told moreover, that notwithstanding
all her search, Isis was never able to recover the member of Osiris,
which having been

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

thrown into the Nile immediately upon its separation from the rest of
the body, had been devoured by the Lepidotus, the Phagrus, and the
Oxyrynchus, fish which of all others, for this reason, the Egyptians
have in more especial avoidance. In order however to make some amends
for the loss, Isis consecrated the Phallus made in imitation of it, and
instituted a solemn festival to its memory, which is even to this day
observed by the Egyptians.

"After these things, Osiris returning from the other world, appeared to
his son Orus, encouraged him to the battle, and at the same time
instructed him in the exercise of arms. He then asked him, 'what he
thought was the most glorious action a man could perform?' to which Orus
replied, 'to revenge the injuries offered to his father and mother.' He
then asked him, 'what animal he thought most serviceable to a soldier?'
and being answered 'a horse'; this raised the wonder of Osiris, so that
he farther questioned him, 'why he preferred a horse before a lion?'
because, adds Orus, 'tho' the lion be the more serviceable creature to
one who stands in need of help, yet is the horse <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md) more useful in overtaking and cutting off
a flying adversary.' These replies much rejoiced Osiris, as they showed
him that his son was

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

sufficiently prepared for his enemy--We are moreover, told, that among
the great numbers who were continually deserting from Typho's party was
his concubine Thueris, and that a serpent pursuing her as she was coming
over to Orus, was slain by her soldiers--the memory of which action, say
they, is still preserved in that cord which is thrown into the midst of
their assemblies, and then chopt into pieces--After wards it came to a
battle between them which lasted many days; but victory at length
inclined to Orus, Typho himself being taken prisoner. Isis however, to
whose custody he was committed, was so far from putting him to death,
that she even loosed his bonds and set him at liberty. This action of
his mother so extremely incensed Orus, that he laid hands upon her, and
pulled off the ensign of royalty which she wore on her head; and instead
thereof Hermes clapt on an helmet made in the shape of an oxe's
head--After this, Typho publicly accused Orus of bastardy; but by the
assistance of Hermes (Thoth) his legitimacy was fully established by the
judgment of the Gods themselves--After this, there were two other
battles fought between them, in both of which Typho had the worst.
Furthermore, Isis is said to have accompanied with Osiris after his
death, and in consequence hereof to have brought forth Harpocrates, who
came into the world before his time, and lame in his lower limbs."

When we examine this story by the light of the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

results of hieroglyphic decipherment, we find that a large portion of it
is substantiated by Egyptian texts: *e.g.*, Osiris was the son of Seb
and Nut; the Epact is known in the Calendars as "the five additional
days of the year"; the five gods, Osiris, Horus, Set, Isis, and
Nephthys, were born on the days mentioned by Plutarch; the 17th day of
Athyr (Hathor) is marked as triply unlucky in the Calendars; the
wanderings and troubles of Isis are described, and "lamentations" which
she is supposed to have uttered are found in the texts; lists of the
shrines of Osiris are preserved in several inscriptions; the avenging of
his father by Horus is referred to frequently in papyri and other
documents; the conflict between Set and Horus is described fully in a
papyrus in the British Museum (No. 10,184); a hymn in the papyrus of
Hunefer relates all that Thoth performed for Osiris; and the begetting
of Horus by Osiris after death is mentioned in a hymn to Osiris dating
from the XVIIIth dynasty in the following passage:--

Thy sister put forth her protecting power for thee, she scattered abroad
those who were her enemies, she drove away evil hap, she pronounced
mighty words of power, she made cunning her tongue, and her words failed
not. The glorious Isis was perfect in command and in speech, and she
avenged her brother. She sought him without ceasing, she wandered round
and round the earth uttering cries of pain, and she rested

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

(*or* alighted) not until she had found him. She overshadowed him with
her feathers, she made air (or wind) with her wings, and she uttered
cries at the burial of her brother. She raised up the prostrate form of
him whose heart was still, she took from him of his essence, she
conceived and brought forth a child, she suckled it in secret, and none
knew the place thereof; and the arm of the child hath waxed strong in
the great house of Seb. The company of the gods rejoice, and are glad at
the coming of Osiris's son Horus, and firm of heart and triumphant is
the son of Isis, the heir of Osiris." <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52.md)

What form the details of the history of Osiris took in the early
dynasties it is impossible to say, and we know not whether Osiris was
the god of the resurrection to the predynastic or prehistoric Egyptians,
or whether that *rôle* was attributed to him after Mena began to rule in
Egypt. There is, however, good reason for assuming that in the earliest
dynastic times he occupied the position of god and judge of those who
had risen from the dead by his help, for already in the IVth dynasty,
about B.C. 3800, king Men-kau-Râ (the Mycerinus of the Greeks) is
identified with him, and on his coffin not only is he called "Osiris,
King of the South and North, Men-kau-Râ, living for ever," but the
genealogy of Osiris is attributed to him, and

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span id="img_07900"></span> ![](img/07900.jpg)

1\. Isis suckling her child in the papyrus swamps.

2\. Thoth giving the emblem of magic protection to Isis.

3\. Amen-Râ presenting the symbol of "Life" to Isis.

4\. The goddess Nekhebet presenting years, and life, stability, power
and sovereignty to the son of Osiris.

5\. The goddess Sati presenting periods of years, and life, stability,
power and sovereignty to the son of Osiris.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span id="img_08000"></span> ![](img/08000.jpg)

Osiris Hemka begetting a son by Isis, who hovers over him in the form of
a hawk. Anubis, Horus, Nephthys and Shentit are present. Mariette,
Dendérah, IV, 90.

<span id="img_08001"></span> ![](img/08001.jpg)

Osiris on his bier under which are the vases containing his intestines.
Mariette, Dendérah, IV, 70.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

he is declared to be "born of heaven, offspring of Nut, flesh and bone
of Seb." It is evident that the priests of Heliopolis "edited" the
religious texts copied and multiplied in the College to suit their own
views, but in the early times when they began their work, the worship of
Osiris was so widespread, and the belief in him as the god of the
resurrection so deeply ingrained in the hearts of the Egyptians, that
even in the Heliopolitan system of theology Osiris and his cycle, or
company of gods, were made to hold a very prominent position. He
represented to men the idea of a man who was both god and man, and he
typified to the Egyptians in all ages the being who by reason of his
sufferings and death as a man could sympathize with them in their own
sickness and death. The idea of his human personality also satisfied
their cravings and yearnings for intercourse with a being who, though he
was partly divine, yet had much in common with themselves. Originally
they looked upon Osiris as a man who lived on the earth as they lived,
who ate and drank, who suffered a cruel death, who by the help of
certain gods triumphed over death, and attained unto everlasting life.
But what Osiris did they could do, and what the gods did for Osiris they
must also do for them, and as the gods brought about his resurrection so
they must bring about theirs, and as they made him the ruler of the
underworld so they must make them to enter his kingdom and to live there
as long as the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

god himself lived. Osiris, in some of his aspects, was identified with
the Nile, and with Râ, and with several other "gods" known to the
Egyptians, but it was in his aspect as god of the resurrection and of
eternal life that he appealed to men in the valley of the Nile; and for
thousands of years men and women died believing that, inasmuch as all
that was done for Osiris would be done for them symbolically, they like
him would rise again and inherit life everlasting. However far back we
trace religious ideas in Egypt, we never approach a time when it can be
said that there did not exist a belief in the Resurrection, for
everywhere it is assumed that Osiris rose from the dead; sceptics must
have existed, and they probably asked their priests what the Corinthians
asked Saint Paul, "How are the dead raised up? and with what body do
they come?" But beyond doubt the belief in the Resurrection was accepted
by the dominant classes in Egypt. The ceremonies which the Egyptians
performed with the view of assisting the deceased to pass the ordeal of
the judgment, and to overcome his enemies in the next world, will be
described elsewhere, as also will be the form in which the dead were
raised up; we therefore return to the theological history of Osiris.

The centre and home of the worship of Osiris in Egypt under the early
dynasties was Abydos, where the head of the god was said to be buried.
It spread north and south in the course of time, and several

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

large cities claimed to possess one or other of the limbs of his body.
The various episodes in the life of the god were made the subject of
solemn representations in the temple, and little by little the
performance of the obligatory and non-obligatory services in connection
with them occupied, in certain temples, the greater part of the time of
the priests. The original ideas concerning the god were forgotten and
new ones grew up.; from being the *example* of a man who had risen from
the dead and had attained unto life everlasting, he became the *cause*
of the resurrection of the dead; and the power to bestow eternal life
upon mortals was transferred from the gods to him. The alleged
dismemberment of Osiris was forgotten in the fact that he dwelt in a
perfect body in the underworld, and that, whether dismembered or not, he
had become after his death the father of Horus by Isis. As early as the
XIIth dynasty, about B.C. 2500, the worship of this god had become
almost universal, and a thousand years later Osiris had become a sort of
national god. The attributes of the great cosmic gods were ascribed to
him, and he appeared to man not only as the god and judge of the dead,
but also as the creator of the world and of all things in it. He who was
the son of Râ became the equal of his father, and he took his place side
by side with him in heaven.

We have an interesting proof of the identification of Osiris with Râ in
Chapter XVII. of the Book of

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

the Dead. It will be remembered that this Chapter consists of a series
of what might almost be called articles of faith, each of which is
followed by one or more explanations which represent one or more quite
different opinions; the Chapter also is accompanied by a series of
Vignettes. In line 110 it is said, "I am the soul which dwelleth in the
two *tchafi*. <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53.md) What is this then? It
is Osiris when he goeth into Tattu (*i.e.*, Busiris) and findeth there
the soul of Râ; there the one god embraceth the other, and souls spring
into being within the two *tchafi*." In the Vignette which illustrates
this passage the souls of Râ, and Osiris are seen in the forms of hawks
standing on a pylon and facing each other in Tattu; the former has upon
his head a disk, and the latter, who is human-headed, the white crown.
It is a noticeable fact that even at his meeting with Râ the soul of
Osiris preserves the human face, the sign of his kinship with man.

Now Osiris became not only the equal of Râ, but, in many respects, a
greater god than he. It is said that from the nostrils of the head of
Osiris, which was buried at Abydos, came forth the scarabæus <span
id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54.md) which was at once the emblem and type of
the god Khepera, who caused all things to come into being, and of the
resurrection. In this manner Osiris became the source and origin of
gods, men, and things, and

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span id="img_08500"></span> ![](img/08500.jpg)

The soul of Râ (1) meeting the soul of Osiris (2 ) in Tattu. The cat
(*i.e.*, Râ) by the persea tree (3) cutting off the head of the serpent
which typified night.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span id="img_08600"></span> ![](img/08600.jpg)

Horus and his four sons, each armed with a knife, standing before Osiris
and Serapis. The animal-headed man, with knives stuck in his body and
bound by his arms to a forked stick, represents Set or Typhon,
conquered.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

the manhood of the god was forgotten. The next step was to ascribe to
him the attributes of God, and in the XVIIIth and XIXth dynasties he
seems to have disputed the sovereignty of the three companies of gods,
that is to say of the trinity of trinities of trinities, <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) with Amen-Râ, who by this time was usually
called the "king of the gods." The ideas held concerning Osiris at this
period will best be judged by the following extracts from contemporary
hymns:--

"Glory <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56.md) be to thee, O Osiris,
Un-nefer, the great god within Abtu (Abydos), king of eternity, lord of
ever-lastingness, who passest through millions of years in thy
existence. The eldest son of the womb of Nut, engendered by Seb the
Ancestor \[of the gods\], lord of the crowns of the South and of the
North, lord of the lofty white crown; as prince of gods and men he hath
received the crook and the whip, and the dignity of his divine fathers.
Let thy heart, which dwelleth in the mountain of Ament, be content, for
thy son Horus is stablished upon thy throne. Thou art crowned lord of
Tattu (Busiris) and ruler in Abydos."

"Praise <span id="fr_57"></span>[3](#fn_57.md) be unto thee, O Osiris, lord
of eternity, Un-nefer, Heru-Khuti (Harmachis) whose forms are manifold,
and whose attributes are great, who art Ptah-Seker-Tem in Annu
(Heliopolis), the lord of the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

hidden place, and the creator of Het-ka-Ptah (Memphis) and of the gods
\[therein\], the guide of the underworld, whom \[the gods\] glorify when
thou settest in Nut. Isis embraceth thee in peace, and she driveth away
the fiends from the mouth of thy paths. Thou turnest thy face upon
Amentet, and thou makest the earth to shine as with refined copper. The
dead rise up to see thee, they breathe the air and they look upon thy
face when the disk riseth on its horizon; their hearts are at peace,
inasmuch as they behold thee, O thou who art eternity and
everlastingness."

In the latter extract Osiris is identified with the great gods of
Heliopolis and Memphis, where shrines of the Sun-god existed in almost
pre-dynastic times, and finally is himself declared to be "eternity and
everlastingness"; thus the ideas of resurrection and immortality are
united in the same divine being. In the following Litany the process of
identification with the gods is continued:--

1\. "Homage to thee, O thou who art the starry deities in Annu, and the
heavenly beings in Kher-âba; <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58.md) thou
god Unti, <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59.md) who art more glorious than
the gods who are hidden in Annu. O grant thou unto me a path whereon I
may pass in peace, for I am just and true; I have not spoken lies
wittingly, nor have I done aught with deceit."

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

2\. "Homage to thee, O An in Antes, Harmachis; thou stridest over heaven
with long strides, O Harmachis. O grant thou unto me a path," etc. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)

3\. "Homage to thee, O soul of everlastingness, thou Soul who dwellest
in Tattu, Un-nefer, son of Nut; thou art lord of Akert (*i.e.*, the
underworld). O grant thou unto me a path," etc.

4\. "Homage to thee in thy dominion over Tattu; the Ureret crown is
stablished upon thy head; thou art the One who maketh the strength which
protecteth himself, and thou dwellest in peace in Tattu. O grant thou
unto me a path," etc.

5\. "Homage to thee, O lord of the Acacia <span
id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md) tree, the Seker boat <span
id="fr_62"></span>[3](#fn_62.md) is set upon its sledge; thou turnest back
the Fiend, the worker of Evil, and thou causest the Utchat (*i.e.*, the
Eye of Horus or Râ), to rest upon its seat. O grant thou unto me a
path," etc.

6\. "Homage to thee, O thou who art mighty in thine hour, thou great and
mighty Prince, dweller in An-rut-f, <span id="fr_63"></span>[4](#fn_63.md)
lord of eternity and creator of everlastingness, thou art the lord of
Suten-henen (*i.e.*, Heracleopolis Magna). O grant," etc.

7\. "Homage to thee, O thou who restest upon

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Right and Truth thou art lord of Abydos, and thy
limbs are joined unto Ta-tchesert (*i.e.*, the Holy Land, the
underworld); thou art he to whom fraud and guile are hateful. O grant,"
etc.

8\. "Homage to thee, O thou who art within thy boat, thou bringest Hâpi
(*i.e.*, the Nile) forth from his source; the light shineth upon thy
body, and thou art the dweller in Nekhen. O grant," etc.

9\. "Homage to thee, O creator of the gods, thou king of the South and
of the North, O Osiris, victorious one, ruler of the world in thy
gracious seasons; thou art the lord of the celestial world. O grant,"
etc.

And, again: "Râ setteth as Osiris with all the diadems of the divine
spirits und of the gods of Amentet. He is the one divine form, the
hidden one of the Tuat, the holy Soul at the head of Amentet, Un-nefer,
whose duration of life is for ever and ever." <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md)

We have already referred to the help which Thoth gave to Isis when he
provided her with the words which caused her dead husband to live again,
but the best summary of the good deeds which this god wrought for Osiris
is contained in a hymn in the *Papyrus of Hunefer*, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65.md) where the deceased is made to say:--

"I have come unto thee, O son of Nut, Osiris, Prince of everlastingness;
I am in the following of the god Thoth, and I have rejoiced at
everything which he

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

hath done for thee. He brought the sweet air into thy nostrils, and life
and strength to thy beautiful face; and the north wind which cometh
forth from Temu for thy nostrils, O lord of Ta-tchesert. He made the god
Shu to shine upon thy body; he illumined thy path with rays of light; he
destroyed for thee the faults and defects of thy members by the magical
power of the words of his mouth; he made Set and Horus to be at peace
for thy sake; he destroyed the storm-wind and the hurricane; he made the
two combatants (*i.e.*, Set and Horus) to be gracious unto thee and the
two lands to be at peace before thee; he did away the wrath which was in
their hearts, and each became reconciled unto his brother (*i.e.*,
thyself).

"Thy son Horus is triumphant in the presence of the full assembly of the
gods, the sovereignty over the world hath been given unto him, and his
dominion extendeth unto the uttermost parts of the earth. The throne of
the god Seb hath been adjudged unto him, together with the rank which
was created by the god Temu, and which hath been stablished by decrees
\[made\] in the Chamber of Archives, and hath been inscribed upon an
iron tablet according to the command of thy father Ptah-Tanen when be
sat upon the great throne. He hath set his brother upon that which the
god Shu beareth up (*i.e.*, the heavens), to stretch out the waters over
the mountains, and to make to spring up that which groweth upon the
hills, and the grain (?)

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

which shooteth upon the earth, and he giveth increase by water and by
land. Gods celestial and gods terrestrial transfer themselves to the
service of thy son Horus, and they follow him into his hall \[where\] a
decree is passed that he shall be lord over them, and they do \[his
will\] straightway.

"Let the heart rejoice, O lord of the gods, let thy heart rejoice
greatly; Egypt and the Red Land are at peace, and they serve humbly
under thy sovereign power. The temples are stablished upon their own
lands, cities and nomes possess securely the goods which they have in
their names, and we will make unto thee the divine offerings which we
are bound to make, and offer sacrifices in thy name for ever.
Acclamations are made in thy name, libations are poured out to thy KA,
and sepulchral meals \[are brought unto thee\] by the spirits who are in
thy following, and water is sprinkled\]. . . . on each side of the souls
of the dead in this land. Every plan for thee which hath been decreed by
the commands of Râ from the beginning hath been perfected. Now
therefore, O son of Nut, thou art crowned as Neb-er-teber is crowned at
his rising. Thou livest, thou art stablished, thou renewest thy youth,
and thou art true and perfect; thy father Râ maketh strong thy members,
and the company of the gods make acclamations unto thee. The goddess
Isis is with thee and she never leaveth thee; \[thou art\] not
overthrown by thine

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

enemies. The lords of all lands praise thy beauties, even as they praise
Râ when he riseth at the beginning of each day. Thou risest up like an
exalted being upon thy standard, thy beauties lift up the face \[of
man\] and make long \[his\] stride. The sovereignty of thy father Seb
hath been given unto thee, and the goddess Nut, thy mother, who gave
birth to the gods, brought thee forth as the firstborn of five gods, and
created thy beauties and fashioned thy members. Thou art stablished as
king, the white crown is upon thy head, and thou hast grasped in thy
hands the crook and whip; whilst thou wert in the womb, and hadst not as
yet come forth therefrom upon the earth, thou wert crowned lord of the
two lands, and the 'Atef' crown of Râ was upon thy brow. The gods come
unto thee bowing low to the ground, and they hold thee in fear; they
retreat and depart when they see thee with the terror of Râ, and the
victory of thy Majesty is in their hearts. Life is with thee, and
offerings of meat and drink follow thee, and that which is thy due is
offered up before thy face."

In one paragraph of another somewhat similar hymn <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md) other aspects of Osiris are described, and
after the words "Homage to thee, O Governor of those who are in
Amentet," he is called the being who "giveth birth unto men and women a
second time," <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md) *i.e.*, "who

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

maketh mortals to be born again." As the whole paragraph refers to
Osiris "renewing himself," and to his making himself "young like unto Râ
each and every day," there can be no doubt that the resurrection of the
dead, that is to say, their birth into a new life, is what the writer
means by the second birth of men and women. From this passage also we
may see that Osiris has become the equal of Râ, and that he has passed
from being the god of the dead to being the god of the living. Moreover,
at the time when the above extracts were copied Osiris was not only
assumed to have occupied the position which Râ formerly held, but his
son Horus, who was begotten after his death, was, by virtue of his
victory over Set, admitted to be the heir and successor of Osiris. And
he not only succeeded to the "rank and dignity" of his father Osiris,
but in his aspect of "avenger of his father," he gradually acquired the
peculiar position of intermediary and intercessor on behalf of the
children of men. Thus in the Judgment Scene he leads the deceased into
the presence of Osiris and makes an appeal to his father that the
deceased may be allowed to enjoy the benefits enjoyed by all those who
are "true of voice" and justified in the judgment. Such an appeal,
addressed to Osiris in the presence of Isis, from the son born under
such remarkable circumstances was, the Egyptian thought, certain of
acceptance; and the offspring of a father, after the death Osiris in his
closed shrine, accompanied by Isis and his four grandsons. From the
Papyrus of Ani.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span id="img_09500"></span> ![](img/09500.jpg)

Osiris in his closed shrine, accompanied by Isis and his four grandsons.
From the Papyrus of Ani.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

<span id="img_09600"></span> ![](img/09600.jpg)

Thoth and Horus binding together the thrones of Osiris, Isis and
Nephthys.

Mariette, Abydos, Vol. I, Plate 31.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

of whose body he was begotten, was naturally the best advocate for the
deceased.

But although such exalted ideas of Osiris and his position among the
gods obtained generally in Egypt during the XVIIIth dynasty (about B.C.
1600) there is evidence that some believed that in spite of every
precaution the body might decay, and that it was necessary to make a
special appeal unto Osiris if this dire result was to be avoided. The
following remarkable prayer was first found inscribed upon a linen
swathing which had enveloped the mummy of Thothmes III., but since that
time the text, written in hieroglyphics, has been found inscribed upon
the *Papyrus of Nu*, <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md) and it is, of
course, to be found also in the late papyrus preserved at Turin, which
the late Dr. Lepsius published so far back as 1842. This text, which is
now generally known as Chapter CLIV of the Book of the Dead, is entitled
"The Chapter of not letting the body perish." The text begins:--

"Homage to thee, O my divine father Osiris! I have come to thee that
thou mayest embalm, yea embalm these my members, for I would not perish
and come to an end, \[but would be\] even like unto my divine father
Khepera, the divine type of him that never saw corruption. Come, then,
and make me to have the mastery over my breath, O thou lord

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

of the winds, who dost magnify those divine beings who are like unto
thyself. Stablish thou me, then, and strengthen me, O lord of the
funeral chest. Grant thou that I may enter into the land of
everlastingness, even as it was granted unto thee, and unto thy father
Temu, O thou whose body did not see corruption, and who thyself never
sawest corruption. I have never wrought that which thou hatest, nay, I
have uttered acclamations with those who have loved thy KA. Let not my
body turn into worms, but deliver me \[from them\] even as thou didst
deliver thyself. I beseech thee, let me not fall into rottenness as thou
dost let every god, and every goddess, and every animal, and every
reptile to see corruption when the soul hath gone forth from them after
their death. For when the soul departeth, a man seeth corruption, and
the bones of his body rot and become wholly loathsomeness, the members
decay piecemeal, the bones crumble into an inert mass, the flesh turneth
into fœtid liquid, and he becometh a brother unto the decay which cometh
upon him. And he turneth into a host of worms, and he becometh a mass of
worms, and an end is made of him, and he perisheth in the sight of the
god Shu even as doth every god, and every goddess, and every feathered
fowl, and every fish, and every creeping thing, and every reptile, and
every animal, and every thing whatsoever. When the worms see me and know
me, let them fall upon their bellies, and

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

let the fear of me terrify them; and thus let it be with every creature
after \[my\] death, whether it be animal, or bird, or fish, or worm, or
reptile. And let life arise out of death. Let not decay caused by any
reptile make an end \[of me\], and let not them come against me in their
various forms. Do not thou give me over unto that slaughterer who
dwelleth in his torture-chamber (?), who killeth the members of the body
and maketh them to rot, who worketh destruction upon many dead bodies,
whilst he himself remaineth hidden and liveth by slaughter; let me live
and perform his message, and let me do that which is commanded by him.
Give me not over unto his fingers, and let him not gain the mastery over
me, for I am under thy command, O lord of the gods.

Homage to thee, O my divine father Osiris, thou hast thy being with thy
members. Thou didst not decay, thou didst not become worms, thou didst
not diminish, thou didst not become corruption, thou didst not putrefy,
and thou didst not turn into worms."

The deceased then identifying himself with Khepera, the god who created
Osiris and his company of gods, says:--

"I am the god Khepera, and my members shall have an everlasting
existence. I shall not decay, I shall not rot, I shall not putrefy, I
shall not turn into worms, and I shall not see corruption under the eye
of the god Shu. I shall have my being, I shall have

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

my being; I shall live, I shall live; I shall germinate, I shall
germinate, I shall germinate; I shall wake up in peace. I shall not
putrefy; my bowels shall not perish; I shall not suffer injury; mine eye
shall not decay; the form of my countenance shall not disappear; mine
ear shall not become deaf; my head shall not be separated from my neck;
my tongue shall not be carried away; my hair shall not be cut off; mine
eyebrows shall not be shaved off, and no baleful injury shall come upon
me. My body shall be stablished, and it shall neither fall into ruin nor
be destroyed on this earth."

Judging from such passages as those given above we might think that
certain of the Egyptians expected a resurrection of the physical body,
and the mention of the various members of the body seems to make this
view certain. But the body of which the incorruption and immortality are
so strongly declared is the SÂHU, or spiritual body, that sprang into
existence out of the physical body, which had become transformed by
means of the prayers that had been recited and the ceremonies that had
been performed on the day of the funeral, or on that wherein it was laid
in the tomb. It is interesting to notice that no mention is made of meat
or drink in the CLIVth Chapter, and the only thing which the deceased
refers to as necessary for his existence is air, which he obtains
through the god Temu, the god who is always depicted in human form; the
god is here mentioned in his aspect of the

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

night Sun as opposed to Râ the day Sun, and a comparison of the Sun's
daily death with the death of the deceased is intended to be made. The
deposit of the head of the God-man Osiris at Abydos has already been
mentioned, and the belief that it was preserved there was common
throughout Egypt. But in the text quoted above the deceased says, "My
head shall not be separated from my neck," which seems to indicate that
he wished to keep his body whole, notwithstanding that Osiris was
almighty, and could restore the limbs and reconstitute the body, even as
he had done for his own limbs and body which had been hacked to pieces
by Set. Chapter XLIII of the Book of the Dead <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69.md) also has an important reference to the
head of Osiris. It is entitled "The Chapter of not letting the head of a
man be cut off from him in the underworld," and must be of considerable
antiquity. In it the deceased says: "I am the Great One, the son of the
Great One; I am Fire, and the son of the Fire, to whom was given his
head after it had been cut off. The head of Osiris was not taken away
from him, let not the head of the deceased be taken away from him. I
have knit myself together (or reconstituted myself); I have made myself
whole and complete; I have renewed my youth; I am Osiris, the lord of
eternity."

From the above it would seem that, according to

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

one version of the Osiris story, the head of Osiris was not only cut
off, but that it was passed through the fire also; and if this version
be very ancient, as it well may be and probably is, it takes us back to
prehistoric times in Egypt when the bodies of the dead were mutilated
and burned. Prof. Wiedemann thinks <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md)
that the mutilation and breaking of the bodies of the dead were the
results of the belief that in order to make the KA, or "double," leave
this earth, the body to which it belonged must be broken, and he
instances the fact that objects of every kind were broken at the time
when they were placed in the tombs. He traces also a transient custom in
the prehistoric graves of Egypt where the methods of burying the body
whole and broken into pieces seem to be mingled, for though in some of
them the body has been broken into pieces, it is evident that successful
attempts have been made to reconstitute it by laying the pieces as far
as possible in their proper places. And it may be this custom which is
referred to in various places in the Book of the Dead, when the deceased
declares that he has collected his limbs "and made his body whole
again," and already in the Vth dynasty King Teta is thus
addressed--"Rise up, O thou Teta! Thou hast received thy head, thou hast
knitted together thy bones, <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md) thou
hast collected thy members."

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

The history of Osiris, the god of the resurrection, has now been traced
from the earliest times to the end of the period of the rule of the
priests of Amen (about B.C. 900), by which time Amen-Râ had been thrust
in among the gods of the underworld, and prayers were made, in some
cases, to him instead of to Osiris. From this time onwards Amen
maintained this exalted position, and in the Ptolemaic period, in an
address to the deceased Kerâsher we read "Thy face shineth before Râ,
thy soul liveth before Amen, and thy body is renewed before Osiris." And
again it is said, "Amen is nigh unto thee to make thee to live again. .
. . Amen cometh to thee having the breath of life, and he causeth thee
to draw thy breath within thy funeral house." But in spite of this,
Osiris kept and held the highest place in the minds of the Egyptians,
front first to last, as the God-man, the being who was both divine and
human; and no foreign invasion, and no religious or political
disturbances, and no influence which any outside peoples could bring, to
bear upon them, succeeded in making them regard the god as anything less
than the cause and symbol and type of the resurrection, and of the life
everlasting. For about five thousand years men were mummified in
imitation of the mummied form of Osiris; and they went to their graves
believing that their bodies would vanquish the powers of death, and the
grave, and decay, because Osiris had vanquished them; and they

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

had certain hope of the resurrection in an immortal, eternal, and
spiritual body, because Osiris had risen in a- transformed spiritual
body, and had ascended into heaven, where he had become the kin- and the
judge of the dead, and had attained unto everlasting life therein.

The chief reason for the persistence of the worship of Osiris in Egypt
was, probably, the fact that it promised both resurrection and eternal
life to its followers. Even after the Egyptians had embraced
Christianity they continued to mummify their dead, and for long after
they continued to mingle the attributes of their God and the "gods" with
those of God Almighty and Christ. The Egyptians of their own will never
got away from the belief that the body must be mummified if eternal life
was to be assured to the dead, but the Christians, though preaching the
same doctrine of the resurrection as the Egyptians, went a step further,
and insisted that there was no need to mummify the dead at all. St.
Anthony the Great besought his followers not to embalm his body and keep
it in a house, but to bury it and to tell no man where it had been
buried, lest those who loved him should come and draw it forth, and
mummify it as they were wont to do to the bodies of those whom they
regarded as saints. "For long past," he said, "I have entreated the
bishops and preachers to exhort the people not to continue to observe
this useless custom";

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

and concerning his own body, he said, "At the resurrection of the dead I
shall receive it from the Saviour incorruptible." <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md) The spread of this idea gave the art of
mummifying its death-blow, and though from innate conservatism, and the
love of having the actual bodies of their beloved dead near them, the
Egyptians continued for a time to preserve their dead as before, yet
little by little the reasons for mummifying were forgotten, the
knowledge of the art died out, the funeral ceremonies were curtailed,
the prayers became a dead letter, and the custom of making mummies
became obsolete. With the death of the art died also the belief in and
the worship of Osiris, who from being the god of the dead became a dead
god, and to the Christians of Egypt, at least, his place was filled by
Christ, "the firstfruits of them that slept," Whose resurrection and
power to grant eternal life were at that time being preached throughout
most of the known world. In Osiris the Christian Egyptians found the
prototype of Christ, and in the pictures and statues of Isis suckling
her son Horus, they perceived the prototypes of the Virgin Mary and her
Child. Never did Christianity find elsewhere in the world a people whose
minds were so thoroughly well prepared to receive its doctrines as the
Egyptians.

This chapter may be fittingly ended by a few

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

extracts from the *Songs of Isis and Nephthys*, which were sung in the
Temple of Amen-Râ at Thebes by two priestesses who personified the two
goddesses. <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md)

"Hail, thou lord of the underworld, thou Bull of those who are therein,
thou Image of Râ-Harmachis, thou Babe of beautiful appearance, come thou
to us in peace. Thou didst repel thy disasters, thou didst drive away
evil hap; Lord, come to us in peace. O Un-nefer, lord of food, thou
chief, thou who art of terrible majesty, thou God, president of the
gods, when thou dost inundate the land \[all\] things are engendered.
Thou art gentler than the gods. The emanations of thy body make the dead
and the living to live, O thou lord of food, thou prince of green herbs,
thou mighty lord, thou staff of life, thou giver of offerings to the
gods, and of sepulchral meals to the blessed dead. Thy soul flieth after
Râ, thou shinest at dawn, thou settest at twilight, thou risest every
day; thou shalt rise on the left hand of Atmu for ever and ever. Thou
art the glorious one, the vicar of Râ; the company of the gods cometh to
thee invoking thy face, the flame whereof reacheth unto thine enemies.
We rejoice when thou gatherest together thy bones, and when thou hast
made whole thy body daily. Anubis cometh to thee, and the two sisters
(*i.e.*, Isis and Nephthys) come to thee. They have obtained beautiful
things for thee, and they gather

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

together thy limbs for thee, and they seek to put together the mutilated
members of thy body. Wipe thou the impurities which are on them upon our
hair and come thou to us having no recollection of that which hath
caused thee sorrow. Come thou in thy attribute of 'Prince of the earth,'
lay aside thy trepidation and be at peace with us, O Lord. Thou shalt be
proclaimed heir of the world, and the One god, and the fulfiller of the
designs of the gods. All the gods invoke thee, come therefore to thy
temple and go be not afraid. O Râ (*i.e.*, Osiris), thou art beloved of
Isis and Nephthys; rest thou in thy habitation for ever."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[62:1](efl04.htm#fr_40.md) Plutarchi de Iside et
Osiride liber: Græce et Anglice. By S. Squire, Cambridge, 1744.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[62:2](efl04.htm#fr_41.md) *I.e.*, Nut.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[62:3](efl04.htm#fr_42.md) *I.e.*, Seb.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[63:1](efl04.htm#fr_43.md) *I.e.*, Râ.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[63:2](efl04.htm#fr_44.md) I.e., Heru-ur, "Horus
the Elder."

<span id="fn_45"></span>[64:1](efl04.htm#fr_45.md) *I.e.*, Set.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[66:1](efl04.htm#fr_46.md) In the Egyptian calendar
this day was marked triply unlucky.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[66:2](efl04.htm#fr_47.md) The hair cut off as a
sign of mourning was usually laid in the tomb of the dead.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[67:3](efl04.htm#fr_48.md) *I.e.*, a wreath of
clover.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[68:1](efl04.htm#fr_49.md) Not the Byblos of Syria
(Jebêl) but the papyrus swamps of the Delta.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[72:1](efl04.htm#fr_50.md) A son of the first
Egyptian king, who died in his early youth see Herodotus, ii. 79.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[75:1](efl04.htm#fr_51.md) The horse does not
appear to have been known in Egypt before the XVIIIth dynasty; this
portion of Plutarch's version of the history of Osiris must, then, be
later than B.C. 1500.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[78:1](efl04.htm#fr_52.md) This remarkable hymn was
first made known by Chabas, who published a translation of it, with
notes, in *Revue Archéologique*, Paris, 1857, t. xiv. p. 65 ff.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[84:1](efl04.htm#fr_53.md) *I.e.*, the souls of
Osiris and Râ.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[84:2](efl04.htm#fr_54.md) See von Bergmann in
*Aeg. Zeitschrift*, 1880, p. 88 ff.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[87:1](efl04.htm#fr_55.md) Each company of the gods
contained three trinities or triads.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[87:2](efl04.htm#fr_56.md) See Chapters of Coming
Forth by Day (translation), p. 11.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[87:3](efl04.htm#fr_57.md) *Ibid.*, p. 34.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[88:1](efl04.htm#fr_58.md) A district near Memphis.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[88:2](efl04.htm#fr_59.md) A god who walks before
the boat of the god Af, holding a star in each hand.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[89:1](efl04.htm#fr_60.md) This petition is only
written once, but it is intended to be repeated after each of the nine
sections of the Litany.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[89:2](efl04.htm#fr_61.md) This tree was in
Heliopolis, and the Cat, *i.e.*, the Sun, sat near it.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[89:3](efl04.htm#fr_62.md) The ceremony of setting
the Seker boat on its sledge was performed at dawn.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[89:4](efl04.htm#fr_63.md) The place where nothing
grows--the underworld.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[90:1](efl04.htm#fr_64.md) See Chapters of Coming
Forth by Day, p. 334.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[90:2](efl04.htm#fr_65.md) *Ibid.*, p. 343.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[93:1](efl04.htm#fr_66.md) See *Chapters of Coming
Forth by Day*, p. 342.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[93:2](efl04.htm#fr_67.md) The words are *mes
tememu em nem*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[97:1](efl04.htm#fr_68.md) Brit. Mus., No. 10,477,
sheet 18. I have published the text in my *Chapters of Coming Forth by
Day*, pp. 398-402.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[101:1](efl04.htm#fr_69.md) See *The Chapters of
Coming Forth by Day*, p. 98.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[102:1](efl04.htm#fr_70.md) See J. do Morgan,
*Ethnographie Préhistorique*, p. 210.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[102:2](efl04.htm#fr_71.md) *Recueil de Travaux*,
tom. v. p. 40 (1. 287).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[105:1](efl04.htm#fr_72.md) See Rosweyde, *Vitae
Patrum*, p. 59; *Life of St. Anthony*, by Athanasius (Migne),
*Patrologiæ*, Ser. Graec. tom. 26, col. 972.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[106:1](efl04.htm#fr_73.md) See my Hieratic Papyrus
of Nesi-Amsu (Archæologia, vol. lii.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The ''Gods'' of the Egyptians](efl05.md)
