[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Next](tnai01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# TALES OF THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS

SELECTED AND ANNOTATED

BY

STITH THOMPSON

Indiana University Press

Bloomington

\[1929\]

Scanned at Intangible Textual Heritage, 1998 and April 2001

TO MY PARENTS  
JOHN WARDEN THOMPSON  
ELIZA McCLASKEY THOMPSON  

{p. vii}

# PREFACE

DURING the past century the untiring labors of a score or two of field
workers have gathered from the North American Indians by far the most
extensive body of tales representative of any primitive people. These
tales are available in government reports, folk-lore journals, and
publications of learned societies. Unfortunately, the libraries in which
more than a small portion of them can be examined are few, and even in
the largest libraries the very wealth of material serves but to confuse
the general reader who seeks without undue expenditure of time to
acquaint himself with American Indian tales.

To meet the obvious need presented by this situation, this collection
has been prepared. The editor has sought to make available in the
compass of a single volume typical examples of such of these tales as
have gained any general currency. Some tales are common to the tribes of
a single culture area, some to the whole East or the whole West, and
some are known over practically the whole continent. Indeed, few tales
worth telling are confined to a single tribe. The assiduous reader soon
learns to recognize many recurrent patterns or types, which transcend
geographical and linguistic boundaries, and which form the basis of most
of the tales in the various collections. In recognition of the
persistence of these types, the editor has endeavored to secure
representative versions of each of the better-known tales then, by means
of comparative notes, to show the extent of the distribution of each
tale and each motif; and, finally, to present the material in such wise
as to be obvious to the general reader.

The unit of arrangement of the volume is thus the tale--not the tribe or
the culture area. That each area has characteristics peculiar to itself
the editor shows in the Introduction, but for the purpose of this volume
the tale-type has been chosen as the most logical basis for
classification. Only the first chapter, that on mythological tales,
follows a geographical order. It is hoped that the geographical
arrangement of the notes will give adequate recognition to the
significance of tribe and culture area.

{p. viii}

In his choice of the texts of the tales the editor has striven to use a
full, well-told example of each tale. With the following exceptions, he
has given the texts as they appear in the original collections. (1) In
stories about a single hero, the spelling of his name has been
standardized. (2) Certain Indian names have been changed in spelling in
order to be more easily pronounced by the general reader. Occasionally
an Indian word has been omitted entirely when it did not add to the
meaning of the story. (3) In several places irrelevant episodes have
been omitted. These changes are always indicated.

For valuable assistance in the preparation of the volume, the editor
owes much to his graduate students of the past few years, especially for
making his notes on various motifs fuller than they would otherwise be.
To his wife he is grateful for much assistance in many indispensable
parts of the undertaking. Particularly to his friend, Professor Archer
Taylor of the University of Chicago, he desires at this time to give
thanks for his encouragement and detailed advice at nearly every stage
of the work.

For courteous permission to reprint tales, acknowledgment is hereby made
to the American Museum of Natural History, to the American Folk-Lore
Society, to the Canadian Geological Survey, to Professor Franz Boas for
the Jesup North Pacific Expedition Papers, to the Field Columbian
Museum, to the University of California, to the Carnegie Institution, to
G. P. Putnam's Sons, and to Wellesley College.

STITH THOMPSON

BLOOMINGTON, INDIANA

{p. ix}

# CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION xv

CHAPTER I

MYTHOLOGICAL STORIES

I. SEDNA, MISTRESS OF THE UNDERWORLD (Eskimo) 3

II\. SUN SISTER AND MOON BROTHER (Eskimo) 4

III\. GLOOSCAP (Micmac) 5

IV\. MANABOZHO 8

    A. MANABOZHO'S BIRTH (Menomini) 8

    B. MANABOZHO'S WOLF BROTHER (Menomini) 10

    C. MANABOZHO PLAYS LACROSSE (Menomini) 11

V. THE WOMAN WHO FELL FROM THE SKY (Seneca) 14

VI\. THE BEGINNING OF NEWNESS (Zuñi) 17

VII\. RAVEN'S ADVENTURES 19

    A. RAVEN BECOMES VORACIOUS (Tsimshian) 19

    B. THE THEFT OF LIGHT (Tsimshian) 22

VIII\. THE CREATION (Maidu) 24

IX\. THE CREATION (Kato) 30

CHAPTER II

MYTHICAL INCIDENTS

X. THE LIZARD-HAND (Yokuts) 38

XI\. DETERMINATION OF THE SEASONS (Tahltan) 38

XII\. MARRIAGE OF THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH (Cherokee) 39

XIII\. DETERMINATION OF NIGHT AND DAY (Iroquois) 39

XIV\. THE THEFT OF FIRE (Maidu) 40

XV\. THE SUN SNARER (Menomini) 42

XVI\. THE MAN WHO ACTED AS THE SUN (Bella Coola) 44

XVII\. THE MAN IN THE MOON (Lillooet) 45

{p. x}

XVIII\. ORIGIN OF THE PLEIADES (Onondaga) 46

XIX\. THE BAG OF WINDS (Thompson) 47

XX\. THE BIRD WHOSE WINGS MADE THE WIND (Micmac) 48

XXI\. THE RELEASE OF THE WILD ANIMALS (Comanche) 49

XXII\. THE EMPOUNDED WATER (Malecite) 51

XXIII\. THE ORIGIN OF CORN (Abanaki) 51

CHAPTER III

TRICKSTER TALES

XXIV\. MANABOZHO'S ADVENTURES (Ojibwa and Menomini) 53

XXV\. THE TRICKSTER'S GREAT FALL AND HIS REVENGE (Menomini) 57

XXVI\. THE DECEIVED BLIND MEN (Menomini) 59

XXVII\. THE TRICKSTER'S RACE (Blackfoot) 61

XXVIII\. THE EYE-JUGGLER (Cheyenne) 63

XXIX\. THE SHARPENED LEG (Cheyenne) 64

XXX\. THE OFFENDED ROLLING STONE (Pawnee) 64

XXXI\. THE TRICKSTER KILLS THE CHILDREN (Arapaho) 66

XXXII\. WILDCAT GETS A NEW FACE (Uintah Ute) 68

XXXIII\. THE TRICKSTER BECOMES A DISH (Lillooet) 68

XXXIV\. COYOTE PROVES HIMSELF A CANNIBAL (Jicarilla Apache) 70

XXXV\. THE BUNGLING HOST (Thompson) 71

XXXVI\. COYOTE AND PORCUPINE (Nez Percé) 73

XXXVII\. BEAVER AND PORCUPINE (Tlingit) 75

XXXVIII\. THE BIG TURTLE'S WAR PARTY (Skidi Pawnee) 75

CHAPTER IV

HERO TALES

XXXIX\. THE SUN TESTS HIS SON-IN-LAW(Bella Coola) 78

XL\. THE JEALOUS UNCLE (Kodiak) 87

XLI\. BLUEJAY AND HIS COMPANIONS (Quinault) 93

XLII\. DUG-FROM-GROUND (Hupa) 97

XLIII\. THE ATTACK ON THE GIANT ELK(Jicarilla Apache) 101

{p. xi}

XLIV\. LODGE-BOY AND THROWN-AWAY (Crow) 104

XLV\. BLOOD-CLOT-BOY (Blackfoot) 108

XLVI\. THE SON-IN-LAW TESTS (Timagami Ojibwa) 113

XLVII\. THE JEALOUS FATHER (Cree) 116

XLVIII\. DIRTY-BOY (Okanagon) 120

XLIX\. THE FALSE BRIDEGROOM (Gros Ventre) 124

CHAPTER V

JOURNEYS TO THE OTHER WORLD

L. THE STAR HUSBAND--TYPE I: THE WISH TO MARRY A STAR (Timagami Ojibwa)
126

LI\. THE STAR HUSBAND--TYPE II: THE GIRL ENTICED TO THE SKY (Arapaho)
128

LII\. THE STRETCHING TREE (Chilcotin) 130

LIII\. THE ARROW CHAIN (Tlingit) 131

LIV\. MUDJIKIWIS (Plains Cree) 135

LV\. ORPHEUS (Cherokee) 148

LVI\. THE VISIT TO CHIEF ECHO (Tsimshian) 148

CHAPTER VI

ANIMAL WIVES AND HUSBANDS

LVII\. THE PIQUED BUFFALO-WIFE (Blackfoot) 150

LVIII\. BEAR-WOMAN AND DEER-WOMAN (Lassik) 153

LIX\. SPLINTER-FOOT-GIRL (Arapaho) 154

LX\. THE EAGLE AND WHALE HUSBANDS (Greenland Eskimo) 160

LXI\. THE FOX-WOMAN (Labrador Eskimo) 161

LXII\. THE WOMAN STOLEN By KILLER-WHALES (Tahltan) 162

LXIII\. THE ROLLING HEAD (Cheyenne) 163

LXIV\. THE BEAR-WOMAN (Blackfoot) 164

LXV\. THE DOG-HUSBAND (Quinault) 167

LXVI\. THE YOUTH WHO JOINED THE DEER (Thompson) 169

{p. xii}

CHAPTER VII

MISCELLANEOUS TALES

LXVII\. THE DESERTED CHILDREN (Gros Ventre) 174

LXVIII\. THE PRINCESS WHO REJECTED HER COUSIN (Tsimshian) 178

LXIX\. THE FATAL SWING (Osage) 184

LXX\. THE SKIN-SHIFTING OLD WOMAN (Wichita) 186

LXXI\. THE CHILD AND THE CANNIBAL (Bella Coola) 190

LXXII\. THE CANNIBAL WHO WAS BURNED (Haida) 193

LXXIII\. THE CONQUERING GAMBLER (Chilcotin) 194

LXXIV\. THE DECEIVED BLIND MAN (Smith Sound Eskimo) 195

LXXV\. THE GIRL WHO MARRIED HER BROTHER (Shasta) 196

LXXVI\. THE SWAN-MAIDENS (Smith Sound Eskimo) 198

LXXVII\. THE DEATH OF PITCH (Tsimshian) 199

CHAPTER VIII

TALES BORROWED FROM EUROPEANS

LXXVIII\. THE SEVEN-HEADED DRAGON (Ojibwa) 201

LXXIX\. JOHN THE BEAR (Assiniboin) 205

LXXX\. THE ENCHANTED HORSE (Malecite) 208

LXXXI\. LITTLE POUCET (Thompson) 218

LXXXII\. THE WHITE CAT (Chilcotin) 222

LXXXIII\. CINDERELLA (Zuñi) 225

LXXXIV\. THE TRUE BRIDE (Thompson) 231

LXXXV\. THE MAGIC APPLES (Penobscot) 238

LXXXVI\. MAKING THE PRINCESS LAUGH (Micmac) 241

LXXXVII\. THE CLEVER NUMSKULL (Micmac) 248

LXXXVIII\. THE FOX AND THE WOLF (Menomini) 254

LXXXIX\. THE TAR-BABY (Cherokee) 258

XC\. THE TURTLE'S RELAY RACE (Arikara) 258

XCI\. THE PEACE FABLE (Wyandot) 259

XCII\. THE ANT AND THE GRASSHOPPER (Shuswap) 260

{p. xiii}

CHAPTER IX

BIBLE STORIES

XCIII\. ADAM AND EVE (Thompson) 261

XCIV\. NOAH'S FLOOD (Thompson) 262

XCV\. THE TOWER OF BABEL (Choctaw) 263

XCVI\. CROSSING THE RED SEA (Cheyenne) 264

NOTES

    ABBREVIATIONS USED IN NOTES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 269

    COMPARATIVE NOTES 271

    LIST OF MOTIFS DISCUSSED IN THE NOTES 361

    SOURCES ARRANGED BY CULTURE AREAS AND TRIBES 368

    BIBLIOGRAPHY 371

    MAP OF TRIBES AND CULTURE AREAS

{p. xiv}

# INTRODUCTION

NEARLY three centuries have passed since the first American Indian tales
were recorded by Europeans. The Jesuit Fathers in their Relations
beginning with 1633 report tales current among the tribes with whom they
had come into contact. From them we have at this early date rather good
versions of the Iroquois creation myth (No. v of this collection), of
"The Sun Snarer" (No. xv) and of "The Empounded Water" (No. xxii). These
tales have the same form when collected in the twentieth century as they
had in the early seventeenth.

Though tales were reported sporadically during the next two centuries by
travellers and explorers, it was not till the second quarter of the
nineteenth century that any considerable body of this folk-lore became
available. Through the labors of Henry Rowe Schoolcraft, the legends of
the Ojibwa and their neighbors were reported at some length.
Unfortunately, the scientific value of his work is marred by the manner
in which he has reshaped the stories to suit his own literary taste.
Several of his tales, indeed, are distorted almost beyond recognition.
Nevertheless, he introduced to the civilized world a considerable body
of Indian legend. Among these tales was the myth of Manabozho (No. iv),
though he caused great confusion by adapting to his myth the name of the
Iroquois hero, Hiawatha. Through the poem of Longfellow, the details of
this myth have become a part of American literature. Another mythical
tale known anew through the work of Schoolcraft was "The Sun Snarer"
(No. xv), already mentioned as reported by the Jesuits. He also tells a
number of trickster incidents (for example, Nos. xxiv, xxv, and xxvi).
His work serves as a landmark in the history of the recording of
American Indian tales.

A result of Schoolcraft's sentimentality has been the attitude of a
large part of the general public toward Indian tradition. All sections
of the country have acquired legends of "lovers' leaps." The courtship
of Hiawatha and Minnehaha, the least "Indian" of any of the events in
"Hiawatha," has come for many readers to stand as the typical American
Indian

{p. xvi}

tale. If a collection of authentic tales, like the present, can help
correct so erroneous an impression, it will have been well worth
preparing.

Since Schoolcraft's day collecting has continued. Most of it in the
sixties, seventies, and eighties of the past century was done faithfully
and well. Too little regard, indeed, was paid to the preservation of
variants, or to reproducing carefully the style of the native narrator.
But such embroidery as appears in the otherwise excellent volumes of
Rink's Eskimo or Rand's Micmac tales seems to be in diction rather than
in incident.

Beginning about 1890, largely through the influence of Professor Franz
Boas and others inspired by the desire to make their work of scientific
value, collectors have been covering the entire continent in an
increasingly efficient manner. A number of agencies have contributed to
the very gratifying results thus attained. The Bureau of American
Ethnology in its reports and bulletins, the University of Pennsylvania
Museum, the American Museum of Natural History, the American Folk-Lore
Society in its memoirs and in the *Journal of American Folk-Lore* have
issued tales from every quarter of the continent. Several universities
and societies have devoted themselves to the cultivation of particular
areas. Thus the Field Museum has specialized in tales of the Pueblo and
Plains tribes. the University of California has confined itself largely
to the tribes of California; the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, to the
tribes of the North Pacific Coast; Columbia University, to the North
Pacific Coast and to Oregon; and the Canadian Geological Survey, to the
Central and Eastern Woodland tribes. The American Ethnological Society
has issued in text and close translation a series of studies covering
the continent. These are of especial value to students of linguistics
and of literary style. Aside from all these organized efforts,
independent collectors such as Cushing for the Zuñi, Curtin for the
Modoc, the Wintun, the Yana, and the Seneca, and Grinnell for the
Blackfoot, the Cheyenne, and the Pawnee, have added to the store of
available material. Some idea of the extent of recent collections and of
the manner in which the whole territory north of Mexico has been covered
will be gained by an examination of the list of sources on page 368. No
other primitive people has such an extensive and accurate record of its
myths, tales, and legends as the North American Indian.

{p. xvii}

After even a limited perusal of a few representative volumes of these
tales the reader will begin to recognize certain general types of story
that prevail in nearly all parts of the continent. Further reading but
confirms the prevalence of these fundamental types.

Prominent among these will be found mythological stories dealing with
the world before it was in the present state. The primary purpose of
such tales is to show the preparation for the present order of affairs.
They often treat of demigods or culture heroes. They explain origins of
animals, or tribes, or objects, or ceremonies, or the universe itself.
The true creation myth, as Professor Boas points out, is almost wholly
lacking, but origin myths of a sort are found over a large territory.
The Zuñi myth (No. vi) and the California myths (Nos. viii and ix) are
about as clear examples of the creation myth as are to be found. Stories
of the "Glooscap" type (No. iii), in which the culture hero (in a world
assumed as already existing) acts as an originator of various aspects of
culture and is responsible for many changes in topography, are much more
prevalent. In the Southwest and the Southeast, migration legends tell of
the emergence of the tribe from lower worlds in mythological times.

Aside from such rather well-developed mythological tales, there are a
number of separate incidents or episodes that evidently belong to the
same world of thought. The whole purpose of such tales is to explain by
some happening in an earlier world the existence of some phenomenon in
present-day life. Without the explanation the tale is pointless.

Attempts at exact definition of "myth" as distinguished from "tale" seem
futile. As Waterman has pointed out in his study of the explanatory
element in North American mythology, it is quite certain that no
satisfactory classification of tales can be made on the basis of whether
some phenomenon is explained or not. By far the greater number of
explanations he has studied are not organic: they are not necessary to
the story, but are added as an ornament or for other reasons. The same
explanations combine freely with a great number of different tales. Nor
can more successful classification be made on the basis of ritualistic
significance, or on that of personification. All these things appear and
disappear--the tale remains as the only permanent element. In this
volume, tales involving

{p. xviii}

an earlier world and primarily devoted to explaining present conditions
have been classed as mythical. But no sharp line can be drawn. Certainly
no real difference is found in published collections, whether the author
calls his book "myths," or "tales," or "legends."

A second class of tale is that relating the deeds of a trickster.
Sometimes the buffoon is a human being, but more often he is an animal
endowed with human characteristics. Usually it is quite impossible to
tell whether animal or person is in the mind of the narrator. The
distinction is never very clear. In the most human of these tales , such
as the Manabozho cycle (No. xxiv), the animal nature of the trickster
seems always in the background of the narrative. Sometimes the trickster
appears outside his proper cycle and confusion between the two natures
is especially marked. Such is true, for example, in the version of the
"Son-in-Law Tests" here given (No. xlvi).

To the civilized reader, perhaps the most incongruous feature of the
trickster tales is the frequent identification of the buffoon with the
culture hero. Such identification is found over a large part of the
continent. In one set of tales, for example, Manabozho is a beneficent
being, bringing culture and light to his people (No. iv); in another
(No. xxiv), he is the incarnation of greediness, lust, cruelty, and
stupidity. As Professor Boas has shown, even the acts of benevolence of
such trickster demigods are often mere accidental by-products of baser
motives. Raven steals the sun that he may more easily satisfy his greed;
incidentally, his people receive light. While it would be going too far
to say that none of the trickster demigods is altruistic, one must
always remember that most of the culture heroes are also tricksters and
that even in their most dignified moments they are prone to show
something of their dual nature.

A third large division of American Indian tales concerns the life of
human beings under conditions at least remotely resembling the present.
To be sure, in all of these the marvelous occupies a large place.
Transformation, magic, otherworld journeys, ogres, and beast marriages
abound. But the characters are thought of as distinctly human. The
general background is the tribal life and environment. The resemblance
to the European tale in method and material is often striking. The
characters and the setting are usually as vague as in a story

{p. xix}

from Grimm, the events as definitely established by convention.
Motivation is usually weak, frequently quite absent. But to the average
educated reader this type of tale is often more interesting than either
the mythological story or the trickster cycle. We seem to have at least
a partial expression of the life of the people from whom the tales come.

A large group of these stories we may call "hero" tales, for they
concern themselves with the exploits of a hero (or often of twin
heroes). As will be seen from an examination of our fourth chapter, the
tales usually relate attempts made to kill the hero and his successful
escapes from death. He often deliberately seeks dangerous enemies and
overcomes them. Frequently the hero is subjected to tests by his
father-in-law--an incident bearing very interesting resemblances to the
European Son-in-Law Test theme.

From one area to another the hero differs in type. On the North Pacific
Coast the heroes of even this kind of tale may be of the animal-human
type (for example, No. xvi); in California and on the Plains his
supernatural birth is stressed (Nos. xlii, xliv, xlv); the unpromising
hero turned victor is common on the Plains (No. xlix), the Plateau (No.
xlviii), and among the Iroquois. Twin heroes are frequent on the Plains
and in the Southwest.

On the North Pacific Coast the hero cycle merges with the next to be
mentioned--tales of journeys to the other world. In these stories there
is, from the point of view of the civilized reader, a confusion of
worlds. Usually the "other world" is pictured as above; sometimes as
below; sometimes as across a vast river or sea. The cosmological
concepts of the particular tribe are always in the background of these
tales, and a real understanding of what the narrator has in mind can
often be gained only by a serious study of the religious ideas of the
tribe. In spite, however, of tribal differences, such simple concepts as
a star-world, a sky window, a rope to the sky, a rainbow-bridge to the
upper world are to be found everywhere. For example, "The Star Husband"
(Nos. l and li) is told over the entire width of the continent.

In the discussion of the trickster cycle, mention has been made of the
confusion between man and animal. This same confusion exists in the many
stories of beast marriages. Animals carry off human girls or marry human
husbands. They

{p. xx}

have offspring--sometimes human, sometimes animal, sometimes capable of
becoming either at will. Sometimes the animal spouse is a transformed
person. The tales regularly end with the transformation of the animal
spouse to human form, or with an escape from the animal.

All the classes of tales thus far discussed are sufficiently widespread
to attract the attention of the casual reader. A number of stories of
relatively wide distribution are much more difficult to classify. These
have been grouped into a chapter to themselves (chapter VII).

In the stories of certain tribes the recent influence of the Europeans
is very apparent. The French in Canada, the Spanish in the Southwest,
and the negroes in the Southeast have contributed many tales to the
tribes in their respective territories. Usually the Indians recognize
these definitely as borrowings. European phraseology, background, and
ideas abound. Not fewer than fifty well-known European tales are current
among the American Indians. Several good examples of such tales, as well
as of Bible narratives, form chapters VIII and IX of this collection.

As the discussion of types has several times implied, there is a
difference in the tales of the American Indian as we pass from one
culture area to another. The same themes may--usually do--appear, but
there are differences, nevertheless. Certain kinds of tale or hero or
setting may be favorites with one tribe and not with another.
Explanatory stories may prevail here; hero myths there; trickster tales
in a third tribe A few words will serve to characterize the various
areas.

The Eskimos are poor in explanatory myths and trickster tales.
Insignificant animal stories and accounts of monsters and pursuits
occupy a much larger proportion of their mythology than the selections
here given would indicate. As a whole, their stories have a very low
level of interest. (Nos. i, ii, xl, lx, lxi, lxxiv, lxxvi.)

The tribes of the Mackenzie River district have little to distinguish
their tales from those of their neighbors. As they approach the Eskimos
to the north, the Coast tribes to the west, the Plains and Plateau
tribes to the south, their stories show corresponding change.

In contrast the Plateau area gives us collections of marked
individuality. A wandering hero-trickster changes topography

{p. xxi

and gets into mischief. Journeys to the upper world, unpromising heroes
and heroines, and animal marriages are frequent. These peoples have
borrowed freely from the Europeans. Their trickster cycle contains both
Plains and Pacific Coast elements. (Nos. xvii, xix, xxxiii, xxxv, xxxvi,
xlviii, lxvi, lxxiii, lxxxi, lxxxii, xcii, xciii, xciv.)

Tales of the North Pacific Coast are of a considerable variety. No more
than the peoples already discussed do they possess a real creation myth.
The trickster--Raven in the north, Mink, and Blue Jay farther south--is
very active. Tales based on ritual or social rank are frequent. The sea
is ever present, and in place of the animals of the Plateau, these
tribes tell stories of whales and salmon. Tales involving the other
world are prominent. (Nos. vii, xi, xvi, xxxvii, xxxix, xli, liii, lvi,
lxii, lxv, lxviii, lxxi, lxxii, lxxvii.)

The interest of the teller of tales in California seems to be two things
only--the creation and the deeds of the trickster. A few other animal
tales are present. One feels that, with the possible exception of the
Eskimos, the range of interest is least among the California Indians of
any tribes on the continent. (Nos. viii, ix, x, xiv, xlii, lviii.)

In the Plains the range of interest is extraordinarily wide. Practically
every class of tale current anywhere occurs here. If there are any
favorite types they are the trickster and the hero tales. In certain
parts of the area (for example, among the Caddoan tribes) the origin
myth is important. (Nos. xxi, xxvii, xxviii, xxix, xxx, xxxi, xxxii,
xxxviii, xliv, xlv, xlix, li, liv, lvii, lix, lxiii, lxiv, lxvii, lxix,
lxx, lxxix, xc, xcvi.)

In general spirit it is hard to distinguish between the tales of the
Plains and those of the Central Woodland. The trickster cycle in almost
all its parts is common to the two areas. The mythology of the Central
Woodland tribes is nearly uniform, whereas the Plains tribes show great
divergence. The Manabozho cycle prevails through most of this area.
(Nos. iv, xxiv, xxv, xxvi, xlvi, xlvii, lxviii, lxxxviii.)

The Northeast Woodland has been in such constant contact with Europeans
that the native tales, except among such remote tribes as the Naskapi,
have been almost crowded out. In the culture-hero cycle, myths
explaining topography are prominent. Animal marriages and trickster
tales are frequent.

{p. xxii}

The Glooscap cycle is notable as an account of a culture hero not
combined (or certainly to a very small extent) with a trickster. (Nos.
iii, xx, xxii, xxiii, lxxx, lxxxv, lxxxvi.)

No other tribes show such thorough independence in their tales and
detachment from other sections as do the Iroquois. Though their origin
myth has much in common with that of the Central Woodland, the rest of
their tales show little outside influence. The reader is impressed with
a great monotony of motivation and treatment. Accounts of cruel uncles,
wicked brothers, cannibalistic mothers, flying heads, and ravaging
monsters are given but slight relief through an occasional trickster
tale or a beautiful myth of otherworld journeying. (Nos. v, xiii, xviii,
xci.)

Animal tales and migration legends mark the collections from the
Southeast. The animal cycle has become so greatly influenced by the
"Uncle Remus" tales as to be at least as much negro, as Indian. (Nos.
xii, lv, lxxix, xcv.)

The tribes of the Southwest desert land have many interesting stories of
the emergence of the tribe from lower worlds and its final establishment
in its present habitat. Their hero tales are usually connected with
their mythology. The trickster cycle of the Plains is also prevalent.
Among some tribes (for example, the Navaho) there is a tendency to
string many tales into a long and complicated myth. (Nos. vi, xxxiv,
xliii, lxxxiii.)

After due consideration is given to the differences in the various
areas, however, these will not be found nearly so striking as the
likenesses. Generally speaking, though proportion varies, the same
classes of tales are found everywhere on the continent. The practised
reader immediately recognizes a tale as characteristically American
Indian, whether it comes from California or Labrador.

In spite of the intrusion of stories from the whites during the past few
centuries, the body of older American Indian tales is very clearly
established. These tales have been here for a very long time--long
enough for the incidents to travel over the entire continent. That they
have some sort of relation to myths of the Old World seems in many cases
most probable, but until the exact nature of parallels has been studied
and a large number of them traced, speculation is perhaps unwise.
Certain very clear instances of ancient migration of tales from Asia
even

{p. xxiii}

now appear, but only very careful and detailed investigation will make
any larger generalization safe.

The American Indian tale offers ample material for much profitable
study. The groping toward literary style, the attempt to narrate
interestingly, the primitive conception of humor--such are only a few of
the possibilities of their use for the student. To the general reader
they hold out great attractions as a characteristic product of our
native Americans. We may well be grateful to the faithful collectors who
have gathered such a wealth of material for our profit and enjoyment.
