[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnai03)  [Next](tnai05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

{p. 78}

# CHAPTER IV

# HERO TALES\[110\]

## XXXIX. THE SUN TESTS HIS SON-IN-LAW\[111\]

##### (BELLA COOLA: Boas, *Jesup North Pacific Expedition*, i, 73)

In a place on Bella Coola River, there used to be a salmon-weir. A chief
and his wife lived at this place. One day the wife was cutting salmon on
the bank of the river. When she opened the last salmon, she found a
small boy in it. She took him out and washed him in the river. She
placed him near by, entered the house, and said to the people, "Come and
see what I have found in my salmon!" She had a child in her house, which
was still in the cradle. The little boy whom she had found was half as
long as her fore-arm. She carried him into the house, and the people
advised her to take good care of him. She nursed him with her own baby.
When the people were talking in the house, the baby looked around as
though he understood what they were saying. On the following day the
people were surprised to see how much he had grown, and in a few days he
was as tall as any ordinary child.\[112\] Her own baby also grew up with
marvelous rapidity. She gave each of them one breast. After a few days
they were able to walk and to talk.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .

\[When they mature, the boys go on adventures.\]

The two young men were passing by the houses, and looked into the
doorways. There was a house in the centre of this town; there they saw a
beautiful girl sitting in the middle of the house. Her hair was red, and
reached down to the floor. She was very white. Her eyes were large, and
as clear as rock crystal. The boy fell in love with the girl. They went
on, but his thoughts were with her. The Salmon boy said, "I am going to
enter this house. You must watch closely what I do, and imitate me. The
Door of this house tries to bite every one who enters." The Door opened,
and the Salmon jumped into the

{p. 79}

house. Then the Door snapped,\[113\] but missed him. When it opened
again, the boy jumped into the house. They found a number of people
inside, who invited them to sit down. They spread food before them, but
the boy did not like their food. It had a very strong smell, and looked
rather curious. It consisted of algae that grow on logs that lie in the
river.

When the boy did not touch it, one of the men said to him, "Maybe you
want to eat those two children. Take them down to the river and throw
them into the water, but do not look." The two children arose, and he
took them down to the river. Then he threw them into the water without
looking at them. At the place where he had thrown them down, he found a
male and a female Salmon. He took them up to the house and roasted them.
The people told him to preserve the intestines and the bones carefully.
After he had eaten, one of the men told him to carry the intestines and
the bones to the same place where he had thrown the children into the
water. He carried them in his hands, and threw them into the river
without looking. When he entered the house, he heard the children
following him. The girl was covering one of her eyes with her hands. The
boy was limping, because he had lost one of his bones. Then the people
looked at the place where the boy had been sitting, and they found the
eye, and a bone from the head of the male salmon. They ordered the boy
to throw these into the water. He took the children and the eye and the
bone, and threw them into the river. Then the children were hale and
well.\[114\]

After a while the youth said to his Salmon brother, "I wish to go to the
other house where I saw the beautiful girl." They went there, and he
said to his Salmon brother, "Let us enter. I should like to see her face
well." They went in. Then the man arose, and spread a caribou blanket
for them to sit on, and the people gave them food. Then he whispered to
his brother, "Tell the girl I want to marry her." The Salmon boy told
the girl, who smiled, and said, "He must not marry me. Whoever marries
me must die. I like him, and I do not wish to kill him; but if he wishes
to die, let him marry me.\[115\]

.     .     .     .     .     .     .

The woman was the Salmon-berry Bird. After one day she gave birth to a
boy, and on the following day she gave birth to a girl.\[116\] She was
the daughter of the Spring Salmon.

{p. 80}

After a while the girl's father said, "Let us launch our canoe, and let
us carry the young man back to his own people." He sent a messenger to
call all the people of the village; and they all made themselves ready,
and early the next morning they started in their canoes. The young man
went in the canoe of the Spring Salmon, which was the fastest. The canoe
of the Sock-eye Salmon came next. The people in the canoe of the Calico
Salmon were laughing all the time. They went up the river; and a short
distance below the village of the young man's father they landed, and
made fast their canoes. Then they sent two messengers up the river to
see if the people had finished their salmon-weir. Soon they returned
with information that the weir had been finished. Then they sent the
young man and his wife, and they gave them a great many presents for the
young man's father.

The watchman who was stationed at the salmon-weir saw two beautiful
salmon entering the trap. They were actually the canoes of the salmon;
but they looked to him like two salmon. Then the watchman put the traps
down over the weir, and he saw a great many fish entering them. He
raised the trap when it was full, and took the fish out. The young man
thought, "I wish he would treat me and my wife carefully", and his wish
came true. The man broke the heads of the other salmon, but he saved the
young man and his wife. Then he carried the fish up to the house, and
hung them over a pole.

During the night the young man and his wife resumed their human
shape.\[117\] The youth entered his father's house. His head was covered
with eagle-down. He said to his father, "I am the fish whom you caught
yesterday. Do you remember the time when you lost me? I have lived in
the country of the Salmon.\[236\] The Salmon accompanied me here. They
are staying a little farther down the river. It pleases the Salmon to
see the people eating fish." And, turning to his mother, he continued,
"You must be careful when cutting Salmon. Never break any of their
bones, but preserve them, and throw them into the water." The two
children of the young man had also entered into the salmon-trap. He put
some leaves on the ground, placed red and white cedar-bark over them,
and covered them with eagle-down, and he told his mother to place the
Salmon upon these.

{p. 81}

As soon as he had given these instructions, the Salmon began to come up
the river. They crossed the weir and entered the traps. They went up the
river as far as Stuick, and the people dried the Salmon according to his
instructions. They threw the bones into the water, and the Salmon
returned to life, and went back to their own country, leaving their meat
behind. The Cohoes Salmon had the slowest canoe, and therefore he was
the last to reach the villages. He gave many presents to the Indians. He
gave them many-colored leaves, and thus caused the leaves of the trees
to change color in the autumn.

Now all the Salmon had returned. The Salmon-berry Bird and her children
had returned with them. Then the young man made up his mind to build a
small hut, from which he intended to catch eagles. He used a long pole,
to which a noose was attached. The eagles were baited by means of
Salmon. He spread a mat in his little house, and when he had caught an
eagle he pulled out its down. He accumulated a vast amount of down. Then
he went back to his house and asked his younger brother to accompany
him. When they came to the hut which he had used for catching eagles, he
gave the boy a small staff. Then he said to him, "Do not be sorry when I
leave you. I am going to visit the Sun. I am not going to stay away a
long time. I staid long in the country of the Salmon, but I shall not
stay long in heaven. I am going to lie down on this mat. Cover me with
this down, and then begin to beat time with your staff. You will see a
large feather flying upward, then stop." The boy obeyed, and everything
happened as he had said. The boy saw the feather flying in wide circles.
When it reached a great height, it began to soar in large circles, and
finally disappeared in the sky.\[118\] Then the boy cried, and went back
to his mother.

The young man who had ascended to heaven found there a large house. It
was the House of Myths.\[119\] There he resumed his human shape, and
peeped in at the door. Inside he saw a number of people who were turning
their faces toward the wall. They were sitting on a low platform in the
rear of the house. In the right-hand corner of the house he saw a large
fire, and women sitting around it. He leaned forward and looked into the
house. An old woman discovered him, and beckoned him to come to her. He
stepped up to her, and she warned him by signs not to go to the rear of
the house. She said, "Be careful! {p. 82} The men in the rear of the
house intend to harm you." She opened a small box, and gave him the
bladder of a mountain-goat, which contained the cold wind.\[72\] She
told him to open the bladder if they should attempt to harm him. She
said that if he opened it, no fire could burn him. She told him that the
men were going to place him near the fire, in order to burn him; that
one of them would wipe his face, then fire would come forth from the
floor, scorching everything. The old woman told him everything that the
people were going to do.\[171\] Now the man in the rear of the house
turned round. He was the Sun himself. He was going to try the strength
of the visitor. When he saw the young man, he said to the old woman,
"Did anybody come to visit you? Let the young man come up to me. I wish
him to sit down near me." The young man stepped up to the Sun, and as
soon as he had sat down, the Sun wiped his face and looked at the young
man (he had turned his face while he was wiping it). Then the young man
felt very hot. He tied his blanket tightly round his body, and opened
the bladder which the woman had given him. Then the cold wind that blows
down the mountains in the winter was liberated, and he felt cool and
comfortable. The Sun had not been able to do him any harm. The old man
did not say anything, but looked at his visitor.

After a while he said, "I wish to show you a little underground house
that stands behind this house." They both rose and went outside. The
small house had no door. Access was had to it by an opening in the
centre of the roof, through which a ladder led down to the floor. Not a
breath of air entered this house. It was made of stone. When they had
entered, the Sun made a small fire in the middle of the house; then he
climbed up the ladder and closed the door, leaving his visitor inside.
The Sun pulled up the ladder, in order to make escape impossible. Then
the house began to grow very hot. When the boy felt that he could not
stand the heat any longer, he opened the bladder, and the cold wind came
out; snow began to fall on the fire, which was extinguished; icicles
began to form on the roof, and it was cool and comfortable inside. After
a while the Sun said to his four daughters, "Go to the little
underground house that stands behind our house, and sweep it," meaning
that they were to remove the remains of the young man whom he believed
to be burned. They obeyed

{p. 83}

at once, each being eager to be the first to enter. When they opened the
house, they were much surprised to find icicles hanging down from the
roof.

When they were climbing down the ladder, the youth arose and scratched
them. The youngest girl was the last to step down. The girls cried when
the youth touched them, and ran away. The Sun heard their screams, and
asked the reason. He was much surprised and annoyed to hear that the
young man was still alive. Then he devised another way of killing his
visitor. He told his daughters to call him into his house. They went,
and the young man re-entered the House of Myths. In the evening he lay
down to sleep. Then the Sun said to his daughters, "Early tomorrow
morning climb the mountain behind our house. I shall tell the boy to
follow you." The girls started while the visitor was still asleep. The
girls climbed up to a small meadow which was near a precipice. They had
taken the form of mountain-goats. When the Sun saw his daughters on the
meadow, he called to his visitor, saying, "See those mountain-goats!"
The young man arose when he saw the mountain-goats. He wished to kill
them. The Sun advised him to walk up the right-hand side of the
mountain, saying that the left-hand side was dangerous. The young man
carried his bow and arrow. The Sun said, "Do not use your own arrows!
Mine are much better." Then they exchanged arrows, the Sun giving him
four arrows of his own. The points of these arrows were made of
coal.\[121\]

Now the young man began to climb the mountain. When he came up to the
goats, he took one of the arrows, aimed it, and shot. It struck the
animals, but fell down without killing it. The same happened with the
other arrows. When he had spent all his arrows, they rushed up to him
from the four sides, intending to kill him. His only way of escape was
in the direction of the precipice.\[122\] They rushed up to him, and
pushed him down the steep mountain. He fell headlong, but when he was
halfway down he transformed himself into a ball of bird's down. He
alighted gently on a place covered with many stones. There he resumed
the shape of a man, arose, and ran into the house of the Sun to get his
own arrows. He took them, climbed the mountain again, and found the
mountain-goats on the same meadow. He shot them and killed them, and
threw them down the precipice; then he returned. He found the

{p. 84}

goats at the foot of the precipice, and cut off their feet. He took them
home. He found the Sun sitting in front of the house. He offered him the
feet, saying, "Count them, and see how many I have killed." The Sun
counted them and now he knew that all his children were dead. Then he
cried, "You killed my children!" Then the youth took the bodies of the
goats, fitted the feet on, and threw the bodies into a little river that
was running past the place where they had fallen down. Thus they were
restored to life. He had learned this art in the country of the Salmon.
Then he said to the girls, "Now run to see your father! He is wailing
for you." They gave him a new name, saying, "He has restored us to
life." The boy followed them. Then the Sun said, when he entered, "You
shall marry my two eldest daughters."

On the next morning the people arose. Then the Sun said to them, "What
shall I do to my son-in-law?" He called him, and said, "Let us raise the
trap of my salmon-weir." They went up to the river in the Sun's canoe.
The water of the river was boiling. The youth was in the bow of the
canoe, while the Sun was steering. He caused the canoe to rock,
intending to throw the young man into the water. The water formed a
small cascade, running down over the weir. He told the young man to walk
over the top of the weir in order to reach the trap. He did so, walking
over the top beam of the weir. When he reached the baskets, the beam
fell over, and he himself fell into the water . The Sun saw him rise
twice in the whirlpool just below the weir. When he did not see him rise
again, he turned his canoe, and thought, "Now the boy has certainly gone
to Nuskyakek." The Sun returned to his house, and said to his daughters,
"I lost my son-in-law in the river. I was not able to find him." Then
his daughters were very sad.

When the boy disappeared in the water, he was carried to Nuskyakek; and
he resumed the shape of a salmon while in the water, and as soon as he
landed he resumed human shape and returned to his wife. The Sun saw him
coming, and was much surprised. In the evening they went to sleep. On
the following morning the Sun thought, "How can I kill my son-in-law?"
After a while he said to him, " Arise! We will go and split wood for
fuel." He took his tools. They launched their canoe, and went down the
river to the sea. When they reached

{p. 85}

there, it was perfectly calm. There were many snags embedded in the mud
in the mouth of the river, some of which were only half submerged. They
selected one of these snags a long distance from the shore, and began to
split it. Then the Sun intentionally dropped his hammer into the water,
and thought at the same time, "Do not fall straight down, but fall
sideways, so that he will have much difficulty in finding you." Then he
sat down in his canoe, and said, "Oh! I lost my old hammer. I had it at
the time when the Sun was created." He looked down into the water, and
did not say a word. After a while he said to the young man, "Do you know
how to dive? Can you get my hammer? The water is not very deep here."
The young man did not reply. Then the Sun continued, "I will not go back
without my hammer." Then the boy said, "I know how to dive. If you so
wish, I will try to get it." The Sun promised to give him supernatural
power if he was able to bring the hammer back. The youth jumped into the
water, and then the Sun ordered the sea to rise, and he called the cold
wind to make the water freeze. It grew so cold that a sheet of ice a
fathom thick was formed at once on top of the sea. "Now," he thought, "I
certainly have killed you!" He left his canoe frozen up in the ice, and
went home. He said to his daughters, "I have lost my son-in-law. He
drifted away when the cold winds began to blow down the mountains. I
have also lost my little hammer." But when he mentioned his hammer, his
daughters knew at once what had happened. The young man found the
hammer, and after he had obtained it he was going to return to the
canoe, but he struck his head against the ice, and was unable to get
out. He tried everywhere to find a crack. Finally he found a very narrow
one. He transformed himself into a fish, and came out of the crack. He
jumped about on the ice in the form of a fish, and finally resumed his
own shape.

He went back to the Sun's house, carrying the hammer. The Sun was
sitting in front of the fire, his knees drawn up, and his legs apart.
His eyes were closed, and he was warming himself. The young man took his
hammer and threw it right against his stomach, saying, "Now take better
care of your treasures." The young man scolded the Sun, saying, "Now
stop trying to kill me. If you try again, I shall kill you. Do you think
I am an ordinary man? You cannot conquer me." The Sun did not reply.

{p. 86}

In the evening he said to his son-in-law, "I hear a bird singing, which
I should like very much to have."\[126\] The young man asked, "What bird
is it?" The Sun replied, "I do not know it. Watch it early to-morrow
morning." The young man resolved to catch the bird. Very early in the
morning he arose, then he heard the bird singing outside. He knew at
once that it was the ptarmigan. He left the house, and thought, "I wish
you would come down!" Then the bird came down, and when it was quite
near by he shot it. He hit one of its wings, intending to catch it
alive. He waited for the Sun to arise. The bird understood what the
young man said, who thus spoke: "The chief here wishes to see you. Do
not be afraid, I am not going to kill you. The chief has often tried to
kill me, but he has been unable to do so. You do not need to be afraid."
The young man continued, "When it is dark I shall tell the Sun to ask
you to sit near him, and when he is asleep I want you to peck out his
eyes." When the Sun arose, the youth went into the house carrying the
bird, saying, "I have caught the bird; now I hope you will treat it
kindly. It will awaken us when it is time to arise. When you lie down,
let it sit down near you, then it will call you in the morning."

In the evening the Sun asked the bird to sit down next to his face. When
he was asleep, the bird pecked out his eyes without his knowing it.
Early in the morning he heard the bird singing. He was going to open his
eyes, but he was not able to do so. Then he called his son, saying, "The
bird has blinded me." The young man jumped up and went to his
father-in-law, and said, "Why did you wish for the bird? Do you think it
is good? It is a bad bird. It has pecked out your eyes." He took the
bird and carried it outside, and thanked it for having done as it was
bidden. Then the bird flew away.

When it was time for the Sun to start on his daily course, he said, "I
am afraid I might fall, because I cannot see my way." For four days he
staid in his house. He did not eat, he was very sad. Then his son-in-law
made up his mind to cure him. He did not do so before, because he wanted
to punish him for his badness. He took some water, and said to his
father-in-law, "I will try to restore your eyesight." He threw the water
upon his eyes, and at once his eyes were healed and well.\[279\] He
said, "Now you can see what power I have. The water with which I have
washed my face has the power to heal

{p. 87}

diseases. While I was in the country of the Salmon, I bathed in the
water in which the old Salmon bathed, in order to regain youth,
therefore the water in which I wash makes everything young and
well."\[50\] From this time on, the Sun did not try to do any harm to
the young man.

Finally he wished to return to his father's village. He left the house,
and jumped down through the hole in heaven. His wife saw him being
transformed into a ball of eagle-down, which floated down gently. Then
her father told her to climb as quickly as she could down his eyelashes.
She did so, and reached the ground at the same time as her husband. He
met his younger brother, who did not recognize him. He had been in
heaven for one year.

## XL. THE JEALOUS UNCLE\[127\]

##### (KODIAK: Golder, *Journal of American Folk-Lore*, xvi, 90, No. 8)

In a village lived a man, known to his neighbors as "Unnatural Uncle."
When his nephews became a few years old, he would kill them. Two had
already suffered death at his hands. After the second had disappeared,
his wife went to the mother of the boys, and said: "Should another boy
be born to you, let us conceal the fact from my husband, and make him
believe the child a girl. In that case he will not harm him, and we may
succeed in bringing him up."

Not long after the above conversation another nephew was born. Unnatural
Uncle, hearing that a child was born, sent his wife to ascertain the sex
of the child. She, as had been agreed upon, reported the child a girl.
"Let her live," he said.\[128\]

The two women tended and dressed the boy as if he were a girl. When he
grew older, they told him to play with the girls, and impressed upon him
that he should at all times imitate the ways, attitudes, and postures of
the girls, especially when attending to the calls of nature. Unnatural
Uncle watched the boy as he was growing up, and often wondered at his
boyish looks. One day the boy, not knowing that his uncle was about and
observing him, raised up his parka, and so exposed his body. "Ah," said
Unnatural Uncle to his wife, on reaching home, "this is the way you have
fooled me. But I know everything now. Go and tell my nephew I wish to
see him." With tears in her eyes the poor woman delivered the message to
the

{p. 88}

nephew, told him of the disappearance of his brothers, and of his
probable fate. The father and mother of the boy wept bitterly, for they
were certain he would never return. The boy himself, although
frightened, assured his parents to the contrary, and begged them not to
worry, for he would come back safe and sound.

"Did my brothers have any playthings?" he asked before going.

He was shown to a box where their things were kept. In it he found a
piece of a knife, some eagle-down, and a sour cranberry. These he hid
about his person, and went to meet his uncle. The latter greeted him,
and said: "Nephew, let us go and fetch some wood."

When they came to a large forest, the boy remarked: "Here is good wood;
let us take some of it, and go back."

"Oh, no! There is better wood farther on," said the uncle.

From the forest they stepped into a bare plain. "Let us go back. There
is no wood here," called the boy. But the uncle motioned to him to come
on, telling him that they would soon find better wood. A little later
they came to a big log. "Here is what I want," exclaimed the uncle, and
began splitting it. "Here, nephew, jump in, and get that wedge out,"
called the uncle to the boy, as one of the wedges fell in. When the boy
did so, the man knocked out the other wedges; the log closed in on the
boy, and held him fast. "Stay there!" said Unnatural Uncle, and walked
off.\[129\]

For some time the boy remained in this helpless condition, planning a
means of escape. At last he thought of his sour cranberry, and, taking
it in his hand, he rubbed with it the interior of the log from edge to
edge. The sourness of the berry caused the log to open its mouth, thus
freeing him.

On his way back to the village, he gathered a bundle of wood, which he
left at his uncle's door, announcing the fact to him: "Here, uncle, I
have brought you the wood." The latter was both surprised and vexed at
his failure, and determined more than ever to kill the boy. His wife,
however, warned him: "You had better not harm the boy; you have killed
his brothers, and if you hurt him, you will come to grief."

"I will kill him, too," he savagely replied.

When the boy reached his father's home, he found them weeping and
mourning. "Don't weep!" he pleaded. "He

{p. 89}

cannot hurt me; no matter where he takes me, I will always come back."
In the morning he was again summoned to appear at his uncle's. Before
going, he entreated his parents not to feel uneasy, assuring them that
no harm would befall him, and that he would be back. The uncle called
the boy to go with him after some ducks and eggs. They passed several
places abounding in ducks and eggs, and each time that the boy
suggested, "Let us take these and go back," the uncle replied: "Oh, no!
There are better ducks and eggs farther on." At last they came to a
steep bluff, and, looking down, saw a great many ducks and eggs. "Go
down carefully, nephew, and gather those ducks and eggs. Be quick, and
come back as soon as you can.

The boy saw the trap at a glance, and prepared for it by taking the
eagle-down in each hand, between thumb and finger. As the boy took a
step or two downward, the uncle gave him a push, causing him to lose his
footing.\[122\] "He will never come back alive from here," smiled the
uncle to himself, as he walked back. If he had remained awhile longer
and looked down before going, he would have seen the boy descending
gently instead of falling. The eagle-down kept him up in the air, and he
lighted at his own pleasure safe and sound. After gathering all the
ducks and eggs he wanted, he ascended by holding up the down, as before,
and blowing under it. Up, up he went, and in a short time stood on the
summit. It was night before he sighted his uncle's home. At the door he
deposited the birds and eggs, and shouted: "Here, uncle, are the ducks
and eggs."

"What! back again!" exclaimed the man very much mortified. His wife
again pleaded with him to leave the boy in peace. "You will come to
grief, if you don't," she said. "No; he cannot hurt me," he replied
angrily, and spent the remainder of the night thinking and planning.

Although he assured them that he would return, the boy's parents did not
have much faith in it; for he found them on his return weeping for him.
This grieved him. "Why do you weep?" he said. "Didn't I say I would come
back? He can take me to no place from which I cannot come back."

In the evening of the third day the aunt appeared and said that her
husband wished the boy. He told his parents not to be disturbed, and
promised to come back soon. This time the

{p. 90}

uncle invited him to go with him after clams. The clams were very large,
large enough to inclose\[130\] a man. It was ebb tide, and they found
plenty of clams not far from the beach. The boy suggested that they take
these and go back, but the uncle put him off with, "There are better
clams farther out." They waded into the water, and then the man noticed
an extraordinarily large clam. "Take him," he said, but when the boy
bent over, the clam took him in. So confident was Unnatural Uncle of his
success this time that he uttered not a word, but with a triumphant grin
on his face and a wave of his hand he walked away. The boy tried to
force the valves apart, but not succeeding, he cut the ligament with his
piece of a knife, compelling the clam to open up little by little until
he was able to hop out. He gathered some clams, and left them at his
uncle's door as if nothing had happened. The man, on hearing the boy's
voice outside, was almost beside himself with rage. His wife did not
attempt to pacify him. "I will say nothing more," she said. "I have
warned you, and if you persist in your ways, you will suffer."

The next day Unnatural Uncle was busy making a box.

"What is it for?" asked his wife.

"A plaything for our nephew," he replied.

In the evening the boy was sent for. On leaving his parents he said: "Do
not feel uneasy about my absence. This time I may be away a long time,
but I will come back nevertheless."

"Nephew, here is something to amuse you," said his uncle. "Get inside of
it, so that I may see whether it fits you." It fitted him; so did the
lid the box; and the rope the lid. He felt himself borne along, and from
the noise of the waves he knew it was to the sea. The box was lowered,
and with a shove it was set adrift. It was stormy, the waves beat over
the box, and several times he gave himself up as lost. How long he
drifted he had no idea; but at last he heard the waves dashing against
the beach, and his heart rejoiced. Louder, and louder did the joyful
peal sound. He gathered himself together for the sudden stop which soon
came, only to feel himself afloat again the next moment. This experience
he went through several times, before the box finally stopped and he
realized he was on land once more.

As he lay there, many thoughts passed through his mind; where was he?
was any one living there? would he be saved? {p. 91} or would the flood
tide set him adrift again? what were his people at home doing? These,
and many other thoughts passed through his brain, when he was startled
by hearing voices, which he recognized, a little later, as women's. This
is what he heard:

"I saw the box first," said one.

"No, I saw it first," said the other.

"I am sure I saw it before you," said the first speaker again, "and,
therefore, it is mine."

"Well, you may have the box, but its contents shall belong to me,"
replied the other.

They picked up the box, and began to carry it, but finding it somewhat
heavy and being anxious to know what it contained, they stopped to untie
it.

"If there are many things in there, I shall have some of them," said the
first speaker, who rued her bargain. The other one said nothing. Great
was their surprise on beholding him. He was in turn surprised to see two
such beautiful girls, the large village, the numerous people, and their
peculiar appearance, for he was among the Eagle people in Eagle land .
The full grown people, like the full grown eagles, had white faces and
heads, while those of the young people, like those of young eagles, were
dark. Eagle skins were hanging about all over the village; and it amused
him to watch some of the people put on their eagle skins and change to
eagles, and after flying around, take them off and become human beings
again.

The girls, being the daughters of the village chief, led the boy to
their father, each claiming him. When he had heard them both, the chief
gave the boy to the older girl (the second speaker). With her he lived
happily, but his thoughts would very often wander back to his former
home, the people there, his parents; and the thought of his uncle's
cruelty to them would make his heart ache. His wife noted these spells
of depression, and questioned him about them until he told her of his
parents and uncle. She, like a good wife, bade him cheer up, and then
went to have a talk with her father. He sent for his son-in-law, and
advised him to put on his (chief's) eagle skin, soar up high until he
could see his village, fly over there, visit his parents, and bring them
back with him. He did as he was told, and in a short time found himself
in the village. Although he could see all other people, his parents were
not in sight.

{p. 92}

This was in the evening. During the night he went out to sea, brought
back a large whale, and placed it on the beach, knowing that all the
villagers would come out for the meat. The first person to come to the
village beach in the morning was Unnatural Uncle; and when he saw the
whale, he aroused the village, and a little later all, except the boy's
father and mother, were there, cutting and storing up the whale. His
parents were not permitted to come near the whale, and when some of the
neighbors left some meat at their house, Unnatural Uncle scolded, and
forbade it being done again. "I can forgive him the killing of my
brothers, the attempts on my life, but I will revenge his treatment of
my parents." With these thoughts in his mind, the eagle left his perch,
and flew over to the crowd. He circled over its head a little while, and
then made a swoop at his uncle. "Ah, he knows that I am chief, and the
whale is mine, and he asks me for a piece of meat." Saying this, he
threw a piece of meat at the eagle. The second time the eagle descended
it was still nearer the man's head, but he tried to laugh it off, and
turn it to his glory. The people, however, did not see it that way, and
warned him to keep out of the eagle's clutches, for the eagle meant
mischief. When the eagle dropped the third time, it was so near his head
that he fell on his face. The fourth time the eagle swooped him, and
flew off with him.

Not far from the shore was a high and steep rock, and on its summit the
eagle put down the man, placing himself opposite. When he had taken off
the skin, and disclosed himself, he said to his trembling uncle: "I
could have forgiven you the death of my brothers, the four attempts on
my life, but for the cruel treatment of my parents you shall pay. The
whale I brought was for my parents and others, and not for you alone;
but you took entire possession of it, and would not allow them even to
approach it. I will not kill you without giving you a chance for your
life. Swim back to the shore, and you shall be spared." As he could not
swim, Unnatural Uncle supplicated his nephew to take him back, but the
latter, putting on the eagle skin,\[132\] and hardening his eagle heart,
clutched him, and from a dizzy height in the air dropped him into the
sea.

From the beach the crowd watched the fatal act, understood and
appreciated it, and, till it was dark, continued observing, from the
distance, the eagle. When all had retired, he pulled

{p. 93}

off the skin, and set out for his father's barrabara. He related to his
parents his adventures, and invited them to accompany him to his adopted
land, to which they gladly consented. Early in the morning he put on
again his skin, and, taking a parent in each claw, flew with them to
Eagle land, and there they are living now.

## XLI. BLUEJAY AND HIS COMPANIONS\[133\]

##### (QUINAULT: Farrand, *Jesup North Pacific Expedition*, ii, 102, No. 3)

Bluejay and his chief, with Land Otter, Beaver, and another man, used to
go out seal-hunting together. In the same house with them, but at the
other end, lived Grouse, who was a widower with a lot of children, and
he spent most of his time in the woods building a canoe. Every trip that
the five men made, they caught five seals, very fat ones; but they gave
nothing but the poor, lean parts to Grouse. Bluejay was at the bottom of
this, and kept saying that fat was too good for Grouse; and he poked fun
at him and sneered at him whenever he was about. Grouse never said a
word, but took what was given him without complaining.

One day Grouse made a wooden seal, carving it out of cedar, and burning
it until it was black. Then he talked to the seal, and told it what it
was to do; and it dived down into the water and went out to sea.

Next day before daylight, the five men started out, and about sunrise
came upon a big seal, and speared it.\[134\] The seal dived, and swam to
the westward, dragging the canoe after it until they were out of sight
of land. The spearman tried to get rid of it, but could not; and when
night came they were still rushing westward, and when they waked in the
morning they were still going, but not so fast. Not long afterward the
line slackened, and they heard something butting against the canoe.
Bluejay looked over, and saw a wooden seal with the harpoon sticking
into it just behind the flipper. Then his chief began to scold Bluejay,
and said, "I know this is Grouse's work. He is angry because we gave him
no fat, and because you talked to him so much." Bluejay could only hang
his head and say nothing.

They cut the line and began to paddle back, but had no idea where they
were going. Three days and two nights they paddled,

{p. 94}

and the third night they all fell asleep from exhaustion. When they
waked in the morning, the canoe was stuck fast and they thought they
were ashore, and one of them, the fifth man, jumped out, but he sank and
was drowned; and, then they saw that they were not ashore, but that the
seaweed was so thick that they had stuck fast in it. So now there were
only four of them, and they paddled on. On the fourth night they did not
feel like sleeping, for they thought they could see the hills back of
Quinault. In the morning they could discern the coast plainly, and after
paddling all day they reached the shore, and landed at a place quite
strange to them. Next morning they went on again in what they thought
was a southerly direction, and suddenly, as they rounded a point, came
upon a village. Several canoes came out through the surf and helped them
ashore, and they were taken up to the village.

In the centre of the village was a tall smooth pole which the people
said was Squirrel's pole, which he used for climbing; and they said that
Squirrel would like to have a climbing-match with Bluejay. Bluejay's
master said to him, "Now don't get frightened, but go in and do your
best. You know you can climb well, and if you are beaten we may all be
killed." Then both Squirrel and Bluejay took sharp bones, so that if one
got ahead he could hit the one behind on the head; and they started to
climb. All the people crowded around to see the contest, for the pole
was high and the two were well matched. At last the people saw them
reach the top, and saw one of them strike the other on the head so that
he came tumbling down; and all the people shouted, for they thought it
was Bluejay. But when he reached the ground, they found it was Squirrel
who had lost. So now, since Bluejay had beaten their best climber, they
let him and his companions go.

They paddled on down the coast, and after some time they rounded a
point, and come upon another village, much like the first. Here
Hair-seal challenged Bluejay to a diving-match,\[136\] and Bluejay found
himself in a difficult position, for he was no diver at all. But his
master turned the canoe over and washed it out, leaving the brush from
the bottom floating about it on the water. Then he told Bluejay to
accept the challenge and dive, but to come up under the brush and lie
there concealed, and not to show himself. So both Bluejay and Hair-seal
dived; and Bluejay came up immediately under the brush,

{p. 95}

and floated there where no one could see him. He waited until he
shivered so with the cold that the brush moved with his shaking, and his
master began to be afraid the people would notice it: so he rocked the
canoe and made waves to conceal the motion of the brush, and no one
suspected that Bluejay was hidden there. Now, they had agreed, that,
when the sun had passed from one tree to another not far off, each was
to have the right to hit the other in the head with a sharp bone. So,
when Bluejay saw that the sun had reached the second tree, he dived
down, and found Hair-seal lying with his head down close to the bottom.
Bluejay jabbed him with the bone before Hair-seal knew what was
happening, and Hair-seal came floating up to the surface. All the people
shouted, "Bluejay's up!" But it turned out to be Hair-seal, while
Bluejay went back under the brush without showing himself There he
waited about half an hour longer, and then came out shouting and
laughing, and saying that he felt splendidly and not tired at all. In
that way Hair-seal was beaten, and the people let Bluejay and his party
go on again.

They paddled on as before until they came to another village, and there
the people challenged the four wanderers to go into a sweat-house with
four of their people and see which could stand the most heat. So four of
the village people went into one corner of the sweat-house, and the four
travelers into the other. Then the door was closed so that it was pitch
dark, and soon it became very hot.\[120\] But Beaver and Land Otter
began to dig, and in a very short time they had tunnelled to the river.
Then all four got into the water and were as comfortable as could be,
while the four men from the village were nearly baked. When the time was
up, Bluejay and his friends came back into the sweat-house, and when the
door was opened they all jumped out. Bluejay and his friends were as
fresh as possible, while the four men from the village were nearly
cooked, and their eyes were all white from the heat. So, having beaten
the people at their own game, they were allowed to go on, and, paddling
as hard as they could, before they knew it they had rounded another
point, and come upon a village as before. They ran the canoe clear up on
the beach and tied it, and, taking their paddles, went into one of the
houses.

The people immediately challenged the new arrivals to sit up five days
and five nights without sleeping,\[137\] against four of their

{p. 96}

own number. The friends were afraid not to accept, so they started the
match. One party sat on one side of the house and the other on the
other. The men from the village had spears, and when any one of them was
falling asleep, they would prod him with a spear and wake him. They kept
calling out to each other all night, "Are you awake? Are you still
awake?" And they reviled each other constantly. Bluejay did all the
talking for his side, and was hardly quiet a minute. All the next day
they jeered at each other, and so they did the next night. Bluejay and
the spokesman of the other side kept talking back and forth the whole
time. The next day they did the same thing, and so on the third night;
and the fourth day and the fourth night it was still the same. On that
night the men from the village nearly went to sleep; but Bluejay's men
were all right as yet. Bluejay himself was almost done up; but his
master would pull his ears and kept him awake, for Bluejay's master was
the best man of them all. The fifth night the men of the village went to
sleep, and Bluejay's master told Land Otter and Beaver to dig so that
they could get out. They did so, and fetched four pieces of old wood
with phosphorescent spots on them; and they placed the pieces where they
had been sitting,\[282\] one piece for each man; and the spots looked
like eyes. Then, while the other crowd was still sleeping, they got out,
and, taking everything they could lay their hands on, they stole away in
the canoe. Just before daylight one of the other four waked, and called
Bluejay several times, but got no answer. So he waked the others, and,
taking their spears, they speared what they thought were their rivals.
But when daylight came, they saw that they had been fooled, and that
their spears were sticking into wood.

There was great excitement, and the people decided to give chase, and,
making ready their canoes, they started after the fugitives. Along in
the afternoon, Bluejay's master said, "I feel sure some one is following
us," and, looking back, they saw a lot of canoes in pursuit. Then they
paddled with all their might; and Bluejay's master paddled so hard that
at every stroke he broke a paddle, until he had broken all they had, and
they floated helpless. Then the others turned to Bluejay and said, "You
are always talking about your tamanous. Make use of him now, if you have
one, for we are in a bad fix." But Bluejay could only hang his head, for
he had no tamanous. {p. 97} Then Land Otter called on his tamanous, and
a little wind arose.\[138\] Then Beaver called upon his, and the wind
became a little stronger; but all the time the other canoes were drawing
closer. Then Bluejay's master called upon his tamanous, and there swept
down a great storm and a fog. The storm lasted only a short time, and
when it had passed, they looked about them and saw hundreds of capsized
canoes, but not a man living; for all the people had been drowned. They
went around and gathered up all the paddles they wanted, and went on,
and at last reached the Quinault country, and were among good people.
The people who had pursued them were probably Makahs, for they are a bad
lot. Finally they reached their home near Damon's Point, and after that,
whenever they came in from sealing, they were careful to give Grouse the
biggest and fattest seal.

## XLII. DUG-FROM-GROUND\[139\]

##### (HUPA: Goddard, *University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology*, i, 146, No. 2)

An old woman was living with her granddaughter, a virgin. The girl used
to go to dig roots and her grandmother used to say to her, "You must not
dig those with two stocks." The girl wondered why she was always told
that. One morning she thought, "I am going to dig one," so she went
across the river and began digging. She thought, "I am going to take out
one with a double stock." When she had dug it out she heard a baby cry.
She ran back to the river, and when she got there she heard someone
crying "mother" after her. She jumped into the boat and pushed it
across. When she got across, the baby had tumbled down to the other
shore. She ran up to the house and there she heard it crying on that
side. She ran into the house, then she heard it crying back of the
house. At once she sat down and then she heard it tumble on the roof of
the house. The baby tumbled through the smoke-hole and then rolled about
on the floor. The old woman jumped up and put it in a baby basket. The
young woman sat with her back to the fire and never looked at the child.

The old woman took care of the baby alone. After a time it commenced to
sit up and finally to walk. When he was big enough to shoot, the old
woman made a bow and he began to

{p. 98}

kill birds. Afterward he killed all kinds of game; and, because his
mother never looked at him, he gave whatever he killed to his
grandmother. Finally he became a man. The young woman had been in the
habit of going out at dawn and not returning until dark. She brought
back with her acorns as long as her finger. One time the young man
thought "I am going to watch and see where she goes." The young woman
had always said to herself, "If he will bring acorns from the place I
bring them, and if he will kill a white deer, I will call him my son."
Early one morning the son saw his mother come out of the house and start
up the ridge. He followed her and saw her go along until she came to a
dry tree. She climbed this and it grew with her to the sky. The young
man then returned saying, "Tomorrow I am going up there." The woman came
home at night with the usual load of long acorns.

The next morning the man went the way his mother had gone, climbed the
tree as he had seen her do, and it grew with him to the sky.\[199\] When
he arrived there he saw a road. He followed that until he came to an
oak, which he climbed, and waited to see what would happen. Soon he
heard laughing girls approaching. They came to the tree and began to
pick acorns from allotted spaces under it. The young man began to throw
down acorns. "That's right, Bluejay," said one of the girls. Then
another said, "It might be Dug-from-the-ground. You can hardly look at
him, they say, he is so handsome." Two others said, "Oh, I can look at
him, I always look at this walking one (pointing to the sun); that is
the one you can hardly look at." He came down from the tree and passed
between the girls. The two who had boasted they could look at him,
turned their faces to the ground. The other two who had thought they
could not look him in the face were able to do so.\[18a\]

The young man killed the deer, the killing of which the mother had made
the second condition for his recognition as a son. He then filled the
basket from his mother's place under the tree and went home. When the
woman saw him with the acorns as long as one's finger, she called him
her son.

After a time he said, "I am going visiting." "All right," said the
grandmother, and then she made for him a bow and arrows of blue-stone,
and a shinny stick and sweat-house wood of the same material. These he
took and concealed by putting

{p. 99}

them under the muscles of his forearm. He dressed himself for the
journey and set out. He went to the home of the immortals at the edge of
the world toward the east. When he got down to the shore on this side
they saw him. One of them took out the canoe of red obsidian and
stretched it until it was the proper size.\[14c\] He launched it and
came across for him. When he had landed, the young man placed his hand
on the bow and as he did so, the boat gave a creak, he was so strong.
When they had crossed he went to the village. In the middle of it he saw
a house of blue-stone with a pavement in front of black obsidian. He
went in and heard one say, "It is my son-in-law for whom I had expected
to be a long time looking."

When the sun had set there came back from different places ten brothers.
Some had been playing kiñ, some had been playing shinny, some had been
hunting, some spearing salmon, and others had been shooting at a mark.
Eagle and Panther were both married to daughters of the family. They
said to him, "You here, brother-in-law?" "Yes," he said, "I came a
little while ago." When it was supper time they put in front of him a
basket of money's meat, which mortal man cannot swallow.\[140\] He ate
two baskets of it and they thought he must be a smart man. After they
had finished supper they all went to the sweathouse to spend the night.
At midnight the young man went to the river to swim. There he heard a
voice say, "The sweathouse wood is all gone." Then Mink told him that
men could not find sweat-house wood near by, but that some was to be
found to the southeast. They called to him for wood from ten
sweat-houses and he said "Yes" to all. Mink told him about everything
they would ask him to do. He went back to the sweat-house and went in.
When the east whitened with the dawn, he went for sweat-house wood as
they had told him. He came to the place where the trail forks and one of
them turns to the northeast and the other to the southeast. There he
drew out from his arm the wood his grandmother had provided him with and
split it fine. He made this into ten bundles and carried them back to
the village. When he got there he put them down carefully but the whole
earth shook with the shock. He carried a bundle to each sweat-house.
They all sweated themselves. He spent the day there and at evening went
again to the sweat-house. When he went to the river to swim, Mink met
him again and told him that the next day they would play shinny.

{p. 100}

After they were through breakfast the next morning, they said, "Come,
brother-in-law, let us go to the place where they play shinny." They all
went and after placing their bets began to play. Twice they were beaten.
Then they said, "Come, brother-in-law, play." They passed him a stick.
He pressed down on it and broke it. "Let me pick up something," he said.
He turned about and drew out his concealed shinny stick and the balls.
Then he stepped out to play and Wildcat came to play against him. The
visitor made the stroke and the balls fell very near the goal. Then he
caught Wildcat, smashing his face into its present shape,\[99\] and
threw the ball over the line. He played again, this time with Fox. Again
he made the stroke and when he caught Fox he pinched his face out long
as it has been ever since. He then struck the ball over the line and
won. The next time he played against Earthquake. The ground opened up a
chasm but he jumped over it. Earthquake threw up a wall of blue-stone
but he threw the ball through it. "Dol" it rang as it went through. Then
he played with Thunder. It rained and there was thunder. It was the
running of that one which made the noise. It was then night and he had
won back all they had lost. There were ten strings of money, besides
otterskins, fisherskins, and blankets.

The next day they went to shoot at the white bird which Indians can
never hit.\[142\] The others commenced to shoot and then they said to
their guest, "Come, you better shoot." They gave him a bow, which broke
when he drew it. Then he pulled out his own and said, "I will shoot with
this although the nock has been cut down and it is not very good." They
thought, "He can't hit anything with that." He shot and hit the bird,
and dentalia fell all about. They gathered up the money and carried it
home.

The Hupa man went home to his grandmother. As many nights as it seemed
to him he had spent, so many years he had really been away.\[143\] He
found his grandmother lying by the fire. Both of the women had been
worried about him. He said to them, "I have come back for you." "Yes,"
they said, "we will go." Then he repaired the house, tying it up anew
with hazel withes. He poked a stick under it and away it went to the end
of the world toward the east, where he had married. They are living
there yet.

{p. 101}

## XLIII. THE ATTACK ON THE GIANT ELK\[144\]

##### (JICARILLA APACHE: Russell, *Journal of American Folk-Lore*, xi, 255)

In the early days, animals and birds of monstrous size preyed upon the
people; the giant Elk, the Eagle, and others devoured men, women, and
children, until the gods were petitioned for relief. A deliverer was
sent to them in the person of Jonayaíyin, the son of the old woman who
lives in the West, and the second wife of the Sun. She divided her time
between the Sun and the Water-fall, and by the latter bore a second son,
named Kobachíschini, who remained with his mother while his brother went
forth to battle with the enemies of mankind. In four days Jonayaíyin
grew to manhood,\[112\] then he asked his mother where the Elk lived.
She told him that the Elk was in a great desert far to the southward.
She gave him arrows with which to kill the Elk. In four steps he reached
the distant desert where the Elk was lying.

Jonayaíyin cautiously observed the position of the Elk from behind a
hill. The Elk was lying on an open plain, where no trees or bushes were
to be found that might serve to shelter Jonayaíyin from view while he
approached. While he was looking at the Elk, with dried grass before his
face, the Lizard said to him, "What are you doing, my friend?"
Jonayaíyin explained his mission, whereupon the Lizard suggested that he
clothe himself in the garments of the Lizard, in which he could approach
the Elk in safety. Jonayaíyin tried four times before he succeeded in
getting into the coat of the Lizard. Next the Gopher came to him with
the question, "What are you doing here, my friend?" When Jonayaíyin told
the Gopher of his intention, the latter promised to aid him.\[147\] The
Gopher thought it advisable to reconnoitre by burrowing his way
underground to the Elk. Jonayaíyin watched the progress of the Gopher as
that animal threw out fresh heaps of earth on his way.

At length the Gopher came to the surface underneath the Elk, whose giant
heart was beating like a mighty hammer. He then proceeded to gnaw the
hair from about the heart of the Elk. "What are you doing?" said the
Elk. "I am cutting a few hairs for my little ones; they are now lying on
the bare ground," replied the Gopher, who continued until the magic coat
of the Elk was all cut away from about the heart of the

{p. 102}

Elk. Then he returned to Jonayaíyin, and told the latter to go through
the hole which he had made and shoot the Elk.

Four times the Son of the Sun tried to enter the hole before he
succeeded. When he reached the Elk, he saw the great heart beating above
him, and easily pierced it with his arrows; four times his bow was drawn
before he turned to escape through the tunnel which the Gopher had been
preparing for him. This hole extended far to the eastward, but the Elk
soon discovered it, and thrusting his antler into it, followed in
pursuit. The Elk ploughed up the earth with such violence that the
present mountains were formed, which extend from east to west. The black
spider closed the hole with a strong web, but the Elk broke through it
and ran southward, forming the mountain chains which trend north and
south. In the south the Elk was checked by the web of the blue spider,
in the west by that of the yellow spider, while in the north the web of
the many-colored spider resisted his attacks until he fell dying from
exhaustion and wounds. Jonayaíyin made a coat from the hide of the Elk,
gave the front quarters to the Gopher, the hind quarters to the Lizard,
and carried home the antlers. He found that the results of his
adventures were not unknown to his mother, who had spent the time during
his absence in singing, and watching a roll of cedar bark which sank
into the earth or rose in the air as danger approached or receded from
Jonayaíyin, her son.\[150\]

Jonayaíyin next desired to kill the great Eagle, I-tsa. His mother
directed him to seek the Eagle in the West. In four strides he reached
the home of the Eagle, an inaccessible rock, on which was the nest,
containing two young eaglets. His ear told him to stand facing the east
when the next morning the Eagle swooped down upon him and tried to carry
him off. The talons of the Eagle failed to penetrate the hard elk-skin
by which he was covered. "Turn to the south," said the ear, and again
the Eagle came, and was again unsuccessful. Jonayaíyin faced each of the
four points in this manner, and again faced toward the east; whereupon
the Eagle succeeded in fastening its talons in the lacing on the front
of the coat of the supposed man, who was carried to the nest above and
thrown down before the young eagles, with the invitation to pick his
eyes out. As they were about to do this, Jonayaíyin gave a warning hiss,
at which the young ones cried, "He is living yet." "Oh, no," replied the
old Eagle; "that is only the rush of air

{p. 103}

from his body through the holes made by my talons." Without stopping to
verify this, the Eagle flew away.

Jonayaíyin threw some of the blood of the Elk which he had brought with
him to the young ones, and asked them when their mother returned. "In
the afternoon when it rains," they answered. When the mother Eagle came
with the shower of rain in the afternoon, he stood in readiness with one
of the Elk antlers in his hand. As the bird alighted with a man in her
talons, Jonayaíyin struck her upon the back with the antler, killing her
instantly. Going back to the nest, he asked the young eagles when their
father returned. "Our father comes home when the wind blows and brings
rain just before sunset," they said. The male Eagle came at the
appointed time, carrying a woman with a crying infant upon her back.
Mother and babe were dropped from a height upon the rock and killed.
With the second antler of the Elk, Jonayaíyin avenged their death, and
ended the career of the eagles by striking the Eagle upon the back and
killing him. The wing of this eagle was of enormous size; the bones were
as large as a man's arm; fragments of this wing are still preserved at
Taos. Jonayaíyin struck the young eagles upon the head, saying, "You
shall never grow any larger." Thus deprived of their strength and power
to injure mankind, the eagles relinquished their sovereignty with the
parting curse of rheumatism, which they bestowed upon the human race.

Jonayaíyin could discover no way by which he could descend from the
rock, until at length he saw an old female Bat on the plain below. At
first she pretended not to hear his calls for help; then she flew up
with the inquiry, "How did you get here?" Jonayaíyin told how he had
killed the eagles. "I will give you all the feathers you may desire if
you will help me to escape," concluded he. The old Bat carried her
basket by a slender spider's thread. He was afraid to trust himself in
such a small basket suspended by a thread, but she reassured him,
saying: "I have packed mountain sheep in this basket, and the strap has
never broken. Do not look while we are descending; keep your eyes shut
as tight as you can."\[217\] He began to open his eyes once during the
descent, but she warned him in time to avoid mishap. They went to the
foot of the rock where the old Eagles lay. Jonayaíyin filled her basket
with feathers, but told her not to go out on the plains, where there are
many

{p. 104}

small birds. Forgetting this admonition, she was soon among the small
birds, who robbed the old Bat of all her feathers. This accounts for the
plumage of the small bird klokin, which somewhat resembles the color of
the tail and wing feathers of the bald eagle. The Bat returned four
times for a supply of feathers, but the fifth time she asked to have her
basket filled, Jonayaíyin was vexed. "You cannot take care of your
feathers, so you shall never have any. This old skin on your basket is
good enough for you." "Very well," said the Bat, resignedly, "I deserve
to lose them, for I never could take care of those feathers."

## XLIV. LODGE-BOY AND THROWN-AWAY\[152\]

##### (CROW: Simms, *Field Museum: Anthropological Series*, ii, 303, No. 19)

Once upon a time there lived a couple, the woman being pregnant. The man
went hunting one day, and in his absence a certain wicked woman named
Red-Woman came to the tipi and killed his wife and cut her open and
found boy twins. She threw one behind the tipi curtain, and the other
she threw into a spring. She then put a stick inside the woman and stuck
one end in the ground, to give her the appearance of a live person, and
burned her upper lip, giving her the appearance as though
laughing.\[105\]

When her husband came home, tired from carrying the deer he had killed,
he saw his wife standing near the door of the tipi, looking as though
she were laughing at him, and he said: "I am tired and hungry, why do
you laugh at me?" and pushed her. As she fell backwards, her stomach
opened, and he caught hold of her and discovered she was dead. He knew
at once that Red-Woman had killed his wife.

While the man was eating supper alone one night a voice said, "Father,
give me some of your supper." As no one was in sight, he resumed eating
and again the voice asked for supper. The man said, "Whoever you are,
you may come and eat with me, for I am poor and alone." A young boy came
from behind the curtain, and said his name was
"Thrown-behind-the-Curtain." During the day, while the man went hunting,
the boy stayed home. One day the boy said, "Father, make me two bows and
the arrows for them." His father asked him why he wanted two bows. The
boy said, "I want them to change

{p. 105}

about." His father made them for him, but surmised the boy had other
reasons, and concluded he would watch the boy, and on one day, earlier
than usual, he left his tipi and hid upon a hill overlooking his tipi,
and while there, he saw two boys of about the same age shooting arrows.

That evening when he returned home, he asked his son, "Is there not
another little boy of your age about here?" His son said, "Yes, and he
lives in the spring." His father said, "You should bring him out and
make him live with us." The son said, "I cannot make him, because he has
sharp teeth like an otter, but if you will make me a suit of rawhide, I
will try and catch him."

One day, arrangements were made to catch the boy. The father said, "I
will stay here in the tipi and you tell him I have gone out." So
Thrown-behind-the-Curtain said to Thrown-in-Spring. "Come out and play
arrows." Thrown-in-Spring came out just a little, and said, "I smell
something." Thrown-behind-the-Curtain said, "No, you don't, my father is
not home," and after insisting, Thrown-in-Spring came out, and both boys
began to play. While they were playing, Thrown-behind-the-Curtain
disputed a point of their game, and as Thrown-in-Spring stooped over to
see how close his arrow came, Thrown-behind-the-Curtain grabbed him from
behind and held his arms close to his sides and Thrown-in-Spring turned
and attempted to bite him, but his teeth could not penetrate the rawhide
suit. The father came to the assistance of Thrown-behind-the-Curtain and
the water of the spring rushed out to help Thrown-in-Spring; but
Thrown-in-Spring was dragged to a high hill where the water could not
reach him, and there they burned incense under his nose, and he became
human. The three of them lived together.

One day one of the boys said, "Let us go and wake up mother." They went
to the mother's grave and one said, "Mother, your stone pot is
dropping," and she moved.\[153\] The other boy said, "Mother, your hide
dresser is falling," and she sat up. Then one of them said, "Mother,
your bone crusher is falling," and she began to arrange her hair, which
had begun to fall off. The mother said, "I have been asleep a long
time."\[154\] She accompanied the boys home.

The boys\[155\] were forbidden by their father to go to the river bend
above their tipi;\[156\] for an old woman lived there who had

{p. 106}

a boiling pot, and every time she saw any living object, she tilted the
kettle toward it\[157\] and the object was drawn into the pot and boiled
for her to eat. The boys went one day to see the old woman, and they
found her asleep and they stole up and got her pot and awakened the old
woman and said to her, "Grandmother, why have you this here?" at the
same time tilting the pot towards her, by which she was drowned and
boiled to death. They took the pot home and gave it to their mother for
her own protection.

Their father told them not to disobey him again and said, "There is
something over the hill I do not want you to go near." They were very
anxious to find out what this thing was, and they went over to the hill
and as they poked their heads over the hilltop, the thing began to draw
in air,\[158\] and the boys were drawn in also; and as they went in,
they saw people and animals, some dead and others dying. The thing
proved to be an immense alligator-like serpent. One of the boys touched
the kidneys of the thing and asked what they were. The alligator said,
"That is my medicine, do not touch it." And the boy reached up and
touched its heart and asked what it was, and the serpent grunted and
said, "This is Where I make my plans." One of the boys said, "You do
make plans, do you?" and he cut the heart off and it died.\[159\] They
made their escape by cutting between the ribs and liberated the living
ones and took a piece of the heart home to their father.

After the father had administered another scolding, he told the boys not
to go near the three trees standing in a triangular shaped piece of
ground; for if anything went under them they would bend to the ground
suddenly, killing everything in their way.\[160\] One day the boys went
towards these trees, running swiftly and then stopping suddenly near the
trees, which bent violently and struck the ground without hitting them.
They jumped over the trees, breaking the branches and they could not
rise after the branches were broken.

Once more the boys were scolded and told not to go near a tipi over the
hill; for it was inhabited by snakes, and they would approach anyone
asleep and enter his body through the rectum.\[161\] Again the boys did
as they were told not to do and went to the tipi, and the snakes invited
them in. They went in and carried flat pieces of stone with them and as
they sat down they placed the flat pieces of stones under their rectums.

{p. 107}

After they had been in the tipi a short while, the snakes began putting
their heads over the poles around the fireplace and the snakes began to
relate stories, and one of them said "When there is a drizzling rain,
and when we are under cover, it is nice to sleep."\[162\] One of the
boys said, "When we are lying down under the pine trees and the wind
blows softly through them and has a weird sound, it is nice to sleep."
All but one of the snakes went to sleep, and that one tried to enter the
rectum of each of the boys and failed, on account of the flat stone. The
boys killed all of the other snakes but that one, and they took that one
and rubbed its head against the side of a cliff, and that is the reason
why snakes have flattened heads.\[4\]

Again the boys were scolded by their father, who said, "There is a man
living on the steep cut bank, with deep water under it, and if you go
near it he will push you over the bank into the water for his father in
the water to eat."\[163\] The boys went to the place, but before going,
they fixed their headdresses with dried grass. Upon their arrival at the
edge of the bank, one said to the other, "Just as he is about to push
you over, lie down quickly." The man from his hiding place suddenly
rushed out to push the boys over, and just as he was about to do it, the
boys threw themselves quickly upon the ground, and the man went over
their heads, pulling their headdress with him, and his father in the
water ate him.

Upon the boys' return, and after telling what they had done, their
father scolded them and told them, "There is a man who wears moccasins
of fire,\[164\] and when he wants anything, he goes around it and it is
burned up." The boys ascertained where this man lived and stole upon him
one day when he was sleeping under a tree and each one of the boys took
off a moccasin and put it on and they awoke him and ran about him and he
was burned and went up in smoke. They took the moccasins home.

Their father told them that something would yet happen to them; for they
had killed so many bad things. One day while walking the valley they
were lifted from the earth and after travelling in mid air for some
time, they were placed on top of a peak in a rough high mountain with a
big lake surrounding it and the Thunder-Bird said to them, "I want you
to kill a long otter that lives in the lake; he eats all the young ones
that I produce and I cannot make him stop." So the boys began to make
arrows, and they gathered dry pine sticks and began

{p. 108}

to heat rocks, and the long otter came towards them. As it opened its
mouth the boys shot arrows into it; and as that did not stop it from
drawing nearer, they threw the hot rocks down its throat, and it curled
up and died afterwards. They were taken up and carried through the
air\[145d\] and gently placed upon the ground near their homes, where
they lived for many years.

## XLV. BLOOD-CLOT-BOY\[165\]

##### (BLACKFOOT: Wissler and Duvall, *Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History*, ii, 53)

Once there was an old man and woman whose three daughters married a
young man. The old people lived in a lodge by themselves. The young man
was supposed to hunt buffalo, and feed them all. Early in the morning
the young man invited his father-in-law to go out with him to kill
buffalo. The old man was then directed to drive the buffalo through a
gap where the young man stationed himself to kill them as they went by.
As soon as the buffalo were killed, the young man requested his
father-in-law to go home. He said, "You are old. You need not stay here.
Your daughters can bring you some meat." Now the young man lied to his
father-in-law; for when the meat was brought to his lodge, he ordered
his wives not to give meat to the old folks. Yet one of the daughters
took pity on her parents, and stole meat for them. The way in which she
did this was to take a piece of meat in her robe, and as she went for
water drop it in front of her father's lodge.

Now every morning the young man invited his father-in-law to hunt
buffalo; and, as before, sent him away and refused to permit his
daughters to furnish meat for the old people. On the fourth day, as the
old man was returning, he saw a clot of blood in the trail, and said to
himself, "Here at least is something from which we can make soup." In
order that he might not be seen by his son-in-law, he stumbled, and
spilt the arrows out of his quiver. Now, as he picked up the arrows, he
put the clot of blood into the quiver. Just then the young man came up
and demanded to know what it was he picked up. The old man explained
that he had just stumbled, and was picking up his arrows. So the old man
took the clot of blood home and requested his wife to make blood-soup.
When the pot began to boil, the old woman heard a child crying. She
looked all around,

{p. 109}

but saw nothing. Then she heard it again. This time it seemed to be in
the pot. She looked in quickly, and saw a boy baby:\[166\] so she lifted
the pot from the fire, took the baby out and wrapped it up.

Now the young man, sitting in his lodge, heard a baby crying, and said,
"Well, the old woman must have a baby." Then he sent his oldest wife
over to see the old woman's baby, saying, "If it is a boy, I will kill
it." The woman came into look at the baby, but the old woman told her it
was a girl.\[128\] When the young man heard this, he did not believe it.
So he sent each wife in turn; but they all came back with the same
report. Now the young man was greatly pleased, because he could look
forward to another wife. So he sent over some old bones, that soup might
be made for the baby. Now, all this happened in the morning. That night
the baby spoke to the old man, saying, "You take me up and hold me
against each lodge-pole in succession." So the old man took up the baby,
and, beginning at the door, went around in the direction of the sun, and
each time that he touched a pole the baby became larger.\[112\] When
halfway around, the baby was so heavy that the old man could hold him no
longer. So he put the baby down in the middle of the lodge, and, taking
hold of his head, moved it toward each of the poles in succession, and,
when the last pole was reached, the baby had become a very fine young
man. Then this young man went out, got some black flint \[obsidian\]
and, when he got to the lodge, he said to the old man, "I am the
Smoking-Star. I came down to help you. When I have done this, I shall
return."

Now, when morning came, Blood-Clot (the name his father gave him) arose
and took his father out to hunt. They had not gone very far when they
killed a scabby cow. Then Blood-Clot lay down behind the cow and
requested his father to wait until the son-in-law came to join him. He
also requested that he stand his ground and talk back to the son-in-law.
Now, at the usual time in the morning, the son-in-law called at the
lodge of the old man, but was told that he had gone out to hunt. This
made him very angry, and he struck at the old woman, saying, "I have a
notion to kill you." So the son-in-law went out.

Now Blood-Clot had directed his father to be eating a kidney when the
son-in-law approached. When the son-in-law came up

{p. 110}

and saw all this, he was very angry. He said to the old man, "Now you
shall die for all this." "Well," said the old man, "you must die too,
for all that you have done." Then the son in-law began to shoot arrows
at the old man, and the latter becoming frightened called on Blood-Clot
for help. Then Blood-Clot sprang up and upbraided the son-in-law for his
cruelty. "Oh," said the son-in-law, "I was just fooling." At this
Blood-Clot shot the son-in-law through and through. Then Blood-Clot said
to his father, "We will leave this meat here: it is not good. Your
son-in-law's house is full of dried meat. Which one of your daughters
helped you?" The old man told him that it was the youngest. Then
Blood-Clot went to the lodge, killed the two older women, brought up the
body of the son-in-law, and burned them together. Then he requested the
younger daughter to take care of her old parents, to be kind to them,
etc. "Now," said Blood-Clot, "I shall go to visit the other Indians."

So he started out, and finally came to a camp. He went into the lodge of
some old women, who were very much surprised to see such a fine young
man. They said, "Why do you come here among such old women as we? Why
don't you go where there are young people?" "Well," said Blood-Clot,
"give me some dried meat." Then the old women gave him some meat, but no
fat. "Well," said Blood-Clot, "you did not give me the fat to eat with
my dried meat." "Hush!" said the old women. "You must not speak so loud.
There are bears here that take all the fat and give us the lean, and
they will kill you, if they hear you." "Well," said Blood-Clot, "I will
go out to-morrow, do some butchering, and get some fat." Then he went
out through the camp, telling all the people to make ready in the
morning, for he intended to drive the buffalo over \[the drive\].

Now there were some bears who ruled over this camp. They lived in a
bear-lodge \[painted lodge\], and were very cruel. When Blood-Clot had
driven the buffalo over, he noticed among them a scabby cow. He said, "I
shall save this for the old women." Then the people laughed, and said,
"Do you mean to save that poor old beast? It is too poor to have fat."
However, when it was cut open it was found to be very fat. Now, when the
bears heard the buffalo go over the drive, they as usual sent out two
bears to cut off the best meat, especially all the fat; but Blood-Clot
had already butchered the buffalo,

{p. 111}

putting the fat upon sticks. He hid it as the bears came up. Also he had
heated some stones in a fire. When they told him what they wanted, he
ordered them to go back. Now the bears were very angry, and the chief
bear and his wife came up to fight, but Blood-Clot killed them by
throwing hot stones down their throats.\[167\]

Then he went down to the lodge of the bears and killed all, except one
female who was about to become a mother. She pleaded so pitifully for
her life, that he spared her. If he had not done this, there would have
been no more bears in the world.\[4\] The lodge of the bears was filled
with dried meat and other property. Also all the young women of the camp
were confined there. Blood-Clot gave all the property to the old women,
and set free all the young women. The bears' lodge he gave to the old
women. It was a bear painted lodge.

"Now," said Blood-Clot, "I must go on my travels." He came to a camp and
entered the lodge of some old women. When these women saw what a fine
young man he was, they said, "Why do you come here, among such old
women? Why do you not go where there are younger people?" "Well," said
he, "give me some meat." The old women gave him some dried meat, but no
fat. Then he said, "Why do you not give me some fat with my meat?"
"Hush!" said the women, "you must not speak so loud. There is a
snake-lodge \[painted lodge\] here, and the snakes take everything. They
leave no fat for the people." "Well," said Blood-Clot, "I will go over
to the snake-lodge to eat." "No, you must not do that," said the old
women. "It is dangerous. They will surely kill you." "Well," said he, "I
must have some fat with my meat, even if they do kill me."

Then he entered the snake-lodge. He had his white rock knife ready. Now
the snake, who was the head man in this lodge, had one horn on his head.
He was lying with his head in the lap of a beautiful woman. He was
asleep. By the fire was a bowl of berry-soup ready for the snake when he
should wake. Blood-Clot seized the bowl and drank the soup. Then the
women warned him in whispers, "You must go away: you must not stay
here." But he said, "I want to smoke." So he took out his knife and cut
off the head of the snake, saying as he did so, "Wake up! light a pipe!
I want to smoke." Then with his knife he began to kill all the snakes.
At last there was

{112}

one snake who was about to become a mother, and she pleaded so pitifully
for her life that she was allowed to go. From her descended all the
snakes that are in the world. Now the lodge of the snakes was filled up
with dried meat of every kind, fat, etc. Blood-Clot turned all this over
to the people, the lodge and everything it contained. Then he said, "I
must go away and visit other people."

So he started out. Some old women advised him to keep on the south side
of the road, because it was dangerous the other way. But Blood-Clot paid
no attention to their warning. As he was going along, a great windstorm
struck him and at last carried him into the mouth of a great fish. This
was a sucker-fish and the wind was its sucking. When he got into the
stomach of the fish, he saw a great many people. Many of them were dead,
but some were still alive. He said to the people, "Ah, there must be a
heart somewhere here. We will have a dance." So he painted his face
white, his eyes and mouth with black circles, and tied a white rock
knife on his head, so that the point stuck up. Some rattles made of
hoofs were also brought. Then the people started in to dance. For a
while Blood-Clot sat making wing-motions with his hands, and singing
songs. Then he stood up and danced, jumping up and down until the knife
on his head struck the heart. Then he cut the heart down. Next he cut
through between the ribs of the fish, and let all the people out.\[159\]

Again Blood-Clot said he must go on his travels. Before starting, the
people warned him, saying that after a while he would see a woman who
was always challenging people to wrestle with her, but that he must not
speak to her. He gave no heed to what they said, and, after he had gone
a little way, he saw a woman who called him to come over. "No," said
Blood-Clot. "I am in a hurry." However, at the fourth time the woman
asked him to come over, he said, "Yes, but you must wait a little while,
for I am tired. I wish to rest. When I have rested, I will come over and
wrestle with you." Now, while he was resting, he saw many large knives
sticking up from the ground almost hidden by straw.\[168\] Then he knew
that the woman killed the people she wrestled with by throwing them down
on the knives. When he was rested, he went over. The woman asked him to
stand up in the place where he had seen the knives; but he said, "No, I
am not quite ready. Let

{p. 113}

us play a little, before we begin." So he began to play with the woman,
but quickly caught hold of her, threw her upon the knives, and cut her
in two.

Blood-Clot took up his travels again, and after a while came to a camp
where there were some old women. The old women told him that a little
farther on he would come to a woman with a swing,\[169\] but on no
account must he ride with her. After a time he came to a place where he
saw a swing on the bank of a swift stream. There was a woman swinging on
it. He watched her a while, and saw that she killed people by swinging
them out and dropping them into the water. When he found this out, he
came up to the woman. "You have a swing here; let me see you swing," he
said. "No," said the woman, "I want to see you swing." "Well," said
Blood-Clot, "but you must swing first" "Well,"' said the woman, "Now I
shall swing. Watch me. Then I shall see you do it." So the woman swung
out over the stream. As she did this, he saw how it worked. Then he said
to the woman, "You swing again while I am getting ready"; but as the
woman swung out this time, he cut the vine and let her drop into the
water. This happened on Cut Bank Creek.

"Now," said Blood-Clot, "I have rid the world of all the monsters,\[12\]
I will go back to my old father and mother." So he climbed a high ridge,
and returned to the lodge of the old couple. One day he said to them, "I
shall go back to the place from whence I came. If you find that I have
been killed, you must not be sorry, for then I shall go up into the sky
and become the Smoking-Star." Then he went on and on, until he was
killed by some Crow Indians on the war-path. His body was never found;
but the moment he was killed, the Smoking-Star appeared in the sky,
where we see it now.\[71\]

## XLVI. THE SON-IN-LAW TESTS\[170\]

##### (TIMAGAMI OJIBWA: Speck, *Memoirs of the Geological Survey of Canada: Anthropological Series*, ix, 44)

Wemicus \[the animal-trickster\] had a son-in-law who was a man. This
man's wife, the daughter of Wemicus, had had a great many husbands,
because Wemicus had put them to so many different tests that they had
been all killed off except this one. He, however, had succeeded in
outwitting Wemicus in

{p. 114}

every scheme that he tried on him. Wemicus and this man hunted beaver in
the spring of the year by driving them all day with dogs.

The man's wife warned him\[171\] before they started out to hunt,
saying, "Look out for my father; he might burn your moccasins in camp.
That's what he did to my other husbands." That night in camp Wemicus
said, "I didn't tell you the name of this lake. It is called 'Burnt
moccasins lake.'" When the man heard this, he thought that Wemicus was
up to some sort of mischief and was going to burn his moccasins. Their
moccasins were hanging up before a fire to dry and, while Wemicus was
not looking, the man changed the places of Wemicus' moccasins and his
own, and then went to sleep. Soon the man awoke and saw Wemicus get up
and throw his own moccasins into the fire. Wemicus then said, "Say!
something is burning; it is your moccasins." Then the man answered, "No,
not mine, but yours." So Wemicus had no moccasins, and the ground was
covered with snow. After this had happened the man slept with his
moccasins on.\[172\]

The next morning the man started on and left Wemicus there with no
shoes. Wemicus started to work. He got a big boulder, made a fire, and
placed the boulder in it until it became red hot. He then wrapped his
feet with spruce boughs and pushed the boulder ahead of him in order to
melt the snow. In this way he managed to walk on the boughs. Then he
began to sing, "Spruce is warm, spruce is warm." When the man reached
home be told his wife what had happened. "I hope Wemicus will die," she
said. A little while after this they heard Wemicus coming along singing,
"Spruce is warm, spruce is warm." He came into the wigwam and as he was
the head man, they were obliged to get his meal ready.

The ice was getting bad by this time, so they stayed in camp a while.
Soon Wemicus told his son-in-law, "We'd better go sliding." He then went
to a hill where there were some very poisonous snakes. The man's wife
warned her husband of these snakes and gave him a split stick holding a
certain kind of magic tobacco, which she told him to hold in front of
him so that the snakes would not hurt him. Then the two men went
sliding. At the top of the hill Wemicus said, "Follow me," for he
intended to pass close by the snakes' lair. So when they slid, Wemicus
passed safely and the man held his stick with the

{p. 115}

tobacco in it in front of him, thus preventing the snakes from biting
him. The man then told Wemicus that he enjoyed the sliding.\[173\]

The following day Wemicus said to his son-in-law, "We had better go to
another place." When she heard this, the wife told her husband that, as
it was getting summer, Wemicus had in his head many poisonous lizards
instead of lice. She said, "He will tell you to pick lice from his head
and crack them in your teeth. But take low-bush cranberries and crack
them instead." So the man took cranberries along with him. Wemicus took
his son-in-law to a valley with a great ravine in it. He said, "I wonder
if anybody can jump across this?" "Surely," said the young man, "I can."
Then the young man said, "Closer," and the ravine narrowed and he jumped
across easily. When Wemicus tried, the young man said, "Widen," and
Wemicus fell into the ravine. But it did not kill him, and when he made
his way to the top again, he said, "You have beaten me." Then they went
on.

They came to a place of hot sand and Wemicus said, "You must look for
lice in my head."\[174\] "All right father," replied the son-in-law. So
Wemicus lay down and the man started to pick the lice. He took the
cranberries from inside his shirt and each time he pretended to catch a
louse, he cracked a cranberry and threw it on the ground, and so Wemicus
got fooled a second time that day. Then they went home and Wemicus said
to his son-in-law, "There are a whole lot of eggs on that rocky island
where the gulls are. We will go get the eggs, come back, and have an egg
supper." As Wemicus was the head man, his son-in-law had to obey him.

So they started out in their canoe and soon came to the rocky island.
Wemicus stayed in the canoe and told the man to go ashore and to bring
the eggs back with him and fill the canoe. When the man reached the
shore, Wemicus told him to go farther back on the island,\[175\] saying,
"That's where the former husbands got their eggs, there are their
bones." He then started the canoe off in the water by singing, without
using his paddle.\[14a\] Then Wemicus told the gulls to eat the man,
saying to them, "I give you him to eat." The gulls started to fly about
the man, but the man had his paddle with him and he killed one of the
gulls with it. He then took the gulls' wings and fastened them on
himself, filled his shirt with eggs, and started flying over the lake by
the aid of the wings.\[176\]

{p. 116}

When he reached the middle of the lake, he saw Wemicus going along and
singing to himself. Wemicus, looking up, saw his son-in-law but mistook
him for a gull. The man flew back to camp and told his wife to cook the
eggs, and he told his children to play with the wings. When Wemicus
reached the camp, he saw the children playing with the wings and said,
"Where did you get those wings?" "From father," was the reply. "Your
father? Why the gulls ate him!" Then he went to the wigwam and there he
saw the man smoking. Then Wemicus thought it very strange how the man
could have gotten home, but no one told him how it had been done.
Thought he, "I must try another scheme to do away with him."

One day Wemicus said to his son-in-law, "We'd better make two canoes of
birch-bark, one for you and one for me. We'd better get bark." So they
started off for birch-bark. They cut a tree almost through and Wemicus
said to his son-in-law, "You sit on that side and I'll sit on this." He
wanted the tree to fall on him and kill him. Wemicus said, "You say,
'Fall on my father-in-law,' and I'll say, 'Fall on my son-in-law,' and
whoever says it too slowly or makes a mistake will be the one on whom it
will fall." But Wemicus made the first mistake, and the tree fell on him
and crushed him. However, Wemicus was a manitu and was not hurt. They
went home with the bark and made the two canoes. After they were made,
Wemicus said to his son-in-law, "Well, we'll have a race in our two
canoes, a sailing race." Wemicus made a big bark sail, but the man did
not make any, as he was afraid of upsetting. They started the race.
Wemicus went very fast and the man called after him, "Oh, you are
beating me." He kept on fooling and encouraging Wemicus, until the wind
upset Wemicus' canoe and that was the end of Wemicus. When the man
sailed over the spot where Wemicus had upset, he saw a big pike there,
into which Wemicus had been transformed when the canoe upset. This is
the origin of the pike.\[4\]

## XLVII. THE JEALOUS FATHER\[177\]

##### (CREE: Skinner, *Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History*, ix, 92)

Once there was an old man named Aioswé who had two wives. When his son
by one of these women began to grow up, Aioswé

{p. 117}

became jealous of him. One day, he went off to hunt and when he came
back, found marks on one of the women (the co-wife with his son's
mother) which proved to him that his son had been on terms of intimacy
with her.\[178\]

One day the old man and the boy went to a rocky island to hunt for
eggs.\[175\] Wishing to get rid of his son, the old man persuaded him to
gather eggs farther and farther away from the shore. The young man did
not suspect anything until he looked up and saw his father paddling off
in the canoe. "Why are you deserting me, father? "he cried. "Because you
have played tricks on your stepmother," answered the old man.

When the boy found that he was really left behind, he sat there crying
hour after hour. At last, Walrus appeared. He came near the island and
stuck his head above the water. "What are you crying for, my son?" said
Walrus. "My father has deserted me on this island and I want to get home
to the mainland. Will you not help me to get ashore?" the boy replied.
Walrus said that he would do so willingly.\[179\] "Get on my back," said
Walrus, "and I will take you to the mainland." Then Walrus asked
Aioswé's son if the sky was clear. The boy replied that it was, but this
was a lie, for he saw many clouds. Aioswé's son said this because he was
afraid that Walrus would desert him if he knew it was cloudy. Walrus
said, "If you think I am not going fast enough, strike on my horns
\[tusks\] and let me know when you think it is shallow enough for you to
get ashore, then you can jump off my back and walk to the land."

As they went along, Walrus said to the boy, "Now my son, you must let me
know if you hear it thunder, because as soon as it thunders, I must go
right under the water." The boy promised to let Walrus know. They had
not gone far, when there came a peal of thunder. Walrus said, "My son, I
hear thunder." "Oh, no, you are mistaken," said the boy who feared to be
drowned, "what you think is thunder is only the noise your body makes
going so quickly through the water." Walrus believed the boy and thought
he must have been wrong. Some time later, there came another peal of
thunder and this time, Walrus knew he was not mistaken, he was sure it
was thunder. He was very angry and said he would drop Aioswé's son
there, whether the water was shallow or not. He did so but the lad had
duped Walrus with his lies so that he came

{p. 117}

where the water was very shallow and the boy escaped, but Walrus was
killed by lightning before he could reach water deep enough to dive in.
This thunderstorm was sent to destroy Walrus by Aioswé's father, who
conjured for it. Walrus, on the other hand, was the result of conjuring
by his mother, who wished to save her son's life.\[182\]

When Aioswé's son reached the shore, he started for home, but he had not
gone far before he met an old woman,\[180\] who had been sent as the
result of a wish for his safety by his mother (or was a wish for his
safety on his mother's part, personified). The old woman instructed the
lad how to conduct himself if he ever expected to reach his home and
mother again. "Now you have come ashore there is still a lot of trouble
for you to go through before you reach home," said she, and she gave him
the stuffed skin of an ermine (weasel in white winter coat). "This will
be one of your weapons to use to protect yourself," were her words as
she tendered him this gift, and she told him what dangers he would
encounter and what to do in each case.

Then the son of Aioswé started for his home once more. As he journeyed
through the forest he came upon a solitary wigwam inhabited by two old
blind hags, who were the result of an adverse conjuration by his father.
Both of these old women had sharp bones like)daggers; protruding from
the lower arm at the elbow."\[181\] They were very savage and used to
kill everybody they met. When Aioswé's son approached the tent, although
the witches could not see him, they knew from their magic powers that he
was near. They asked him to come in and sit down, but he was suspicious,
for he did not like the looks of their elbows.

He thought of a plan by which he might dupe the old women into killing
each other. Instead of going himself and sitting between them he got a
large parchment and fixing it to the end of a pole, he poked it in
between them. The old women heard it rattle and thought it was the boy
himself coming to sit between them. Then they both turned their backs to
the skin and began to hit away at it with their elbows. Every time they
stabbed the skin, they cried out, " I am hitting the son of Aioswé! I've
hit him! I've hit him!" At last, they got so near each other that they
began to hit one another, calling out all the time, "I am hitting the
son of Aioswé!" They finally

{p. 119}

stabbed each other to death and the son of Aioswé escaped this danger
also.

When the young man had vanquished the two old women he proceeded on his
journey. He had not gone very far when he came to a row of dried human
bones hung across the path so that no one could pass by without making
them rattle. Not far away, there was a tent full of people and big dogs.
Whenever they heard anyone disturb the bones, they would set upon him
and kill him. The old woman who had advised Aioswé's son told him that
when he came to this place he could escape by digging a tunnel in the
path under the bones. When he arrived at the spot he began to follow her
advice and burrow under. He was careless and when he was very nearly
done and completely out of sight, he managed to rattle the bones. At
once, the dogs heard and they cried out, "That must be Aioswé's son."
All the people ran out at once, but since Aioswé's son was under ground
in the tunnel they could not see him, so after they had searched for a
while they returned. The dogs said, "We are sure this is the son of
Aioswé," and they continued to search.

At length, they found the mouth of the hole Aioswé's son had dug. The
dogs came to the edge and began to bark till all the people ran out
again with their weapons. Then Aioswé's son took the stuffed ermine skin
and poked its head up. All the people saw it and thought it was really
ermine. Then they were angry and killed the dogs for lying.

Aioswé's son escaped again and this time he got home. When he drew near
his father's wigwam, he could hear his mother crying, and as he
approached still closer he saw her. She looked up and saw him coming.
She cried out to her husband and co-wife, "My son has come home again."
The old man did not believe it. "It is not possible," he cried. But his
wife insisted on it. Then the old man came out and when he saw it was
really his son, he was very much frightened for his own safety. He
called out to his other wife, "Bring some caribou skins and spread them
out for my son to walk on." But the boy kicked them away. "I have come a
long way," said he, "with only my bare feet to walk on."

That night, the boy sang a song about the burning of the world and the
old man sang against him but he was not strong enough. "I am going to
set the world on fire," said the boy to his father, "I shall make all
the lakes and rivers boil." {p. 120} He took up an arrow and said, "I am
going to shoot this arrow into the woods; see if I don't set them on
fire." He shot his arrow into the bush and a great blaze sprang up and
all the woods began to burn.

"The forest is now on fire," said the old man, "but the water is not yet
burning." "I'll show you how I can make the water boil also," said his
son. He shot another arrow into the water, and it immediately began to
boil. Then the old man who wished to escape said to his son, "How shall
we escape?" The old man had been a great bear hunter and had a large
quantity of bear's grease preserved in a bark basket. "Go into your fat
basket," said his son, "you will be perfectly safe there." Then he drew
a circle on the ground and placed his mother there. The ground enclosed
by the circle was not even scorched, but the wicked old man who had
believed he would be safe in the grease baskets, was burned to death.

Aioswé's son said to his mother, "Let us become birds. What will you
be?" "I'll be a robin," said she. "I'll be a whisky jack (Canada jay),"
he replied. They flew off together.\[4\]

## XLVIII. DIRTY-BOY\[183\]

##### (OKANAGON: Teit, *Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society*, xi, 85, No. 6)

The people of a certain region were living together in a very large
camp. Their chief had two beautiful daughters of marriageable age. Many
young men had proposed to them, but all had been refused. The chief
said, "Whom do my daughters wish to marry? They have refused all the
men." Sun and Star, who were brother and sister,\[184\] lived in the
sky, and had seen all that had happened. Sun said to his sister, "The
chief's daughters have rejected the suits of all our friends. Let us go
down and arrange this matter! Let us try these girls!" They made
clothes, and at night they descended to earth.

During the darkness they erected a lodge on the outskirts of the camp.
It had the appearance of being very old, and of belonging to poor
people. The poles were old and badly selected. The covering was tattered
and patched, and made of tule mats. The floor was strewn with old dried
brush and grass, and the beds were of the same material. Their blankets
consisted of old mats and pieces of old robes; and their kettles and
cups

{p. 121}

were of bark, poorly made. Star had assumed the form of a decrepit old
woman dressed in rags; and Sun, that of a dirty boy with sore
eyes.\[185\]

On the following morning the women of the camp saw the lodge, and peered
in. When they returned, they reported, "Some very poor people arrived
during the night, and are camped in an old mat lodge. We saw two persons
inside,--a dirty, sore-eyed boy; and his grandmother, a very old woman
in ragged clothes."

Now, the chief resolved to find husbands for his daughters. He sent out
his speaker to announce that in four days there would be a
shooting-contest\[142\] open to all the men, and the best marksman would
get his daughters for wives.\[186\] The young men could not sleep for
eagerness. On the third day the chief's speaker announced, "To-morrow
morning every one shall shoot. Each one will have two shots. An eagle
will perch on the tall tree yonder; and whoever kills it shall have the
chief's daughters." Coyote was there and felt happy. He thought he would
win the prize. On the following morning an eagle was seen soaring in the
air, and there was much excitement as it began to descend. It alighted
on a tree which grew near one end of the camp. Then the young men tried
to shoot it. Each man had two arrows. The previous evening Sun had said
to Star, "Grandmother, make a bow and arrows for me." She said, "What is
the use? You cannot shoot. You never used bow and arrows." He replied,
"I am going to try. I shall take part in the contest to-morrow. I heard
what the chief said." She took pity on him, and went to a red
willow-bush, cut a branch for a bow, and some twigs for arrows. She
strung the bow with a poor string, and did not feather the arrows.

Coyote, who was afraid some one else might hit the bird, shouted, "I
will shoot first. Watch me hit the eagle." His arrow struck the lowest
branch of the tree and fell down, and the people laughed. He said, "I
made a mistake. That was a bad arrow. This one will kill the eagle." He
shot, and the arrow fell short of the first one. He became angry, and
pulled other arrows from his quiver. He wanted to shoot them all. The
people seized him, and took away his arrows, saying, "You are allowed to
shoot twice only." All the people shot and missed. When the last one had
shot, Sun said, "Grandmother, lift the door of the lodge a little, so
that I can shoot." She said,

{p. 122}

"First get out of bed." She pulled the lodge mat aside a little, and he
shot. The arrow hit the tail of the eagle. The people saw and heard the
arrow coming from Dirty-Boy's lodge, but saw no one shooting it. They
wondered. He shot the second arrow, which pierced the eagle's heart.

Now, Wolf and others were standing near Dirty-Boy's lodge, and Wolf
desired much to claim the prize. He shouted, "I shot the bird from the
lodge-door!" and ran to pick it up; but the old woman Star ran faster
than he, picked up the bird, and carried it to the chief. She claimed
his daughters for her grandson. All the people gathered around, and made
fun of Dirty-Boy. They said, "He is bedridden. He is lousy, sore-eyed,
and scabby-faced." The chief was loath to give his daughters to such a
person. He knew that Dirty-Boy could not walk. Therefore he said ,
"To-morrow there shall be another contest. This will be the last one, I
cannot break my word. Whoever wins this time shall have my daughters."

He announced that on the morrow each man should set two traps for
fishers an animal very scarce at the place where the camp was located.
If any one should catch a fisher one night, then he was to stay in the
mountains another day to catch a second one. After that he had to come
back. Those who caught nothing the first night had to come home at once.
Only two traps were allowed to each man; and two fishers had to be
caught,--one a light one, and one a dark one,--and both prime skins.
When all the men had gone to the mountains, Sun said to his sister,
"Grandmother, make two traps for me." She answered, "First get out of
bed!" However, she had pity on him, and made two deadfalls of willow
sticks. She asked him where she should set them; and he said, "One on
each side of the lodge-door."

On the following morning all the men returned by noon; not one of them
had caught a fisher. When Star went out, she found two fine fishers in
the traps. Now the chief assembled the men to see if any one had caught
the fishers. He was glad, because he knew that Dirty-Boy could not walk;
and unless he went to the mountains, he had no chance to kill fishers.
Just then the old grandmother appeared, dragging the fishers. She said,
"I hear you asked for two fishers; here are two that my grandson
caught." She handed them over to him, and then left.

{p. 123}

Coyote had boasted that he would certainly catch the fishers. When he
went up the mountain, he carried ten traps instead of two. He said,
"Whoever heard of setting only two traps? I shall set ten." He set them
all, remained out two nights, but got nothing.

The chief said to his daughters, "You must become the wives of
Dirty-Boy. I tried to save you by having two contests; but since I am a
great chief, I cannot break my word. Go now, and take up your abode with
your husband." They put on their best clothes and went. On the way they
had to pass Raven's house, and heard the Ravens laughing inside, be
cause the girls had to marry Dirty-Boy. The elder sister said, "Let us
go in and-see what they are laughing about!" The younger one said, "No,
our father told us to go straight to our husband." The elder one went
in, and sat down beside Raven's eldest son. She became his wife. Like
all the other Ravens, he was ugly, and had a big head; but she thought
it better to marry him than to become the wife of a dirty, sickly boy.

The younger one went on, entered Dirty-Boy's lodge, and sat down by his
side. The old woman asked her who she was, and why she had come. When
the old woman had been told, she said, "Your husband is sick, and soon
he will die. He stinks too much. You must not sleep with him. Go back to
your father's lodge every evening; but come here in the daytime, and
watch him and attend him."

Now, the Raven family that lived close by laughed much at the younger
daughter of the chief. They were angry because she had not entered their
house and married there, as her elder sister had done. To hurt her
feelings, they dressed their new daughter-in-law in the finest clothes
they had. Her dress was covered with beads, shells, elk's teeth, and
quill-work. They gave her necklaces, and her mother-in-law gave her a
finely polished celt of green stone (jade) to hang at her belt. The
younger sister paid no attention to this, but returned every morning to
help her grandmother-in-law to gather fire-wood, and to attend to her
sick husband.

For three days matters remained this way. In the evening of the third
day Sun said to his sister, "We will resume our true forms to-night, so
that people may see us to-morrow." That night they transformed
themselves."\[188\] The old mat lodge became a fine new skin lodge,
surpassing those of the Blackfeet

{p. 124}

and other tribes, richly decorated with ornaments, and with streamers
tied to the top and painted. The old bark kettle became a bright copper
kettle; and new pretty woven baskets, and embroidered and painted bags,
were in the house. The old woman became a fine-looking person of tall
figure, with clothes covered with shining stars. Dirty-Boy became a
young, handsome man of light complexion. His clothes were covered with
shining copper. His hair reached to the ground and shone like the rays
of the sun. In the morning the people saw the new lodge, and said, "Some
rich chief has arrived, and has camped where the poor people were. He
has thrown them out."

When the girl arrived, she was much surprised to see the transformation.
She saw a woman in the door, wearing a long skin dress covered with star
pendants, with bright stars in her hair. She addressed her in a familiar
voice, saying, "Come in and sit with your husband!" The girl then knew
who she was. When she entered, she saw a handsome man reclining, with
his head on a beautiful parfleche. His garments and hair were decorated
with bright suns. The girl did not recognize him, and looked around. The
woman said, "That is your husband; go and sit beside him." Then she was
glad.

Sun took his wife to the copper kettle which stood at the door. It
contained a shining liquid. He pushed her head into it, and when the
liquid ran down over her hair and body, lines of sparkling small stars
formed on her. He told her to empty the kettle. When she did so, the
liquid ran to the chief's lodge, forming a path, as of gold-dust. He
said, "This will be your trail when you go to see your father."

## XLIX. THE FALSE BRIDEGROOM\[189\]

##### (GROS VENTRE: Kroeber, *Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History*, i, 108, No. 28)

There were two girls, sisters. The older sister said, "We will go to
look for Shell-Spitter." There was a man who was poor and who lived
alone with his old mother. He was the Loon and his mother was
Badger-Woman. He heard that two girls were looking for Shell-Spitter. He
went to the children of the camp, and took their shells away from them.
The girls arrived, and asked for Shell-Spitter's tent. It was shown
them, and they went to it. There stood the Loon. "What are you girls
looking

{p. 125}

for?" he said. "We are looking for Shell-Spitter." "I am he." "Let us
see you spit shells."

He had filled his mouth with shells, and now spit them out. The two
girls stooped, and hastily picked them up, each trying to snatch them
before the other. Then he took them to his tent. His tent was old and
poor. His mother was gray-headed. He said to them, "I have another tent.
It is fine and large. I have brought you here because there is more room
to sleep." The girls went inside.

Soon some one called to the Loon, "Come over! they are making the
sun-dance!" "Oh!" he said. "Now I have to sit in the middle again, and
give away presents. I am tired of it. For once they ought to get some
one else. I am to sit on the chief's bed in the middle of the lodge."

He told his mother, "Do not let these women go out." Then he went out,
and the old woman guarded the door. When she was asleep, one of the
girls said, "I will go out to look." She stepped over the old woman, and
went to the dance-lodge. Looking in, she saw the people dancing on the
Loon's rump. On the bed in the middle sat a fine man. Whenever he spit,
he spit shells.\[190\] The ground all around him was covered with them.

Then the girl went back, and called to her sister, "Come out! They are
dancing on this man; but the one who spits shells sits in the middle of
the lodge." Then they both went to the lodge. They went inside and sat
down behind Shell-Spitter.

Then the man on the ground, on whom the people were dancing, saw them.
He jumped up. He killed Shell-Spitter, and ran out. He said to his
mother, "I told you to watch, and not to let those women out." Then he
told her, "Dig a hole quickly!" She quickly dug a hole inside the tent.
He entered it, and then she followed him. The people came, but could do
nothing. When they stopped trying to shoot, Badger-Woman came out of the
hole, singing in ridicule of Shell-Spitter's death. Before the people
could reach her she dropped into the hole again. She did this
repeatedly.\[191\]
