[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac002)  [Next](ac004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="101.">101.</span></span>

That the Lord is the "east" also appears from the Word, as in Ezekiel:
He brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh the way of the
east, and behold the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the
east; and His voice was as the voice of many waters, and the earth shone
with His glory (Ezek. 43:1-2, 4). It was in consequence of the Lord's
being the "east" that a holy custom prevailed in the representative
Jewish Church, before the building of the temple, of turning their faces
toward the east when they prayed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="102.">102.</span></span>

Verse 9. And out of the ground made Jehovah God to grow every tree
desirable to behold, and good for food; the tree of lives also, in the
midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge \[scientiae\] of good
and evil. A "tree" signifies perception; a "tree desirable to behold"
the perception of truth; a "tree good for food" the perception of good;
the "tree of lives" love and the faith thence derived; the "tree of the
knowledge of good and evil" faith derived from what is sensuous, that
is, from mere memory-knowledge \[scientia\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="103.">103.</span></span>

The reason why "trees" here signify perceptions is that the celestial
man is treated of, but it is otherwise when the subject is the spiritual
man, for on the nature of the subject depends that of the predicate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="104.">104.</span></span>

At this day it is unknown what Perception is. It is a certain internal
sensation from the Lord alone, as to whether a thing is true and good;
and it was very well known to the Most Ancient church. This perception
is so perfect with the angels, that by it they are aware and have
knowledge of what is true and good; of what is from the Lord, and what
from themselves; and also of the quality of anyone who comes to them,
merely from his approach, and from a single one of his ideas. The
spiritual man has no perception, but has conscience. A dead man has not
even conscience; and very many do not know what conscience is, and still
less what perception is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="105.">105.</span></span>

The "tree of lives" is love and the faith thence derived; "in the midst
of the garden" is in the will of the internal man. The will, which in
the Word is called the "heart" is the primary possession of the Lord
with man and angel. But as no one can do good of himself, the will or
heart is not man's, although it is predicated of man; cupidity, which he
calls will, is man's. Since then the will is the "midst of the garden"
where the tree of lives is placed, and man has no will, but mere
cupidity, the "tree of lives" is the mercy of the Lord, from whom comes
all love and faith, consequently all life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="106.">106.</span></span>

But the nature of the "tree of the garden" or perception; of the "tree
of lives" or love and the faith thence derived; and of the "tree of
knowledge" or faith originating in what is sensuous and in mere
memory-knowledge, will be shown in the following pages.

<span class="margnote"><span id="107.">107.</span></span>

Verse 10. And a river went out of Eden, to water the garden, and from
thence it was parted, and was into four heads. A "river out of Eden"
signifies wisdom from love, for "Eden" is love; "to water the garden" is
to bestow intelligence; to be "thence parted into four heads" is a
description of intelligence by means of the four rivers, as follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="108.">108.</span></span>

The most ancient people, when comparing man to a "garden" also compared
wisdom, and the things relating to wisdom, to "rivers;" nor did they
merely compare them, but actually so called them, for such was their way
of speaking. It was the same afterwards in the Prophets, who sometimes
compared them, and sometimes called them so. As in Isaiah: Thy light
shall arise in darkness, and thy thick darkness shall be as the light of
day, and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like an outlet of
waters, whose waters lie not (Isa. 58:10-11). Treating of those who
receive faith and love. Again, speaking of the regenerate: As the
valleys are they planted, as gardens by the river's side; as
lignaloes <span id="fr_4"></span>[108-1](#fn_4) which Jehovah hath
planted, as cedar-trees beside the waters (Num. 24:6). In Jeremiah:
Blessed is the man who trusteth in Jehovah; he shall be as a tree
planted by the waters, and that sendeth forth her roots by the river
(Jer. 17:7-8). In Ezekiel the regenerate are not compared to a garden
and a tree, but are so called: The waters made her to grow, the deep of
waters uplifted her, the river ran round about her plant, and sent out
its channels to all the trees of the field; she was made beautiful in
her greatness, in the length of her branches, for her root was by many
waters. The cedars in the garden of God did not hide her; the fir-trees
were not like her boughs, and the plane-trees were not like her
branches, nor was any tree in the garden of God equal to her in her
beauty; I have made her beautiful by the multitude of her branches, and
all the trees of Eden that were in the garden of God envied her (Ezek.
31:4, 7-9). From these passages it is evident that when the most ancient
people compared man, or the things in man, to a "garden" they added the
"waters" and "rivers" by which he might be watered, and by these waters
and rivers meant such things as would cause his growth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="109.">109.</span></span>

That although wisdom and intelligence appear in man, they are, as has
been said, of the Lord alone, is plainly declared in Ezekiel by means of
similar representatives: Behold, waters issued out from under the
threshold of the house eastward; for the face of the house is the east;
and he said, These waters issue out to the border toward the east, and
go down into the plain, and come to the sea, which being led into the
sea, the waters shall be healed; and it shall come to pass that every
living soul which creepeth, whithersoever the water of the rivers shall
come, shall live. And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side
and on that side, there come up all trees for food, whose leaf shall not
fade, neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed; it is born again in
its months, because these its waters issue out of the sanctuary, and the
fruit thereof shall be for food, and the leaf thereof for medicine
(Ezek. 47:1, 8-9, 12). Here the Lord is signified by the "east" and by
the "sanctuary" whence the waters and rivers issued. In like manner in
John: He showed me a pure river of water of life, bright as crystal,
going forth out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. In the midst of
the street thereof, and of the river on this side and that, was the tree
of life, which bare twelve \[manner of\] fruits, and yielded her fruit
every month; and the leaf of the tree was for the healing of the nations
(Rev. 22:1-2).

<span class="margnote"><span id="110.">110.</span></span>

Verses 11, 12. The name of the first is Pishon; that is it which
compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold; and the gold
of that land is good; there is bdellium and the onyx stone. The "first"
river, or "Pishon" signifies the intelligence of the faith that is from
love; "the land of Havilah" signifies the mind; "gold" signifies good;
"bdellium and the onyx stone" truth. "Gold" is mentioned twice because
it signifies the good of love and the good of faith from love; and
"bdellium and the onyx stone" are mentioned because the one signifies
the truth of love, and the other the truth of faith from love. Such is
the celestial man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="111.">111.</span></span>

It is however a very difficult matter to describe these things as they
are in the internal sense, for at the present day no one knows what is
meant by faith from love, and what by the wisdom and intelligence thence
derived. For external men scarcely know of anything but memory-knowledge
\[scientia\], which they call intelligence and wisdom, and faith. They
do not even know what love is, and many do not know what the will and
understanding are, and that they constitute one mind. And yet each of
these things is distinct, yea, most distinct, and the universal heaven
is ordinated by the Lord in the most distinct manner according to the
differences of love and faith, which are innumerable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="112.">112.</span></span>

Be it known moreover that there is no wisdom which is not from love,
thus from the Lord; nor any intelligence except from faith, thus also
from the Lord; and that there is no good except from love, thus from the
Lord; and no truth except from faith, thus from the Lord. What are not
from love and faith, and thus from the Lord, are indeed called by these
names, but they are spurious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="113.">113.</span></span>

Nothing is more common in the Word than for the good of wisdom or of
love to be signified and represented by "gold." All the gold in the ark,
in the temple, in the golden table, in the candlestick, in the vessels,
and upon the garments of Aaron, signified and represented the good of
wisdom or of love. So also in the Prophets, as in Ezekiel: In thy wisdom
and in thine intelligence thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten
gold and silver in thy treasures (Ezek. 18:4), where it is plainly said
that from wisdom and intelligence are "gold and silver" or the good and
the true, for " silver here signifies truth, as it does also in the ark
and in the temple. In Isaiah: The multitude of camels shall cover thee,
the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come,
they shall bring gold and incense, and they shall show forth the praises
of Jehovah (Isa. 60:6). Thus also: The wise men from the east, who came
to Jesus when He was born, fell down and worshiped Him; and when they
had opened their treasures, they presented unto Him gifts; gold, and
frankincense, and myrrh (Matt. 2:1, 11). Here also "gold" signifies
good; "frankincense and myrrh" things that are grateful because from
love and faith, and which are therefore called "the praises of Jehovah."
Wherefore it is said in David: He shall live, and to him shall be given
of the gold of Sheba; prayer also shall be made for him continually, and
every day shall He bless him (Ps. 72:15).

<span class="margnote"><span id="114.">114.</span></span>

The truth of faith is signified and represented in the Word by precious
"stones" as by those in the breast-plate of judgment, and on the
shoulders of Aaron's ephod. In the breast-plate, "gold, blue, bright
crimson, scarlet double-dyed, and fine-twined linen" represented such
things as are of love, and the precious "stones" such as are of faith
from love; as did likewise the two "stones of memorial" on the shoulders
of the ephod, which were onyx stones, set in ouches of gold (Exod.
28:9-22). This signification of precious stones is also plain from
Ezekiel, where, speaking of a man possessed of heavenly riches, which
are wisdom and intelligence, it is said: Full of wisdom, and perfect in
beauty, thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone
was thy covering, the ruby, the topaz, the diamond, the beryl, the onyx,
and the jasper; the sapphire, the chrysoprase, the emerald, and gold;
the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was in thee; in the day
that thou wast created they were prepared; thou wast perfect in thy ways
from the day that thou wast created (Ezek. 28:12, 13, 15), which words
it must be evident to everyone do not signify stones, but the celestial
and spiritual things of faith; yea, each stone represented some
essential of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="115.">115.</span></span>

When the most ancient people spoke of "lands" they understood what was
signified by them, just as those at the present day who have an idea
that the land of Canaan and Mount Zion signify heaven, do not so much as
think of any land or mountain when these places are mentioned, but only
of the things which they signify. It is so here with the "land of
Havilah" which is mentioned again in Genesis 25:18, where it is said of
the sons of Ishmael, that they "dwelt from Havilah even unto Shur, which
is before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria." Those who are in a
heavenly idea perceive from these words nothing but intelligence, and
what flows from intelligence. So by to "compass"-as where it is said
that the river Pishon "compasseth the whole land of Havilah"-they
perceive a flowing in; as also in the onyx stones on the shoulders of
Aaron's ephod being encompassed with ouches of gold (Exod. 28:11), they
perceive that the good of love should inflow into the truth of faith.
And so in many other instances.

<span class="margnote"><span id="116.">116.</span></span>

Verse 13. And the name of the second river is Gihon; the same is it that
compasseth the whole land of Cush. The "second river" which is called
"Gihon" signifies the knowledge \[cognitio\] of all things that belong
to the good and the true, or to love and faith, and the "land of Cush"
signifies the mind or faculty. The mind is constituted of the will and
the understanding; and what is said of the first river has reference to
the will, and what of this one to the understanding to which belong the
knowledges \[cognitiones\] of good and of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="117.">117.</span></span>

The "land of Cush" or Ethiopia, moreover, abounded in gold, precious
stones, and spices, which, as before said, signify good, truth, and the
things thence derived which are grateful, such as are those of the
knowledges of love and faith. This is evident from the passages above
cited (n. 113) from Isa. 60:6; Matt. 2:1, 11; Ps. 72:15. That similar
things are meant in the Word by "Cush" or "Ethiopia" and also by "Sheba"
is evident from the Prophets, as in Zephaniah, where also the "rivers of
Cush" are mentioned: In the morning He will give His judgment for light;
for then will I turn to the people with a clear language, that they may
all call upon the name of Jehovah, to serve Him with one shoulder; from
the passage of the rivers of Cush My suppliants shall bring Mine
offering (Zeph. 3:5, 9-10). And in Daniel, speaking of the king of the
north and of the south: He shall have power over the treasures of gold
and of silver, and over all the desirable things of Egypt; and the
Lybians and the Ethiopians shall be under his steps (Dan. 11:43), where
"Egypt" denotes memory-knowledges \[scientifica\], and the "Ethiopians"
knowledges \[cognitiones\]. \[2\] So in Ezekiel: The merchants of Sheba
and Raamah, these were thy merchants, in the chief of all spices, and in
every precious stone, and in gold (Ezek. 27:22), by whom in like manner
are signified knowledges \[cognitiones\] of faith. So in David, speaking
of the Lord, consequently of the celestial man: In his days shall the
righteous flourish, and abundance of peace until there shall be no moon;
the kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents; the kings
of Sheba and Seba shall offer a gift (Ps. 72:7, 10).These words, as is
plain from their connection with the preceding and subsequent verses,
signify celestial things of faith. Similar things were signified by the
queen of Sheba, who came to Solomon, and proposed hard questions, and
brought him spices, gold, and precious stones (1 Kings 10:1-2). For all
things contained in the historical parts of the Word, as well as in the
Prophets, signify, represent, and involve arcana.

<span class="margnote"><span id="118.">118.</span></span>

Verse 14. And the name of the third river is Hiddekel; that is it which
goeth eastward toward Asshur; and the fourth river it is Phrath. The
"river Hiddekel" is reason, or the clearsightedness of reason. "Asshur"
is the rational mind; the "river which goeth eastward toward Asshur"
signifies that the clearsightedness of reason comes from the Lord
through the internal man into the rational mind, which is of the
external man; "Phrath" or Euphrates, is memory-knowledge \[scientia\],
which is the ultimate or boundary.

<span class="margnote"><span id="119.">119.</span></span>

That "Asshur" signifies the rational mind, or the rational of man, is
very evident in the Prophets, as in Ezekiel: Behold, Asshur was a cedar
in Lebanon, with fair branches and a shady grove, and lofty in height;
and her offshoot was among the thick boughs. The waters made her grow,
the deep of waters uplifted her, the river ran round about her plant
(Ezek. 31:3-4). The rational is called a "cedar in Lebanon;" the
"offshoot among the thick boughs" signifies the knowledges of the
memory, which are in this very plight. This is still clearer in Isaiah:
In that day shall there be a path from Egypt to Asshur, and Asshur shall
come into Egypt, and Egypt into Asshur, and the Egyptians shall serve
Asshur. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with
Asshur, a blessing in the midst of the land, that Jehovah Zebaoth shall
bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt My people, and Asshur the work of My
hands, and Israel Mine inheritance (Isa. 19:23-25). By "Egypt" in this
and various other passages is signified memory-knowledges, by "Asshur"
reason, and by "Israel" intelligence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="120.">120.</span></span>

As by "Egypt" so also by "Euphrates" are signified memory-knowledges
\[scientiae seu scientifica\], and also the sensuous things from which
these knowledges come. This is evident from the Word in the Prophets, as
in Micah: My she-enemy hath said, Where is Jehovah thy God? The day in
which He shall build thy walls \[macerias\], that day shall the decree
be far removed; that day also He shall come even to thee from Asshur,
and to the cities of Egypt, and to the river \[Euphrates\] (Micah
7:10-12). So did the prophets speak concerning the coming of the Lord
who should regenerate man so that he might become like the celestial
man. In Jeremiah: What hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the
waters of Sihor? Or what hast thou to do in the way of Asshur, to drink
the waters of the river \[Euphrates\]? (Jer. 2:18), where "Egypt" and
"Euphrates" likewise signify memory-knowledges, and "Asshur" reasonings
thence derived. In David: Thou hast made a vine to go forth out of
Egypt; Thou hast cast out the nations; Thou hast planted her; Thou hast
sent out her shoots even to the sea, and her twigs to the river
(Euphrates) (Ps. 80:8, 11), where also the "river Euphrates" signifies
what is sensuous and of the memory \[sensuali et scientifico\]. For the
Euphrates was the boundary of the dominions of Israel toward Assyria, as
the knowledge of the memory is the boundary of the intelligence and
wisdom of the spiritual and celestial man. The same is signified by what
was said to Abraham: Unto thy seed will I give this land, from the river
of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates (Gen. 15:18). These
two boundaries have a like signification.

<span class="margnote"><span id="121.">121.</span></span>

The nature of celestial order, or how the things of life proceed, is
evident from these rivers, namely, from the Lord, who is the "East" and
that from Him proceeds wisdom, through wisdom intelligence, through
intelligence reason, and so by means of reason the knowledges of the
memory are vivified. This is the order of life, and such are celestial
men; and therefore, since the elders of Israel represented celestial
men, they were called "wise, intelligent, and knowing" (Deut. 1:13, 15).
Hence it is said of Bezaleel, who constructed the ark, that he was:
Filled with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in
knowledge \[scientia\], and in all work (Exod. 31:3; 35:31; 36:1-2).

<span class="margnote"><span id="122.">122.</span></span>

Verse 15. And Jehovah God took the man, and put him in the garden of
Eden, to till it and take care of it. By the "garden of Eden" are
signified all things of the celestial man, as described; by to "till it
and take care of it" is signified that it is permitted him to enjoy all
these things, but not to possess them as his own, because they are the
Lord's.

<span class="margnote"><span id="123.">123.</span></span>

The celestial man acknowledges, because he perceives, that all things
both in general and in particular are the Lord's. The spiritual man does
indeed acknowledge the same, but with the mouth, because he has learned
it from the Word. The worldly and corporeal man neither acknowledges nor
admits it; but whatever he has he calls his own, and imagines that were
he to lose it, he would altogether perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="124.">124.</span></span>

That wisdom, intelligence, reason, and knowledge \[scientia\] are not of
man, but of the Lord, is very evident from all that the Lord taught; as
in Matthew, where the Lord compares Himself to a householder, who
planted a vineyard, and hedged it round, and let it out to husbandmen
(21:33); and in John: The Spirit of truth shall guide you into all
truth; for He shall not speak of Himself, but what things soever He
shall hear, He shall speak; He shall glorify Me, for He shall receive of
Mine, and shall declare it unto you (John 16:13-14). And in another
place: A man can receive nothing except it be given him from heaven
(John 3:27). That this is really so is known to everyone who is
acquainted with even a few of the arcana of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="125.">125.</span></span>

Verse 16. And Jehovah God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of
the garden, eating thou mayest eat. To "eat of every tree" is to know
from perception what is good and true; for, as before observed, a "tree"
signifies perception. The men of the Most Ancient Church had the
knowledges of true faith by means of revelations, for they conversed
with the Lord and with angels, and were also instructed by visions and
dreams, which were most delightful and paradisal to them. They had from
the Lord continual perception, so that when they reflected on what was
treasured up in the memory they instantly perceived whether it was true
and good, insomuch that when anything false presented itself, they not
only avoided it but even regarded it with horror: such also is the state
of the angels. In place of this perception of the Most Ancient Church,
however, there afterwards succeeded the knowledge \[cognitio\] of what
is true and good from what had been previously revealed, and afterwards
from what was revealed in the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="126.">126.</span></span>

Verse 17. But of the tree of the knowledge \[scientia\] of good and
evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof,
dying thou shalt die. These words, taken together with those just
explained, signify that it is allowable to become acquainted with what
is true and good by means of every perception derived from the Lord, but
not from self and the world; that is, we are not to inquire into the
mysteries of faith by means of the things of sense and of the memory
\[per sensualia et scientifica\], for in this case the celestial of
faith is destroyed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="127.">127.</span></span>

A desire to investigate the mysteries of faith by means of the things of
sense and of the memory, was not only the cause of the fall of the
posterity of the Most Ancient Church, as treated of in the following
chapter, but it is also the cause of the fall of every church; for hence
come not only falsities, but also evils of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="128.">128.</span></span>

The worldly and corporeal man says in his heart, If I am not instructed
concerning the faith, and everything relating to it, by means of the
things of sense, so that I may see, or by means of those of the memory
\[scientifica\], so that I may understand, I will not believe; and he
confirms himself in this by the consideration that natural things cannot
be contrary to spiritual. Thus he is desirous of being instructed from
things of sense in what is celestial and Divine, which is as impossible
as it is for a camel to go through the eye of a needle; for the more he
desires to grow wise by such means, the more he blinds himself, till at
length he believes nothing, not even that there is anything spiritual,
or that there is eternal life. This comes from the principle which he
assumes. And this is to "eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil" of which the more anyone eats, the more dead he becomes. But he
who would be wise from the Lord, and not from the world, says in his
heart that the Lord must be believed, that is, the things which the Lord
has spoken in the Word, because they are truths; and according to this
principle he regulates his thoughts. He confirms himself by things of
reason, of knowledge, of the senses, and of nature \[per rationalia,
scientifica, sensualia et naturalia\], and those which are not
confirmatory he casts aside.

<span class="margnote"><span id="129.">129.</span></span>

Everyone may know that man is governed by the principles he assumes, be
they ever so false, and that all his knowledge and reasoning favor his
principles; for innumerable considerations tending to support them
present themselves to his mind, and thus he is confirmed in what is
false. He therefore who assumes as a principle that nothing is to be
believed until it is seen and understood, can never believe, because
spiritual and celestial things cannot be seen with the eyes, or
conceived by the imagination. But the true order is for man to be wise
from the Lord, that is, from His Word, and then all things follow, and
he is enlightened even in matters of reason and of memory-knowledge \[in
rationalibus et scientificis\]. For it is by no means forbidden to learn
the sciences, since they are useful to his life and delightful; nor is
he who is in faith prohibited from thinking and speaking as do the
learned of the world; but it must be from this principle-to believe the
Word of the Lord, and, so far as possible, confirm spiritual and
celestial truths by natural truths, in terms familiar to the learned
world. Thus his starting-point must be the Lord, and not himself; for
the former is life, but the latter is death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="130.">130.</span></span>

He who desires to be wise from the world, has for his "garden" the
things of sense and of memory-knowledge \[sensualia et scientifica\];
the love of self and the love of the world are his "Eden"; his "east" is
the west, or himself; his "river Euphrates" is all his memory-knowledge
\[scientificum\], which is condemned; his "second river" where is
"Assyria" is infatuated reasoning productive of falsities; his "third
river" where is "Ethiopia" is the principles of evil and falsity thence
derived, which are the knowledges of his faith; his "fourth river" is
the wisdom thence derived, which in the Word is called "magic." And
therefore "Egypt"-which signifies memory-knowledge \[scientia\]-after
the knowledge became magical, signifies such a man, because, as may be
seen from the Word, he desires to be wise from self. Of such it is
written in Ezekiel: Thus hath said the Lord Jehovih, Behold, I am
against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great whale that lieth in the
midst of his rivers, who hath said, My river is mine own, and I have
made it for myself. And the land of Egypt shall be for a solitude, and a
waste, and they shall know that I am Jehovah, because he hath said, The
river is mine, and I have made it (Ezek. 29:3, 9). Such men are also
called "trees of Eden in hell" in the same Prophet, where also Pharaoh,
or the Egyptian, is treated of in these words: When I shall have made
him descend into hell with them that descend into the pit; to whom art
thou thus made like in glory and in greatness among the trees of Eden?
yet shalt thou be made to descend with the trees of Eden into the lower
earth, in the midst of the uncircumcised, with them that be slain by the
sword. This is Pharaoh and all his crew (Ezek. 31:16, 18), where the
"trees of Eden" denote knowledges \[scientifica et cognitiones\] from
the Word, which they thus profane by reasonings. Genesis 2, verses 18-25
18. And Jehovah God said, It is not good that the man should be alone, I
will make him a help as with him. 19. And Jehovah God formed out of the
ground every beast of the field, and every fowl of the heavens, and
brought it to the man to see what he would call it; and whatsoever the
man called every living soul, that was the name thereof. 20. And the man
gave names to every beast, and to the fowl of the heavens, and to every
wild animal of the field; but for the man there was not found a help as
with him. 21. And Jehovah God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man,
and he slept; and He took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in
the place thereof. 22. And the rib which Jehovah God had taken from the
man, He built into a woman, and brought her to the man. 23. And the man
said, This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; therefore she
shall be called wife, because she was taken out of man \[vir\]. 24.
Therefore shall a man \[vir\] leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh. 25. And they were
both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="131.">131.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. The posterity of the Most Ancient Church, which inclined
to their Own, <span id="fr_5"></span>[131-1](#fn_5) is here treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="132.">132.</span></span>

Since man is such as not to be content to be led by the Lord, but
desires to be led also by himself and the world, or by his Own,
therefore the Own which was granted him is here treated of (verse 18).

<span class="margnote"><span id="133.">133.</span></span>

And first it is given him to know the affections of good and the
knowledges of truth with which he is endowed by the Lord; but still he
inclines to his Own (verses 19, 20).

<span class="margnote"><span id="134.">134.</span></span>

Wherefore he is let into a state of his Own, and an Own is given him,
which is described by the rib built into a woman (verses 21 to 23).

<span class="margnote"><span id="135.">135.</span></span>

Celestial and spiritual life are adjoined to the man's Own, so that they
appear as a one (verse 24).

<span class="margnote"><span id="136.">136.</span></span>

And innocence from the Lord is insinuated into this Own, so that it
still might not be unacceptable (verse 25).

<span class="margnote"><span id="137.">137.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE The first three chapters of Genesis treat in general
of the Most Ancient Church, which is called "Man" \[homo\] from its
first period to its last, when it perished: the preceding part of this
chapter treats of its most flourishing state, when it was a celestial
man; here it now treats of those who inclined to their Own, and of their
posterity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="138.">138.</span></span>

Verse 18. And Jehovah God said, It is not good that the man should be
alone; I will make him a help as with him. By "alone" is signified that
he was not content to be led by the Lord, but desired to be led by self
and the world; by a "help as with him" is signified man's Own, which is
subsequently called a "rib built into a woman."

<span class="margnote"><span id="139.">139.</span></span>

In ancient times those were said to "dwell alone" who were under the
Lord's guidance as celestial men, because such were no longer infested
by evils, or evil spirits. This was represented in the Jewish Church
also by their dwelling alone when they had driven out the nations. On
this account it is sometimes said of the Lord's church, in the Word,
that she is "alone" as in Jeremiah: Arise, get you up to a quiet nation
that dwelleth confidently, saith the Lord, which hath neither gates nor
bar; they dwell alone (Jer. 49:31). In the prophecy of Moses: Israel
hath dwelt confidently alone (Deut. 33:28). And still more clearly in
the prophecy of Balaam: Lo, the people dwelleth alone, and shall not be
reckoned among the nations (Num. 23:9), where "nations" signify evils.
This posterity of the Most Ancient Church was not disposed to dwell
alone, that is, to be a celestial man, or to be led by the Lord as a
celestial man, but, like the Jewish Church, desired to be among the
nations. And because they desired this, it is said, "it is not good that
the man should be alone" for he who desires is already in evil, and it
is granted him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="140.">140.</span></span>

That by "a help as with him" is signified man's Own, is evident both
from the nature of this Own, and from what follows. As however the man
of the church who is here treated of was well disposed, an Own was
granted him, but of such a kind that it appeared as it were his own, and
therefore it is said "a help as with him."

<span class="margnote"><span id="141.">141.</span></span>

Innumerable things might be said about man's Own in describing its
nature with the corporeal and worldly man, with the spiritual man, and
with the celestial man. With the corporeal and worldly man, his Own is
his all, he knows of nothing else than his Own, and imagines, as before
said, that if he were to lose this Own he would perish. With the
spiritual man also his Own has a similar appearance, for although he
knows that the Lord is the life of all, and gives wisdom and
understanding, and consequently the power to think and to act, yet this
knowledge is rather the profession of his lips than the belief of his
heart. But the celestial man discerns that the Lord is the life of all
and gives the power to think and to act, for he perceives that it is
really so. He never desires his Own, nevertheless an Own is given him by
the Lord, which is conjoined with all perception of what is good and
true, and with all happiness. The angels are in such an Own, and are at
the same time in the highest peace and tranquility, for in their Own are
those things which are the Lord's, who governs their Own, or them by
means of their Own. This Own is the veriest celestial itself, whereas
that of the corporeal man is infernal. But concerning this Own more
hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="142.">142.</span></span>

Verses 19, 20. And Jehovah God formed out of the ground every beast of
the field, and every fowl of the heavens, and brought it to the man to
see what he would call it; and whatsoever the man called every living
soul, that was the name thereof. And the man gave names to every beast,
and to the fowl of the heavens, and to every wild animal of the field;
but for the man there was not found a help as with him. By "beasts" are
signified celestial affections, and by "fowls of the heavens" spiritual
affections; that is to say, by "beasts" are signified things of the
will, and by "fowls" things of the understanding. To "bring them to the
man to see what he would call them" is to enable him to know their
quality, and his "giving them names" signifies that he knew it. But
notwithstanding that he knew the quality of the affections of good and
of the knowledges of truth that were given him by the Lord, still he
inclined to his Own, which is expressed in the same terms as before-that
"there was not found a help as with him."

<span class="margnote"><span id="143.">143.</span></span>

That by "beasts" and "animals" were anciently signified affections and
like things in man, may appear strange at the present day; but as the
men of those times were in a celestial idea, and as such things are
represented in the world of spirits by animals, and in fact by such
animals as they are like, therefore when they spoke in that way they
meant nothing else. Nor is anything else meant in the Word in those
places where beasts are mentioned either generally or specifically. The
whole prophetic Word is full of such things, and therefore one who does
not know what each beast specifically signifies, cannot possibly
understand what the Word contains in the internal sense. But, as before
observed, beasts are of two kinds- evil or noxious beasts, and good or
harmless ones-and by the good beasts are signified good affections, as
for instance by sheep, lambs, and doves; and as it is the celestial, or
the celestial spiritual man, who is treated of, such are here meant.
That "beasts" in general signify affections, may be seen above,
confirmed by some passages in the Word (n. 45, 46), so that there is no
need of further confirmation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="144.">144.</span></span>

That to "call by name" signifies to know the quality, is because the
ancients, by the "name" understood the essence of a thing, and by
"seeing and calling by name" they understood to know the quality. The
reason was that they gave names to their sons and daughters according to
the things which were signified, for every name had something peculiar
in it, from which, and by which, they might know the origin and the
nature of their children, as will be seen in a future part of this work,
when, of the Lord's Divine mercy, we come to treat of the twelve sons of
Jacob. As therefore the names implied the source and quality of the
things named, nothing else was understood by "calling by name." This was
the customary mode of speaking among them, but one who does not
understand this may wonder that such things should be signified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="145.">145.</span></span>

In the Word also by "name" is signified the essence of a thing, and by
"seeing and calling by name" is signified to know the quality. As in
Isaiah: I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of
secret places, that thou mayest know that I, Jehovah, who call thee by
thy name, am the God of Israel. For Jacob My servant's sake, and Israel
My chosen, I have even called thee by thy name, I have surnamed thee,
and thou hast not known Me (Isa. 45:3-4). In this passage, to "call by
name" and to "surname" signifies to foreknow the quality. Again: Thou
shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of Jehovah shall declare
(Isa. 62:2),signifying to become of another character, as appears from
the preceding and subsequent verses. Again: Fear not, O Israel, for I
have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art Mine (Isa.
43:1), denoting that He knew their quality. Again in the same Prophet:
Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things,
that bringeth out their army by number. He will call them all by name
(Isa. 40:26), meaning that He knew them all. In the Revelation: Thou
hast a few names even in Sardis who have not defiled their garments: he
that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will
not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his
name before My Father, and before His angels (Rev. 3:4-5). Whose names
are not written in the Lamb's book of life (Rev. 13:8). By "names" in
these passages are by no means meant names, but qualities; nor is the
name of anyone ever known in heaven, but his quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="146.">146.</span></span>

From what has been stated, the connection of what is signified may be
seen. In verse 18 it is said, "It is not good that the man should be
alone, I will make him a help as with him" and presently "beasts" and
"birds" are spoken of, which nevertheless had been treated of before,
and immediately it is repeated that "for the man there was not found a
help as with him" which denotes that although he was permitted to know
his quality as to the affections of good, and knowledges of truth, still
he inclined to his Own; for those who are such as to desire what is
their own, begin to despise the things of the Lord, however plainly they
may be represented and shown to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="147.">147.</span></span>

Verse 21. And Jehovah God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and
he slept; and He took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in the
place thereof. By a "rib" which is a bone of the chest, is meant man's
Own, in which there is but little vitality, and indeed an Own which is
dear to him; by "flesh in the place of the rib" is meant an Own in which
there is vitality; by a "deep sleep" is meant the state into which he
was let so that he might seem to himself to have what is his own, which
state resembles sleep, because while in it he knows not but that he
lives, thinks, speaks, and acts, from himself. But when he begins to
know that this is false, he is then roused as it were out of sleep, and
becomes awake.

<span class="margnote"><span id="148.">148.</span></span>

The reason why what is man's own (and indeed an Own which is dear to
him) is called a "rib" which is a bone of the chest, is that among the
most ancient people the chest signified charity, because it contains
both the heart and the lungs; and bones signified the viler things,
because they possess a minimum of vitality; while flesh denoted such as
had vitality. The ground of these significations is one of the deepest
arcana known to the men of the most Ancient Church, concerning which of
the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="149.">149.</span></span>

In the Word also, man's Own is signified by "bones" and indeed an Own
vivified by the Lord, as in Isaiah: Jehovah shall satisfy thy soul in
droughts, and make thy bones alert, and thou shalt be like a watered
garden (Isa. 58:11). Again: Then shall ye see, and your heart shall
rejoice, and your bones shall sprout as the blade (Isa. 66:14). In
David: All my bones shall say, Jehovah, who is like unto Thee? (Ps.
35:10). This is still more evident from Ezekiel, where he speaks of
bones receiving flesh, and having spirit put into them: The hand of
Jehovah set me in the midst of the valley, and it was full of bones; and
He said to me, prophesy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry
bones, hear the word of Jehovah; thus saith the Lord Jehovih to these
bones, Behold, I bring breath \[spiritus\] into you, and ye shall live,
and I will lay sinews upon you, and will make flesh come upon you, and
cover you with skin, and I will put breath \[spiritus\] in you, and ye
shall live, and ye shall know that I am Jehovah (Ezek. 37:1, 4-6). \[2\]
The Own of man, when viewed from heaven, appears like a something that
is wholly bony, inanimate, and very ugly, consequently as being in
itself dead, but when vivified by the Lord it looks like flesh. For
man's Own is a mere dead thing, although to him it appears as something,
indeed as everything. Whatever lives in him is from the Lord's life, and
if this were withdrawn he would fall down as dead as a stone; for man is
only an organ of life, and such as is the organ, such is the life's
affection. The Lord alone has what is His Own; by this Own He redeemed
man, and by this Own He saves him. The Lord's Own is Life, and from His
Own, man's Own, which in itself is dead, is made alive. The Lord's Own
is also signified by the Lord's words in Luke: A spirit hath not flesh
and bones as ye see Me have (Luke 24:39). It was also meant by not a
bone of the paschal lamb being broken (Exod. 12:46).

<span class="margnote"><span id="150.">150.</span></span>

The state of man when in his Own, or when he supposes that he lives from
himself, is compared to "deep sleep" and indeed by the ancients was
called deep sleep; and in the Word it is said of such that they have
"poured out upon them the spirit of deep sleep" (Isa. 29:10), and that
they sleep a sleep (Jer. 51:57). That man's Own is in itself dead, and
that no one has any life from himself, has been shown so clearly in the
world of spirits, that evil spirits who love nothing but their Own, and
obstinately insist that they live from themselves, were convinced by
sensible experience, and were forced to confess that they do not live
from themselves. For a number of years I have been permitted in an
especial manner to know how the case is with what is man's own, and it
has been granted to me to perceive clearly that I could think nothing
from myself, but that every idea of thought flows in, and sometimes I
could perceive how and whence it flowed in. The man who supposes that he
lives from himself is therefore in what is false, and by believing that
he lives from himself appropriates to himself everything evil and false,
which he would never do if his belief were in accordance with the real
truth of the case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[108-1](ac003.htm#fr_4) The Latin is tentoria,
"tents" seemingly a misprint for santalos. \[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_5"></span>[131-1](ac003.htm#fr_5) The Latin word proprium
is the term used in the original text that in this and other places has
been rendered by the expression "Own." The dictionary meaning of
propius, as an adjective, is "one's own" "proper" "belonging to one's
self alone" "special" "particular" "peculiar." The neuter of this which
is the word proprium, when used as a noun means "possession" "property;"
also "a peculiarity" "characteristic mark" "distinguishing sign"
"characteristic." The English adjective "own" is defined by Webster to
mean "belonging to" "belonging exclusively or especially to" "peculiar;"
so that our word "own" is a very exact equivalent of proprius, and if we
make it a noun by writing it "Own" in order to answer to the Latin
proprium, we effect a very close translation. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 151-200](ac004)
