[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac007)  [Next](ac009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="351.">351.</span></span>

That "Abel" signifies charity has been shown before. By charity is meant
love toward the neighbor, and mercy; for he who loves his neighbor as
himself is also compassionate toward him in his sufferings, as toward
himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="352.">352.</span></span>

That the "firstlings of the flock" signify that which is of the Lord
alone, is evident from the firstlings or firstborn in the representative
church, which were all holy, because they had relation to the Lord, who
alone is the "firstborn." Love and the faith thence derived are the
"firstborn." All love is of the Lord, and not one whit of it is of man,
therefore the Lord alone is the "firstborn." This was represented in the
ancient churches by the firstborn of man and of beast being sacred to
Jehovah (Exod. 13:2, 12, 15); and by the tribe of Levi, which in the
internal sense signifies love-though Levi was born after Reuben and
Simeon who in the internal sense signify faith-being accepted instead of
all the firstborn, and constituting the priesthood (Num. 3:40-45;
8:14-20). Of the Lord as the firstborn of all, with respect to His human
essence, it is thus written in David: He shall call Me, My Father, My
God, and the rock of My salvation. I will also make Him My firstborn,
high above the kings of the earth (Ps. 89:26-27).And in John: Jesus
Christ the firstborn of the dead, and the prince of the kings of the
earth (Rev. 1:5). Observe that the firstborn of worship signify the
Lord, and the firstborn of the church, faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="353.">353.</span></span>

By "fat" is signified the celestial itself, which is also of the Lord.
The celestial is all that which is of love. Faith also is celestial when
it is from love. Charity is the celestial. All the good of charity is
the celestial. All these were represented by the various kinds of fat in
the sacrifices, and distinctively by that which covered the liver, or
the caul; by the fat upon the kidneys; by the fat covering the
intestines, and upon the intestines; which were holy, and were offered
up as burnt-offerings upon the altar (Exod. 29:13, 22; Lev. 3:3, 4, 14;
4:8-9, 19, 26, 31, 35; 8:16, 25). They were therefore called the "bread
of the offering by fire for a rest unto Jehovah" (Lev. 3:14, 16). For
the same reason the Jewish people were forbidden to eat any of the fat
of the beasts by what is called "a perpetual statute throughout your
generations" (Lev. 3:17; 7:23, 25). This was because that church was
such that it did not even acknowledge internal, much less celestial
things. \[2\] That "fat" signifies celestial things, and the goods of
charity, is evident in the Prophets; as in Isaiah: in Isaiah: Wherefore
do ye weigh silver for that which is not bread? and your labor for that
which satisfieth not? Attend ye diligently unto Me, and eat ye that
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness (Isa. 55:2).
And in Jeremiah: I will fill the soul of the priests with fatness, and
My people shall be satiated with My good (Jer. 31:14), where it is very
evident that fatness is not meant, but celestial spiritual good. So in
David: They are filled with the fatness of Thy house, and Thou makest
them drink of the river of Thy deliciousnesses. For with Thee is the
fountain of lives; in Thy light we see light (Ps. 36:8-9).Here "fatness"
and the "fountain of lives" signify the celestial, which is of love; and
the "river of deliciousnesses" and "light" the spiritual, which is of
faith from love. Again in David: My soul shall be satiated with marrow
and fatness, and my mouth shall praise Thee with lips of songs (Ps.
63:5), where in like manner "fat" denotes the celestial, and "lips of
songs" the spiritual. That it is what is celestial is very evident,
because it will satiate the soul. For the same reason the first fruits,
which were the firstborn of the earth, are called "fat" (Num. 18:12).
\[3\] As celestial things are of innumerable genera, and still more
innumerable species, they are described in general in the song which
Moses recited before the people: Butter of kine, and milk of the flock,
with fat of lambs and of rams, the sons of Bashan, and of goats, with
the fat of the kidneys of wheat; and thou shalt drink the blood of the
grape, unmixed (Deut. 32:14). It is impossible for anyone to know the
signification of these expressions except from the internal sense.
Without the internal sense, such expressions as the "butter of kine" the
"milk of sheep" the "fat of lambs" the "fat of rams and goats" the "sons
of Bashan" the "fat of the kidneys of wheat" and the "blood of the
grape" would be words and nothing more, and yet they all and each
signify genera and species of celestial things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="354.">354.</span></span>

That "Jehovah looked to Abel, and to his offering" signifies that the
things of charity, and all worship grounded therein, are pleasing to the
Lord, has been explained before, as regards both "Abel" and his
"offering."

<span class="margnote"><span id="355.">355.</span></span>

Verse 5. But to Cain and his offering He looked not; and Cain's anger
was kindled exceedingly, and his faces fell. By "Cain" as has been
stated, is signified faith separated from love, or such a doctrine as
admits of the possibility of this separation; by his "offering not being
looked to" is signified as before that his worship was unacceptable. By
"Cain's anger being kindled exceedingly, and his faces falling" is
signified that the interiors were changed. By "anger" is denoted that
charity had departed; and by the "faces" the interiors, which are said
to "fall" when they are changed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="356.">356.</span></span>

That by "Cain" is signified faith separated from love, or a doctrine
that admits of this separation; and that "to his offering He looked not"
signifies that his worship was not acceptable, has been shown before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="357.">357.</span></span>

That "Cain's anger was kindled" signifies that charity had departed, is
evident from what is afterwards related of his killing his brother Abel,
by whom is signified charity. Anger is a general affection resulting
from whatever is opposed to self-love and its cupidities. This is
plainly perceived in the world of evil spirits, for there exists there a
general anger against the Lord, in consequence of evil spirits being in
no charity, but in hatred, and whatever does not favor self-love \[amori
proprio\] and the love of the world, excites opposition, which is
manifested by anger. In the Word, "anger" "wrath" and even "fury" are
frequently predicated of Jehovah, but they are of man, and are
attributed to Jehovah because it so appears, for a reason mentioned
above. Thus it is written in David: He sent against them the anger of
His nostril, and wrath, and fury, and trouble, and an immission of evil
angels; He hath weighed a path for His anger, He withheld not their soul
from death (Ps. 78:49-50). Not that Jehovah ever sends anger upon
anyone, but that men bring it upon themselves; nor does He send evil
angels among them, but man draws them to himself. And therefore it is
added, that He "hath weighed a path for His anger, and withheld not
their soul from death;" and therefore it is said in Isaiah, "To Jehovah
shall he come, and all that were incensed against Him shall be ashamed"
(Isa. 45:24), whence it is evident that "anger" signifies evils, or what
is the same, a departure from charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="358.">358.</span></span>

That by the "faces falling" is signified that the interiors were
changed, is evident from the signification of the "face" and of its
"falling." The face, with the ancients, signified internal things,
because internal things shine forth through the face; and in the most
ancient times men were such that the face was in perfect accord with the
internals, so that from a man's face everyone could see of what
disposition or mind he was. They considered it a monstrous thing to show
one thing by the face and think another. Simulation and deceit were then
considered detestable, and therefore the things within were signified by
the face. When charity shone forth from the face, the face was said to
be "lifted up;" and when the contrary occurred, the face was said to
"fall;" wherefore it is also predicated of the Lord that He "lifts up
His faces upon man" as in the benediction (Num. 6:26; and in Ps. 4:6),
by which is signified that the Lord gives charity to man. What is meant
by the "face falling" appears from Jeremiah: I will not make My face to
fall toward you, for I am merciful, saith Jehovah (Jer. 3:12). The "face
of Jehovah" is mercy, and when He "lifts up His face" upon anyone, it
signifies that out of mercy He gives him charity; and the reverse when
He "makes the face to fall" that is, when man's face falls.

<span class="margnote"><span id="359.">359.</span></span>

Verse 6. And Jehovah said unto Cain, Why is thine anger kindled? and why
are thy faces fallen? "Jehovah said unto Cain" means that conscience
dictated; that his "anger was kindled, and that his countenance fell"
signifies as before that charity had departed, and that the interiors
were changed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="360.">360.</span></span>

That "Jehovah said unto Cain" means that conscience dictated, needs no
confirmation, as a similar passage was explained above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="361.">361.</span></span>

Verse 7. If thou doest well, is there not an uplifting? and if thou
doest not well, sin lieth at the door; and to thee is his desire, and
thou rulest over him. "If thou doest well, an uplifting" signifies that
if thou art well disposed thou hast charity; "if thou doest not well,
sin lieth at the door" signifies that if thou art not well disposed thou
hast no charity, but evil. "To thee is his desire, and thou rulest over
him" signifies that charity is desirous to be with thee, but cannot
because thou desirest to rule over it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="362.">362.</span></span>

The doctrine of faith called "Cain" is here described, which in
consequence of separating faith from love, separated it also from
charity, the offspring of love. Wherever there is any church, there
arise heresies, because while men are intent on some particular article
of faith they make that the main thing; for such is the nature of man's
thought that while intent on some one thing he sets it before any other,
especially when his imagination claims it as a discovery of his own, and
when the love of self and of the world puff him up. Everything then
seems to agree with and confirm it, until at last he will swear that it
is so, even if it is false. Just in this way those called "Cain" made
faith more essential than love, and as they consequently lived without
love, both the love of self and the phantasy thence derived conspired to
confirm them in it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="363.">363.</span></span>

The nature of the doctrine of faith that was called "Cain" is seen from
the description of it in this verse, from which it appears that charity
was capable of being joined to faith, but so that charity and not faith
should have the dominion. On this account it is first said, "If thou
doest well art thou not uplifted?" signifying, If thou art well
disposed, charity may be present; for to "do well" signifies, in the
internal sense, to be well disposed, since doing what is good comes from
willing what is good. In ancient times action and will made a one; from
the action they saw the will, dissimulation being then unknown. That an
"uplifting" signifies that charity is present, is evident from what has
been already said about the face, that to "lift up the face" is to have
charity, and that for the "face to fall" is the contrary.

<span class="margnote"><span id="364.">364.</span></span>

Secondly, it is said, "If thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door"
which signifies, If thou art not well disposed, there is no charity
present, but evil. Everybody can see that "sin lying at the door" is
evil ready and desirous to enter; for when there is no charity there are
unmercifulness and hatred, consequently all evil. Sin in general is
called the "devil" who, that is, his crew of infernals, is ever at hand
when man is destitute of charity; and the only means of driving away the
devil and his crew from the door of the mind, is love to the Lord and
toward the neighbor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="365.">365.</span></span>

In the third place it is said, "Unto thee is his desire, and thou rulest
over him" by which is signified that charity is desirous to abide with
faith, but cannot do so because faith wishes to rule over it, which is
contrary to order. So long as faith seeks to have the dominion, it is
not faith, and only becomes faith when charity rules; for charity is the
principal of faith, as was shown above. Charity maybe compared to flame,
which is the essential of heat and light, for heat and light are from
it; and faith in a state of separation may be compared to light that is
without the heat of flame, when indeed there is light, but it is the
light of winter in which everything becomes torpid and dies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="366.">366.</span></span>

Verse 8. And Cain spake to Abel his brother; and it came to pass when
they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and
slew him. "Cain spake to Abel" signifies an interval of time. "Cain" as
before stated, signifies faith separated from love; and "Abel" charity,
the brother of faith, on which account he is here twice called his
"brother." A "field" signifies whatever is of doctrine. "Cain rose up
against Abel his brother, and slew him" signifies that separated faith
extinguished charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="367.">367.</span></span>

It is unnecessary to confirm these things by similar passages from the
Word, except so far as to prove that charity is the "brother" of faith,
and that a "field" signifies whatever is of doctrine. That charity is
the "brother" of faith is evident to everyone from the nature or essence
of faith. This brotherhood was represented by Esau and Jacob, and was
the ground of their dispute about the birthright and the consequent
dominion. It was also represented by Pharez and Zarah, the sons of Tamar
by Judah (Gen. 38:28, 29, 30); and by Ephraim and Manasseh (Gen. 48:13,
14); and in both of these, as well as in other similar cases, there is a
dispute about the primogeniture and the consequent dominion. For both
faith and charity are the offspring of the church. Faith is called a
"man" as was Cain, in verse 1 of this chapter, and charity is called a
"brother" as in Isa. 19:2; Jer. 13:14; and other places. The union of
faith and charity is called "the covenant of brethren" (Amos 1:9).
Similar to the signification of Cain and Abel, was that of Jacob and
Esau, as just said; in that Jacob also was desirous of supplanting his
brother Esau, as is evident also in Hosea: To visit upon Jacob his ways,
according to his doings will He recompense him; he supplanted his
brother in the womb (Hos. 12:2-3). But that Esau, or the charity
represented by Esau, should nevertheless at length have the dominion,
appears from the prophetic prediction of their father Isaac: By thy
sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to
pass, when thou hast the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from
off thy neck (Gen. 27:40).Or what is the same, the Church of the
Gentiles, or new church, is represented by Esau, and the Jewish Church
is represented by Jacob; and this is the reason for its being so often
said that the Jews should acknowledge the Gentiles as brethren; and in
the Church of the Gentiles, or primitive church, all were called
brethren, from charity. Such as hear the Word and do it are likewise
called brethren by the Lord (Luke 8:21); those who hear are such as have
faith; those who do are such as have charity; but those who hear, or say
that they have faith, and do not, or have not charity, are not brethren,
for the Lord likens them unto fools (Matt. 7:24, 26).

<span class="margnote"><span id="368.">368.</span></span>

That a "field" signifies doctrine, and consequently whatever belongs to
the doctrine of faith and charity, is evident from the Word, as in
Jeremiah: O My mountain in the field, I will give thy possessions
\[facultates\] and all thy treasures for a spoil (Jer. 17:3). In this
passage "field" signifies doctrine; "possessions" and "treasures" denote
the spiritual riches of faith, or the things that belong to the doctrine
of faith. In the same: Shall the snow of Lebanon fail from the rock of
My field? (Jer. 18:14). It is declared concerning Zion, when destitute
of the doctrine of faith, that she shall be "plowed like a field" (Jer.
:26:18, Micah 3:12). In Ezekiel: He took of the seed of the land, and
set it in a field of sowing (Ezek. 17:5), treating of the church and of
its faith; for doctrine is called a "field" from the seed in it. In the
same: And let all the trees of the field know that I Jehovah bring down
the high tree (Ezek. 17:24). In Joel: The field is laid waste, the
ground mourneth, for the corn is wasted, the new wine is dried up, the
oil languisheth, the husbandmen are ashamed, the harvest of the field is
perished, all the trees of the field are withered (Joel 1:10-12), where
the "field" signifies doctrine, "trees" knowledges, and "husbandmen"
worshipers. In David: The field shall exult and all that is therein;
then shall all the trees of the forest sing (Ps. 96:12),where it is
perfectly evident that the field cannot exult, nor the trees of the
forest sing; but things that are in man, which are the knowledges of
faith. In Jeremiah: How long shall the land mourn, and the herb of every
field wither? (Jer. 12:4), where it is also evident that neither the
land nor the herbs of the field can mourn; but that the expressions
relate to something in man while in a state of vastation. A similar
passage occurs in Isaiah: The mountains and the hills shall break forth
before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands (Isa. 55:12). The Lord also in His prediction concerning the
consummation of the age calls the doctrine of faith a "field:" Then
shall two be in the field, the one shall be taken and the other left
(Matt. 24:40; Luke 17:36), where by a "field" is meant the doctrine of
faith, both true and false. As a "field" signifies doctrine, whoever
receives a seed of faith, whether a man, the church, or the world, is
also called a "field."

<span class="margnote"><span id="369.">369.</span></span>

From this then it follows that the words "Cain rose up against his
brother Abel, and slew him, when they were in the field together" denote
that while both faith and charity were from the doctrine of faith, yet
faith separate from love could not but disregard and thereby extinguish
charity; as is the case at the present day with those who maintain that
faith alone saves, without a work of charity, for in this very
supposition they extinguish charity, although they know and confess with
their lips that faith is not saving unless there is love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="370.">370.</span></span>

Verse 9. And Jehovah said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he
said, I know not, am I my brother's keeper? "Jehovah said unto Cain"
signifies a certain perceptivity from within that gave them a dictate
concerning charity or the "brother Abel." Cain's reply, "I know not, am
I my brother's keeper?" signifies that faith considered charity as
nothing, and was unwilling to be subservient to it, consequently that
faith altogether rejected everything of charity. Such did their doctrine
become.

<span class="margnote"><span id="371.">371.</span></span>

By the "speaking of Jehovah" the most ancient people signified
perception, for they knew that the Lord gave them the faculty to
perceive. This perception could continue no longer than while love was
the principal. When love to the Lord ceased, and consequently love
toward the neighbor, perception perished; but insofar as love remained,
perception remained. This perceptive faculty was proper to the Most
Ancient Church, but when faith became separated from love, as in the
people after the flood, and charity was given through faith, then
conscience succeeded, which also gives a dictate, but in a different
way, of which, by the Lord's Divine mercy, hereafter. When conscience
dictates, it is in like manner said in the Word that "Jehovah speaks;"
because conscience is formed from things revealed, and from knowledges,
and from the Word; and when the Word speaks, or dictates, it is the Lord
who speaks; hence nothing is more common, even at the present day, when
referring to a matter of conscience, or of faith, than to say, "the Lord
says."

<span class="margnote"><span id="372.">372.</span></span>

To be a "keeper" signifies to serve, like the "door-keepers" and
"porters" (that is, the keepers of the threshold), in the Jewish Church.
Faith is called the "keeper" of charity, from the fact that it ought to
serve it, but it was according to the principles of the doctrine called
"Cain" that faith should rule, as was said in verse 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="373.">373.</span></span>

Verse 10. And He said, What hast thou done? The voice of thy brother's
bloods crieth to Me from the ground. The "voice of thy brother's bloods"
signifies that violence had been done to charity; the "crying of bloods"
is the accusation of guilt, and "ground" signifies a schism, or heresy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="374.">374.</span></span>

That the "voice of bloods" signifies that violence had been done to
charity, is evident from many passages in the Word, in which "voice"
denotes anything that accuses, and "blood" any kind of sin, and
especially hatred; for whosoever bears hatred toward his brother, kills
him in his heart; as the Lord teaches: Ye have heard that it was said to
them of old, Thou shalt not kill, and whosoever shall kill shall be in
danger of the judgment; but I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with
his brother rashly shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever
shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; but
whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of the hell of fire
(Matt. 5:21, 22), by which words are meant the degrees of hatred. Hatred
is contrary to charity, and kills in whatever way it can, if not with
the hand, yet in spirit, and is withheld only by external restraints
from the deed of the hand. Therefore all hatred is "blood" as in
Jeremiah: Why makest thou thy way good to seek love? Even in thy skirts
are found the bloods of the souls of the needy innocent ones (Jer.
2:33-34). \[2\] And as hatred is denoted by "blood" so likewise is every
kind of iniquity, for hatred is the fountain of all iniquities. As in
Hosea: Swearing falsely, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
committing adultery, they rob, and bloods, in bloods have they touched;
therefore shall the land mourn, and everyone that dwelleth therein shall
languish (Hos. 4:2-3). And in Ezekiel, speaking of unmercifulness: Wilt
thou judge the city of bloods, and make known to her all her
abominations? a city that sheddeth bloods in the midst of it. Thou art
become guilty through thy blood that thou hast shed (Ezek. 22:2-4, 6,
9). In the same: The land is full of the judgment of bloods, and the
city is full of violence (Ezek. 7:23). And in Jeremiah: For the sins of
the prophets of Jerusalem, and the iniquities of her priests, that have
shed the blood of the righteous in the midst of her, they wander blind
in the streets, they have been polluted with blood (Lam. 4:13-14). 13,
14). In Isaiah: When the Lord shall wash away the filth of the daughters
of Zion, and shall have purged the bloods of Jerusalem from the midst,
with the spirit of judgment, and with the spirit of burning (Isa. 4:4).
And again: Your palms are defiled in blood, and your fingers in iniquity
(Isa. 59:3). In Ezekiel, speaking of the abominations of Jerusalem,
which are called "bloods:" I passed by thee, and saw thee trampled in
thine own bloods, and I said unto thee, Live in thy bloods, yea, I said
unto thee, Live in thy bloods (Ezek. 16:6, 22). \[3\] The unmercifulness
and hatred of the last times are also described by "blood" in the
Revelation (16:3, 4). "Bloods" are mentioned in the plural, because all
unjust and abominable things gush forth from hatred, as all good and
holy ones do from love. Therefore he who feels hatred toward his
neighbor would murder him if he could, and indeed does murder him in any
way he can; and this is to do violence to him, which is here properly
signified by the "voice of bloods."

<span class="margnote"><span id="375.">375.</span></span>

A "voice crying" and the "voice of a cry" are common forms of expression
in the Word, and are applied to every case where there is any noise,
tumult, or disturbance, and also on the occasion of any happy event (as
in Exod. 32:17-18; Zeph. 1:9-10; Isa. 65:19; Jer. 48:3). In the present
passage it denotes accusation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="376.">376.</span></span>

From this it follows that the "crying of bloods" signifies the
accusation of guilt; for those who use violence are held guilty. As in
David: Evil shall slay the wicked, and they that hate the righteous
shall be guilty (Ps. 34:21). In Ezekiel: Thou city art become guilty by
the blood which thou hast shed (Ezek. 22:4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="377.">377.</span></span>

That the "ground" here signifies a schism or heresy, is evident from the
fact that a "field" signifies doctrine, and therefore the "ground"
having the field in it, is a schism. Man himself is the "ground" and
also the "field" because these things are inseminated in him, for man is
man from what is inseminated in him, a good and true man from goods and
truths, an evil and false man from evils and falsities. He who is in any
particular doctrine or heresy is named from it, and so in the passage
before us the term "ground" is used to denote a schism or heresy in man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="378.">378.</span></span>

Verse 11. And now cursed art thou from the ground, which hath opened its
mouth to receive thy brother's bloods from thy hand. "Cursed art thou
from the ground" signifies that through the schism he had become
averted; "which hath opened its mouth" signifies that the heresy taught
them; to "receive thy brother's bloods from thy hand" signifies that it
did violence to charity, and extinguished it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="379.">379.</span></span>

That these things are signified, is evident from what has gone before;
and that to be "cursed" is to be averse to good, has been already shown
(n. 245). For iniquities and abominations, or hatreds, are what avert
man, so that he looks downward only, that is, to bodily and earthly
things, thus to those which are of hell. This takes place when charity
is banished and extinguished, for then the bond which connects the Lord
with man is severed, since only charity, or love and mercy, are what
conjoin us with Him, and never faith without charity, for this is no
faith, being mere knowledge, such as the infernal crew themselves may
possess, and by which they can craftily deceive the good, and feign
themselves angels of light; and as the most wicked preachers are
sometimes wont to do, with a zeal like that of piety, although nothing
is further from their hearts than that which proceeds from their lips.
Can anyone be of judgment so weak as to believe that faith alone in the
memory, or the thought thence derived, can be of any avail, when
everybody knows from his own experience that no one esteems the words or
assenting of another, no matter of what nature, when they do not come
from the will or intention? It is this that makes them pleasing, and
that conjoins one man with another. The will is the real man, and not
the thought or speech which he does not will. A man acquires his nature
and disposition from the will, because this affects him. But if anyone
thinks what is good, the essence of faith, which is charity, is in the
thought, because the will to do what is good is in it. But if he says
that he thinks what is good, and yet lives wickedly, he cannot possibly
will anything but what is evil, and there is therefore no faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="380.">380.</span></span>

Verse 12. When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield
unto thee its strength; a fugitive and a wanderer shalt thou be in the
earth. To "till the ground" signifies to cultivate this schism or
heresy; "it shall not yield unto thee its strength" signifies that it is
barren. To be a "fugitive and a wanderer in the earth" is not to know
what is good and true.

<span class="margnote"><span id="381.">381.</span></span>

That to "till the ground" means to cultivate this schism or heresy,
appears from the signification of "ground" of which we have just now
spoken; and that its "not yielding its strength" denotes its barrenness,
is evident both from what was said concerning ground, and from the words
themselves, as well as from this consideration, that those who profess
faith without charity, profess no faith, as was said above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="382.">382.</span></span>

That to be a "fugitive and a wanderer in the earth" signifies not to
know what is good and true, is evident from the signification of
"wandering" and "fleeing away" in the Word. As in Jeremiah: The prophets
and priests wander blind in the streets, they have been polluted in
blood; the things they cannot do they touch with garments (Lam. 4:13,
14), where "prophets" are those who teach, and "priests" those who live
accordingly; to "wander blind in the streets" is not to know what is
true and good. \[2\] In Amos: A part of the field was rained upon, and
the part of the field whereupon it rained not withered; so two or three
cities shall wander unto one city to drink waters, and shall not be
satisfied (Amos 4:7, 8), where by the "part of the field on which it
rained" is signified the doctrine of faith from charity; and by the
"part" or "piece" "of the field on which it did not rain" the doctrine
of faith without charity. To "wander to drink the waters" likewise
denotes to seek after truth. \[3\] In Hosea: Ephraim is smitten, their
root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit; my God will cast them away,
because they did not hearken unto Him; and they shall be wanderers among
the nations (Hos. 9:16, 17). "Ephraim" here denotes the understanding of
truth, or faith, because he was the firstborn of Joseph; the "root which
was dried up" denotes charity that cannot bear fruit; "wanderers among
the nations" are those who do not know what is true and good. \[4\] In
Jeremiah: Go ye up against Arabia, and devastate the sons of the east.
Flee, wander ye exceedingly; the inhabitants of Hazor have let
themselves down into the deep for a habitation (Jer. 49:28, 30).
"Arabia" and the "sons of the east" signify the possession of celestial
riches, or of the things that are of love, which, when vastated, are
said to "flee" and "wander" that is, to be "fugitives and wanderers"
when they do nought of what is good. Of the "inhabitants of Hazor" or
those who possess spiritual riches, which are those of faith, it is said
that they "let themselves down into the deep" that is, they perish.
\[5\] In Isaiah: All thy foremost ones wander together, they are bound
before the bow, they have fled from far (Isa. 22:3), speaking of the
"valley of vision" or the phantasy that faith is possible without
charity. Hence appears the reason why it is said, in a subsequent verse
(Isa. 22:14), that he who professes faith that is apart from charity is
a "fugitive and a wanderer" that is, knows nothing of good and truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="383.">383.</span></span>

Verse 13. And Cain said unto Jehovah, Mine iniquity is greater than can
be taken away. "Cain said unto Jehovah" signifies a certain confession
that he was in evil, induced by some internal pain; "mine iniquity is
greater than can be taken away" signifies despair on that account.

<span class="margnote"><span id="384.">384.</span></span>

Hence it appears that something of good still remained in Cain; but that
all the good of charity afterwards perished is evident from what is said
of Lamech (verses 19, 23, 24).

<span class="margnote"><span id="385.">385.</span></span>

Verse 14. Behold Thou hast cast me out this day from the faces of the
ground, and from Thy faces shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and
a wanderer in the earth; and it shall come to pass that everyone that
findeth me shall slay me. To be "cast out from the faces of the ground"
signifies to be separated from all the truth of the church; to be "hid
from Thy faces" signifies to be separated from all the good of faith of
love; to be a "fugitive and a wanderer in the earth" is not to know what
is true and good; "everyone that findeth me shall slay me" signifies
that all evil and falsity would destroy him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="386.">386.</span></span>

That to be "cast out from the faces of the ground" is to be separated
from all the truth of the church, is evident from the signification of
"ground" which, in the genuine sense, is the church, or the man of the
church, and therefore whatever the church professes, as shown above. The
meaning of a word necessarily varies with the subject treated of, and
therefore even those who wrongly profess faith, that is who profess a
schism or heresy, are also called "ground." Here however to be "driven
out from the faces of the ground" signifies to be no longer in the truth
of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="387.">387.</span></span>

That to be "hid from Thy faces" signifies to be separated from all the
good of the faith of love, is evident from the signification of the
"faces of Jehovah." The "face of Jehovah" as before said, is mercy, from
which proceed all the goods of the faith of love, and therefore the
goods of faith are here signified by His "faces."

<span class="margnote"><span id="388.">388.</span></span>

To be a "fugitive and a wanderer in the earth" means as before not to
know what is true and good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="389.">389.</span></span>

That "everyone finding him would slay him" signifies that every evil and
falsity would destroy him, follows from what has been said. For the case
is this. When a man deprives himself of charity, he separates himself
from the Lord, since it is solely charity, that is, love toward the
neighbor, and mercy, that conjoin man with the Lord. Where there is no
charity, there is disjunction, and where there is disjunction, man is
left to himself or to his Own; and then whatever he thinks is false, and
whatever he wills is evil. These are the things that slay man, or cause
him to have nothing of life remaining.

<span class="margnote"><span id="390.">390.</span></span>

Those who are in evil and falsity are in continual dread of being slain,
as is thus described in Moses: Your land shall be a desolation, and your
cities a waste, and upon them that are left of you I will bring softness
into their heart in the land of their enemies, and the sound of a driven
leaf shall chase them, and they shall flee as fleeing from a sword, and
they shall fall when none pursueth, and shall stumble everyone upon his
brother, as it were before a sword, when none pursueth (Lev. 26:33,
36-37). In Isaiah: The treacherous deal treacherously, yea, in the
treachery of the treacherous they deal treacherously. And it shall come
to pass that he who fleeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into
the pit, and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be
taken in the snare; the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it,
and it shall fall, and not rise again (Isa. 24:16-20). In Jeremiah:
Behold, I bring a dread upon thee, from all thy circuits shall ye be
driven out every man toward his faces, and none shall gather up him that
wandereth (Jer. 49:5). In Isaiah: We will flee upon the horse, therefore
shall ye flee; and, we will ride upon the swift, therefore shall they
that pursue you be rendered swift; one thousand shall flee at the rebuke
of one, at the rebuke of five shall ye flee (Isa. 30:16-17). In these
and other passages of the Word, those who are in falsity and evil are
described as "fleeing" and as in "fear of being slain." They are afraid
of everybody, because they have no one to protect them. All who are in
evil and falsity hate their neighbor, so that they all desire to kill
one another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="391.">391.</span></span>

The state of evil spirits in the other life shows most clearly that
those who are in evil and falsity are afraid of everybody. Those who
have deprived themselves of all charity wander about, and flee from
place to place. Wherever they go, if to any societies, these at once
perceive their character by their mere coming, for such is the
perception that exists in the other life; and they not only drive them
away, but also severely punish them, and with such animosity that they
would kill them if they could. Evil spirits take the greatest delight in
punishing and tormenting one another; it is their highest gratification.
Not until now has it been known that evil and falsity themselves are the
cause of this, for whatever anyone desires for another returns upon
himself. Falsity has in itself the penalty of falsity, and evil has in
itself the penalty of evil, and consequently they have in themselves the
fear of these penalties.

<span class="margnote"><span id="392.">392.</span></span>

Verse 15. And Jehovah said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain,
vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And Jehovah set a mark upon
Cain, lest any finding him should smite him. By "vengeance being taken
sevenfold on anyone who slays Cain" is signified that to do violence to
faith even when thus separated would be a sacrilege; "Jehovah set a mark
upon Cain, lest any finding him should smite him" signifies that the
Lord distinguished faith in a particular manner, in order that it might
be preserved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="393.">393.</span></span>

Before we proceed to elucidate the internal sense of the words before
us, it is necessary to know how the case is with faith. The Most Ancient
Church was of such a character as to acknowledge no faith except that
which is of love, insomuch that they were unwilling even to mention
faith, for through love from the Lord they perceived all things that
belong to faith. Such also are the celestial angels of whom we have
spoken above. But as it was foreseen that the human race could not be of
this character, but would separate faith from love to the Lord, and
would make of faith a doctrine by itself, it was provided that they
should indeed be separated, but in such a way that through faith, that
is, through the knowledges of faith, men might receive from the Lord
charity, so that knowledge \[cognitio\] or hearing should come first,
and then through knowledge or hearing, charity, that is, love toward the
neighbor, and mercy, might be given by the Lord, which charity should
not only be inseparable from faith, but should also constitute the
principal of faith. And then instead of the perception they had in the
Most Ancient Church, there succeeded conscience, acquired through faith
joined to charity, which dictated not what is true, but that it is true,
and this because the Lord has so said in the Word. The churches after
the flood were for the most part of this character, as also was the
primitive or first church after the Lord's advent, and by this the
spiritual angels are distinguished from the celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="394.">394.</span></span>

Now as this was foreseen, and was provided, lest the human race should
perish in eternal death, it is here declared that none should do
violence to Cain, by whom is signified faith separated from charity; and
further that a mark was set upon him, which means that the Lord
distinguished faith in a particular manner, in order to secure its
preservation. These are arcana hitherto undiscovered, and are referred
to by the Lord in what He said respecting marriage, and eunuchs, in
Matthew: There are eunuchs who were so born from their mother's womb;
and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs of men; and there are
eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of God's sake;
he that is able to receive it let him receive it (Matt. 19:12). Those in
the heavenly marriage are called "eunuchs;" those so "born from the
womb" are such as resemble the celestial angels; those "made of men" are
such as are like the spiritual angels; and those "made so by themselves"
are like angelic spirits, who act not so much from charity as from
obedience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="395.">395.</span></span>

That the words "whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him
sevenfold" signify that to do violence to faith even when thus separated
would be sacrilege, is evident from the signification of "Cain" which is
faith separated from charity, and from the signification of "seven"
which is what is sacred. The number "seven" was esteemed holy, as is
well known, by reason of the six days of creation, and of the seventh,
which is the celestial man, in whom is peace, rest, and the sabbath.
Hence this number occurs so frequently in the rites of the Jewish
Church, and is everywhere held sacred, and hence also both greater and
less periods of time were distinguished into sevens, and were called
"weeks" such as the great intervals of time to the coming of the Messiah
(Dan. 9:24-25); and the time of seven years called a "week" by Laban and
Jacob (Gen. 29:27-28). For the same reason, wherever it occurs, the
number seven is accounted holy or inviolable. Thus we read in David:
Seven times a day do I praise Thee (Ps. 119:164). In Isaiah: The light
of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun
shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days (Isa. 30:26), where the
"sun" denotes love, and the "moon" faith from love, which should be as
love. As the periods of man's regeneration are distinguished into six,
before the seventh arrives, that is, the celestial man, so also are the
periods of his vastation, up to the time when nothing celestial remains.
This was represented by the several captivities of the Jews, and by the
last or Babylonish captivity, which lasted seven decades, or seventy
years. It is also said several times that the earth should rest on its
sabbaths. The same is represented by Nebuchadnezzar, in Daniel: His
heart shall be changed from man, and a beast's heart shall be given unto
him, and seven times shall pass over him (Dan. 4:16, 23, 32). And in
John, concerning the vastation of the last times: I saw another sign in
heaven, great and marvelous, seven angels, having the seven last plagues
(Rev. 15:1, 6-8); and that: The Gentiles should tread the holy city
under foot forty and two months, or six times seven (Rev. 11:2). And
again: I saw a book written within and on the back, sealed with seven
seals (Rev. 5:1). For the same reason the severities and augmentations
of punishment were expressed by the number seven; as in Moses: If ye
will not yet for all this obey Me, then I will chastise you sevenfold
for your sins (Lev. 26:18, 21, 24, 28). And in David: Render unto our
neighbors sevenfold into their bosom (Ps. 79:12). Now as it was a
sacrilege to do violence to faith-since as has been said it was to be of
service-it is said that "whosoever should slay Cain, vengeance should be
taken on him sevenfold."

<span class="margnote"><span id="396.">396.</span></span>

That "Jehovah set a mark on Cain, lest any should smite him" signifies
that the Lord distinguished faith in a particular manner in order that
it might be preserved, is evident from the signification of a "mark" and
of "setting a mark" on anyone, as being a means of distinction. Thus in
Ezekiel: Jehovah said, Go through the midst of the city, through the
midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark (that is, "mark out") upon the
foreheads of the men groaning and sighing for all the abominations
(Ezek. 9:4), where by "marking out the foreheads" is not meant a mark or
line upon the front part of their heads, but to distinguish them from
others. So in John, it is said that The locusts should hurt only those
men who had not the mark of God on their foreheads (Rev. 9:4), where
also to have the mark means to be distinguished. \[2\] And in the same
book we read of a "mark on the hand and on the forehead" (Rev. 13:16).
The same thing was represented in the Jewish Church by binding the first
and great commandment on the hand and on the forehead, concerning which
we read in Moses: Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is one Jehovah; and
thou shalt love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and thou shalt bind these words for a
sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes
(Deut. 6:4, 8; 11:13, 18). By this was represented that they should
distinguish the commandment respecting love above every other, and hence
the signification of "marking the hand and the forehead" becomes
manifest. \[3\] So in Isaiah: I come to gather all nations and tongues;
and they shall come and shall see My glory; and I will set a mark upon
them (Isa. 66:18-19). And in David: O turn unto me, and have mercy upon
me, give Thy strength unto Thy servant, and save the son of Thy
handmaid. Set upon me a mark for good, and they that hate me shall see
and be ashamed (Ps. 86:16-17).From these passages the meaning of a mark
is now evident. Let no one therefore imagine that any mark was set upon
a particular person called Cain, for the internal sense of the Word
contains things quite different from those contained in the sense of the
letter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="397.">397.</span></span>

Verse 16. And Cain went out from the faces of Jehovah, and dwelt in the
land of Nod, toward the east of Eden. By the words "Cain went out from
the faces of Jehovah" is signified that faith was separated from the
good of the faith of love; "he dwelt in the "land of Nod" signifies
outside of truth and good; "toward the east of Eden" is near the
intellectual mind, where love reigned before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="398.">398.</span></span>

That to "go out from the faces of Jehovah" signifies to be separated
from the good of the faith of love may be seen in the explication of
verse 14; that to "dwell in the land of Nod" signifies outside of truth
and good, is evident from the signification of the word "Nod" which is
to be a wanderer and a fugitive; and that to be "a wanderer and a
fugitive" is to be deprived of truth and good, may be seen above. That
"toward the east of Eden" signifies near the intellectual mind, where
love had previously reigned, and also near the rational mind, where
charity had previously reigned, is evident from what has been said of
the signification of "the east of Eden" namely, that "the east" is the
Lord, and "Eden" love. With the men of the Most Ancient Church, the
mind, consisting of the will and the understanding, was one; for the
will was the all in all, so that the understanding was of the will. This
was because they made no distinction between love, which is of the will,
and faith, which is of the understanding, because love was the all in
all, and faith was of love. But after faith was separated from love, as
was the case with those who were called "Cain" no will reigned any
longer, and as in that mind the understanding reigned instead of the
will, or faith instead of love, it is said that he "dwelt toward the
east of Eden;" for as was just now observed faith was distinguished, or
"had a mark set upon it" that it might be preserved for the use of
mankind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="399.">399.</span></span>

Verse 17. And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived, and bare Enoch; and
he was building a city, and called the name of the city after the name
of his son, Enoch. The words "Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and
bare Enoch" signify that this schism or heresy produced another from
itself that was called "Enoch." By "the city which he built" is
signified all that was doctrinal and heretical therefrom, and because
the schism or heresy was called "Enoch" it is said that "the name of the
city was called after the name of his son, Enoch."

<span class="margnote"><span id="400.">400.</span></span>

That "Cain knew his wife, and she conceived, and bare Enoch" signifies
that this schism or heresy produced another from itself, is evident from
what has been previously said, as well as from what is stated in the
first verse, that the Man and Eve his wife produced Cain; so that the
things which now follow are similar conceptions and births, whether of
the church, or of heresies, whereof they formed a genealogy, for these
are similarly related to each other. From one heresy that is conceived
there are born a host of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 401-450](ac009)
