[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac012)  [Next](ac014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="601.">601.</span></span>

That the man who was left from the Most Ancient Church could not be
regenerated, on account of his direful persuasions and foul cupidities
(verses 11, 12) whereby he would utterly destroy himself (verse 13).

<span class="margnote"><span id="602.">602.</span></span>

But the man of the church called "Noah" who is described by the "ark"
was not so (verse 14); and the remains with him are described by the
measures (verse 15); the things of his understanding, by the "window"
"door" and "mansions" (verse 16).

<span class="margnote"><span id="603.">603.</span></span>

That he would be preserved when the rest would perish by an inundation
of evil and falsity (verse 17).

<span class="margnote"><span id="604.">604.</span></span>

And that the truths and goods which were with him would be saved (verse
18); and thus whatever was of the understanding and whatever was of the
will, by regeneration (verses 19, 20); for receiving which he was to be
prepared (verse 21); and that it was so done (verse 22).

<span class="margnote"><span id="605.">605.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE The subject now treated of is the formation of a new
church, which is called "Noah;" and its formation is described by the
ark into which living things of every kind were received. But as is wont
to be the case, before that new church could arise it was necessary that
the man of the church should suffer many temptations, which are
described by the lifting up of the ark, its fluctuation, and its delay
upon the waters of the flood. And finally, that he became a true
spiritual man and was set free, is described by the cessation of the
waters, and the many things that follow. No one can see this who adheres
to the sense of the letter only, in consequence (and especially is this
the case here) of all things being historically connected, and
presenting the idea of a history of events. But such was the style of
the men of that time, and most pleasing to them it was that all things
should be wrapped up in representative figures, and that these should be
arranged in the form of history; and the more coherent the historical
series, the better suited it was to their genius. For in those ancient
times men were not so much inclined to memory-knowledges \[scientiis\]
as at this day, but to profound thoughts, of which the offspring was
such as has been described. This was the wisdom of the ancients.

<span class="margnote"><span id="606.">606.</span></span>

That the "flood" the "ark" and therefore the things described in
connection with them, signify regeneration, and also the temptations
that precede regeneration, is in some degree known among the learned at
this day, who also compare regeneration and temptations to the waters of
a flood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="607.">607.</span></span>

But the character of this church will be described hereafter. That an
idea of it may be presented here, it shall be briefly said that the Most
Ancient Church was celestial, as already shown, but this church became
spiritual. The Most Ancient Church had a perception of good and truth;
this, or the Ancient Church, had not perception, but in its place
another kind of dictate, which may be called conscience. \[2\] But what
is as yet unknown in the world, and is perhaps difficult to believe, is
that the men of the Most Ancient Church had internal respiration, and
only tacit external respiration. Thus they spoke not so much by words,
as afterwards and as at this day, but by ideas, as angels do; and these
they could express by innumerable changes of the looks and face,
especially of the lips. In the lips there are countless series of
muscular fibers which at this day are not set free, but being free with
the men of that time, they could so present, signify, and represent
ideas by them as to express in a minute's time what at this day it would
require an hour to say by articulate sounds and words, and they could do
this more fully and clearly to the apprehension and understanding of
those present than is possible by words, or series of words in
combination. This may perhaps seem incredible, but yet it is true. And
there are many others, not of this earth, who have spoken and at this
day speak in a similar manner; concerning whom, of the Lord's Divine
mercy hereafter. \[3\] It has been given me to know the nature of that
internal respiration, and how in process of time it was changed. As
these most ancient people had a respiration such as the angels have, who
breathe in a similar manner, they were in profound ideas of thought, and
were able to have such perception as cannot be described; and even if it
could be described such as it really was, it would not be believed,
because it would not be comprehended. But in their posterity this
internal respiration little by little came to an end; and with those who
were possessed with dreadful persuasions and phantasies, it became such
that they could no longer present any idea of thought except the most
debased, the effect of which was that they could not survive, and
therefore all became extinct.

<span class="margnote"><span id="608.">608.</span></span>

When internal respiration ceased, external respiration gradually
succeeded, almost like that of the present day; and with external
respiration a language of words, or of articulate sound into which the
ideas of thought were determined. Thus the state of man was entirely
changed, and became such that he could no longer have similar
perception, but instead of perception another kind of dictate which may
be called conscience, for it was like conscience, though a kind of
intermediate between perception and the conscience known to some at this
day. And when such determination of the ideas of thought took place,
that is to say, into spoken words, they could no longer be instructed,
like the most ancient man, through the internal man, but through the
external. And therefore in place of the revelations of the Most Ancient
Church, doctrinal things succeeded, which could first be received by the
external senses, and from them material ideas of the memory could be
formed, and from these, ideas of thought, by which and according to
which they were instructed. Hence it was that this church which followed
possessed an entirely different genius from that of the Most Ancient
Church, and if the Lord had not brought the human race into this genius,
or into this state, no man could have been saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="609.">609.</span></span>

As the state of the man of this church which is called "Noah" was
altogether changed from that of the man of the Most Ancient Church, he
could no longer-as said before-be informed and enlightened in the same
way as the most ancient man; for his internals were closed, so that he
no longer had communication with heaven, except such as was unconscious.
Nor, for the same reason, could he be instructed except as before said
by the external way of sense or of the senses. On this account, of the
Lord's providence, doctrinal matters of faith, with some of the
revelations to the Most Ancient Church, were preserved for the use of
this posterity. These doctrinal things were first, collected by "Cain"
and were stored up that they might not be lost; and therefore it is said
of Cain that a "mark was set upon him, lest anyone should slay him"
(concerning which see what was said at that place, Gen. 4:15). These
doctrinal matters were afterwards reduced into doctrine by "Enoch;" but
because this doctrine was of use to no one at that time, but was for
posterity, it is said that "God took him." (See also Gen. 5:24.) These
doctrinal matters of faith are what were preserved by the Lord for the
use of this posterity or church; for it was foreseen by the Lord that
perception would be lost, and therefore it was provided that these
doctrinal things should remain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="610.">610.</span></span>

Verse 9. These are the births of Noah; Noah was a man righteous and
perfect in his generations: Noah walked with God. By "the births of
Noah" is signified a description of the reformation or regeneration of
the new church. That "Noah was a man just and perfect in his
generations" signifies that he was such that he could be endowed with
charity; "just" (or "righteous") has relation to the good of charity,
and "perfect" to the truth of charity. The "generations" are those of
faith. To "walk with God" signifies here as before, when said of Enoch,
the doctrine of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="611.">611.</span></span>

That by "the births of Noah" is signified a description of the
reformation or regeneration of the new church, is evident from what has
been said before (Gen. 2:4; Gen. 5:1).

<span class="margnote"><span id="612.">612.</span></span>

Noah was a man righteous and perfect <span
id="fr_8"></span>[612-1](#fn_8) in his generations. That this signifies
that he was such that he could be endowed with charity, is evident from
the signification of "just and perfect" "just" (or "righteous") having
regard to the good of charity, and "perfect" to the truth of charity;
and also from the essential of that church being charity, concerning
which, of the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter. That "just" (or
"righteous") has regard to the good of charity, and "perfect" to the
truth of charity, is evident from the Word, as in Isaiah: They will seek
Me daily and desire knowledge of My ways, as a nation that doeth
righteousness, and forsaketh not the judgment of their God; they will
ask of Me the judgments of righteousness, and will long for the approach
of God (Isa. 58:2). Here "judgment" denotes the things which are of
truth, and "righteousness" those which are of good. "Doing judgment and
righteousness" became as it were an established formula for doing what
is true and good (as in Isa. 56:1; Jer. 22:3, 13, 15; 23:5; 33:14, 16,
19). The Lord said: The righteous <span id="fr_9"></span>[612-2](#fn_9)
shall shine forth as the sun, in the kingdom of My father (Matt. 13:43),
"the righteous" meaning those who are endowed with charity; and
concerning the consummation of the age He said: The angels shall go
forth and shall sever the wicked from among the righteous (Matt. 13:49).
Here also the "righteous" denote those who are in the good of charity.
\[2\] But "perfect" signifies the truth which is from charity, for there
is truth from many another origin; but that which is from the good of
charity from the Lord is called "perfect" and a "perfect man" as in
David: Who shall sojourn in Thy tent, who shall dwell in the mountain of
Thy holiness? He that walketh perfect, and worketh righteousness, and
speaketh the truth in his heart (Ps. 15:1-2). The "perfect" \[or
"complete"\] man is here described. Again: With the holy Thou wilt show
Thyself holy; with the perfect man Thou wilt show Thyself perfect (Ps.
18:25), where the "perfect man" is one who is so from holiness, or the
good of charity. And again: Jehovah will withhold no good from them that
walk in perfectness \[integritate\] (Ps. 84:11). \[3\] That a "perfect
man" is one who is true from good, or who speaks and does truth from
charity, is evident from the words "walk" and "way" being often applied
to what is perfect, that is, to wholeness or entirety, and also the
words "upright" or "uprightness" which words pertain to truth. As in
David: I will teach the perfect in the way how far he shall come unto
me. I will walk within my house in the perfectness of my heart (Ps.
101:2); and in the sixth verse: He that walketh in the way of the
perfect, he shall minister unto me (Ps. 101:6). Again: Blessed are the
perfect in the way, who walk in the law of Jehovah (Ps. 119:1). And
again: Perfectness and uprightness shall guard me (Ps. 25:21). And in
another place: Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end
of that man is peace (Ps. 37:37). It is evident from these passages that
he is called "righteous" who does what is good, and that he is called
"perfect" who does what is true therefrom, which also is to "do
righteousness and judgment." "Holiness" and "righteousness" are the
celestial of faith; "perfectness" and "judgment" are the spiritual
thence derived.

<span class="margnote"><span id="613.">613.</span></span>

That the "generations" are those of faith, does not appear from the
sense of the letter, which is historical; but as internal things only
are here treated of, generations of faith are signified. It is also
evident from the connection that the generations here are no others. It
is the same in other passages of the Word, as in Isaiah: They that shall
be of thee shall build the waste places of old; thou shalt raise up the
foundations of generation and generation; and thou shalt be called, The
repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in (Isa. 58:12).
All these things signify what is of faith; the "waste places of old"
signify celestial things of faith; the "foundations of generation and
generation" spiritual things of faith, which had lapsed from the ancient
times that are likewise signified. Again: They shall build the old
wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, they shall renew the
waste cities, the desolations of generation and generation (Isa. 61:4);
with similar signification. And again: They shall not labor in vain, nor
bring forth for trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of
Jehovah, and their offspring with them (Isa. 65:23).Here also "bringing
forth" \[generare\] is predicated of the things of faith; "laboring" of
those of love. Of the latter it is said that they are "the seed of the
blessed of Jehovah;" of the former, that they are "offspring."

<span class="margnote"><span id="614.">614.</span></span>

That "to walk with God" signifies the doctrine of faith, may be seen
from what was said before respecting Enoch (chapter v. 22, 24), of whom
also it is said that he "walked with God;" and there it signifies the
doctrine of faith preserved for the use of posterity. And as this is the
posterity for whose use it was preserved, the subject is now here taken
up again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="615.">615.</span></span>

The quality of the man of this church is here described in general; not
that he was such as yet-for his formation is treated of in what
follows-but that such he might become: that is to say, that by
knowledges of faith he could be endowed with charity, and so act from
charity, and from the good of charity know what is true. For this reason
the good of charity or "righteous" precedes, and the truth of charity or
"perfect" follows. Charity, as before said, is love toward the neighbor
and mercy; and it is a lower degree of the love of the Most Ancient
Church, which was love to the Lord. Thus love now descended and became
more external, and is to be called charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="616.">616.</span></span>

Verse 10. And Noah begat three sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth. "Noah begat
three sons" signifies that three kinds of doctrine thence arose, which
are meant by "Shem, Ham, and Japheth."

<span class="margnote"><span id="617.">617.</span></span>

Noah begat three sons. That this signifies that three kinds of doctrine
thence arose, is evident from all that has been shown before about names
signifying nothing else than churches, or, what is the same, doctrines.
So it is here; but here they are merely mentioned for the sake of the
series or connection with the things that precede, which are, that it
was foreseen by the Lord that the man of this genius could be endowed
with charity; but yet that three kinds of doctrines would thence have
birth, which doctrines, of the Lord's Divine mercy, shall be described
hereafter, where Shem, Ham, and Japheth are treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="618.">618.</span></span>

That "Noah was righteous and perfect" that he "walked with God" and in
this verse that he "begat three sons" is all said in the past tense, and
yet these expressions look to the future. It should be known that the
internal sense is such that it has no relation to times; and this the
original language favors, where sometimes one and the same word is
applicable to any time whatever, without using different words, for by
this means interior things appear more evidently. The language derives
this from the internal sense, which is more manifold than anyone could
believe; and therefore it does not suffer itself to be limited by times
and distinctions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="619.">619.</span></span>

Verse 11. And the earth was corrupt before God; and the earth was filled
with violence. By the "earth" is signified the race mentioned before. It
is said to be "corrupt" on account of their dreadful persuasions; and to
be "filled with violence" on account of their foul cupidities. Here and
in the following verses of this chapter it is said "God" because there
was now no church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="620.">620.</span></span>

That by the "earth" is signified the race which has been treated of
before, is evident from what has already been told respecting the
signification of "earth" and of "ground." The "earth" <span
id="fr_10"></span>[620-1](#fn_10) is a term very often used in the Word;
and by it is signified the "land" where the true church of the Lord is,
as the "land" of Canaan; also a "land" where there is not a church, as
the "land" of Egypt, and of the Gentiles. Thus it denotes the race that
dwells there; and as it denotes the race, it denotes likewise everyone
of the race who is there. The church is called the "land" from celestial
love, as the "land of Canaan;" and the "land of the Gentiles" from
impure loves. But it is called "ground" from faith which is implanted;
for, as has been said, the land or country is the containant of the
ground, and the ground is the containant of the field, just as love is
the containant of faith, and faith is the containant of the knowledges
of faith which are implanted. Here the "earth" is taken for a race in
which everything of celestial love and of the church had perished. What
is predicated is known from the subject.

<span class="margnote"><span id="621.">621.</span></span>

That the earth is said to be "corrupt" on account of their dreadful
persuasions, and "filled with violence" because of their foul
cupidities, is evident from the signification of the verb to "corrupt"
and of the word "violence." In the Word one term is never taken for
another, but uniformly that word is employed which fitly expresses the
thing of which it is predicated; and this so exactly that from the words
alone which are used, what is in the internal sense at once appears, as
here from the words "corrupt" and "violence." "Corrupt" is predicated of
the things of the understanding when it is desolated; "violence" of the
things of the will, when vastated. Thus "to corrupt" is predicated of
persuasions; and "violence" of cupidities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="622.">622.</span></span>

That "to corrupt" is predicated of persuasions, is evident in Isaiah:
They shall not hurt, nor corrupt, in all the mountain of My holiness;
for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of Jehovah (Isa. 11:9); and
so in 65:25, where "to hurt" has relation to the will, or to cupidities,
and "to corrupt" to the understanding, or to persuasions of falsity.
Again: Woe to the sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of
evildoers, sons that are corrupters (Isa. 1:4). Here, as in other
places, "nation" and the "seed of evildoers" denote evils which are of
the will, or of cupidities; "people" and "sons that are corrupters"
falsities which are of the understanding, or of persuasions. In Ezekiel:
Thou wast more corrupt than they in all thy ways (Ezek. 16:47). Here
"corrupt" is predicated of things of the understanding, of the reason,
or of the thought; for "way" is a word that signifies truth. In David:
They have done what is corrupt, and have done abominable work (Ps.
14:1). Here "what is corrupt" denotes dreadful persuasions, and
"abominable" the foul cupidities which are in the work, or from which
the work is done. In Daniel: After sixty and two weeks shall the Messiah
be cut off, and there shall be none belonging to Him; and the people of
the leader that shall come shall corrupt the city and the sanctuary, and
the end thereof shall be with a flood (Dan. 9:26). Here likewise "to
corrupt" denotes persuasions of what is false, of which a "flood" is
predicated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="623.">623.</span></span>

The earth was filled with violence. That this is said on account of
their foul cupidities, and most of all on account of those which come of
the love of self, or of inordinate arrogance, is evident from the Word.
It is called "violence" when men do violence to holy things by profaning
them, as did these antediluvians who immersed the doctrinal things of
faith in all kinds of cupidities. As in Ezekiel: My faces will I turn
from them, and they shall profane My secret \[place\], and robbers shall
enter into it and profane it. Make the chain; for the land is full of
the judgment of bloods, and the city is full of violence (Ezek.
7:22-23). The "violent" are here described as to who they are, and that
they are such as we have stated. Again: They shall eat their bread in
solicitude, and drink their waters in desolation, that her land may be
devastated from its fullness, because of the violence of all them that
dwell therein (Ezek. 12:19). The "bread which they shall eat in
solicitude" is the celestial things, and the "waters which they shall
drink in desolation" are the spiritual things, to which they have done
violence, or which they have profaned. \[2\] In Isaiah: Their webs shall
not be for garments; neither shall they be covered in their works; their
works are works of iniquity, and the deed of violence is in their hands
(Isa. 59:6).Here "webs" and "garments" are predicated of things of the
understanding, that is, of the thought; "iniquity" and "violence" of
things of the will, that is, of works. In Jonah: Let them turn everyone
from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands (Jonah
3:8), where the "evil way" is predicated of falsities, which are of the
understanding; and "violence" of evils, which are of the will. In
Jeremiah: A rumor shall come in one year, and violence in the land (Jer.
51:46). "A rumor" denotes things which are of the understanding,
"violence" those which are of the will. In Isaiah: He hath done no
violence, neither was there any deceit in His mouth (Isa. 53:9). Here
also "violence" denotes the things of the will; "deceit in His mouth"
those of the understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="624.">624.</span></span>

That a state not of the church is here treated of, is evident from the
fact that here and in the following verses of this chapter the name
"God" is used, but in preceding verses "Jehovah." When there is not a
church "God" is the term used, and when there is a church "Jehovah;" as
in the first chapter of Genesis, when there was no church, it is said
"God;" but in the second chapter, when there was a church, it is said
"Jehovah God." The name "Jehovah" is most holy, and belongs only to the
church; but the name "God" is not so holy, for there was no nation that
had not gods, and therefore the name God was not so holy. No one was
permitted to speak the name "Jehovah" unless he had knowledge
\[cognitio\] of the true faith; but anyone might speak the name "God."

<span class="margnote"><span id="625.">625.</span></span>

Verse 12. And God saw the earth, and behold it was corrupt, for all
flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth. "God saw the earth"
signifies that God knew man; "it was corrupt" signifies that there was
nothing but falsity; "for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the
earth" signifies that the corporeal nature of man had destroyed all the
understanding of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="626.">626.</span></span>

God saw the earth. That this signifies that God knew man, is evident to
everyone; for God who knows all things and everything from eternity, has
no need to see whether man is such. To "see" is human, and therefore-as
has been said at the sixth verse and elsewhere-the Word is spoken in
accordance with the appearance of things to man; and this to such a
degree that God is even said to "see with eyes."

<span class="margnote"><span id="627.">627.</span></span>

For all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth. That this signifies
that man's corporeal nature had destroyed all the understanding of
truth, is evident from the signification of "flesh" (concerning which at
verse 3), which in general means every man, and in particular the
corporeal man, or all that is of the body; and from the signification of
a "way" as being the understanding of truth, that is, truth itself. That
a "way" is predicated of the understanding of truth, that is, of truth,
is evident from passages which have been adduced in different places
before, and also from the following. In Moses: Jehovah said, Arise, get
thee down quickly from hence; for thy people have corrupted themselves;
they have suddenly turned back out of the way which I commanded them;
they have made them a molten image (Deut. 9:12, 16), meaning that they
had turned away from the commandments, which are truths. \[2\] In
Jeremiah: Whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of man, to
give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
works (Jer. 32:19).The "ways" here are a life according to the
commandments; the "fruit of his works" is a life from charity. Thus a
"way" is predicated of truths, which are those of the precepts and
commandments. And the meaning of "son of man" \[homo\] and of "man"
\[vir\] is as has been shown above. So in Jeremiah 7:3, and 17:10. In
Hosea: I will visit upon him his ways, and render to him his works (Hos.
4:9). In Zechariah: Return ye from your evil ways, and from your evil
works. Like as Jehovah Zebaoth thought to do unto us according to our
ways, and according to our works (Zech. 1:4, 6). Here the sense is
similar, but the opposite of the former, because they are evil "ways"
and evil "works." In Jeremiah: I will give them one heart, and one way
(Jer. 32:39). "Heart" denotes goods, and "way" truths. In David: Make me
to understand the way of Thy commandments; remove from me the way of
falsehood; and grant me Thy law graciously. I have chosen the way of
truth. I will run the way of Thy commandments (Ps. 119:27, 29-30, 32).
Here the "way of the commandments" is called the "way of truth"-opposite
to which is the "way of falsehood." \[3\] Again: Make known to me Thy
ways, O Jehovah, teach me Thy paths. Lead my way in Thy truth, and teach
me (Ps. 25:4-5). Here likewise a "way" manifestly denotes truth. In
Isaiah: With whom did Jehovah take counsel, and who instructed Him, and
taught Him the path of judgment, and taught Him knowledge \[scientia\],
and made Him to know the way of understanding (Isa. 40:14), manifestly
for the understanding of truth. In Jeremiah: Thus hath said Jehovah,
Stand ye upon the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the
good way, and go therein (Jer. 6:16). Here likewise "way" is put for the
understanding of truth. In Isaiah: I will lead the blind in a way that
they knew not, in paths that they have not known I will lead them (Isa.
42:16). The terms "way" "path" \[semita\], "path" \[trames\], "street"
\[platea\], and "street" \[vicus\] are predicated of truth, because they
lead to truth; as also in Jeremiah: They have caused them to stumble in
their ways, in the ancient paths, to walk in by-paths, in a way not cast
up (Jer. 18:15). So in the book of Judges: In the days of Jael the paths
ceased, and they that walked in paths went through crooked paths. The
streets ceased in Israel (Judg. 5:6).

<span class="margnote"><span id="628.">628.</span></span>

The internal sense here is that every man whatsoever, in the land where
the church was, "had corrupted his way" so that he did not understand
truth. For every man had become corporeal, not only those referred to in
the preceding verse, but also those called "Noah" who are specifically
treated of here and in the following verse, for such they were before
they were regenerated. These things are said first, because in the
following verses their regeneration is treated of. And because but
little of the church remained, "God" is now named, not "Jehovah." In
this verse is signified that there was nothing true, and in the
following verse, that there was nothing good, except in the remains
which they had who are called "Noah" (for without remains there is no
regeneration), and also in the doctrinal matters that they knew. But
there was no understanding of truth, as there never can be except where
there is a will of good. Where the will is not, there is no
understanding; and as the will is, such is the understanding. The most
ancient people had a will of good, because they had love to the Lord;
and from this they had an understanding of truth, but this understanding
wholly perished with the will. A kind of rational truth however, as well
as natural good, remained with those who are called "Noah" and therefore
they could be regenerated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="629.">629.</span></span>

Verse 13. And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before
Me, for the earth is filled with violence from their faces, and behold I
destroy them with the earth. "God said" signifies that it was so; "the
end of all flesh is come before Me" signifies that the human race could
not but perish: "for the earth is filled with violence" signifies that
they no longer had a will of good; "behold I destroy them with the
earth" signifies that the human race would perish with the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="630.">630.</span></span>

That "God said" signifies that it was so, is evident from the fact that
in Jehovah there is nothing but Being \[Esse\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="631.">631.</span></span>

That the end of all flesh is come before Me signifies that the human
race could not but perish, is evident from the words themselves, and
from the signification of "flesh" which means every man in general, and
specifically the corporeal man, as already shown.

<span class="margnote"><span id="632.">632.</span></span>

That the earth is filled with violence signifies that they no longer had
a will of good, is evident from what has been said and shown before
concerning the signification of "violence" (at verse 11). In the
preceding verse the understanding of truth was spoken of, and here the
will of good, because both had perished with the man of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="633.">633.</span></span>

The case is this: With no man is there any understanding of truth and
will of good, not even with those who were of the Most Ancient Church.
But when men become celestial it appears as if they had a will of good
and understanding of truth, and yet this is of the Lord alone, as they
also know, acknowledge, and perceive. So is it with the angels also. So
true is this that whoever does not know, acknowledge, and perceive that
it is so, has no understanding of truth or will of good whatever. With
every man, and with every angel, even the most celestial, that which is
his own is nothing but falsity and evil; for it is known that the
heavens are not clean before the Lord \[Job 15:15\], and that all good
and all truth are of the Lord alone. But so far as a man or an angel is
capable of being perfected, so far of the Lord's Divine mercy he is
perfected, and receives as it were an understanding of truth and a will
of good; but his having these is only an appearance. Every man can be
perfected-and consequently receive this gift of the Lord's mercy-in
accordance with the actual doings of his life, and in a manner suited to
the hereditary evil implanted by his parents.

<span class="margnote"><span id="634.">634.</span></span>

But it is extremely difficult to say, in a manner to be apprehended,
what is the understanding of truth and the will of good in the proper
sense, for the reason that a man supposes everything he thinks to be of
the understanding, since he calls it so; and everything that he desires
he supposes to be of the will, since he calls it so. And it is the more
difficult to explain this so as to be apprehended, because most men at
this day are also ignorant of the fact that what is of the understanding
is distinct from what is of the will, for when they think anything they
say they will it, and when they will a thing they say they think it.
This is one cause of the difficulty, and another reason why this subject
can with difficulty be comprehended is that men are solely in what is of
the body, that is, their life is in the most external things. \[2\] And
for these reasons they do not know that there is in every man something
that is interior, and something still interior to that, and indeed an
inmost; and that his corporeal and sensuous part is only the outermost.
Desires, and things of the memory, are interior; affections and rational
things are interior still to these; and the will of good and
understanding of truth are inmost. And these are so distinct from each
other that nothing can ever be more distinct. The corporeal man makes
all these into a one, and confounds them. This is why he believes that
when his body dies all things are to die; though in fact he then first
begins to live, and this by his interiors following one another closely
in their order. If his interiors were not thus distinct, and did not
thus succeed each other, men could never be in the other life spirits,
angelic spirits, and angels, who are thus distinguished according to
their interiors. For this reason there are three heavens, most distinct
from each other. From these considerations it may now in some measure be
evident what, in the proper sense, are the understanding of truth and
the will of good; and that they can be predicated only of the celestial
man, or of the angels of the third heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="635.">635.</span></span>

What is said in the preceding verse and in this signifies that in the
end of the days of the antediluvian church all understanding of truth
and will of good had perished, so that among the antediluvians who were
imbued with dreadful persuasions and filthy cupidities not even a
vestige appeared. But with those who are called "Noah" there continued
to be remains, which however could not bring forth anything of
understanding and will, but only rational truth and natural good. For
the operation of remains is according to the nature of the mad Through
remains these people could be regenerated; and persuasions did not
obstruct and absorb the Lord's operation through remains. Persuasions,
or principles of falsity, when rooted in impede all operation; and
unless these are first eradicated the man can never be regenerated,
concerning which subject, of the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="636.">636.</span></span>

I will destroy them with the earth. That this signifies that together
with the church the human race would perish, is evident from its being
said "with the earth;" for the "earth" in a wide sense signifies love,
as before said, and thus the celestial of the church. Here, since no
love and nothing whatever that is celestial remained, the "earth"
signifies the love of self, and whatever is contrary to the celestial of
the church. And yet there was a man of the church, for they had
doctrinal things of faith. For, as before stated, the earth is the
containant of the ground, and the ground is the containant of the field;
as love is the containant of faith, and faith is the containant of the
knowledges of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="637.">637.</span></span>

That "I will destroy them with the earth" signified that together with
the church the human race would perish, is on this account: If the
Lord's church should be entirely extinguished on the earth, the human
race could by no means exist, but one and all would perish. The church,
as before said, is as the heart: so long as the heart lives, the
neighboring viscera and members can live; but as soon as the heart dies,
they one and all die also. The Lord's church on earth is as the heart,
whence the human race, even that part of it which is outside the church,
has life. The reason is quite unknown to anyone, but in order that
something of it may be known, it may be stated that the whole human race
on earth is as a body with its parts, wherein the church is as the
heart; and that unless there were a church with which as with a heart
the Lord might be united through heaven and the world of spirits, there
would be disjunction; and if there were disjunction of the human race
from the Lord, it would instantly perish. This is the reason why from
the first creation of man there has always been some church, and
whenever the church has begun to perish it has yet remained with some.
\[2\] This was also the reason of the Lord's coming into the world. If
in His Divine mercy He had not come, the whole human race on this earth
would have perished, for the church was then at its last extremity, and
there was scarcely any good and truth surviving. The reason why the
human race cannot live unless it is conjoined with the Lord through
heaven and the world of spirits, is that in himself regarded man is much
viler than the brutes. If left to himself he would rush into the ruin of
himself and of all things; for he desires nothing else than what would
be for the destruction of himself and of all. His order should be that
one should love another as himself; but now everyone loves himself more
than others, and thus hates all others. But with brute animals the case
is quite different: their order is that according to which they live.
Thus they live quite according to the order in which they are, and man
entirely contrary to his order. Therefore unless the Lord should have
compassion on him, and conjoin him with Himself through angels, he could
not live a single moment; but this he does not know.

<span class="margnote"><span id="638.">638.</span></span>

Verse 14. Make thee an ark of gopher woods, mansions shalt thou make the
ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch. By the "ark" is
signified the man of that church; by "gopher wood" his concupiscences;
by the "mansions" are signified the two parts of the man, which are the
will and the understanding; by "pitching it within and without" is
signified his preservation from an inundation of cupidities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="639.">639.</span></span>

That by the "ark" is signified the man of that church, or the church
called "Noah" is sufficiently evident from the description of it in the
following verses; and from the fact that the Lord's Word everywhere
involves spiritual and celestial things; that is, that the Word is
spiritual and celestial. If the ark with its coating of pitch, its
measurement, and its construction, and the flood also, signified nothing
more than the letter expresses, there would be nothing at all spiritual
and celestial in the account of it, but only something historical, which
would be of no more use to the human race than any similar thing
described by secular writers. But because the Word of the Lord
everywhere in its bosom or interiors involves and contains spiritual and
celestial things, it is very evident that by the ark and all the things
said about the ark, are signified hidden things not yet revealed. \[2\]
It is the same in other places, as in the case of the little ark in
which Moses was concealed, which was placed among the sedge by the
riverside (Exod. 2:3); and to take a more lofty instance, it was the
same with the holy ark in the wilderness, that was made after the
pattern shown to Moses on Mount Sinai. If each and all things in this
ark had not been representative of the Lord and His kingdom, it would
have been nothing else than a sort of idol, and the worship idolatrous.
In like manner the temple of Solomon was not holy at all of itself, or
on account of the gold, silver, cedar, and stone in it, but on account
of all the things which these represented. And so here-if the ark and
its construction, with its several particulars, did not signify some
hidden thing of the church, the Word would not be the Word of the Lord,
but a kind of dead letter, as in the case of any profane writer.
Therefore it is evident that the ark signifies the man of the church, or
the church called "Noah."

<span class="margnote"><span id="640.">640.</span></span>

That by "gopher woods" are signified concupiscences, and by the
"mansions" the two parts of this man, which are the will and the
understanding, no one has hitherto known. Nor can anyone know how these
things are signified, unless he is first told how the case was with that
church. The Most Ancient Church, as has often been said, knew from love
whatever was of faith; or what is the same, from a will of good had
understanding of truth. But their posterity received also by inheritance
that cupidities, which are of the will, ruled over them, in which they
immersed the doctrinal things of faith, and thus became "Nephilim." When
therefore the Lord foresaw that if man continued to be of such a nature
he would perish eternally, He provided that the will should be separated
from the understanding, and that man should be formed, not as before by
a will of good, but through an understanding of truth should be endowed
with charity, which appears as a will of good. Such did this new church
become which is called "Noah" and thus it was of an entirely different
nature from the Most Ancient Church. Besides this church, there were
other churches also at that time, as that which is called "Enosh" (see
Gen. 4:26), and others also of which no such mention and description is
extant. Only this church "Noah" is here described, because it was of
another and entirely different nature from the Most Ancient Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="641.">641.</span></span>

As this man of the church must be reformed as to that part of man which
is called the understanding, before he could be reformed as to the other
part which is called the will, it is here described how the things of
the will were separated from those of the understanding, and were as it
were covered over and reserved, lest anything should touch the will. For
if things of the will, that is of cupidity, had been excited, the man
would have perished, as will appear, of the Lord's Divine mercy,
hereafter. These two parts-the will and the understanding-are so
distinct in man that nothing could be more distinct, as has been given
me also to know with certainty from the fact that things of the
understanding of spirits and angels flow into the left part of the head
or brain, and things of the will into the right; and it is the same with
respect to the face. When angelic spirits flow in, they do so gently
like the softest breaths of air; but when evil spirits flow in, it is
like an inundation into the left part of the brain with dreadful
phantasies and persuasions, and into the right with cupidities, their
influx being as it were an inundation of phantasies and cupidities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="642.">642.</span></span>

From all this it is evident what this first description of the ark
involves, with its construction of gopher wood, its mansions, and its
coating within and without with pitch, namely, that one part, that of
the will, was preserved from inundation; and only that part opened which
is of the understanding, and is described, in verse 16, by the window,
the door, and the lowest, second, and third stories. These things are
not easily believed, because hitherto no one has had any idea of them.
And yet they are most true. But these are the least and most general of
the hidden meanings which man is ignorant of. If the individual
particulars were told him, he could not apprehend even one of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="643.">643.</span></span>

But as regards the signification itself of the words: that "gopher wood"
signifies concupiscences, and the "mansions" the two parts of man, is
evident from the Word. Gopher wood is a wood abounding in sulphur, <span
id="fr_11"></span>[643-1](#fn_11) like the fir, and others of its kind.
On account of its sulphur it is said that it signifies concupiscences,
because it easily takes fire. The most ancient people compared things in
man (and regarded them as having a likeness) to gold, silver, brass,
iron, stone, and wood-his inmost celestial to gold, his lower celestial
to brass, and what was lowest, or the corporeal therefrom, to wood. But
his inmost spiritual they compared (and regarded as having a likeness)
to silver, his lower spiritual to iron, and his lowest to stone. And
such in the internal sense is the signification of these things when
they are mentioned in the Word, as in Isaiah: For brass I will bring
gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for
stones iron; I will also make thine officers peace, and thine exactors
righteousness (Isa. 60:17). Here the Lord's kingdom is treated of, in
which there are not such metals, but spiritual and celestial things; and
that these are signified is very evident from the mention of "peace" and
"righteousness." "Gold" "brass" and "wood" here correspond to each
other, and signify things celestial or of the will, as before said; and
"silver" "iron" and "stone" correspond to each other, and signify things
spiritual or of the understanding. \[2\] In Ezekiel: They shall make a
spoil of thy riches and make a prey of thy merchandise; thy stones, and
thy wood (Ezek. 26:12). It is very manifest that by "riches" and
"merchandise" are not meant worldly riches and merchandise, but
celestial and spiritual; and the same by the "stones" and "wood"-the
"stones" being those things which are of the understanding, and the
"wood" those which are of the will. In Habakkuk: The stone crieth out of
the wall, and the beam out of the wood answereth (Hab. 2:11). The
"stone" denotes the lowest degree of the understanding; and the "wood"
the lowest of the will, which "answers" when anything is drawn from
sensuous knowledge \[scientifico sensuali\]. Again: Woe unto him that
saith to the wood, Awake; and to the dumb stone, Arise, this shall
teach. Behold it is fastened with gold and silver, and there is no
breath in the midst of it. But Jehovah is in the temple of His holiness
(Hab. 2:19-20). Here also "wood" denotes cupidity; "stone" denotes the
lowest of the understanding, and therefore to be "dumb" and to "teach"
are predicated of it; "there is no breath in the midst of it" signifies
that it represents nothing celestial and spiritual, just as a temple
wherein are stone and wood, and these bound together with gold and
silver, is to those who think nothing of what they represent. \[3\] In
Jeremiah: We drink our waters for silver; our wood cometh for price
(Lam. 5:4). Here "waters" and "silver" signify the things of the
understanding; and "wood" those of the will. Again: Saying to wood, Thou
art my father; and to the stone, Thou hast brought us forth (Jer. 2:27).
Here "wood" denotes cupidity, which is of the will, whence is the
conception; and "stone" the sensuous knowledge \[scientifico sensuali\],
from which is the "bringing forth." Hence, in different places in the
Prophets, "serving wood and stone" is put for worshiping graven images
of wood and stone, by which is signified that they served cupidities and
phantasies; and also "committing adultery with wood and stone" as in
Jeremiah (3:9). In Hosea: My people inquire of their wood, and the staff
thereof declareth unto them; because the spirit of whoredoms hath led
them away (Hos. 4:12), meaning that they make inquiry of graven images
of wood, or of cupidities. \[4\] In Isaiah: Topheth is prepared from
yesterday, the pile thereof is fire and mulch wood, the breath of
Jehovah is like a stream of burning sulphur (Isa. 30:33). Here "fire"
"sulphur" and "wood" stand for foul cupidities. In general, "wood"
signifies the things of the will which are lowest; the precious woods,
such as cedar and the like, those which are good, as for example the
cedar wood in the temple, and the cedar wood employed in the cleansing
of leprosy (Lev. 14:4, 6-7); also the wood cast into the bitter waters
at Marah, whereby the waters became sweet (Exod. 15:25), concerning
which, of the Lord's Divine mercy in those places. But woods that were
not precious, and those which were made into graven images, as well as
those used for funeral piles and the like, signify cupidities; as in
this place does the gopher wood, on account of its sulphur. So in
Isaiah: The day of vengeance of Jehovah; the streams thereof shall be
turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into sulphur, and the land
thereof shall become burning pitch (Isa. 34:9). "Pitch" stands for
dreadful phantasies; "sulphur" for abominable cupidities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="644.">644.</span></span>

That by the "mansions" are signified the two parts of man, which are the
will and the understanding, is evident from what has been stated before:
that these two parts, the will and the understanding, are most distinct
from each other, and that for this reason, as before said, the human
brain is divided into two parts, called hemispheres. To its left
hemisphere pertain the intellectual faculties, and to the right those of
the will. This is the most general distinction. Besides this, both the
will and the understanding are distinguished into innumerable parts, for
so many are the divisions of the intellectual things of man, and so many
those of the will, that they can never be described or enumerated even
as to the universal genera, still less as to their species. A man is a
kind of least heaven, corresponding to the world of spirits and to
heaven, wherein all the genera and all the species of the things of the
understanding and of the will are distinguished by the Lord in the most
perfect order, so that not even the least of them is undistinguished,
concerning which, of the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter. In heaven these
divisions are called Societies, in the Word "habitations" and by the
Lord "mansions" (John 14:2). Here also they are called "mansions"
because they are predicated of the ark, which signifies the man of the
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="645.">645.</span></span>

That to "pitch it within and without with pitch" signifies preservation
from an inundation of cupidities, is evident from what has been said
before. For the man of this church was first to be reformed as to the
things of his understanding, and therefore he was preserved from an
inundation of cupidities, which would destroy all the work of
reformation. In the original text it is not indeed said that it was to
be "pitched with pitch" but a word is used which denotes "protection"
derived from "expiate" or "propitiate" and therefore it involves the
same. The expiation or propitiation of the Lord is protection from the
inundation of evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="646.">646.</span></span>

Verse 15. And thus shalt thou make it: three hundred cubits the length
of the ark, fifty cubits its breadth, and thirty, cubits its height. By
the numbers here as before are signified remains, that they were few;
the "length" is their holiness, the "breadth" their truth, and the
"height" their good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="647.">647.</span></span>

That these particulars have such a signification, as that the numbers
"three hundred" "fifty" and "thirty" signify remains, and that they are
few; and that "length" "breadth" and "height" signify holiness, truth,
and good, cannot but appear strange to everyone, and very remote from
the letter. But in addition to what was said and shown above concerning
numbers (at verse 3 of this chapter, that a "hundred and twenty" there
signify remains of faith), it may be evident to everyone also from the
fact that they who are in the internal sense, as are good spirits and
angels, are beyond all such things as are earthly, corporeal, and merely
of the world, and thus are beyond all matters of number and measure, and
yet it is given them by the Lord to perceive the Word fully, and this
entirely apart from such things. And this being true, it may therefore
be very evident that these particulars involve things celestial and
spiritual which are so remote from the sense of the letter that it
cannot even appear that there are such things. Such are celestial and
spiritual things both in general and in particular. And from this a man
may know how insane it is to desire to search into those things which
are matters of faith, by means of the things of sense and knowledge
\[sensualia et scientifica\]; and to be unwilling to believe unless he
apprehends them in this way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="648.">648.</span></span>

That in the Word numbers and measures signify things celestial and
spiritual, is very evident from the measurement of the New Jerusalem and
of the Temple, in John, and in Ezekiel. Anyone may see that by the "New
Jerusalem" and the "new Temple" is signified the kingdom of the Lord in
the heavens and on earth, and that the kingdom of the Lord in the
heavens and on earth is not subject to earthly measurement; and yet its
dimensions as to length, breadth, and height are designated by numbers.
From this anyone may conclude that by the numbers and measures are
signified holy things, as in John: There was given me a reed like unto a
rod; and the angel stood, and said unto me, Rise, and measure the temple
of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein (Rev. 11:1). And
concerning the New Jerusalem: The wall of the New Jerusalem was great
and high, having twelve gates, and over the gates twelve angels, and
names written, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of
Israel; on the east three gates, on the north three gates, on the south
three gates, on the west three gates. The wall of the city had twelve
foundations, and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
He that talked with me had a golden reed, to measure the city, and the
gates thereof, and the wall thereof. The city lieth four square, and the
length thereof is as great as the breadth. And he measured the city with
the reed, twelve thousand furlongs; the length and the breadth and the
height thereof are equal. He measured the wall thereof, a hundred and
forty and four cubits, which is the measure of a man, that is, of an
angel (Rev. 21:12-17). \[2\] The number "twelve" occurs here throughout,
which is a very holy number because it signifies the holy things of
faith (as said above, at verse 3 of this chapter, and as will be shown,
of the Lord's Divine mercy, at the twenty-ninth and thirtieth, chapters
of Genesis). And therefore it is added that this measure is the "measure
of a man, that is, of an angel." It is the same with the new Temple and
new Jerusalem in Ezekiel which are also described as to their measures
(40:3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13-14, 22, 25, 30, 36, 42, 47; 41:1 to the end;
42:5-15; Zech. 2:1-2). Here too regarded in themselves the numbers
signify nothing but the holy celestial and spiritual abstractedly from
the numbers. So with all the numbers of the dimensions of the ark (Exod.
25:10); of the mercy seat; of the golden table; of the tabernacle; and
of the altar (Exod. 25:10, 17, 23; 26, and 27:1); and all the numbers
and dimensions of the temple (1 Kings 6:2-3), and many others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="649.">649.</span></span>

But here the numbers or measures of the ark signify nothing else than
the remains which were with the man of this church when he was being
reformed, and that they were but few. This is evident from the fact that
in these numbers five predominates, which in the Word signifies some or
a little, as in Isaiah: There shall be left therein gleanings, as the
shaking of an olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the
uppermost bough, four or five in the branches of a fruitful one (Isa.
17:6), where "two or three" and "five" denote a few. Again: One thousand
at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee; until ye be
left as a pole upon the top of a mountain (Isa. 30:17),where also "five"
denotes a few. So too the least fine, after restitution, was a "fifth
part" (Lev. 5:16; 6:5; 22:14; Num. 5:7). And the least addition when
they redeemed a beast, a house, a field, or the tithes, was a "fifth
part" (Lev. 27:13, 15, 19, 31).

<span class="margnote"><span id="650.">650.</span></span>

That "length" signifies the holiness, "breadth" the truth, and "height"
the good of whatever things are described by the numbers, cannot so well
be confirmed from the Word, because they are each and all predicated
according to the subject or thing treated of. Thus "length" as applied
to time signifies perpetuity and eternity, as "length of days" in Ps.
23:6, and 21:4; but as applied to space it denotes holiness, as follows
therefrom. And the same is the case with "breadth" and "height." There
is a trinal dimension of all earthly things, but such dimensions cannot
be predicated of celestial and spiritual things. When they are
predicated, greater or less perfection is meant, apart from the
dimensions, and also the quality and quantity; thus here the quality,
that they were remains; and the quantity, that they were few.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[612-1](ac013.htm#fr_8) "Perfect" is used here in
the sense of "whole," "entire." Swedenborg's word is integer.
\[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_9"></span>[612-2](ac013.htm#fr_9) The Latin has only one
word for our two English words "just" and "righteous" and it is the same
with "justice" and "righteousness." \[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_10"></span>[620-1](ac013.htm#fr_10) The Latin word terra
means both "earth" and "land." \[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_11"></span>[643-1](ac013.htm#fr_11) The word "sulphur" was
formerly used not exclusively as the name of brimstone, but also as a
general term for inflammable substance. The classification of gopher
here with the fir (abies), which is a turpentine tree, would seem to
imply that the inflammable constituent of the gopher also was
turpentine, and that this is what is meant here by "sulphur." See Lord
Bacon's "History of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt." \[Note in the Rotch
edition.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 651-700](ac014)
