[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac024)  [Next](ac026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="1201.">1201.</span></span>

That "Zidon" signifies exterior knowledges of spiritual things, is
evident from the fact that it is called the "first-born of Canaan;" for
the firstborn of every church, in the internal sense, is faith (n. 352,
367). But here, where there is no faith, because no internal things,
there are nothing but exterior knowledges of spiritual things which are
in the place of faith; thus knowledges such as existed among the Jews,
which are knowledges not only of the rites of external worship, but also
of many things, such as doctrinals, which belong to that worship. That
this is the signification of "Zidon" is also evident from the fact that
Tyre and Zidon were extreme borders of Philistia, and were moreover by
the sea; and therefore by "Tyre" interior knowledges are signified, and
by "Zidon" exterior knowledges, that is, of spiritual things-which is
also evident from the Word. In Jeremiah: On the day that cometh to lay
waste all the Philistines, to cut off from Tyre and Zidon every helper
that remaineth; for Jehovah will lay waste the Philistines, the remnant
of the isle of Caphtor (Jer. 47:4). Here "the Philistines" denote the
mere memory-knowledge of the knowledges of faith and charity; "Tyre"
denotes the interior knowledges, and "Zidon" the exterior knowledges, of
spiritual things. \[2\] In Joel: What are ye to Me, O Tyre and Zidon,
and all the borders of Philistia? Forasmuch as ye have taken My silver
and gold, and have carried into your temples My desirable good things
(Joel 3:4-5). Here "Tyre and Zidon" evidently denote knowledges, and are
called "the borders of Philistia;" "silver and gold," and "desirable
good things," are knowledges. In Ezekiel: The princes of the north, all
of them, and every Zidonian who has gone down with the slain into the
pit. When he has been made to lie in the midst of the uncircumcised,
with them that are slain with the sword; Pharaoh and all his crowd
(Ezek. 32:30, 32). "The Zidonians" here denote exterior knowledges,
which without internal things are nothing but memory-knowledges and
therefore they are named in connection with Pharaoh, or Egypt, by whom
memory-knowledges are signified. In Zechariah: Hamath also shall be
bordered thereon; Tyre and Zidon, because she was very wise (Zech. 9:2).
The subject here is Damascus; "Tyre and Zidon" denote knowledges. \[3\]
In Ezekiel: The inhabitants of Zidon and of Arvad were thy rowers; thy
wise men, O Tyre, were in thee, they were thy pilots (Ezek. 27:8). Here
"Tyre" denotes interior knowledges; wherefore her wise men are called
"pilots;" and "Zidon" denotes exterior knowledges, and therefore her
inhabitants are called "rowers;" for such is the relation of interior
knowledges to exterior. In Isaiah: Let the inhabitants of the isle be
silent, the merchant of Zidon, that passes over the sea, they have
replenished thee. And in great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of
the river was her revenue, and she was the mart of nations. Be ashamed,
O Zidon, for the sea hath spoken, the stronghold of the sea, saying, I
have not travailed, nor brought forth, nor have I brought up young men,
nor caused virgins to grow up (Isa. 23:2-4). "Zidon" here denotes
exterior knowledges, which, because there is nothing internal in them,
are called "the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river her revenue, the
mart of the nations," and also "the sea," and "the stronghold of the
sea;" and it is said that she doth not "travail and bring forth"-which
could not be comprehended in the literal sense, but is all perfectly
clear in the internal sense; as is the case with other passages in the
Prophets. Because "Zidon" signifies exterior knowledges, it is said to
be "a circuit about Israel," that is, around the spiritual church (Ezek.
28:24, 26); for exterior knowledges are like a circuit round about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1202.">1202.</span></span>

That Zidon is called "the firstborn of Canaan" because these knowledges
are the foremost things of such external worship, wherein is no internal
worship, has just been explained, in the preceding paragraph.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1203.">1203.</span></span>

That "Heth" signifies exterior knowledges of celestial things is
consequently evident. It is customary in the Prophets for spiritual and
celestial things to be joined together, that is, where spiritual things
are treated of, celestial things are also treated of; for the reason
that the one is from the other, and there is a certain want of
perfection if they are not conjoined; so that there is an image of the
heavenly marriage in each and all things of the Word. It is also evident
from this, as well as from the Word in other places, that by "Zidon" are
signified exterior knowledges of spiritual things, and by "Heth"
exterior knowledges of celestial things, in both senses-that is to say,
without internal things, and with internal things-and also simply
exterior knowledges. Spiritual things, as has often been said before,
are those which are of faith; and celestial things are those which are
of love; and again, spiritual things are those which are of the
understanding, and celestial things are those which are of the will.
That "Heth" signifies exterior knowledges without internal, is evident
in Ezekiel: Thus saith the Lord Jehovih unto Jerusalem, Thy tradings and
thy nativity are of the land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and
thy mother a Hittite. Thou art thy mother's daughter, that loatheth her
man \[vir\] and her sons; and the sister of thy sisters, that loathed
their husbands and their sons. Your mother was a Hittite, and your
father an Amorite (Ezek. 16:3, 45). Here external worship without
internal is "Canaan;" to "loathe husbands and sons," is to reject goods
and truths. Hence her mother is called "a Hittite." But "Heth" is also
taken in the Word for exterior knowledges of celestial things in a good
sense, as are nearly all names of countries, cities, nations, and
persons, for a reason already explained. Concerning this signification
of "Heth," by the Divine mercy of the Lord hereafter. Knowledges of
spiritual things are those which have regard to faith, consequently to
doctrine; and knowledges of celestial things are those which have regard
to love, and thus to life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1204.">1204.</span></span>

Verses 16-18. And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite, and
the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, and the Arvadite, and the
Zemarite, and the Hamathite. And afterwards were the families of the
Canaanites spread abroad. "The Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the
Girgashite, and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, and the
Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite" were so many nations, by
which are signified also so many different idolatries. "And afterwards
were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad," signifies that all
other forms of idolatrous worship are derived from these.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1205.">1205.</span></span>

The Jebusite, Amorite, Girgashite, Hivite, Arkite, Sinite, Arvadite,
Zemarite, and Hamathite, were so many nations, and they also signify so
many different idolatries. That idolatries were signified by these
nations, is evident from many places in the Word, for they were the
inhabitants of the land of Canaan who on account of their idolatries
were cast out, and in part extirpated. But in the internal sense of the
Word these nations are not signified, but the idolatries themselves in
general, with whomsoever and wheresoever they are; specifically, among
the Jews. For they who make worship consist merely in externals, and are
entirely unwilling to know internal things, and when instructed reject
them, are very prone to all these idolatries, as is clearly manifest
from the Jews. In internal worship alone is there a bond that withholds
man from idolatry; and when this ceases, there is nothing that
restrains. There are however interior idolatries, as well as external
ones. They who have external worship without internal rush into external
idolatries; they who have external worship whose interiors are unclean
rush into interior idolatries; and both these kinds of idolatries are
signified by these nations. Interior idolatries are so many falsities
and cupidities which men love and adore, and which are thus in place of
the gods and idols that existed among the Gentiles. But what particular
kinds of falsities and cupidities are those which are adored, and which
are signified by these nations-the Jebusite, Amorite, Girgashite,
Hivite, Arkite, Sinite, Arvadite, Zemarite, and Hamathite-it would take
too long to explain here; but of the Lord's Divine mercy it will be told
in the places where their names occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1206.">1206.</span></span>

Afterwards were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad. That this
signifies that all other forms of idolatrous worship are derived from
these, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1207.">1207.</span></span>

Verse 19. And the border of the Canaanite was from Zidon, in coming to
Gerar, even unto Gaza, in coming to Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and
Zeboiim, even unto Lasha. By "Zidon," here as before, exterior
knowledges are signified; by "Gerar" are signified the things that are
revealed concerning faith; by "Gaza" the things that are revealed
concerning charity; "the border of the Canaanites was from Zidon, in
coming to Gerar, even unto Gaza," signifies the extension of knowledges
to truth and good, with those who have external worship without
internal; "in coming to Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim, even unto
Lasha," signifies the falsities and evils in which they terminate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1208.">1208.</span></span>

That by "Zidon" are signified exterior knowledges, is evident from what
was shown above, at verse 15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1209.">1209.</span></span>

That by "Gerar" are signified the things that have been revealed
concerning faith, and thus in general faith itself, is evident from the
passages where Gerar is mentioned (as Gen. 20:1; 26:1, 17), concerning
which signification of "Gerar," of the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1210.">1210.</span></span>

That by "Gaza" are signified the things that have been revealed
concerning charity, is evident from the fact that where spiritual things
are treated of in the Word, celestial things also are treated of,
conjointly (that is to say, when things of faith are treated of, so also
are those of charity); and the same is also evident from the Word where
"Gaza" is mentioned; and still further from the consideration that
knowledges extend to faith, and even to charity, which is their furthest
limit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1211.">1211.</span></span>

The border of the Canaanites was from Zidon, in coming to Gerar, even
unto Gaza. That this signifies the extension of knowledges with those
who have external worship without internal, is evident from the
signification of "Gerar" and of "Gaza." Thus far do the boundaries of
all knowledges that relate to worship extend, whether that worship be
external or internal; for all worship is from faith and charity. What is
not from these is not worship, but is idolatry. As Canaan, that is,
external worship and its derivations, is the subject here treated of,
the boundaries and extensions meant are those not of worship, but of
knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1212.">1212.</span></span>

In coming to Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim, even unto Lasha. That
these signify the falsities and evils in which they terminate, can be
seen from the signification of the same in the historical and
prophetical parts of the Word. There are, in general, two origins of
falsities; one is the cupidities that belong to the love of self and of
the world; the other is knowledges \[cognitiones et scientifica\],
through reasonings; and the falsities which thus originate, when they
would domineer over truths, are signified by "Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah,
and Zeboiim." That falsities and evils from them are the boundaries of
external worship which is without internal, anyone may see. In such
worship there is nothing but what is dead; and therefore whichever way
the man who is in such worship turns, he sinks into falsities. There is
nothing internal that leads and keeps him in the way of truth, but only
what is external, which carries him whithersoever cupidity and phantasy
lead. As Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim are mentioned in both the
historical and prophetical parts of the Word, what each specifically
signifies, will of the Lord's Divine mercy be there explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1213.">1213.</span></span>

Verse 20. These are the sons of Ham, according to their families,
according to their tongues, in their lands, in their nations. "The sons
of Ham" signify derivations of doctrinals and of worships from the
corrupt internal worship which is "Ham;" "according to their families,
according to their tongues, in their lands, in their nations," signifies
according to the genius of each, in particular and in general;
"according to their families," is according to their morals; "according
to their tongues," is according to their opinions; "in their lands," is
in general relatively to their opinions; "in their nations," is in
general relatively to their morals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1214.">1214.</span></span>

That "the sons of Ham" signify derivations of doctrinals and of worships
from the corrupt internal worship which is "Ham," is evident from the
signification of "sons," as being doctrinals; and from the signification
of "Ham," as being corrupt internal worship; concerning which before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1215.">1215.</span></span>

According to their families, according to their tongues, in their lands,
in their nations. That this signifies according to the genius of each,
in particular and in general, was explained above (at verse 5), where
the same words occur, but in another order. The subject there was the
sons of Japheth, that "From these were dispersed the isles of the
nations, in their lands, everyone according to his tongue, according to
their families, as to their nations," signified external worships in
which there was internal. In that passage therefore the things that
belong to doctrine take precedence; but here those which belong to
morals, or to life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1216.">1216.</span></span>

That "according to their families" is according to their morals; that
"according to their tongues" is according to their opinions; that "in
their lands" is in general relatively to their opinions; and that "in
their nations" is in general relatively to their morals, can be seen
from the signification of each term in the Word-that is, of "family,"
"tongue," "land," and "nation"-concerning which see what was said above,
at verse 5.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1217.">1217.</span></span>

Verse 21. And there was born to Shem also; he is the father of all the
sons of Eber; the elder brother of Japheth. By "Shem" is here signified
the Ancient Church in general; "there was born to Shem," signifies that
a new church sprang from the Ancient Church; by "Eber" is signified this
new church, which is to be called the Second Ancient Church; "he is the
father of all the sons of Eber," signifies that this second Ancient
Church, and what belonged to this church, sprang from the prior Ancient
Church as from its father; "the elder brother of Japheth," signifies
that its worship was external.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1218.">1218.</span></span>

That by "Shem" is here signified the Ancient Church in general, is
evident from the fact that the subject here treated of is Eber, whom
Shem now bears reference to; and from his being called in this verse
"the elder brother of Japheth."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1219.">1219.</span></span>

That "there was born to Shem" here signifies that a new church sprang
from the Ancient Church, is evident from the contents of this verse,
which treat of Eber, by whom that new church is meant, of which
hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1220.">1220.</span></span>

That by "Eber" a new church is signified, which is to be called the
Second Ancient Church, is evident from what follows, where Eber is
specifically treated of. Eber is mentioned here because that new church
was from him. How the case was with Eber and with this second church,
will of the Lord's Divine mercy be told hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1221.">1221.</span></span>

He is the father of all the sons of Eber. That this signifies that this
second Ancient Church, and what belonged to this church, sprang from the
prior Ancient Church, as from its father, will likewise be seen from
what follows concerning Eber, and concerning this church; for Eber is
treated of from verses 24 to 30 of this chapter, and from verse 11 to
the end of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1222.">1222.</span></span>

The elder brother of Japheth. That this signifies that its worship was
external, is evident from the signification of "Japheth," as being the
external church, concerning which in the preceding chapter, in the 18th
and following verses; and above, in this chapter, verses 1 to 5. Here
"Shem, the elder brother of Japheth" signifies specifically that the
internal church and the external church are brothers; for such is the
relation of internal worship to external worship in which there is
internal. It is a blood-relationship, for in each the principal is
charity. But the internal church is the elder brother, because it is
prior and interior. "The elder brother of Japheth" here involves also
that the second Ancient Church, called "Eber," was as a brother to the
first Ancient Church. For by "Japheth," in the internal sense, nothing
else is signified than external worship in which there is internal, in
whatever church; thus also the worship of this new Ancient Church, which
was chiefly external. Such is the internal sense of the Word that the
historicals of the literal sense are not attended to when universals,
which are abstract from the literal sense, are regarded; for they look
toward one another in a contrary manner. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1222-1](#fn_26.md) Hence "the elder brother of Japheth"
here signifies, in the internal sense, the worship of the new Ancient
Church, that it was external. Unless this were signified, it would be
needless to say here that he was the elder brother of Japheth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1223.">1223.</span></span>

Verse 22. The sons of Shem: Elam, and Asshur, and Arpachshad, and Lud,
and Aram. By "Shem" is signified here as before, an internal church; by
"the sons of Shem," the things that are of wisdom; "Elam, and Asshur,
and Arpachshad, and Lud, and Aram" were so many nations, by which are
signified things that are of wisdom-by "Elam" faith from charity, by
"Asshur" the derivative reason, by "Arpachshad" the derivative
memory-knowledge, by "Lud" the knowledges of truth, by "Aram" the
knowledges of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1224.">1224.</span></span>

From all this it is evident what these names signify in the internal
sense, namely, that the Ancient Church, which was internal, was endowed
with wisdom, intelligence, memory-knowledge, and the knowledges of truth
and of good. Such things are contained in the internal sense, although
here are only names from which nothing else appears in the literal sense
than that there were so many origins or fathers of nations, thus nothing
doctrinal, much less anything spiritual and celestial. Such is the case
also in the Prophets, where, whenever a series of names occurs, which in
the internal sense signify actual things, they follow one another in a
beautiful order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1225.">1225.</span></span>

That by "Shem" is signified an internal church, has been stated and
shown in the preceding chapter, at the 18th and following verses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1226.">1226.</span></span>

That by "the sons of Shem" are signified the things that are of wisdom,
is evident merely from Shem's being an internal church, the sons of
which are none other than things of wisdom. Everything is called wisdom
that is begotten of charity, because it comes by means of charity from
the Lord, from whom is all wisdom, for He is wisdom itself. Hence comes
true intelligence, and hence comes true memory-knowledge, and hence
comes true knowledge, which are all sons of charity, that is, sons of
the Lord through charity. And because they are sons of the Lord through
charity, wisdom is predicated of each of them, for wisdom is in each of
them, and they draw their life from it, and this in such a manner that
neither intelligence, nor memory-knowledge, nor knowledge, has life
except from the wisdom which is of charity, which is of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1227.">1227.</span></span>

That "Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, and Aram" were so many nations, is
evident from the historical and prophetical parts of the Word where they
are mentioned. And that they signify things that are of wisdom, is
evident from what has been said just above, and from what follows. Among
these nations there was an internal church; with others, who were called
sons of Japheth, there was an external church; with those who were
called sons of Ham there was a corrupted internal church; and with those
who were sons of Canaan there was a corrupted external church. Whether
it be said internal and external worship, or an internal and an external
church, it is quite the same.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1228.">1228.</span></span>

That by "Elam" is signified faith from charity, is evident from the
essence of an internal church. A church is internal when charity is the
principal of it, from which it thinks and acts. The first offspring of
charity is none other than faith; for faith is from it, and from no
other source. That "Elam" is faith from charity, or the faith itself
which constitutes an internal church, is evident also in Jeremiah: The
Word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam:
Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might. And upon
Elam will I bring the four winds from the four ends of the heavens, and
will scatter them toward all those winds; and there shall be no nation
whither the outcasts of Elam shall not come. And I will cause Elam to be
dismayed before their enemies, and before them that seek their soul; and
I will bring evil upon them, My fierce anger, and I will send the sword
after them till I have consumed them. And I will set My throne in Elam,
and will destroy from thence the king and the princes. But it shall come
to pass in the latter days that I will bring back the captivity of Elam
(Jer. 49:34-39). \[2\] In this passage "Elam" denotes faith, or what is
the same thing, an internal church, become perverted and corrupt; and
then the same restored. Just as in the Word, Judah, Israel, and Jacob,
are frequently spoken of-by whom churches are signified-by "Judah" a
celestial church, by "Israel" a spiritual church, by "Jacob" an external
church; of which become perverted it is said in like manner that they
should be scattered, and then, being scattered by their enemies, they
should be gathered again and brought back from their captivity, by which
is meant the creation of a new church. So here it is said of Elam, or
the internal church perverted and corrupt, that it should be scattered,
and afterwards that it should be brought back; and then that Jehovah
should set His throne in Elam, that is in the internal church, or in the
internals of the church, which are nothing else than the things of faith
from charity. \[3\] In Isaiah: The burden of the desert of the sea. It
cometh from the desert, from a terrible land. A grievous vision is
declared unto Me; the treacherous one dealeth treacherously: and the
waster layeth waste. Go up, O Elam, besiege, O Madai; all the sighing
thereof I will make to cease (Isa. 21:1-2). Here the laying waste of the
church by Babel is spoken of; "Elam" is the internal church; "Madai" is
the external church, or external worship in which is internal. That
Madai is such a church, or such worship, is shown at verse 2 of this
chapter, where Madai is said to be a son of Japheth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1229.">1229.</span></span>

That by "Asshur" is signified reason, is evident from what was shown
above, at verse 11 of this chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1230.">1230.</span></span>

That by "Arpachshad" is signified memory-knowledge, cannot be so well
confirmed from the Word, but is evident from the series of things that
precede and that follow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1231.">1231.</span></span>

That by "Lud" are signified the knowledges of truth, is evident from the
fact that the knowledges of truth are from that source, that is, from
the Lord through charity, and thus through faith, by means of reason and
of memory-knowledge. So also in Ezekiel: Persia and Lud and Put were in
thine army, thy men of war; they hanged the shield and helmet in thee;
they set forth thine honor (Ezek. 27:10). This is said of Tyre. "Lud and
Put" denote knowledges, which are said to be in her army and to be her
men of war, because they serve in defending truths with the aid of
reason. This also is to "hang the shield and helmet." That "Put"
signifies the exterior knowledges of the Word, may be seen above, at
verse 6 of this chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1232.">1232.</span></span>

That by "Aram," or Syria, are signified the knowledges of good, follows;
and is seen also from the Word, as in Ezekiel: Aram was thy trader, in
the multitude of thy works; in chrysoprase, crimson, and broidered work,
and fine linen, and coral, and carbuncle; they gave them in thy tradings
(Ezek. 27:16), where Tyre is treated of, or the possession of
knowledges; and "works, chrysoprase, crimson, broidered work, fine
linen, coral, and carbuncle," here signify nothing else than the
knowledges of good. In Hosea: Jacob fled into the field of Aram, and
Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept guard; and by a prophet
Jehovah brought Israel up out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he kept.
Ephraim hath provoked to anger with bitternesses (Hos. 12:12-14).
"Jacob" here denotes the external church, and "Israel," the internal
spiritual church; "Aram," the knowledges of good; "Egypt,"
memory-knowledge that perverts; "Ephraim," intelligence perverted. What
these signify in series cannot be seen from the literal sense, but only
from the internal sense, where names signify actual things of the
church, as has been said. In Isaiah: Behold Damascus is rejected from
being a city, and is become a ruinous heap. The fortress also shall
cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of
Aram shall be as the glory of the sons of Israel (Isa. 17:1, 3). "The
remnant of Aram" here denotes the knowledges of good, which are called
"the glory of Israel." "Aram," or Syria, in the opposite sense, denotes
the knowledges of good perverted; for it is a usual thing in the Word
that the expressions are used in both senses (Isa. 7:4-6; 9:11-12; Deut.
26:5).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1233.">1233.</span></span>

Verse 23. And the sons of Aram: Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
"Aram" here, as before, signifies the knowledges of good; "the sons of
Aram" are the derivative knowledges, and that which comes of these
knowledges; "Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash," signify so many kinds
of these knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1234.">1234.</span></span>

That "Aram" signifies the knowledges of good, has been shown just above.
That "the sons of Aram" are the derivative knowledges, and the things
which are of knowledges, follows. These derivative knowledges are
natural truths; and the things which are of knowledges are the things
done according to them. That these things are signified cannot be so
well confirmed from the Word, because these are not among the names that
are frequently mentioned. Only Uz is mentioned, in Jeremiah 25:20, and
Lam. 4:21. It follows then that "Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash" signify so
many kinds of these knowledges, and of deeds according thereto.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1235.">1235.</span></span>

Verse 24. And Arpachshad begat Shelah; and Shelah begat Eber.
"Arpachshad" was a nation so called, by which is signified
memory-knowledge; "Shelah" likewise was a nation so called, by which is
signified that which is derived from this memory-knowledge; by "Eber"
also a nation is signified, the father of which was Eber, one who was
called by this name, by whom there is signified a second Ancient Church,
which was separate from the former one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1236.">1236.</span></span>

That "Arpachshad" was a nation so called, and that by it is signified
memory-knowledge, is evident from what was said of it just above, at
verse 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1237.">1237.</span></span>

That "Shelah" likewise was a nation, and that by it is signified that
which is derived from this memory-knowledge, follows, because it is said
that "Arpachshad begat Shelah."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1238.">1238.</span></span>

That by "Eber" is signified a nation also, whose father was Eber, one
who was called by this name, is to be understood in this way. Those
mentioned hitherto were the nations among whom the Ancient Church
existed, and were all called sons of Shem, of Ham, of Japheth, and of
Canaan, because by Shem, Ham, Japheth, and Canaan are signified the
various worships of the church. Noah, Shem, Ham, Japheth, and Canaan
never existed as men; but because the Ancient Church specifically, and
in general every church, is such that it is true internal, corrupt
internal, true external, and corrupt external, therefore the
above-mentioned names were given in order that all the differences in
general might be referred to them and their sons, as to their heads.
Moreover the nations here named originally had such worship; and
therefore are called the sons of one of the sons of Noah. And for the
same reason also, such worships themselves are signified by the names of
these nations in the Word. \[2\] This first Ancient Church, signified by
Noah and his sons, was not confined to a few, but extended over many
kingdoms, as is evident from the nations mentioned, namely, Assyria,
Mesopotamia, Syria, Ethiopia, Arabia, Lybia, Egypt, Philistia as far as
Tyre and Sidon, and the whole land of Canaan, on this side and beyond
Jordan. But afterwards in Syria a kind of external worship began, which
from thence spread itself widely around, over many countries, especially
over Canaan, and which was different from the worship of the Ancient
Church. And as something of a church thus arose that was separate from
the Ancient Church, there sprang up thence as it were a new church,
which may therefore be called the Second Ancient Church. The first
institutor of this was Eber, and therefore this church is called after
Eber. At that time, as has been said before, all were distinguished into
households, families, and nations. Each nation acknowledged one father,
from whom also it was named, as is seen in various places in the Word.
Thus the nation which acknowledged Eber as its father was called the
Hebrew nation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1239.">1239.</span></span>

That by "Eber" is signified a second Ancient Church that was separate
from the former, is evident from what has just been said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1240.">1240.</span></span>

Verse 25. And unto Eber were born two sons; the name of the one was
Peleg, for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was
Joktan. Eber was the first institutor of the second Ancient Church, and
by him this church is signified; unto him "were born two sons," by whom
are signified the two kinds of worship, namely, internal and external.
His two sons were called "Peleg" and "Joktan;" by "Peleg" is signified
the internal worship of that church, and by "Joktan" its external
worship; "for in his days was the earth divided," signifies that a new
church then arose, "the earth" here as before signifying the church;
"his brother's name was Joktan" signifies the external worship of that
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1241.">1241.</span></span>

As to Eber being the first institutor of the second Ancient Church, by
whom this church is signified, the case is this. The first Ancient
Church, so widely spread as has been stated, especially through the
Asiatic world, in process of time degenerated-as is usual with all
churches everywhere-and was adulterated by innovators, as to both its
external and its internal worship, and this in various places; and
especially by the fact that all things significative and representative
which the Ancient Church had from the mouth of the Most Ancient
Church-which all bore reference to the Lord and His Kingdom-were turned
into things idolatrous, and by some of the nations into things magical.
That the whole church might not go to ruin, it was permitted by the Lord
that significative and representative worship should be somewhere
reestablished, which was done by Eber. This worship consisted chiefly in
externals. The externals of worship, in addition to the priestly offices
and what pertained to them, were high places, groves, statues,
anointings, and many other things called statutes. The internals of
worship were doctrinal things handed down from the time before the
flood, especially from those who were called "Enoch," who collected the
perceptive findings of the Most Ancient Church, and made doctrinal
things therefrom. These were their Word; and from these internals and
those externals came the worship of this church, a worship set up anew
by Eber, but added to, and also changed. Especially did they begin to
exalt sacrifices above other rites. In the true Ancient Church
sacrifices had been unknown, except among some of the descendants of Ham
and Canaan, who were idolaters, and with whom they were permitted to
prevent them from sacrificing their sons and daughters. From all this
the quality of this second Ancient Church, instituted by Eber and
continued among his posterity who were called the Hebrew nation, is
manifest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1242.">1242.</span></span>

That by the two sons of Eber, who were named Peleg and Joktan, the two
kinds of worship of that church, internal and external, are signified-by
Peleg the internal worship and by Joktan the external worship-is evident
especially from this, that in the internal sense this second Ancient
Church is signified by Eber and the Hebrew nation, and that in every
church there is an internal and an external. For without the internal it
is not and cannot be called a church, but an idolatry. Therefore, "sons"
being here predicated of the church, it is evident that by one son the
internal of the church is signified, and by the other the external; as
in various other places in the Word; and as is signified by Adah and
Zillah, the two wives of Lamech (see n. 409); by Leah and Rachel; by
Jacob and Israel, of whom hereafter; and by others. The posterity of
Joktan is treated of in this chapter; that of Peleg in the following
chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1243.">1243.</span></span>

For in his days was the earth divided. That this signifies that a new
church then arose, is now consequently evident; for by "the earth"
nothing else than the church is signified, which has been clearly shown
above (n. 662, 1066).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1244.">1244.</span></span>

And his brother's name was Joktan. That this signifies the external
worship of that church, has been shown just above. That external worship
is called a "brother" may be seen above, at verse 21 of this chapter,
where it is said of Shem that he was the elder brother of Japheth. This
is why the name "brother" is here added.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1245.">1245.</span></span>

Verses 26-29. And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth,
and Jerah. And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah. And Obal, and Abimael, and
Sheba. And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of
Joktan. These were so many nations of the family of Eber, by which are
signified so many rituals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1246.">1246.</span></span>

That these were so many nations, of the families of Eber, may be seen
from the state in which they lived at that period. In the most ancient
time, as has been said before, nations were distinguished into families,
and these into households. Each nation acknowledged one father, from
whom it was named. As they were multiplied, the sons of the one father
in like manner constituted households, families, and nations; and so on.
So it was with these sons of Joktan, as we may see it was with the sons
of Jacob, who afterwards when multiplied constituted tribes, each one of
which acknowledged one of the sons of Jacob, from whom it was named, as
its father; and yet all taken together were from Jacob, and were called
Jacob. Just so these nations were from Eber, and were called Hebrews.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1247.">1247.</span></span>

That by these nations are signified so many rituals, is evident from the
fact that in the Word names never signify anything else than actual
things; for in its internal sense the Word relates only to the Lord, to
His Kingdom in the heavens and on earth, and consequently to the church
and the things of the church. Such is the case with these names. And as
Joktan, a son of Eber, signifies the external worship of this new
church, as was said before, so his sons can signify nothing else than
things of external worship, which are rituals, and in fact so many kinds
of rituals. But what these kinds of rituals are, it is impossible to
say, because they are determined by their relation to the worship
itself, and until this is known nothing can be said about its rituals;
nor would it be of any use to know them. Neither do the names recur in
the Word, except Sheba, Ophir, and Havilah; and they are not of this
stock; for the Sheba and Havilah elsewhere spoken of in the Word were of
those who are called sons of Ham, as is evident at verse 7 of this
chapter; and the case is the same with Ophir.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1248.">1248.</span></span>

Verse 30. And their dwelling was from Mesha, in coming unto Sephar, a
mountain of the east. By these words is signified the extension of the
worship, even from the truths of faith to the good of charity. "Mesha"
signifies truth; "Sephar," good; "a mountain of the east," charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1249.">1249.</span></span>

That by these words is signified the extension of the worship, even from
the truths of faith to the good of charity; and that "Mesha" signifies
truth, and "Sephar" good, cannot indeed be confirmed from the Word,
because no mention is made of Mesha and Sephar in the Prophets. Still,
this may be seen from its being the conclusion from what goes before,
and especially from the fact that "a mountain of the east" is the final
thing to which the words that go before bear reference, and in the Word
by "a mountain of the east" is signified charity from the Lord-as will
be shown in what follows-and the same may be seen from the fact that all
things of the church have charity in view, as their finality or end.
From all which it follows that "Mesha" signifies truth, or the terminus
from which the progression commences \[terminus a quo\]; and that
"Sephar" signifies good, and thereby charity, which is "a mountain of
the east," or the terminus to which the progression tends \[terminus ad
quem\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="1250.">1250.</span></span>

That "a mountain of the east" signifies charity, and in fact charity
from the Lord, is evident from the signification of a "mountain" in the
Word, as being love to the Lord and charity toward the neighbor, as has
been shown before (n. 795). And that "the east" signifies the Lord, and
things celestial from Him, which are of love and charity, may be seen
above (n. 101), as well as from the following passages. In Ezekiel: The
cherubim lifted up their wings, and the glory of Jehovah went up from
the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east
of the city (Ezek. 11:22-23). Here "the mountain which is on the east"
signifies nothing else than what is celestial, which is of love and
charity, and which is of the Lord, for it is said that "the glory of
Jehovah stood" thereon. Again: He brought me to the gate, even the gate
that looketh to the way of the east; and behold the glory of the God of
Israel came from the way of the east (Ezek. 43:1-2), where "the east"
has a like signification. \[2\] Again: He brought me back by the way of
the outer gate of the sanctuary which looketh toward the east, and it
was shut. And Jehovah said unto me, This gate shall be shut, it shall
not be opened, neither shall any man enter in by it, but Jehovah the God
of Israel shall enter in by it (Ezek. 44:1-2). Here likewise "the east"
denotes what is celestial, which is of love, which is of the Lord alone.
And again: When the prince shall make a freewill offering, a
burnt-offering, and peace-offerings, a freewill offering unto Jehovah,
one shall open for Him the gate that looketh toward the east, and he
shall make his burnt-offering and his peace-offerings, as he shall do on
the Sabbath day (Ezek. 46:12), in like manner denoting what is
celestial, which is of love to the Lord. \[3\] And in another place: He
brought me back unto the door of the house, and behold waters issued out
from under the threshold of the house eastward, for the face of the
house was toward the east (Ezek. 47:1, 8), speaking of the New Jerusalem
"the east" denotes the Lord, and thus the celestial, which is of love;
"waters" are things spiritual. The same is signified in the passage
before us by "a mountain of the east." Moreover they who dwelt in Syria
were called "sons of the east," concerning which, of the Lord's Divine
mercy hereafter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[1222-1](ac025.htm#fr_26.md) That is, when we look
at the historicals we lose sight of the universals, and when we look at
the universals we lose sight of the historicals. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1251-1300](ac026.md)
