[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac026)  [Next](ac028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="1301.">1301.</span></span>

That these things are signified may now be seen by anyone, both from the
signification of all the things mentioned in this verse, and from such
things being here mentioned as the kind of stones and of mortar that
they used; things by no means worthy to be mentioned in the Word of the
Lord, unless these arcana were contained within them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1302.">1302.</span></span>

Verse 4. And they said, Come, let us build us a city and a tower, and
its head in heaven; and let us make us a name, lest peradventure we be
scattered upon the faces of the whole earth. "And they said," signifies
that it came to pass; "let us build us a city and a tower," signifies
that they framed a doctrine and a worship; "a city" is a doctrine, "a
tower" is the worship of self; "and its head in heaven," signifies even
to their having dominion over the things that are in heaven; "and let us
make us a name," signifies that thereby they might have a reputation for
power; "lest peradventure we be scattered upon the faces of the whole
earth," signifies that otherwise they would not be acknowledged.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1303.">1303.</span></span>

And they said. That this signifies that it came to pass, follows from
the connection, just as the preceding words, "they said a man to his
fellow," signified that it was begun; for Babel is here described, and
what its quality is, by the "tower."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1304.">1304.</span></span>

Let us build us a city and a tower. That this signifies that they framed
a doctrine and a worship, may be seen from the signification of "a
city," and from that of "a tower," concerning which presently. The
church is of such a nature that when charity toward the neighbor
departs, and the love of self succeeds in its place, the doctrine of
faith is of no account except insofar as it can be turned into the
worship of self; and nothing whatever is accounted holy in worship
unless it is for the sake of self, and thus unless it is self-worship.
All love of self is attended with this; for he who loves himself more
than others, not only hates all who are not subservient to him, and
shows them no favor except when they have become subservient, but also,
insofar as he is not under restraint, he rushes on even until he exalts
himself above God. That this is the nature of the love of self when the
reins are given to it, has been shown me to the life. This is what is
signified by "a city and a tower." The love of self and every derivative
cupidity is of all things the most filthy and the most profane, and is
the veriest infernalism; and from this anyone may conclude what the
quality of that worship must be which contains within it an infernalism
so absolute.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1305.">1305.</span></span>

That "a city" signifies doctrine, or that which is doctrinal, whether
genuine or heretical, has been shown before (n. 402).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1306.">1306.</span></span>

That "a tower" is the worship of self, is evident from the signification
of "a tower." The worship of self exists when a man exalts himself above
others even to the point of being worshiped. And therefore the love of
self, which is arrogance and pride, is called "height," "loftiness," and
"being lifted up;" and is described by all things that are high. As in
Isaiah: The eyes of man's pride shall be humbled, and the loftiness of
men shall be brought low, and Jehovah Himself alone shall be exalted in
that day. For the day of Jehovah of Armies is upon everyone proud and
high and upon everyone that is lifted up, and he shall be humbled; and
upon all the cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all
the oaks of Bashan; and upon all the high mountains, and upon all the
hills that are lifted up, and upon every lofty tower, and upon every
fenced wall (Isa. 2:11-18); concerning the love of self, which is
described by the "cedars," "oaks," "mountains," "hills," and "tower"
that are "high" and "lifted up." \[2\] Again: There shall be rivers,
streams of waters, in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers
shall fall (Isa. 30:25); in like manner denoting the love of self, and
the exalting of self in worship. And again: Behold the land of the
Chaldeans; this people was not; Asshur hath founded it in tziim; they
will set up their watchtowers, they will raise up their palaces, he will
make it a ruin (Isa. 23:13); said of Tyre and its vastation;
"watchtowers," expressed by another word, denote the phantasies
therefrom. In Ezekiel: I will cause many nations to come up against
thee, O Tyre, and they shall ruin the walls of Tyre, and destroy her
towers; I will also scrape her dust from her, and will make her the
dryness of a rock (Ezek. 26:3-4); the signification being similar. \[3\]
The love of self in worship, or the worship of self, is called a
"tower," for the reason that a "city" signifies a doctrine (as before
shown, n. 402) and cities were formerly fortified with towers, in which
there were watchmen; and there were also towers on the borders, which
for this reason were called "towers of watchmen" (2 Kings 9:17; 17:9;
18:8), and "watchtowers" (Isa. 23:13). And besides, when the church of
the Lord is compared to a "vineyard," those things which belong to
worship and to its conservation are compared to a "winepress" and to "a
tower in the vineyard," as is evident in Isaiah 5:1, 2; Matt. 21:33;
Mark 12:1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1307.">1307.</span></span>

And its head in heaven. That this signifies even to their having
dominion over the things that are in heaven, follows from what has been
said. For "to have the head in heaven" is to exalt self even that far,
as is evident from the description of Babel in other places in the Word;
and from what has already been said about "lifting up the head" (n.
257). The love of self is that which is least of all in accord with the
heavenly life; for all evils come from it, not only hatreds, but also
revenges, cruelties, and adulteries; and still less does it accord when
it enters into worship, and profanes it. And therefore the hells consist
of such persons, who the more they would lift up their heads into
heaven, the deeper they press themselves down, and the more frightful
are the penalties into which they precipitate themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1308.">1308.</span></span>

And let us make us a name. That this signifies that thereby they might
have a reputation for power, may be seen from the signification of
"making oneself a name." For they knew that everyone desires to be in
some worship; for this is common to all, and exists among all nations.
For everyone who beholds the universe, and still more who considers the
order of the universe, acknowledges some supreme being or entity
\[summum ens\], and as he desires his own prosperity, he pays adoration
to that entity. Moreover there is something within, which dictates this,
for such a dictate flows in from the Lord through the angels who are
with every man. The man who is not like this, and who does not
acknowledge a God, is under the dominion of infernal spirits. Knowing
this, they who build Babylonish towers make themselves a name by means
of doctrinal and holy things, for otherwise they could not be worshiped,
which is signified in what next follows by their otherwise being
scattered over the faces of the whole earth, that is, they would not be
acknowledged. And from this it follows that the higher such men can lift
up the head to heaven, the more they make themselves a name. Their
dominion is greatest over those who have some conscience; for these they
lead whithersoever they will; but as to those who have not conscience,
they rule all such by means of various external bonds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1309.">1309.</span></span>

Lest we be scattered upon the faces of the whole earth. That this
signifies that otherwise they would not be acknowledged, follows from
what has just been said; for to be "scattered abroad upon the faces of
the whole earth," is to be lost to their view, and thus not to be
received and acknowledged.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1310.">1310.</span></span>

Verse 5. And Jehovah came down to see the city and the tower which the
sons of man were building. "Jehovah came down," signifies judgment upon
them; "to see the city and the tower," signifies because they had
perverted doctrine and profaned worship; "which the sons of man were
building," signifies which they had devised for themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1311.">1311.</span></span>

And Jehovah came down. That this signifies judgment upon them, is
evident from what has gone before and from what follows, and also from
the signification of "coming down," when predicated of Jehovah; from
what has gone before, in that the subject has been the building of the
city and tower of Babel; from what follows, in that the subject is the
confusion of lips and of dispersion; from the signification of "coming
down," when predicated of Jehovah, in that this is said when judgment
takes place. Jehovah or the Lord is everywhere present and knows all
things from eternity; and therefore it cannot be said of Him that He
came down to see, except in the literal sense, where it is so said
according to the appearances with man. But in the internal sense it is
not so, for in this sense the subject is presented as it is in itself,
and not according to the appearances; so that in the passage before us
"to come down to see" signifies judgment. \[2\] Judgment is predicated
of a state when evil has reached its highest, or, as it is termed in the
Word, when it is "consummated," or when "iniquity is consummated." For
the case herein is that all evil has its limits as far as which it is
permitted to go; but when it goes beyond these limits, it incurs the
penalty of the evil. This is so both in particular and in general. The
punishment of evil is what is then called a judgment. And because it
appears at first as if the Lord did not see or observe that the evil
exists-for when a man does evil without punishment, he supposes that the
Lord troubles not Himself about the matter, but when he undergoes the
penalty he begins to think that the Lord sees, and even that the Lord
inflicts the punishment-it is therefore said, in accordance with these
appearances, that Jehovah came down to see. \[3\] To "come down" is
predicated of Jehovah, because "the highest" is predicated of Him, that
is, He is said to be in the highest, and this too according to the
appearance, for He is not in things highest but in things inmost, and
this is the reason why in the Word what is highest and what is inmost
have the same signification. On the other hand, judgment or the penalty
of evil takes place in lower and lowest things. This explains why He is
said to "come down;" as also in David: O Jehovah, bow Thy heavens and
come down; touch the mountains and they shall smoke; cast forth
lightning and scatter them (Ps. 144:5-6), where the punishment of evil,
or judgment, is signified. In Isaiah: Jehovah of Armies shall come down
to fight upon Mount Zion, and upon the hill thereof (Isa. 31:4). And
again: O that Thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow
down at Thy presence (Isa. 64:1). Here in like manner to "come down"
denotes the penalty, or judgment, inflicted upon evil. In Micah: Jehovah
cometh forth out of His place, and will come down, and tread upon the
high places of the earth, and the mountains shall be molten under Him
(Micah 1:3-4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1312.">1312.</span></span>

To see the city and the tower. That these words signify because they had
perverted doctrine and profaned worship, is evident from the
signification of a "city" and of a "tower," concerning which before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1313.">1313.</span></span>

Which the sons of man were building. That this signifies which they had
devised for themselves, is clear without explication. "The sons of man"
here are the sons of the church; for they who are not of the church, and
have not the knowledges of faith, cannot devise such things. That such
as these cannot profane holy things, has been shown before (n. 301-303,
593).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1314.">1314.</span></span>

Verse 6. And Jehovah said, Behold, the people are one, and they all have
one lip, and this is what they begin to do; and now nothing will be
withholden from them of all which they have thought to do. "And Jehovah
said," signifies that it was so; "Behold, the people are one, and they
all have one lip," signifies that they all had one truth of faith and
doctrine; "and this is what they begin to do," signifies that they now
begin to become different; "and now nothing will be withholden from them
of all which they have thought to do," signifies unless their state is
now changed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1315.">1315.</span></span>

And Jehovah said. That this signifies that it was so, is evident from
the fact, that here, as has been shown before, we have not true history,
but made-up history; and therefore when it is said that "Jehovah said,"
it can signify nothing else than that it was so, as has also been shown
before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1316.">1316.</span></span>

Behold, the people are one, and they all have one lip. That this
signifies that they all had one truth of faith and doctrine, is evident
from the signification of "people," as being the truth of faith, and
from the signification of "lip," as being doctrine. It has been shown
before (n. 1259), that "people" signifies the truth of faith, that is,
those who are in the truth of faith; and that "lip" signifies the
doctrine of faith, was shown just above (at verse 1). The people is said
to be "one," and their "lip one," when all have as their end the common
good of society, the common good of the church, and the kingdom of the
Lord; for when this is the case the Lord is in the end, and all are a
one from Him. But the Lord cannot possibly be present with a man whose
end is his own good; the Own itself of man estranges the Lord, because
thereby the man twists and turns the common good of society, and that of
the church itself, and even the kingdom of the Lord, to himself,
insomuch that it is as if it existed for him. He thus takes away from
the Lord what is His, and puts himself in His place. When this condition
reigns in a man, there is the like of it in every single thought he has,
and even in the least particulars of his thoughts; for such is the case
with whatever is regnant in any man. \[2\] This does not appear so
manifestly in the life of the body as it does in the other life, for
there whatever is regnant in anyone manifests itself by a certain sphere
which is perceived by all around him, and which is of this character
because it exhales from every single thing in him. The sphere of him who
has regard to himself in everything, appropriates to itself, and, as is
said there, absorbs everything that is favorable to itself, and
therefore it absorbs all the delight of the surrounding spirits, and
destroys all their freedom, so that such a person has to be banished
from society. But when the people is one, and the lip one, that is, when
the common good of all is regarded, one person never appropriates to
himself another's delight, or destroys another's freedom, but insofar as
he can he promotes and increases it. This is the reason why the heavenly
societies are as a one, and this solely through mutual love from the
Lord; and the case is the same in the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1317.">1317.</span></span>

And this is what they begin to do. That this signifies that now they
began to become different, is evident from the connection. To "begin to
do," here signifies their thought or intention, and consequently their
end, as also is evident from the words that next follow, "and now
nothing will be withholden from them of all which they have thought to
do." That in the internal sense their end is signified, is because
nothing else than the end in a man is regarded by the Lord. Whatever may
be his thoughts and deeds-which vary in ways innumerable-provided the
end is made good, they are all good; whereas if the end is evil, they
are all evil. It is the end that reigns in everything a man thinks and
does. The angels with a man, being the Lord's angels, rule nothing in
the man but his ends; for when they rule these, they rule also his
thoughts and actions, seeing that all these are of the end. The end with
a man is his very life; and all things that he thinks and does have life
from the end, for, as was said, they are of the end; and therefore such
as is the end, such is the man's life. The end is nothing else than the
love; for a man cannot have anything as an end except that which he
loves. He who thinks one thing and does another, still has as the end
that which he loves; in the dissimulation itself, or in the deceit,
there is the end, which is the love of self or the love of the world,
and the derivative delight of his life. From these considerations anyone
may conclude that such as is a man's love, such is his life. These
therefore are the things signified by "beginning to do."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1318.">1318.</span></span>

And now nothing will be withholden from them of all which they have
thought to do. That this signifies unless their state is now changed,
may be seen from what follows. The internal sense of the Word is of such
a nature that it keeps constantly in view the things that follow, and
also the conclusion, although this does not appear to be so in the
literal sense. As regards those who are of the character described
above, unless their state were changed, they could not be withheld from
doing all they thought of doing. But that their state was changed, is
evident from what follows. The thought of doing is nothing else than the
intention, that is, the end. The end with a man can never be withheld,
that is, changed, unless his state is changed; for the end is the very
life of a man, as was said. When the state is changed, the end also is
changed; and with the end the thought. The nature of the change of state
that took place with the man of this church, will of the Lord's Divine
mercy be shown in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1319.">1319.</span></span>

Verse 7. Come, let us go down, and there confound their lip, that they
hear not a man the lip of his fellow. "Come, let us go down," signifies
that a judgment was thus effected; "and there confound their lip,"
signifies that not anyone has the truth of doctrine; "that they hear not
a man the lip of his fellow," signifies that all are at variance with
one another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1320.">1320.</span></span>

Come, let us go down. That this signifies that a judgment was thus
effected, is evident from what was said above (at verse 5) about the
signification of "going down." The reason why it is here said, in the
plural, "let us go down and confound their lip," is that it is the
execution of a judgment, which is effected by means of spirits, and
indeed by means of evil spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1321.">1321.</span></span>

And there confound their lip. That this signifies that not anyone has
the truth of doctrine, may be seen from the signification of "lip," as
being doctrine, concerning which see above (at verse 1). Hence it
follows that to "confound the lips" is to confound the things that are
of doctrine, that is, the truths of doctrine. In the internal sense, "to
confound" signifies not only to darken, but also to blot out and
dissipate, so that there is not any truth. When the worship of self
succeeds in the place of the worship of the Lord, then all truth is not
only perverted, but is even abolished, and at last falsity is
acknowledged in the place of truth, and evil in the place of good. For
all the light of truth is from the Lord, and all darkness is from man;
and when man takes the place of the Lord in worship, the light of truth
becomes thick darkness; and then the light is seen by men as thick
darkness, and thick darkness is seen as the light. \[2\] Such moreover
is precisely the life of such persons after death; the life of falsity
is to them as if it were light, but the life of truth is to them as
thick darkness. But when they approach toward heaven, the light of such
a life is changed into total darkness. So long as they are in the world,
they can indeed speak truth, even with eloquence and apparent zeal; and
as there is with all such persons a constant reflection upon self, they
seem to themselves to think as they speak; but as their very end is the
worship of self, their thoughts derive from the end that they do not
acknowledge truth except insofar as self is in the truth. When a man in
whose mouth is the truth is of such a character, it is evident that he
does not possess the truth; and in the other life this is plainly
evident, for there such men not only do not acknowledge the truth which
they had professed in the life of the body, but hold it in hatred, and
persecute it; and this just in proportion as their arrogance or their
worship of self is not taken away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1322.">1322.</span></span>

That they hear not a man the lip of his fellow. That this signifies that
all are at variance, or that the one is against the other, is evident
from the words themselves. "Not to hear one another's lip," is not to
acknowledge what another says, and in the internal sense not to
acknowledge what another teaches, that is, his doctrine, for "lip" is
doctrine, as has been shown above (at verse 1). They acknowledge it
indeed with the mouth, but not with the heart; but agreement with the
mouth is nothing when there is disagreement of the heart. The case in
this respect is the same as it is with evil spirits in the other life,
who, in like manner as the good, are distinguished into societies, but
are kept conjoined together by being attached by the like phantasies and
cupidities, so that they act as a one in persecuting truths and goods.
Thus there is a certain common interest by which they are held together;
but as soon as this common bond is dissolved, they rush one upon
another, and then their delight consists in tormenting their associate
or associates. The case is similar with such doctrine and worship in
this world; those in it acknowledge what pertains to doctrine and ritual
harmoniously enough; but the common interest that holds them together is
the worship of self; and so far as they can share in this common
interest, they acknowledge; but so far as they cannot share or hope to
share in it, they are disunited; for the reason given just above, that
no one of this character possesses any truth, but everyone has falsity
in the place of truth, and evil in the place of good. This therefore is
what is signified by their "not hearing a man the lip of his fellow."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1323.">1323.</span></span>

Verse 8. And Jehovah scattered them from thence upon the faces of all
the earth; and they left off to build the city. "And Jehovah scattered
them from thence upon the faces of all the earth," signifies here, as
before, that they were not acknowledged; "and they left off to build the
city," signifies that such doctrine was not received.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1324.">1324.</span></span>

And Jehovah scattered them upon the faces of all the earth. That this
signifies that they were not acknowledged, is evident from what was said
before (at verse 4), where the same words occur. "And they left off to
build the city"-that this signifies that such doctrine was not received,
is evident from the signification of a "city," as being doctrine (as was
shown above, n. 402); and from what was said at verses 4 and 5
concerning the building of a city and a tower. From all this it is
evident that such doctrine, or such worship, wherein interiorly there is
the love of self, or the worship of self, was not permitted to this
Ancient Church, and this for the reason explained in the verse that next
follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1325.">1325.</span></span>

Verse 9. Therefore He called the name of it Babel, because there did
Jehovah confound the lip of all the earth; and from thence did Jehovah
scatter them upon the faces of all the earth. "Therefore He called the
name of it Babel," signifies such worship; "because there did Jehovah
confound the lip of all the earth," signifies the state of this Ancient
Church, that internal worship began to perish; "the earth" is the
church; "and from thence did Jehovah scatter them upon the faces of all
the earth," signifies that internal worship was annihilated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1326.">1326.</span></span>

Therefore He called the name of it Babel. That this signifies such
worship, that is, the kind of worship signified by "Babel," is evident
from what has been said hitherto; that is to say, worship in which
interiorly there is the love of self, and therefore all that is filthy
and profane. The love of self is nothing else than man's Own; and how
filthy and profane this is may be seen from what has been shown before
concerning man's Own (n. 210, 215). From self-love \[philautia\], that
is, the love of self, or man's Own, all evils flow, such as hatreds,
revenges, cruelties, adulteries, deceits, hypocrisies, impiety; and
therefore when the love of self, or man's Own, is in the worship, such
evils are in it, according to the difference and degree of quantity and
quality that are from that love. Hence comes all the profanation of
worship. In point of fact, in proportion as anything from the love of
self, or from man's Own, is introduced into worship, in the same
proportion internal worship departs, that is, it comes to pass that
there is no internal worship. Internal worship consists in the affection
of good and the acknowledgment of truth, and in proportion as the love
of self, that is, in proportion as man's Own, makes its approach, or
enters in, the affection of good and the acknowledgment of truth depart,
or go out. The holy can never be with the profane, just as heaven cannot
be with hell, but the one must take its departure from the other. Such
is the state and order in the Lord's kingdom. This is the reason why
there is no internal worship among such men as those whose worship is
called "Babel," but only a kind of dead thing, and in fact one inwardly
cadaverous, that is worshiped. From this it is evident what must be the
quality of the external worship that contains such an internal within
it. \[2\] That such worship is "Babel," is evident from the Word in
various places where Babel is described, as in Daniel, where the image
that Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1326-1](#fn_32.md) saw in a dream-the head of which was
of gold, the breast and arms of silver, the belly and thighs of brass,
the legs of iron, and the feet part of iron and part of clay-signifies
that from true worship there finally comes such worship as is called
"Babel;" and therefore a stone cut out of the rock broke in pieces the
iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold (Dan. 2:31-33, 44,
45). The image of gold that Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon set up, and
which they worshiped, was nothing else (Dan. 3:1 to the end). The like
is signified by the king of Babylon with his lords drinking wine out of
the vessels of gold that had been brought from the temple at Jerusalem,
and praising the gods of gold, of silver, of brass, of iron, and of
stone, on which account there appeared the writing upon the wall (Dan.
5:1 to the end). The like is signified also by Darius the Mede
commanding that he should be adored as a god (Dan. 6:7 to the end); and
likewise by the beasts seen by Daniel in a dream (Dan. 7:1 to the end)
and the beasts and the Babylon described by John in the Revelation.
\[3\] That such worship was signified and represented is very evident,
not only in Daniel and John, but also in the Prophets. As in Isaiah:
Their faces are faces of flames. The stars of the heavens and the
constellations thereof shine not with their light; the sun is darkened
in his going forth, and the moon doth not cause her light to shine.
There do the Ziim couch, and their houses are filled with the Ochim; and
the daughters of the night owl dwell there, and satyrs dance there, and
Iim answer in her palaces, and dragons in the buildings of pleasure
(Isa. 13:8, 10, 21-22). This is said of Babylon, and the internal of
such worship is described by "faces of flames," which are cupidities by
"the stars," which are truths of faith, "not giving their light;" by
"the sun," which is holy love, being "darkened;" by "the moon," which is
the truth of faith, "not shining;" by "the Ziim," "Ochim," "daughters of
the owl," "satyrs," "Iim," and "dragons," as being the interiors of
their worship; for such things are of the love of self, that is, of
man's Own. And therefore also Babylon is called in John "the mother of
whoredoms and abominations" (Rev. 17:5); and also "a habitation of
dragons, and a hold of every unclean spirit, and a hold of every unclean
and hateful bird" (Rev. 18:2); from all which it is evident that with
such things within, there cannot be anything of good, or of the truth of
faith; and that insofar as the goods of affection and the truths of
faith depart, such things enter in. The same are called also "the graven
images of the gods of Babylon" (Isa. 21:9). \[4\] That it is the love of
self, or the Own of man, that is in such worship, or that it is the
worship of self, is very evident in Isaiah: Prophesy this parable upon
the king of Babylon: Thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into
the heavens, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; and I will
sit on the mount of assembly, in the sides of the north; I will ascend
above the heights of the cloud, I will become like the Most High. Yet
thou shalt be cast down to hell (Isa. 14:4, 13-15). Here it is manifest
that "Babylon" denotes one who desires to be worshiped as a god; that
is, that it is the worship of self. \[5\] Again: Come down, and sit on
the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon; sit in the earth, without a
throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans; thou hath trusted in thy
wickedness; thou hast said, None seeth me; thy wisdom and thy knowledge,
it hath averted thee; thou hast said in thine heart, I, and there is
none else besides like me (Isa. 47:1, 10). In Jeremiah: Behold, I am
against thee, O destroying mountain, that destroyeth all the earth; and
I will stretch out My hand upon thee, and will roll thee down from the
rocks, and will make thee into a mountain of burning. Though Babylon
should mount up to the heavens, and though she should fortify the height
of her strength, yet from Me shall they that lay waste come to her (Jer.
51:25, 53). From this passage also it is evident that "Babylon" is the
worship of self. \[6\] That such persons have no light of truth, but
total darkness; that is, that they have no truth of faith, is described
in Jeremiah: The word that Jehovah spoke against Babylon, against the
land of the Chaldeans. Out of the north there shall ascend upon her a
nation that shall make her land a desolation, and none shall dwell
therein; from man even to beast they shall move asunder, they shall be
gone (Jer. 50:1, 3); "the north" denotes thick darkness, or no truth;
"no man and no beast," no good. (See further concerning Babel, below, at
verse 28, where Chaldea is treated of.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1327.">1327.</span></span>

There did Jehovah confound the lip of all the earth. That this signifies
the state of this Ancient Church, that internal worship began to perish,
is evident from its being said, "the lip of all the earth," and not, as
before, at verse 7, "the lip of those who began to build a city and a
tower." By "the face of all the earth," is signified the state of the
church, for "the earth" is the church (as has been shown before, n. 662,
1066). As regards the churches after the flood, the case stood thus:
there were three of these churches that are specifically mentioned in
the Word; namely, the First Ancient Church, which was named from Noah;
the Second Ancient Church, named from Eber; and the Third Ancient
Church, named from Jacob, and afterwards from Judah and Israel. \[2\] As
regards the first of these churches, which was named from Noah, that
church was as the parent of those which succeeded it; and, as is wont to
be the case with churches in their beginnings, it was more unimpaired
and guiltless than its successors, as is evident also from the first
verse of this chapter, in that it had "one lip," that is, one doctrine,
in consequence of all its members holding charity to be the essential
thing. But in process of time, like other churches, this First Ancient
Church began to fall, and this chiefly from the fact that many of them
began to aspire after the worship of self, so that they might take
precedence of others; as is evident from verse 4, for they said, "Let us
build us a city and a tower, and its head in heaven; and let us make us
a name." Such men in the church could not but be as a kind of ferment,
or as a firebrand causing a conflagration. As the peril of the
profanation of what is holy thence impended (see n. 571, 582), of the
Lord's Providence the state of this church was changed, so that its
internal worship perished, while its external worship remained, which is
here signified by the statement that Jehovah confounded the lip of all
the earth. It is also evident from this that such worship as is called
"Babel" did not prevail in the First Ancient Church, but in those which
followed, when men began to be worshiped as gods, especially after their
death, whence arose the many gods of the Gentiles. \[3\] The reason why
it was permitted that internal worship should perish and external
remain, was that what is holy might not be profaned; for the profanation
of what is holy is attended with eternal damnation. No one can profane
what is holy except one who is in possession of the knowledges of faith,
and who acknowledges the truth of them. A person who does not possess
them cannot acknowledge, and still less profane them. It is the internal
things that can be profaned; for what is holy abides in internal, and
not in external, things. The case in this respect is the same as it is
with a man who does what is evil, but does not purpose what is evil. To
him the evil that he does cannot be imputed, just as it cannot be
imputed to one who does not do it of deliberate intention, or to one who
is destitute of reason. Thus a man who does not believe that there is a
life after death, and yet performs external worship, cannot profane the
things that belong to eternal life, because he does not believe that
there is any such life; but the case is quite different with those who
know and who acknowledge these things. \[4\] And this is the reason why
it is permitted a man rather to live in pleasures and in cupidities, and
by them to remove himself from internal things, than to come into the
knowledge and acknowledgment of internal things, and profane them. For
this reason the Jews are at this day permitted to immerse themselves in
avarice, that in this way they may be further removed from the
acknowledgment of internal things; for they are of such a character that
if they were to acknowledge them, they could not but profane them.
Nothing removes men further from internal things than avarice, because
it is the lowest earthly cupidity. And the case is the same with many
within the church; and it is the same with the Gentiles outside the
church. These latter, to wit, the Gentiles, are least of all capable of
profanation. This then is the reason why it is here said that Jehovah
confounded the lip of all the earth, and why these words signify that
the state of the church was changed, so that its worship became
external, and devoid of all internal worship. \[5\] The like was
represented and signified by the Babylonish captivity into which the
Israelites, and afterwards the Jews, were carried away, concerning which
it is thus written in Jeremiah: And it shall come to pass, that the
nation and the kingdom which will not serve the king of Babylon, and
whoso will not put his neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, upon
that nation will I visit with the sword, with the famine, and with the
pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand (Jer. 27:8). "To
serve the king of Babylon and to put the neck under his yoke," is to be
utterly deprived of the knowledge and acknowledgment of the good and of
the truth of faith, and thereby of internal worship. \[6\] This is still
more plainly evident in the same Prophet: Thus hath said Jehovah to all
the people in this city, Your brethren who have not gone forth with you
into captivity, thus hath said Jehovah Zebaoth, Behold, I send upon them
the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and I will make them like
horrible figs (Jer. 29:16, 17). "To abide in the city and not go forth
to the king of Babylon," represented and signified those who were in the
knowledges of internal things, or of the truths of faith, and who
profaned them, upon whom it is said there would be sent the sword, the
famine, and the pestilence, which are the penalties of profanation; and
that they should become like horrible figs. \[7\] That by "Babel" are
signified those who deprive others of all the knowledge and
acknowledgment of truth, was also represented and signified by these
things in the same Prophet: I will give all Judah into the hand of the
King of Babylon, and he shall carry them into Babylon, and shall smite
them with the sword. Moreover I will give all the riches of this city,
and all the toil thereof, and all the precious thing thereof, and all
the treasures of the kings of Judah, will I give into the hand of their
enemies, and they shall spoil them, and take them (Jer. 20:4, 5). Here
by "all the riches, all the toil, all the precious thing, and all the
treasures of the kings of Judah," are signified the knowledges of faith,
\[8\] Again: With the families of the north I will bring up the king of
Babylon upon this land, and upon the inhabitants thereof, and upon all
these nations round about, and I will give them to the curse, and will
make them a desolation, and a hissing, and everlasting wastes; and this
whole land shall be a waste (Jer. 25:9, 11). Here the devastation of the
interior things of faith, or of internal worship, is described by
"Babylon." For the man who worships self possesses no truth of faith, as
has been shown before. Everything that is true he destroys and lays
waste, and carries away into captivity. And therefore Babylon is called
"a destroying mountain" (Jer. 51:25). (See what has been further said
concerning Babel above, n. 1182.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1328.">1328.</span></span>

And from thence did Jehovah scatter them upon the faces of all the
earth. That this signifies that internal worship was annihilated, may be
seen from the signification of "scattering," as being to dissipate. In
the proximate sense, the scattering over the faces of all the earth,
means the dispersion of those who desire to build the city of Babel; but
as these are they who deprive others of all the knowledge of truth, as
before said, the words signify, at the same time, the deprivation of
internal worship; for the one is a consequence of the other; and here we
have the consequence, for it is stated for the third time. That the
First Ancient Church was deprived of the knowledges of truth and good,
is evident from the fact that the nations which constituted that Ancient
Church became for the most part idolaters, and yet had a certain
external worship. The lot of those idolaters who are outside the church
is much better than that of those idolaters who are within the church;
for the former are external idolaters, whereas the latter are internal
idolaters. That the lot of the former is better, is evident from the
words the Lord spoke in Luke 13:23, 28-30; Matthew 8:11-12. This
therefore is the reason why the state of this Ancient Church was
changed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1329.">1329.</span></span>

Verse 10. These are the births of Shem: Shem was a son of a hundred
years, and begat Arpachshad two years after the flood. "These are the
births of Shem," signifies the derivations of the Second Ancient Church;
"Shem" is internal worship in general; "a hundred years," signifies the
state of that church at the beginning; "Arpachshad" was a nation so
named, by which is signified memory-knowledge \[scientia\]; "two years
after the flood," signifies the second post-diluvian church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1330.">1330.</span></span>

These are the births of Shem. That this signifies the derivations of the
Second Ancient Church, is evident from the signification of "births," as
being the origin and derivation of doctrinal things and of worships (as
before said, n. 1145). Here, and elsewhere in the Word, the "births" are
no other than those of the church, that is, of doctrinal things and of
worships. The internal sense of the Word enfolds nothing else; and
therefore when any church is born, it is said that "these are its
births," as for instance when the Most Ancient Church was born: "These
are the births of the heavens and of the earth" (Gen. 2:4); and in like
manner with the other churches which followed, before the flood: "This
is the book of the births" (Gen. 5:1). In like manner with the churches
after the flood, which were three-the First called Noah, the Second
named from Eber, the Third from Jacob, and afterwards from Judah and
Israel. When the First of these churches is described, the record begins
in a similar manner: "These are the births of the sons of Noah" (verse 1
of the preceding chapter). So with this Second church, named from Eber,
in this verse: "These are the births of Shem." And with the Third also,
in the twenty-seventh verse of this chapter: "These are the births of
Terah." So that "births" signify nothing else than the origins and
derivations of the doctrinal things and of the worships of the church
that is being described. The reason why the births of this Second church
are derived from Shem, or why its beginning is described by "Shem," is
that "Shem" signifies internal worship, here, the internal worship of
this church. Not that the internal worship of this church was such
internal worship as that which was signified by "Shem" in the preceding
chapter; but merely that it is the internal worship of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1331.">1331.</span></span>

From what has been said it is now evident that "Shem" denotes internal
worship in general. The quality of the internal worship of this church
is evident from those who are named in succession after Shem, namely,
that it was characterized by memory-knowledge \[fuerit scientificum\],
as is confirmed by the numbers of the years, when they are examined and
unfolded.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1332.">1332.</span></span>

That "a hundred years" signifies the state of that church in general, is
evident from what has been stated and shown before concerning numbers
and years (n. 482, 487, 488, 493, 575, 647, 648, 755, 813, 893), namely,
that they signify times and states. But what and of what quality the
states were that are signified by the number "a hundred" years, and by
the numbers of years in the following verses of this chapter, it would
be tedious to explain; moreover the subject is intricate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1334.">1334.</span></span>

That Arpachshad was a nation so named, and that thereby is signified
memory-knowledge, was stated at verse 24 of the preceding chapter (n.
1236).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1335.">1335.</span></span>

Two years after the flood. That this signifies the Second post-diluvian
church, may be seen from the fact that by a "year," in the Word, as also
by a "day" and by a "week," is signified an entire period, greater or
less, of fewer or of more years; in fact a period in the abstract, as
may be seen from the paragraphs referred to above (n. 488, 493). So here
with the "two years after the flood," by which is signified the second
period of the church, which was when this second church began.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1336.">1336.</span></span>

Verse 11. And Shem lived after he begat Arpachshad five hundred years,
and begat sons and daughters. "And Shem lived after he begat Arpachshad
five hundred years," signifies the duration and state; "Shem" signifies
here, as before, internal worship in general; "Arpachshad" signifies
memory-knowledge; "and begat sons and daughters," signifies the
doctrinal things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1337.">1337.</span></span>

That these things are signified, calls for no confirmation, being
evident from the signification of the same words as given above. I shall
merely state that the internal worship of this church was no other than
a kind of memory-knowledge \[scientficum\], thus a kind of love which
may be called a love of truth. For when this church began, there was
scarcely any charity left, and therefore scarcely any faith, which comes
solely from charity; as also is evident from what was said just before
concerning the city and the tower of Babel, in that Jehovah did confound
the lip of all the earth (verse 9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1338.">1338.</span></span>

And begat sons and daughters. That this signifies doctrinal things, is
evident from the signification of "sons," as before given (n. 264,
489-491, 533).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1339.">1339.</span></span>

Verse 12. And Arpachshad lived five and thirty years and begat Shelah.
"And Arpachshad lived five and thirty years," signifies the beginning of
the second state of this church, as well as that second state itself;
"Arpachshad" signifies here, as before, memory-knowledge; "and begat
Shelah," signifies the derivation therefrom. Shelah was a nation so
called, whereby is signified that which pertains to memory-knowledge.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1340.">1340.</span></span>

That these things are signified calls for no confirmation. That "Shelah"
was a nation so called, whereby is signified that which pertains to
memory-knowledge, has been stated before, at verse 24 of the preceding
chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1341.">1341.</span></span>

Verse 13. And Arpachshad lived after he begat Shelah four hundred and
three years, and begat sons and daughters. "And Arpachshad lived after
he begat Shelah four hundred and three years," signifies the duration
and state; "Arpachshad" here, as before, signifies memory-knowledge; and
"Shelah" is that which pertains to memory-knowledge; "and begat sons and
daughters," signifies the doctrinal things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1342.">1342.</span></span>

Verse 14. And Shelah lived thirty years and begat Eber. "And Shelah
lived thirty years," signifies the beginning of a third state; "Shelah"
here, as before, signifies that which pertains to memory-knowledge; "and
begat Eber," signifies a derivation therefrom; "Eber" was a nation
called, from Eber as its father, the Hebrew nation, whereby is signified
the worship in general of the Second Ancient Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1343.">1343.</span></span>

That "Eber" was a nation called, from Eber as its father, the Hebrew
nation, and that thereby is signified the worship in general of the
Second Ancient Church, is evident from those historical parts of the
Word wherein it is spoken of. From that nation, because the new worship
commenced there, all were called Hebrews who had a similar worship.
Their worship was of the kind that was afterwards restored among the
descendants of Jacob; and its chief characteristic consisted in their
calling their God "Jehovah," and in their having sacrifices. The Most
Ancient Church with unanimity acknowledged the Lord, and called Him
Jehovah, as is evident from the first chapters of Genesis, and elsewhere
in the Word. The Ancient Church, that is, the church after the flood,
also acknowledged the Lord, and called Him Jehovah, especially those who
had internal worship, and were called "sons of Shem." The others, who
were in external worship, also acknowledged Jehovah, and worshiped Him.
But when internal worship became external, and still more when it became
idolatrous, and when each nation began to have its own god whom it
worshiped, the Hebrew nation retained the name Jehovah, and called their
God Jehovah; and hereby were distinguished from the other nations. \[2\]
Together with their external worship, the descendants of Jacob in Egypt
lost this also-that they called their God Jehovah; nay, Moses himself
did so; and therefore they were instructed first of all that Jehovah was
the God of the Hebrews, and the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob;
as may be seen from these words in Moses: Jehovah said unto Moses, Thou
shalt come in, thou and the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and
ye shall say unto him, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews hath met with us;
and now let us go, we pray thee, a three days' journey into the
wilderness, and we will sacrifice to Jehovah our God (Exod. 3:18).
Again: Pharaoh said, Who is Jehovah, that I should hearken unto His
voice to let Israel go? I know not Jehovah, and moreover I will not let
Israel go. And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us; let
us go, we pray thee, a three days' journey into the wilderness, and we
will sacrifice to Jehovah our God (Exod. 5:2-3). \[3\] That together
with the worship the descendants of Jacob in Egypt lost also the name of
Jehovah, may be seen from these words in Moses: Moses said unto God,
Behold, when I come unto the sons of Israel, and shall say unto them,
The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you, and they shall say to me,
What is His name? what shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I
AM WHO I AM. And He said, Thus shalt thou say unto the sons of Israel, I
AM hath sent me unto you. And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt
thou say unto the sons of Israel, Jehovah the God of your fathers, the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me
unto you this is My name to eternity (Exod. 3:13-15). \[4\] From these
words it is evident that even Moses did not know Jehovah; and that they
were distinguished from others by the name of Jehovah the God of the
Hebrews. Hence in other places also Jehovah is called the God of the
Hebrews: Thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews
hath sent me unto thee (Exod. 7:16). Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him,
Thus saith Jehovah the God of the Hebrews (Exod. 9:1, 13). And Moses and
Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith Jehovah the
God of the Hebrews (Exod. 10:3). And in Jonah: I am a Hebrew; and I fear
Jehovah the God of the heavens (Jonah 1:9). And also in Samuel: The
Philistines heard the voice of the shouting, and said, What meaneth the
voice of this great shouting in the camp of the Hebrews? And they knew
that the ark of Jehovah was come into the camp. And the Philistines
said, Woe unto us! Who shall deliver us out of the hand of these august
gods? These are the gods that smote the Egyptians with all manner of
plagues in the wilderness. Be like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not
servants unto the Hebrews (1 Sam. 4:6, 8-9). Here also it is evident
that the nations were distinguished by the gods on whose name they
called, and the Hebrew nation by Jehovah. \[5\] That the second
essential of the worship of the Hebrew nation consisted in sacrifices,
is also evident from passages cited above (Exod. 3:18, 5:2, 3); as well
as from the fact that the Egyptians abominated the Hebrew nation on
account of this worship, as is evident from these words in Moses: Moses
said, It is not right so to do, for we shall sacrifice the abomination
of the Egyptians to Jehovah our God; lo, shall we sacrifice the
abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone
us? (Exod. 8:26). For this reason the Egyptians so abominated the Hebrew
nation that they would not eat bread with them (Gen. 43:32). It is also
evident from all this that the posterity of Jacob was not the only
Hebrew nation, but all who had such worship; and therefore in Joseph's
time the land of Canaan was called the land of the Hebrews: Joseph said,
I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews (Gen. 40:15). \[6\]
That there were sacrifices among the idolaters in the land of Canaan,
may be seen from many passages, for they sacrificed to their gods-to the
Baals and others; and moreover Balaam, who was from Syria where Eber
dwelt and whence the Hebrew nation came, not only offered sacrifices
before the descendants of Jacob came into the land of Canaan, but also
called Jehovah his God. That Balaam was from Syria, whence came the
Hebrew nation, see Numbers 23:7; that he offered sacrifices, 22:39-40;
23:1-3, 14, 29; that he called Jehovah his God, 22:18, and throughout
the chapter. What is said of Noah (Gen. 8:20), that he offered
burnt-offerings to Jehovah, is not true history, but is history so made
up, because by burnt-offerings there is signified the holy of worship,
as may there be seen. From all this it is now evident what is signified
by "Ber," or by the Hebrew nation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1344.">1344.</span></span>

Verse 15. And Shelah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three
years, and begat sons and daughters. "And Shelah lived after he begat
Eber four hundred and three years," signifies the duration and state;
"Shelah" here, as before, signifies that which pertains to
memory-knowledge; "Eber" here, as before, signifies the worship of this
church in general; "and begat sons and daughters," signifies the
doctrinal things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1345.">1345.</span></span>

Verse 16. And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg. "And
Eber lived four and thirty years," signifies the beginning of the fourth
state of this church; "Eber" here, as before, signifies the worship of
this church in general; "and begat Peleg," signifies a derivation from
it. "Peleg" was a nation so called from him as its father, whereby there
is signified external worship. That "Peleg" here signifies external
worship, follows from the series of the derivations of worship, and thus
from his derivation. In the preceding chapter, verse 25, there is
another meaning from the signification of this name, that "in his days
the earth was divided," and because there he together with his brother
Joktan represented that Second Ancient Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1346.">1346.</span></span>

Verse 17. And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty
years, and begat sons and daughters. "And Eber lived after he begat
Peleg four hundred and thirty years," signifies the duration and state;
"Eber" and "Peleg" signify the same here as before; "and begat sons and
daughters," signifies doctrinal things which are rituals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1347.">1347.</span></span>

Verse 18. And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu. "And Peleg lived
thirty years," signifies the beginning of the fifth state; "Peleg"
signifies the same here as before; "and begat Reu," signifies a
derivation therefrom. Reu was a nation so named from him as its father,
whereby there is signified a worship still more external.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1348.">1348.</span></span>

Verse 19. And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years,
and begat sons and daughters. "And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two
hundred and nine years," signifies the duration and state; "Peleg" and
"Reu" signify the same here as before; "and begat sons and daughters,"
signifies rituals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1349.">1349.</span></span>

Verse 20. And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug. "And Reu
lived two and thirty years," signifies the beginning of the sixth state;
"Reu" signifies the same here as before; "and begat Serug," signifies a
derivation therefrom. Serug was a nation so named from him as its
father, by which is signified worship in externals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1350.">1350.</span></span>

Verse 21. And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven
years, and begat sons and daughters. "And Reu lived after he begat Serug
two hundred and seven years," signifies the duration and state; "Reu"
and "Serug" signify the same here as before; "and begat sons and
daughters," signifies the rituals of such worship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[1326-1](ac027.htm#fr_32.md) In the original Latin
"Babel" and "Babylon" are the same, namely, "Babel." "Babylon" is the
Greek form of the word. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1351-1400](ac028.md)
