[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac030)  [Next](ac032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="1501.">1501.</span></span>

And all that he had. That this signifies that they left all things that
belonged to celestial truths, follows in the series.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1502.">1502.</span></span>

From all this it is now evident that Abram's sojourn in Egypt represents
and signifies nothing else than the Lord, and in fact His instruction in
childhood. This is also confirmed by what is said in Hosea: Out of Egypt
have I called My son (Hos. 11:1; Matt. 2:15); and again from what is
said in Moses: The dwelling of the sons of Israel who dwelt in Egypt was
thirty years and four hundred years; and it came to pass at the end of
the four hundred and thirty years, and it came to pass on the selfsame
day, that all the armies of Jehovah went out from the land of Egypt
(Exod. 12:40-41); which years were not reckoned from Jacob's going down
into Egypt, but from the sojourning of Abram in Egypt, counting from
which the years were four hundred and thirty. Thus by the "son out of
Egypt" (in Hosea 11:1) in the internal sense is signified the Lord. This
is further confirmed by the fact that in the Word "Egypt" signifies
memory-knowledge (as shown, n.1164, 1165, 1462). \[2\] And that these
arcana are contained is also evident from the fact that the same is said
of Abram during his sojourn in Philistia, namely, that he called his
wife his sister (Gen. 20:1-18); and similar things are said of Isaac
when he also was sojourning in Philistia, in that he too called his wife
his sister (Gen. 26:6-13). These things would not have been related in
the Word, and with almost the same circumstances, unless these arcana
had been concealed within them. Moreover this is the Word of the Lord,
which can in no wise have any life, unless there is an internal sense
that has regard to Him. \[3\] The arcana which lie stored up in these
things, as also in those said concerning Abram and Isaac in Philistia,
are-how the Lord's Human Essence was conjoined with His Divine Essence,,
or what is the same, how the Lord became Jehovah as to His Human Essence
also; and that His inauguration went on from childhood, which
inauguration is here treated of. Moreover these things also involve more
arcana than man can ever believe; but those which can be told are so few
as to be almost nothing. Besides the most profound arcana concerning the
Lord, they also involve arcana concerning the instruction and
regeneration of man, that he may become celestial; as also concerning
his instruction and regeneration, that he may become spiritual; and not
only concerning the instruction of the individual man, but also
concerning that of the church in general. And, further, they involve
arcana concerning the instruction of little children in heaven; in a
word, concerning the instruction of all who become images and likenesses
of the Lord. These things do not at all appear in the sense of the
letter, for the reason that the historical narrative veils them over and
obscures them; but they appear in the internal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1504.">1504.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING PERCEPTION; AND CONCERNING SPHERES IN THE OTHER
LIFE It has already been said that it is known in the other life what
another is on his first approach, even though he does not speak. From
this it may be known that a man's interiors are in a kind of unconscious
activity, and that from this the quality of the spirit is perceived.
That it is so has been evidenced by the fact that this sphere of the
activity not only extends itself to a distance, but that sometimes also,
when the Lord permits, it is in various ways made perceptible to the
senses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1505.">1505.</span></span>

I have also been informed how these spheres, which in the other life
become so perceptible to the senses, are acquired. Take as an example
one who has formed a high opinion of himself and of his own preeminent
excellence. He at last becomes imbued with such a habit, and as it were
with such a nature, that wherever he goes, though he looks at others and
speaks with them, he keeps himself in view; and this at first
manifestly, but afterwards not manifestly, so that he is not aware of
it; but still it is regnant, both in the particulars of his affection
and thought, and in those of his bearing and speech. Men can see this in
others. And this is the kind of thing that in the other life makes a
sphere, which is perceived, but no more frequently than the Lord
permits. The same is the case with other affections; and therefore there
are as many spheres as there are affections and combinations of
affections, which are innumerable. The sphere is as it were the man's
image extended outside of himself, the image in fact of all things that
are in him. In the world of spirits that which is presented to the view
or perception is only something general; what the man is as to
particulars, is known in heaven; but what as to the least particulars is
known to none but the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1506.">1506.</span></span>

In order that the nature of spheres may be known, I may adduce some
things from experience. A certain spirit who had been known to me and
with whom I had conversed while he lived in the body, appeared many
times afterwards among the evil; and as he had a high opinion of
himself, he had acquired a sphere of preeminent excellence, because of
which the spirits suddenly fled away, so that none appeared but himself
alone; and he filled the whole surrounding sphere, which was one of
self-regard. Being deprived of companions, he presently fell into
another state; for in the other life one who is deprived of the society
in which he is, at first becomes as if he were half dead, for his life
is then supported solely by the influx of heaven into his interiors. He
then began to lament and feel torment. The other spirits afterwards said
that they could not endure his presence, because he desired to be
greater than others. Being at last brought into association with others,
he was carried up on high, so that it seemed to him that he alone
governed the universe; to such a degree does the love of self puff
itself up when left to itself. He was then cast down among the
infernals. Such a lot awaits those who think themselves greater than
others. More than any other love is the love of self contrary to mutual
love, which is the life of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1507.">1507.</span></span>

A certain person during his bodily life had seemed to himself to be
greater and wiser than others; in other respects he was well disposed,
and not much given to despising others in comparison with himself; but
as he had been born of high rank, he had contracted a sphere of
supereminence and authority. In this character he came to me, and for a
long time spoke not, but I noticed that he was encompassed as with a
mist, which going forth from him began to cover the other spirits; at
which they began to be distressed. Thereupon, addressing me, they said
that they could not possibly stay there, for they were deprived of all
their freedom, so that they did not dare to say anything. He also began
to speak to them, calling them his sons, and at times instructing them,
but with the authority that he had contracted. This showed the nature in
the other life of a sphere of authority.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1508.">1508.</span></span>

Many times has it been given me to observe that those who in the world
had been endowed with high rank, could not help contracting thereby a
sphere of authority, and therefore in the other life they could neither
hide nor get rid of it. In those of them who had been endowed with faith
and charity, the sphere of authority is in a wonderful way conjoined
with a sphere of goodness, so that it is not troublesome to anyone;
indeed a kind of corresponding subordination is shown them by
well-behaved spirits; and in fact they have no sphere of commanding, but
only a sphere that is natural to them from their high birth, and which
after some delay they put off; for they are good, and strive to put it
off.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1509.">1509.</span></span>

For several days such spirits were with me as during their life in this
world had cared nothing for the good of society, but only for
themselves, being useless members of the commonwealth, and who had had
no end but to live sumptuously, to be clothed splendidly, and to grow
rich; being well practiced in simulation, and in ways of insinuating
themselves by various forms of flattering assent and a display of
services, but only that they might seem devoted, and be intrusted with
their master's goods, while they looked down with contempt upon all who
were earnestly employed. It was perceived that they had been courtiers.
The effect of their sphere was to take from me the power of close
application, and to make it so irksome for me to act and to think in
serious matters, true and good, that at last I scarcely knew what to do.
When such as these come among spirits, they induce on them a similar
torpor. In the other life they are useless members, and are rejected
wherever they come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1510.">1510.</span></span>

Every spirit-and still more every society of spirits-has his own sphere
from his principles and persuasions, which sphere is that of his
principles and persuasions. Evil genii have a sphere of cupidities, and
in their case the sphere of principles and persuasions is such that when
acting upon another it makes truths to be as falsities and calls forth
all things that are confirmatory, so as to induce a belief that
falsities are truths, and that evils are goods. \[2\] This has shown how
easily a man may be confirmed in falsities and evils, if he has no
belief in the truths which are from the Lord. Such spheres are dense in
proportion to the nature of the falsities. These spheres can by no means
agree with the spheres of spirits who are in truths. If they approach,
there arises a repugnance; and if by permission the sphere of falsity
prevails, the good come into temptation and into anxiety. I have also
perceived the sphere of unbelief, which is such that those who are in it
do not believe anything that is said, and scarcely what is presented to
their sight. There is also the sphere of those who believe nothing but
what they apprehend by the senses. \[3\] A certain one was seen by me,
clothed in something dark, sitting at a mill, as if grinding meal, and
at the side were seen little mirrors, and I afterwards saw some things
produced by phantasy,, but which were aerial. I wondered who he was; but
he came to me and said that he was the one who sat at the mill; and that
he had such ideas, as that all things whatsoever are only phantasies,
and that nothing is real. For this reason he had become such as he was.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1511.">1511.</span></span>

It has been made known to me by much experience, so well known that
nothing can be more so, that spirits who are in falsities flow into the
thought, and induce a persuasion exactly as if what is false is true, so
that it cannot possibly appear otherwise, and this they do from their
sphere. In like manner genii, who are in evils, inflow in the same way
into the will, and produce an effect exactly as if what is evil is good,
so that it cannot possibly be felt otherwise; and this also from their
sphere. This influx of spirits of both kinds it has been given me to
plainly perceive a thousand times; also from whom it came, and how
angels from the Lord removed such things; besides many other things that
cannot so well be specifically narrated; so that I have become assured,
with all possible certainty, whence come the falsities and evils with
man; and also that such spheres as remain after the death of the body
and manifest themselves so evidently, are from principles of falsity and
cupidities of evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1512.">1512.</span></span>

The spheres of phantasies, when presented in visible form, appear like
clouds, more or less dense according to the quality of the phantasy.
There is a certain misty rock under the left foot, where the
antediluvians are, and under which they stay. That cloudiness, by which
they are kept apart from all others in the other life, arises from their
phantasies. From those who have lived in hatred and revenge, there
exhale such spheres as cause swooning, and excite vomiting. Such spheres
are as it were poisonous; and it is usual to test how poisonous they
are, and how dense, by fillets of a dull azure color: as these fade
away, the sphere also is lessened.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1513.">1513.</span></span>

A certain spirit came to me of those called the lukewarm, who bore
himself as if he had repented; nor did I perceive the deceit, although I
thought that he was concealing something within. But the spirits said
that they could not endure his presence, and that they felt within
themselves such an effect as men feel when moved to vomit, and that he
was among those who are to be spewed out. He afterwards spoke abominable
things; nor could he desist, however much he was persuaded not to speak
so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1514.">1514.</span></span>

Spheres are also made susceptible to sense by odors, which spirits smell
much more exquisitely than men; for, wonderful to say, odors correspond
to spheres. When the sphere of those who have indulged in the practice
of simulation and have thereby contracted a nature, is turned into an
odor, there is a stench of vomit. When the sphere of those who have
studied eloquence to the end that everything may redound to
self-admiration, is made odoriferous, it is like the odor of burnt
bread. With those who have indulged in mere pleasures, and have been in
no charity and faith, the odor of their sphere is like that of
excrement. So is the odor of those who have spent their lives in
adulteries, but this is still more offensive. When the sphere of those
who have lived in deep hatred and revenge, and in cruelty, is turned
into odors, there is a cadaverous stench. The stench of mice is diffused
around from those who have been sordidly avaricious; the stench of
bedbugs <span id="fr_39"></span>[1514-1](#fn_39) from those who
persecute the innocent. These odors cannot be smelled by any man, except
by one whose interior sensations are opened, so that he may be in
company with spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1515.">1515.</span></span>

The sphere of the stench of a certain woman was perceived, who was
afterwards associated with sirens; and that stench exhaled for some days
wherever she went. The spirits said that the stench seemed deadly; yet
she perceived nothing of it. The stench of sirens is similar, because
their interiors are filthy, while their exteriors are for the most part
becoming and fair (see n. 831). It is wonderful how quickly the sirens
in the other life learn all things there, and know better than others
how things are, even matters of doctrine; but all to the end that they
may turn them into magic, and arrogate to themselves command over
others. They enter into the affections of the good by the simulation of
good and truth; but still their quality remains, which shows that what
is doctrinal is nothing, unless the man becomes as it teaches, that is,
unless he has the life as the end in view; and besides, there are many
among the infernals who had been preeminently skilled in doctrinal
things. But they who have lived a life of charity are all in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1516.">1516.</span></span>

I have spoken with spirits about the sense of taste, which they said
that they do not possess, but a something from which they know what
taste is, and which they likened to an odor, but which they could not
describe. It was brought to my recollection that taste and smell meet in
a kind of third sense, as is evident also from animals which examine
their food by the smell, from which they know whether it is wholesome
and suitable for them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1517.">1517.</span></span>

A vinous odor was perceived, and I was informed that it came from those
who compliment one another from friendship and rightful love, so that
there is also truth in the compliments. This odor exists with much
variety, and comes from the sphere of the beautiful in forms.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1518.">1518.</span></span>

When the celestial angels are with the body of a deceased person who is
to be raised up, the smell of the body is turned into an aromatic odor;
on perceiving which, evil spirits cannot approach.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1519.">1519.</span></span>

The spheres of charity and faith, when perceived as odors, are most
delightful; the odors are pleasant, as of flowers, lilies, and spices of
various kinds, with indefinite variety. Moreover, the spheres of the
angels also are sometimes made visible as atmospheres or auras, which
are so beautiful, so pleasant, and so various, that they cannot possibly
be described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1520.">1520.</span></span>

But in regard to what has been said of the possibility of perceiving the
interiors of a spirit by spheres extended and projected outside of him,
as also by odors, it is to be known that these are not always
perceptible; and besides, they are tempered in various ways by the Lord,
in order that the quality of spirits may not always be exposed before
others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1521.">1521.</span></span>

CHAPTER 13. CONCERNING THE LIGHT IN WHICH THE ANGELS LIVE. That spirits
and angels possess every sense, except taste, far more exquisitely and
perfectly than man ever does, has been made manifest to me in many ways.
They not only see one another and converse together-the angels with the
greatest happiness from mutual love-but in that world there is more to
see than men could believe to be possible; the world of spirits and the
heavens are full of representatives such as were seen by the prophets,
and of so wonderful a nature that if a person's sight were but opened so
that for a few hours he might behold them, he would be astounded. The
light in heaven is such as to incredibly surpass even the midday light
of our solar world. They however have no light from this world, because
they are above or within the sphere of this light; but their light is
from the Lord, who to them is a Sun. Even the midday light of this world
is dense darkness to the angels; and when they have an opportunity to
see it, it is as if they were looking at mere darkness, as I have been
given to know by experience. This shows what a difference there is
between the light of heaven and the light of this world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1522.">1522.</span></span>

I have so frequently seen the light in which spirits and angels live,
that at last I have ceased to wonder at it, because it has become
familiar. But to adduce all my experience would be too tedious; let what
follows suffice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1523.">1523.</span></span>

That I might know the nature of that light, I have often been conducted
into the abodes of good and of angelic spirits, and have seen both the
spirits and the objects there. I have also seen infants and mothers in
light of so great a brightness and resplendence that there could not
possibly be anything brighter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1524.">1524.</span></span>

An intense flaming irradiation unexpectedly poured down before my eyes,
dazzling them greatly-not merely the light of the eye, but the interior
sight also. Presently there appeared a sort of obscurity, like a thick
cloud, in which there was as it were something earthy. While I wondered
at this it was given me to know that such is the light with the angels
in heaven in comparison with that in the world of spirits; and that
although the spirits live in light, yet still there is such a
difference; and that, as does the light, so also do the intelligence and
the wisdom of the angels surpass those of spirits; and not their
intelligence and wisdom only, but also all things that belong to these,
such as their speech, thought, joys, and felicities; for these
correspond to the light. This evidenced to me how great and of what
nature are the perfections of angels as compared with men, who are in
greater obscurity even than spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1525.">1525.</span></span>

The kind of light in which those live who belong to a certain internal
province of the face, was shown me. It was beautifully varied by rays of
golden flame for those who are in affections of good, and by rays of
silver light for those who are in affections of truth. Sometimes they
see the sky-not that which appears before our eyes, but one that is
represented before them--beautifully studded with little stars. The
reason for the difference in the light is that all good spirits who are
in the first heaven, and all angelic spirits who are in the second, and
all angels who are in the third, are distinguished in general into the
celestial and the spiritual; the celestial being those who are in the
love of good, and the spiritual those who are in the love of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1526.">1526.</span></span>

I was withdrawn from the ideas of particular things, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1526-1](#fn_40) or those of the body, so that I might
be kept in spiritual ideas. There then appeared a vivid glow of diamond
light, and this for a considerable time. I cannot describe the light in
any other way; for in its least parts it was like the sparkling of the
diamond. And while I was kept in that light, I perceived the particular
things, which are worldly and corporeal, as it were below me, and
remote; by which I was instructed how great light those are in who are
withdrawn from material ideas into those which are spiritual. Moreover,
the light of spirits and of angels has been seen by me so many times,
that many pages would be filled if all the experiences were recounted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1527.">1527.</span></span>

When the Lord pleases, good spirits appear before others, and also to
one another, as bright stars that sparkle in accordance with the quality
of their charity and faith; but evil spirits appear like little balls of
coal fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1528.">1528.</span></span>

The life of cupidities and of the derivative pleasures sometimes appears
among evil spirits like a coal fire. Into such a fieriness, as it were,
is the life of the Lord's love and mercy changed that flows in with
them; and the life of their phantasies appears as the light from it,
which is a dim light that extends to no great distance; but at the
approach of the life of mutual love, that fieriness is extinguished and
turned into cold, and that dim light is turned into darkness. For evil
spirits pass their lives in darkness; and, wonderful to say, some also
love darkness, and hate light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1529.">1529.</span></span>

It is perfectly well known in heaven, but not so well in the world of
spirits, whence comes the light that is so great, namely, from the Lord;
and it is a remarkable fact that the Lord appears in the third heaven to
the celestial angels as a Sun, and to the spiritual angels as a Moon.
The very origin of the light is this and this alone. But the angels have
light in proportion to what is celestial and spiritual with them, and
the quality of this determines the quality of their light. Thus the
Lord's celestial and spiritual manifests itself before their external
sight by means of light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1530.">1530.</span></span>

That this is so the Word has shown to all; as when the Lord was made
manifest to Peter, James, and John; for His face then shone as the sun,
and His garments became as the light (Matt. 17:2). He so appeared to
them simply because their interior sight was opened. The same is
confirmed also in the Prophets; as in Isaiah, where the Lord's kingdom
in the heavens is treated of: The light of the moon shall be as the
light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the
light of seven days (Isa. 30:26). And in John, where also the Lord's
kingdom, which is called the New Jerusalem, is spoken of: The city hath
no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it; for the glory
of God doth lighten it, and the Lamb is the lamp thereof (Rev. 21:23).
And again: There shall be no night there, and they have no need of a
lamp, neither light of the sun, for the Lord God giveth them light (Rev.
22:5). Besides that when the Lord appeared to Moses, Aaron, Nadab,
Abihu, and the seventy elders, they saw the God of Israel, under whose
feet was as it were a work of sapphire stone, and as it were the
substance of heaven in clearness (Exod. 24:10). As the Lord's celestial
and spiritual appear before the external sight of the angels as a Sun
and a Moon, therefore "the sun" in the Word signifies what is celestial,
and "the moon" what is spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1531.">1531.</span></span>

That I might be confirmed in the truth that the Lord appears to the
celestial angels as a Sun, and to the spiritual angels as a Moon, my
interior sight was of the Lord's Divine mercy so far opened that I
plainly saw the Moon shining, which was encompassed by a number of
smaller moons, the light of which was almost solar, according to the
words in Isaiah: The light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun
(Isa. 30:26). But it was not granted me to see the Sun. The Moon
appeared in front, to the right.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1532.">1532.</span></span>

Wonderful things appear in heaven from the Lord's light, things so
beyond number that they could never be told. They are continual
representatives of the Lord and of His kingdom, such as are mentioned in
the Prophets, and by John in Revelation; besides other significatives.
With the bodily eyes no man can possibly see them, but the moment the
interior sight or that of the spirit is opened by the Lord, such things
become visible. The visions of the prophets were nothing else than
openings of their interior sight; as when John saw the golden lampstands
(Rev. 1:12-13); and the Holy City as pure gold, with its luminary like
to a stone most precious (Rev. 21:2, 10-11); besides many things
mentioned in the Prophets; from which it may be known, not only that the
angels live in the brightest light, but also that there are countless
things there which surpass belief.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1533.">1533.</span></span>

Before my sight was opened, the idea I cherished concerning the
countless things that appear in the other life differed but little from
that of others, that is to say, that in the other life there could be no
light, and such things as exist from light, together with the things of
sense; a notion derived from the phantasy entertained by the learned
respecting the immateriality which they predicate so strongly of spirits
and of all things pertaining to their life; from which no other
conception could be had, than that, because it was immaterial, it was
either so obscure that no idea of it could be grasped, or that it was
nothing; for the immateriality involves such things. And yet the fact is
just the reverse; for unless spirits were organized, and unless angels
were organized substances, they could neither speak, nor see, nor think.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1534.">1534.</span></span>

That by the aid of the light from a celestial and spiritual origin from
the Lord, there are in the other life presented before the sight of
spirits and angels most wonderful objects, such as paradises, cities,
palaces, dwellings, the most beautiful atmospheres, and others besides,
see the "Continuation concerning Light" at the end of this chapter.
GENESIS 13 1. And Abram went up out of Egypt, he and his wife, and all
that he had, and Lot with him, toward the south. 2. And Abram was very
rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold. 3. And he went according to his
journeys from the south and even to Bethel, unto the place where his
tent was at the first, between Bethel and Ai. 4. Unto the place of the
altar which he had made there in the beginning; and there Abram called
on the name of Jehovah. 5. And Lot also, who went with Abram, had flock
and herd, and tents. 6. And the land was not able to bear them that they
might dwell together, for their substance was great, so that they could
not dwell together. 7. And there was strife between the herdmen of
Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle; and the Canaanite and
the Perizzite were then dwelling in the land. 8. And Abram said unto
Lot, Let there be no contention, I pray, between me and thee, and
between my herdmen and thy herdmen, for we are men brethren. 9. Is not
the whole land before thee? Separate, I pray, from me; if to the left
hand, then I will go to the right; or if to the right hand, then I will
go to the left. 10. And Lot lifted up his eyes, and saw all the plain of
Jordan, that it was all well watered, before Jehovah destroyed Sodom and
Gomorrah, like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt in coming
to Zoar. 11. And Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot
journeyed from the east; and they were separated, a man from his
brother. 12. Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelt in the
cities of the plain, and pitched his tent as far as Sodom. 13. And the
men of Sodom were wicked and sinners against Jehovah exceedingly. 14.
And Jehovah said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift
up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, northward,
and southward, and eastward, and westward. 15. For all the land which
thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed, forever. 16. And I
will make thy seed as the dust of the earth; so that if anyone can
number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered. 17.
Arise, walk through the land, in the length of it and in the breadth of
it; for unto thee will I give it. 18. And Abram pitched his tent, and
came, and dwelt in the oak-groves of Mamre, which are in Hebron, and
built there an altar unto Jehovah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1535.">1535.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS This chapter treats of the external man in the Lord which
was to be conjoined with His internal man. The external man is the Human
Essence, the internal is the Divine essence. The former is here
represented by Lot, but the latter by Abram.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1536.">1536.</span></span>

There is here described the state of the external man such as it was in
childhood, when first imbued with knowledges \[scientifica et
cognitiones\]-that it thence advanced more and more to conjunction with
the internal man (verses 1 to 4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1537.">1537.</span></span>

But that there were still many things in His external man that impeded
the conjunction (verses 5 to 7); from which, however, He desired to be
separated (verses 8, 9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1538.">1538.</span></span>

That the external man appeared to the Lord such as it is in its beauty
when conjoined with the internal; and also such as it is when not
conjoined (verses 10 to 13).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1539.">1539.</span></span>

A promise that when the external man was conjoined with the internal,
that is, when the Lord's Human Essence was conjoined with His Divine
Essence, all power and authority \[potestas\] should be given to Him
(verses 14 to 17). Concerning the Lord's interior perception (verse 18).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1540.">1540.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE The true historicals of the Word began, as before
said, with the foregoing chapter-the twelfth. Up to that point, or
rather to Eber, they were made-up historicals. In the internal sense,
the historicals here continued respecting Abram are significative of the
Lord, and in fact of His first life, such as it was before His external
man had been conjoined with the internal so as to make one thing; that
is, before His external man had been in like manner made celestial and
Divine. The historicals are what represent the Lord; the words
themselves are significative of the things that are represented. But
being historical, the mind of the reader cannot but be held in them;
especially at this day, when most persons, and indeed nearly all, do not
believe that there is an internal sense, and still less that it exists
in every word; and it may be that in spite of the fact that the internal
sense has been so plainly shown thus far, they will not even now
acknowledge its existence, and this for the reason that the internal
sense appears to recede so far from the sense of the letter as to be
scarcely recognized in it. And yet that these historicals cannot be the
Word they might know from the mere fact that when separated from the
internal sense there is no more of the Divine in them than in any other
history; whereas the internal sense makes the Word to be Divine. \[2\]
That the internal sense is the Word itself, is evident from many things
that have been revealed, as, "Out of Egypt have I called My son" (Matt.
2:15); besides many others. The Lord Himself also, after His
resurrection, taught the disciples what had been written concerning Him
in Moses and the Prophets (Luke 24:27); and thus that there is nothing
written in the Word that does not regard Him, His kingdom, and the
church. These are the spiritual and celestial things of the Word; but
the things contained in the literal sense are for the most part worldly,
corporeal, and earthly; which cannot possibly make the Word of the Lord.
At this day men are of such a character that they perceive nothing but
such things; and what spiritual and heavenly things are, they scarcely
know. It was otherwise with the men of the Most Ancient and of the
Ancient Church, who, had they lived at this day, and had read the Word,
would not have attended at all to the sense of the letter, which they
would look upon as nothing, but to the internal sense. They wonder
greatly that anyone perceives the Word in any other way. All the books
of the Ancients were therefore so written as to have in their interior
sense a different meaning from that in the letter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1541.">1541.</span></span>

Verse l. And Abram went up out of Egypt, he and his wife, and all that
he had, and Lot with him, toward the south. In the internal sense, the
things here stated, and those which follow in this chapter, also
represent the Lord; there being a continuation of His life from
childhood. "Abram went up out of Egypt," signifies from
memory-knowledges, which left the Lord. In the internal sense, "Abram"
is the Lord, here the Lord when still a child; "Egypt," here as before,
is memory-knowledge; "he and his wife," signifies the celestial truths
that were then with the Lord; "and all that he had" signifies all things
that were of the celestial "things; "and Lot with him" signifies what is
sensuous; "toward the south," signifies into celestial light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1542.">1542.</span></span>

That in the internal sense these things, and those that follow in this
chapter, also represent the Lord, and that it is a continuation of His
life from childhood, may be seen from what was said and shown in the
preceding chapter, and also from what follows, but especially from the
consideration that this is the Word of the Lord, and that it has come
down from Him through heaven, and therefore that not even the least bit
of a word has been written that does not involve heavenly arcana. That
which comes from such an origin cannot possibly be of any other nature.
It has been shown already that in the internal sense the Lord's
instruction when a child is treated of. There are two things with man
which prevent his becoming celestial, one of which belongs to his
intellectual, and the other to his will part: that which belongs to the
intellectual part consists of the empty memory-knowledges he learns in
childhood and youth; and that which belongs to the will part consists of
pleasures from the cupidities which he favors. These are the hindrances
that prevent his being able to attain to celestial things. These are
first to be dispersed; and when they have been dispersed, he can then
for the first time be admitted into the light of celestial things, and
at last into celestial light. \[2\] As the Lord was born as are other
men, and was to be informed as others are, it was necessary for Him to
learn memory-knowledges, which was represented and signified by Abram's
sojourn in Egypt; and that the empty memory-knowledges at last left Him,
was represented by Pharaoh's commanding his men respecting him, and by
their sending him away, and his wife, and all that he had. (See the
foregoing chapter, verse 20.) But that the pleasures which pertain to
the things of the will, and which constitute the sensuous man, but the
outermost of it, also left Him, is represented in this chapter by Lot,
in that he separated himself from Abram; for Lot represents such a man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1543.">1543.</span></span>

And Abram went up out of Egypt. That this signifies from
memory-knowledges, which left the Lord, is evident from the
signification of "Abram," as representing the Lord; and also from the
signification of "Egypt," which is memory-knowledge; and also from the
signification of "going up," for this expression is used of emerging
from the lower things, which are the memory-knowledges, to the higher,
which are the celestial things; and therefore, in the Word, "to go up
from Egypt into the land of Canaan"-an expression which often
occurs-involves the like things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1544.">1544.</span></span>

It has already been shown that here, in the internal sense, "Abram" is
the Lord while still a child, and that "Egypt" is memory-knowledge.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1545.">1545.</span></span>

He and he wife. That this signifies the celestial truths then in the
Lord, may be seen from the signification of "he," that is, of Abram, as
being the Lord, and consequently the celestial that was in Him. A man is
a man from the things that are in him; the Lord, from the celestial
things; for He alone was celestial, so as to be the celestial itself; on
which account celestial things are signified by "Abram," and still more
by "Abraham." This may be further seen from the signification of a
"wife," as being truth adjoined to the celestial (as before shown, n.
1468). That the truths are celestial truths, or truths which are from
celestial things, is evident from the fact that "he" is named first, and
"his wife" afterwards. For celestial truth is one thing, and truth
celestial is another; celestial truth is that which derives its origin
from the celestial; truth celestial is that which is from the truth
which is implanted in the celestial by means of knowledges
\[cognitiones\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="1546.">1546.</span></span>

And all that he had. That this signifies all things that were of the
celestial things, is evident from what has now been said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1547.">1547.</span></span>

And Lot with him. That this signifies what is sensuous, has already been
briefly stated (n. 1428); but as Lot is here specifically treated of, it
must be known what it is in the Lord that he represents. Pharaoh
represented the memory-knowledges that at last sent the Lord away; but
Lot represents sensuous things, by which is meant the external man and
its pleasures that pertain to sensuous things, thus those things which
are outermost, and which are wont to captivate man in his childhood, and
draw him away from goods. For so far as a man indulges the pleasures
that originate from cupidities, he is drawn away from the celestial
things that are of love and charity; because in those pleasures there is
love from self and from the world, with which celestial love cannot
agree. There are, however, pleasures that agree perfectly with celestial
things, and that likewise appear similar in external form (concerning
which see above, n. 945, 994, 995, 997). But the pleasures that
originate from cupidities are to be restrained and wiped out, because
they block the way to celestial things. It is these pleasures, and not
the others, that are treated of in this chapter-by Lot, in that he
separated himself from Abram; and here it is said that such pleasures
were present, which are signified by "Lot with him." But in general by
"Lot" is signified the external man, as will be evident from what
follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1548.">1548.</span></span>

Toward the south. That this signifies into celestial light, is evident
from the signification of "the south," as being a state of light as to
the interiors (spoken of before, n. 1458). There are two states from
which comes celestial light. The first is that into which man is
introduced from infancy; for it is known that infants are in innocence
and in the goods of love, which are the celestial things into which they
are at first introduced by the Lord, and which are stored up in the
child for use in later life, and for his use when he comes into the
other life; these are what are called the first remains, spoken of in
several places before. The other state is, that man is introduced into
spiritual and celestial things by means of knowledges, which must be
implanted in the celestial things given from infancy. With the Lord,
these were implanted in His first celestial things, from which He had
the light which is here called "the south."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1549.">1549.</span></span>

Verse 2. And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
"Abram was very rich in cattle," signifies the goods with which the Lord
was then enriched; "in silver," signifies the truths; "and in gold,"
signifies the goods from truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1550.">1550.</span></span>

Abram was very rich in cattle. That this signifies goods, is evident
from the signification of "cattle," and of "flock," as being good
(concerning which above, n. 343, 415).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[1514-1](ac031.htm#fr_39) Pediculi domestici, a
literal translation into Latin of the Swedish name for the common cimex.
\[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_40"></span>[1526-1](ac031.htm#fr_40) Compare n. 3885, and
see note to n. 2481. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1551-1600](ac032)
