[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac040)  [Next](ac042.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="2001.">2001.</span></span>

That the expression "God" is used for the reason that the Lord is
represented by the God Shaddai whom Abram worshiped, and also because
truth is treated of, which was to be united to good, is evident from
what has been said before. In the Word the Lord is sometimes called
"Jehovah," sometimes "Jehovah God," also the "Lord Jehovih," and
sometimes "God," and always for a secret reason in the internal sense.
Where love or good; and the celestial church, are treated of, He is
called "JEHOVAH;" but when faith or truth, and the spiritual church, are
treated of, He is called "God," and this constantly; and the reason is,
that the Lord's very Being itself is of love, and the Being thence
derived is of faith (n. 709, 732). Here therefore the Lord is called
"God," because the truth which is to be united to good is treated of.
Another reason is that the Lord willed to be represented by the God
Shaddai that Abram worshiped, on which account the name God is retained
in what follows; for in this chapter He is called "Jehovah" only once,
and "God" several times (as in verses 7-8, 15, 18-19, 22-23).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2002.">2002.</span></span>

Verse 4. I, behold, My covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be for a
father of a multitude of nations. "I, behold, My covenant is with thee,"
signifies the union of the Divine Essence with the Human Essence; "and
thou shalt be for a father of a multitude of nations," signifies the
union of the Human Essence with the Divine Essence; "father" signifies
that it would be from the Lord Himself; "a multitude" signifies truth;
"of nations" signifies the good thence derived.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2003.">2003.</span></span>

I, behold, My covenant is with thee. That this signifies the union of
the Divine Essence with the Human Essence, is evident from the
signification of a "covenant," as being conjunction (see n. 665, 666,
1023, 1038). That here "covenant" signifies the union of the Divine
Essence with the Human Essence, is evident from this signification, and
also from the internal sense of what precedes, consequently from the
very words, "My covenant is with thee."

<span class="margnote"><span id="2004.">2004.</span></span>

And thou shalt be for a father of a multitude of nations. That this
signifies the union of the Human Essence with the Divine Essence, cannot
be seen so well from an unfolding of the several words in the internal
sense, unless they are viewed in a kind of general idea, by which this
sense is presented, for such is sometimes the nature of the internal
sense, and when it is so, it may be called more universal, because more
remote. From the explication of the several words there results this
proximate sense: that all truth and all good come from the Lord, for, as
we shall see presently, the expression "father" here signifies from Him,
that is, from the Lord; "multitude" signifies truth; and "of nations"
signifies the good thence derived. But because these-that is, truths and
goods-are the means through which the Lord united the Human Essence to
the Divine Essence, there arises from this that more universal and more
remote sense. The angels perceive these words in this way, and have at
the same time a perception of reciprocal union, namely, that of the
Lord's Divine Essence with the Human Essence and of the Human Essence
with the Divine Essence; for, as before said, "I, My covenant is with
thee" signifies the union of the Divine Essence with the Human Essence;
and consequently the words now under consideration signify the union of
the Human Essence with the Divine Essence. \[2\] That the union was
effected reciprocally, is an arcanum which has not yet been disclosed,
and it is such an arcanum as can scarcely be explained to the
apprehension; for as yet no one knows what influx is, and without a
knowledge of influx no idea can possibly be formed in regard to what is
reciprocal union. Yet this may in some measure be illustrated from the
influx in the case of man, for with man too there is a reciprocal
conjunction. From the Lord, through man's internal (treated of just
above, n. 1999), life continually flows into man's rational, and through
this into his external, and in fact into his knowledges \[scientifica et
cognitiones\], and this life not only adapts them to receive the life,
but also disposes them into order, and so enables the man to think, and
finally to be rational. Such is the conjunction of the Lord with man,
without which man could not think at all, still less be rational, as
everyone can see from the fact that there are in man's thoughts
numberless arcana of science and analytical art-too numerous to render
their exploration possible to all eternity-and which do by no means flow
in through the senses or through the external man, but through the
internal. Man however, on his part, by means of knowledges \[scientifica
et cognitiones\], advances to meet this life which is from the Lord, and
thereby reciprocally conjoins himself. \[3\] But as regards the union of
the Lord's Divine Essence with His Human Essence, and of His Human
Essence with His Divine Essence, this infinitely transcends the
reciprocal conjunction between man and the Lord, for the Lord's internal
was Jehovah Himself and therefore was life itself; whereas man's
internal is not the Lord, and therefore is not life but a recipient of
life. Between the Lord and Jehovah there was union, but between man and
the Lord there is not union, but conjunction. The Lord united Himself to
Jehovah by His own power, and He therefore also became Righteousness;
whereas man by no means conjoins himself by his own power, but by the
power of the Lord; so that the Lord conjoins man with Himself. It is
this reciprocal union that is meant by the Lord, where He attributes
what is His own to the Father, and what is the Father's to Himself, as
in John: Jesus said, He that believeth on Me, believeth not on Me, but
on Him that sent Me: I am come a light into the world, that whosoever
believeth in Me may not abide in the darkness (John 12:44-46), in which
words lie hidden the deepest arcana-arcana concerning the union of good
with truth, and of truth with good; or what is the same, concerning the
union of the Divine Essence with the Human Essence, and of the Human
Essence with the Divine Essence; and therefore the Lord says, "He that
believeth on Me, believeth not on Me, but on Him that sent Me;" and then
almost immediately adds, "He that believeth on Me;" with words between
that refer to this union, namely, "he that seeth Me seeth Him that sent
Me." \[4\] Again in the same gospel: The words that I speak unto you I
speak not from Myself; the Father that abideth in Me, He doeth the
works. Believe Me that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me. Verily
I say unto you, He that believeth in Me, the works that I do shall he do
also (John 14:10-12). In these words are contained the same arcana,
namely, those concerning the union of good with truth, and of truth with
good; or what is the same, of the Lord's Divine Essence with His Human
Essence, and of His Human Essence with His Divine Essence; and He
therefore says, "The words that I speak unto you I speak not from
Myself; the Father who is in Me doeth the works;" and then He almost
immediately adds, "the works that I do;" and here, as before, there are
intervening words concerning the union, which declare, "I am in the
Father, and the Father in Me." This is the mystical union of which many
speak. \[5\] From all this it is evident that the Lord was not another
than the Father, although He spoke of the Father as of another, and this
on account of the reciprocal unition that was to be effected and that
was effected; for He so many times openly says that He is one with the
Father, as in the passages just cited: "He that seeth Me seeth Him that
sent Me" (John 12:45) also, "The Father that abideth in Me; believe Me
that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me" (John 14:10, 11); and in
the same, "If ye had known Me, ye would have known My Father also" (John
8:19); and again, "If ye have known Me, ye have known My Father also;
and from henceforth ye have known Him, and have seen Him; Philip saith
unto Him, Lord, show us the Father; Jesus saith unto him, Am I so long
time with you, and hast thou not known Me, Philip? He that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father; how sayest thou then, Show us the Father?
Believest thou not that I am in the Father and the Father in Me?" (John
14:7-10) and again, "I and the Father are one" (John 10:30). Hence it is
that in heaven they know no other Father than the Lord, because the
Father is in Him, and He is one with the Father; and when they see Him,
they see the Father, as He Himself says (see n. 15).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2005.">2005.</span></span>

That "father" signifies that it would be from the Lord Himself, is
evident from the signification of "father," as just explained, namely,
that whatever was from the Father was from Him, because they were one.
Every man's internal is from his father, and his external from his
mother; or what is the same thing, the soul itself is from the father,
and the body with which the soul is clothed is from the mother. The soul
together with the body, although two, make a one; for the soul is the
body's, and the body is the soul's; and therefore they are inseparable.
The Lord's internal was from the Father, and therefore was the Father
Himself, and hence it is that the Lord says that "the Father is in Him;"
also, "I am in the Father and the Father in Me;" also, "He that seeth Me
seeth the Father; I and the Father are one;" as may be seen in the
passages cited above. In the Word of the Old Testament also the Lord is
called "the Father," as in Isaiah: Unto us a Child is born, unto us a
Son is given and the government shall be upon His shoulder; and His name
shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, God, Hero, the Father of Eternity,
the Prince of Peace (Isa. 9:6). It is evident to everyone that the
"Child" born to us and the "Son" given to us is the Lord, who is called
the "Father of Eternity." Again in Isaiah: Thou art our Father, for
Abraham knoweth us not, and Israel doth not acknowledge us. Thou, O
Jehovah, art our Father, our Redeemer, from eternity is Thy name (Isa.
63:16); where also it is the Lord who is called "Jehovah our Father,"
for there is no other "Redeemer." In Malachi: Have we not all one
Father? Hath not one God created us? (Mal. 2:10). To "create" denotes to
regenerate (as shown in Part First, n. 16, 88, 472). Besides that
everywhere in the Word of the Old Testament, by "Jehovah" is meant the
Lord, because all the rites of the church represented Him; and in the
internal sense all things in the Word regard Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2006.">2006.</span></span>

That "a multitude" signifies truth, is evident from the signification of
"multitude" as being truth (explained before, n. 1941); and from the
signification of "being multiplied," which is predicated of truth (see
n. 43, 55, 913, 983).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2007.">2007.</span></span>

Of nations. That this signifies the good thence derived, is evident from
the signification of "nations" as being good (explained in Part First,
n. 1159, 1258-1260, 1416, 1849).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2008.">2008.</span></span>

Verse 5. And thy name shall no more be called Abram; and thy name shall
be Abraham, for a father of a multitude of nations have I made thee.
"Thy name shall no more be called Abram," signifies that He will put off
the human; "and thy name shall be Abraham," signifies that He will put
on the Divine; "for a father of a multitude of nations have I made
thee," signifies here, as before, that all truth and the good thence
derived come from Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2009.">2009.</span></span>

Thy name shall no more be called Abram, and thy name shall be Abraham.
That "thy name shall no more be called Abram," signifies that He will
put off the human; and that "thy name shall be Abraham," signifies that
He will put on the Divine, is evident from the signification of "name;"
also from the signification of "Abram;" and, afterwards, of "Abraham."
The expression "this shall be thy name," when used in the Word,
signifies the quality, that is, that the person will be of such a
quality, as is evident from what has been adduced in Part First (n. 144,
145, 1754). And as the "name" signifies the quality, the name
comprehends in one complex whatever is in the man. For in heaven no
attention is paid to anyone's name; but when anyone is named, or when
the word name is spoken, there is presented the idea of the person's
quality, that is, of all things that are his, that are connected with
him, and that are in him; hence in the Word "name" signifies quality.
That this may be evident to the understanding we may adduce from the
Word a number of additional confirmatory passages. As in the Benediction
in Moses: Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee; Jehovah make His faces to
shine upon thee and have compassion on thee; Jehovah lift up His faces
upon thee and give thee peace. So shall they put My name upon the sons
of Israel (Num. 6:24-27). From this it is evident what is denoted by
"name," and by "putting the name" of Jehovah upon the sons of Israel,
namely, that Jehovah blesses, guards, enlightens, is pitiful, gives
peace; and thus that Jehovah or the Lord is such. \[2\] In the
Decalogue: Thou shalt not take the name of thy God in vain; for Jehovah
will not hold him guiltless who taketh His name in vain (Exod. 20:7;
Deut. 5:11); where to "take the name of God in vain" does not signify
the name, but all things in general and particular that are from Him,
and therefore all things in general and particular that belong to the
worship of Him, none of which are to be despised, still less blasphemed
and contaminated with what is filthy. In the Lord's Prayer: Hallowed be
Thy name; Thy kingdom come Thy will be done, as in heaven so also in the
earth (Luke 11:2); where also by "name" is not meant the name, but all
things of love and faith; for these are God's or the Lord's, and are
from Him; and as these are holy, the Lord's kingdom comes and His will
is done on earth as in the heavens when they are held to be so. \[3\]
That "name" signifies such things is evident from all the passages in
the Word of the Old and of the New Testament where "name" is mentioned.
As in Isaiah: In that day shall ye say, Confess to Jehovah, call upon
His name, make known His works among the peoples, make mention that His
name is exalted (Isa. 12:4); where to "call upon the name of Jehovah,"
and to "make mention that His name is exalted," does not at all mean to
place worship in the name, or to believe that Jehovah is invoked by
using His name, but by knowing His quality, and thus by means of all
things in general and particular that are from Him. In the same:
Therefore honor ye Jehovah in the Urim the name of Jehovah the God of
Israel in the isles of the sea (Isa. 24:15); where to "honor Jehovah in
the Urim," is to honor Him from the holy things of love; and to "honor
the name of Jehovah the God of Israel in the isles of the sea," is to
honor Him from the holy things of faith. \[4\] In the same: O Jehovah
our God, only in Thee will we make mention of Thy name (Isa. 26:13). I
will raise up one from the north, and he shall come; from the rising of
the sun, he shall call upon My name (Isa. 41:25); where to "make mention
of the name of Jehovah," and to "call upon His name," means to worship
from the goods of love and the truths of faith. They who are from the
north are they who are outside the church and ignorant of the name of
Jehovah, who nevertheless "call upon His name" when they live in mutual
charity and adore as the Deity the Creator of the universe; for the
"calling upon Jehovah" consists in worship and the quality of it, and
not in the name. (That the Lord is present with the Gentiles also may be
seen above, n. 932, 1032, 1059.) \[5\] In the same: The nations shall
see <span id="fr_57"></span>[2009-1](#fn_57.md) thy righteousness, and all
kings thy glory and thou shalt be called by a new name which the mouth
of Jehovah shall name (Isa. 62:2); where "thou shalt be called by a new
name," denotes to become another person, that is, to be created anew or
regenerated, and thus to be such. In Micah: All the peoples will walk
everyone in the name of his god, and we will walk in the name of Jehovah
our God forever and to eternity (Micah 4:5); to "walk in the name of his
god," plainly denotes profane worship; and to "walk in the name of
Jehovah," true worship. In Malachi: From the rising of the sun and even
to its going down, My name shall be great among the nations; and in
every place incense is offered unto My name, and a clean offering for My
name shall be great among the nations (Mal. 1:11); where by "name" is
not signified the name, but the worship; which is the quality of Jehovah
or the Lord, by reason of which He wills to be adored. \[6\] In Moses:
The place which Jehovah your God shall choose out of all the tribes to
put His name there, and to cause His name to dwell there, thither shall
ye bring all that I command you (Deut. 12:5, 11, 14; 16:2, 6, 11); where
also by "putting His name," and "making His name dwell there," is not
signified the name, but the worship, and thus the quality of Jehovah or
the Lord by reason of which He is to be worshiped. His quality is the
good of love and the truth of faith; and "the name of Jehovah dwells"
with those who are in these. In Jeremiah: Go ye unto My place which was
in Shiloh, where I caused My name to dwell in the beginning (Jer. 7:12);
where in like manner "name" denotes worship, and thereby the doctrine of
true faith. Everyone can see that Jehovah does not dwell with him who
merely knows and speaks His name, for the name alone, without any idea,
knowledge, or faith concerning His quality is a mere word. Hence it is
evident that the "name" is the quality, and the knowledge of the
quality. \[7\] In Moses: At that time Jehovah separated the tribe of
Levi, to minister unto Him, and to bless in His name (Deut. 10:8); where
to "bless in the name" of Jehovah is not to do so through the name, but
by means of the things which appertain to the name of Jehovah, spoken of
above. In Jeremiah: This is His name whereby they shall call Him,
Jehovah our righteousness (Jer. 23:6); where the "name" denotes
righteousness, which is the quality of the Lord, of whom these words are
said. In Isaiah: Jehovah hath called Me from the womb, from the bowels
of My mother hath He made mention of <span
id="fr_58"></span>[2009-2](#fn_58) My name (Isa. 49:1.md); also said of the
Lord; to "make mention of His name," is to instruct in respect to His
quality. \[8\] That "name" signifies quality, is still more clearly
evident in John, in Revelation: Thou hast a few names in Sardis that did
not defile their garments; and they shall walk with Me in white, for
they are worthy. He that overcometh shall be clothed in white raiment,
and I will not blot his name out of the book of life; and I will confess
his name before My Father and before the angels. He that overcometh, I
will write upon him the name of My God, and the name of the city of My
God, the New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from My God, and
My new name (Rev. 3:4, 5, 12); where that the "name" is not the name,
but the quality, is plainly evident; the "name in the book of life" is
nothing else; and the quality is also meant by "confessing his name
before the Father," and by "writing upon him the name of God, and of the
city, and the new name;" and the same is true of the names which are
said elsewhere to be written in the book of life, and in heaven (Rev.
13:8, 17:8; Luke 10:20). \[9\] In heaven it is solely by the quality
that anyone is known from another; and in the sense of the letter this
is expressed by the name, as everyone can see from the consideration
that on earth whoever is named is presented in the listener's idea in
accordance with his quality, and it is by this idea that he is known and
distinguished from others. In the other life the ideas remain, but the
names perish; and this is still more the case among the angels. Hence it
is that in the internal sense the "name" is the quality, or to know the
quality. Again: Upon the head of Him who sat upon the white horse were
many diadems; and He hath a name written which no one knoweth but He
Himself. He was clothed in a garment dipped in blood; and His name is
called the Word of God (Rev. 19:12, 13); where that the "name" is the
Word of God, and thus is the quality of Him who sat upon the white
horse, is said in plain words. \[10\] That the "name of Jehovah" is to
know His quality, namely, that He is all the good of love and all the
truth of faith, is clearly evident from these words of the Lord: O
righteous Father I have known Thee, and these also have known that Thou
hast sent Me for I have made known unto them Thy name, and will make it
known; that the love wherewith Thou hast loved Me may be in them, and I
in them (John 17:25, 26). \[11\] And that the "name of God" or of the
Lord is all the doctrine of faith concerning love and charity, which is
signified by "believing in His name," is evident from these words in the
same gospel: As many as received Him, to them gave He the power
\[potestas\] to be sons of God, to them that believe in His name (John
1:12). If ye shall ask anything in My name, I will do it. If ye love Me,
keep My commandments (John 14:13-15). Whatsoever ye shall ask of the
Father in My name, He giveth you. These things I command you, that ye
love one another (John 15:16, 17). In Matthew: Where two or three are
gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of them (John
18:20). By those who are "gathered together in the name of the Lord,"
are here signified those who are in the doctrine of faith concerning
love and charity, and thus who are in love and charity. Again Ye shall
be hated of all nations for My name's sake (Matt. 10:22 24:9, 10; Mark
13:10); where "for My names sake" plainly means for the sake of His
doctrine. \[12\] That the name itself effects nothing, but that
everything is effected by that which the name involves, namely,
everything of charity and faith, is clearly evident from these words in
Matthew: Have we not prophesied by Thy name, and by Thy name cast out
demons, and in Thy name done many mighty works? But then will I profess
unto them, I never dew you; depart from Me, ye that work iniquity (Matt.
7:22, 23); from which it is evident that they who place worship in a
name, as did the Jews in the name of Jehovah, and as do Christians in
the name of the Lord, are not on that account the more worthy, because
the name avails nothing; but that which does avail is that they be of
such a character as the Lord has commanded; for this is to "believe in
His name;" and further, that its being said that there is no salvation
in any other name than the Lord's, means that there is none in any other
doctrine, that is, in no other than mutual love, which is the true
doctrine of faith, and thus in no other than the Lord, because all love
and the derivative faith are from Him alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2010.">2010.</span></span>

Since therefore the "name" signifies the quality and to know what the
quality is, we can see what is signified by the words in this verse,
"thy name shall no more be called Abram, and thy name shall be Abraham;"
to wit, that he was not to be such in quality as in the past, but such
as he was about to be. That Abram served other gods, and worshiped the
god Shaddai, was shown above (n. 1992); but because he was to represent
the Lord, and in fact His internal man, and thus the Celestial of His
Love, his former quality was to be blotted out, that is, the name
"Abram" was to be so changed in character that the Lord could be
represented by it. Therefore the letter H was taken from the name of
Jehovah-which letter is the only one in the name "Jehovah" that involves
the Divine, and which signifies I AM or BEING (Esse)-and was inserted in
his name, and he was called "Abraham." The case is similar with "Sarai,"
spoken of in what follows; to whose name the same letter was also added,
and she was called "Sarah." From this also we can see that in the
internal sense of the Word Abraham represents Jehovah or the Lord. \[2\]
Be it known however that in representations it matters not what a man's
quality is, for in them no attention is paid to the person, but to the
thing which he represents (as was said and shown before, n. 665, 1097 at
the end, 1361). Therefore in the internal sense the signification of
these words is that the Lord will put off the human, and will put on the
Divine; which also is in a series with what goes before, and likewise
with what follows; for a promise is now made concerning the son Isaac,
by whom was to be represented the Lord's Divine rational.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2011.">2011.</span></span>

For a father of a multitude of nations have I made thee. That this
signifies, here as before, that all truth and the good thence derived
come from Him, is evident from the signification of his being "a
father," as denoting that they are from Him; from the signification of
"a multitude," as being truth; and also from that of "nations," as being
the good thence derived (concerning which see above, n. 2005-2007). That
in a more universal or more remote sense these same words signify the
union of the Lord's Human Essence with His Divine Essence, may be seen
above (n. 2004); for the union of the Lord's Human Essence with His
Divine Essence is circumstanced as is that of truth with good; and the
union of His Divine Essence with His Human Essence as is that of good
with truth, which is reciprocal. Nay, in the Lord it was Truth itself
that united itself to Good, and Good that united itself to Truth; for
the Infinite Divine can be spoken of in no other way than as being Good
itself and Truth itself, and therefore the human mind is in no fallacy
when it thinks that the Lord is Good itself and Truth itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2012.">2012.</span></span>

Verse 6. And I will make thee fruitful very exceedingly, and I will make
thee nations, and kings shall go forth from thee. "I will make thee
fruitful very exceedingly," signifies the fruitfulness of good to
infinitude; "and I will make thee nations," signifies that all good is
from Him; "and kings shall go forth from thee," signifies that from Him
is all truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2013.">2013.</span></span>

I will make thee fruitful very exceedingly. That this signifies the
fruitfulness of good to infinitude, is evident from the signification of
being "made fruitful," as being predicated of good (explained before, n.
43, 55, 913, 983); and because it is said "very exceedingly," and the
Lord is treated of, it signifies fruitfulness to infinitude.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2014.">2014.</span></span>

I will make thee nations. That this signifies that all good is from Him,
is evident from the signification of "nations" in its genuine and
primitive sense, as being good (spoken of in Part First, n. 1259, 1260,
1416, 1849).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2015.">2015.</span></span>

Kings shall go forth from thee. That this signifies that all truth is
from Him, is evident from the signification of a "king," in both the
historical and the prophetic Word, as being truth (stated above, n.
1672, but not yet fully shown). From the signification of "nations" as
being goods, and from the signification of "kings" as being truths, we
can see the nature of the internal sense of the Word, and also how
remote it is from the sense of the letter. He who reads the Word,
especially the historical portion, has no other belief than that the
nations there are nations, and the kings kings, and thus that nations
and kings are treated of in the very Word itself. But the idea of
nations, as well as that of kings, altogether perishes when it is
received by the angels, and in their place there succeed good and truth.
This cannot but appear as strange and indeed as a paradox, but still it
is really so, and the truth of it may appear to everyone from
considering that if, in the Word, nations were signified by "nations,"
and kings by "kings," then the Word of the Lord would involve scarcely
anything more than any other history, or any other writing, and thus
would be a merely worldly affair, when yet there is nothing in the Word
that is not Divine, and therefore celestial and spiritual. \[2\] Take as
a single instance what is said in this verse, that Abraham should be
made fruitful and should be made nations, and that kings should go forth
from him-what is this but a merely worldly matter, and in no respect
heavenly? For in these things there is only the glory of the world,
which is nothing at all in heaven; but if this is the Word of the Lord,
there must be in it the glory of heaven, and none of the world's glory.
Therefore the sense of the letter is altogether obliterated and vanishes
when it passes into heaven; and it is so purified that nothing that is
worldly is intermingled. For by "Abraham" is not meant Abraham, but the
Lord; by his being "made fruitful" is not meant that his posterity
should increase exceedingly, but that the good of the Lord's Human
Essence should increase to infinitude; by the "nations" are not meant
nations, but goods; and by the "kings," not kings but truths. Still the
history according to the sense of the letter remains true; for it is
true that it was so said to Abraham; also that he was made fruitful, and
that nations and kings came from him. \[3\] That "kings" signify truths,
may be seen from the following passages. In Isaiah: The sons of
strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto
thee; thou shalt suck the milk of the nations, and the breast of kings
shalt thou suck (Isa. 60:10, 16); what it is to "suck the milk of
nations" and "the breast of kings," is by no means plain from the
letter, but it is from the internal sense, in which it signifies to be
gifted with goods, and instructed in truths. In Jeremiah: There shall
enter in by the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the
throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses (Jer. 17:25; 22:4); to
"ride in chariots and on horses" is a prophetical saying which signifies
an abundance of intellectual things, as may appear from very many
passages in the Prophets; and thus by "kings entering in by the gates of
the city" is signified in the internal sense that they should be imbued
with truths of faith. This is the heavenly sense of the Word, into which
the worldly literal sense passes. \[4\] Again, in the same Prophet:
Jehovah hath despised in the indignation of His anger the king and the
priest; the gates of Zion have sunk into the earth; He hath destroyed
and broken her bars; her king and her princes are among the nations; the
law is not (Lam. 2:6, 9); "the king" here denotes the truth of faith;
"the priest" the good of charity; "Zion" the church which is being
destroyed, and whose bars are being broken; hence "the king and the
princes are among the nations," that is, truth and the things which are
of truth will be banished to such an extent that there will be no "law,"
that is, nothing of the doctrine of faith. In Isaiah: Before the child
shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, the ground shall be
forsaken, which thou loathest in the presence of her two kings (Isa.
7:16); where the Lord's coming is treated of; the "ground which shall be
forsaken" denotes faith, of which there would then be none, and the
truths of which are the "kings that would be loathed." \[5\] In the same
Prophet: I will lift up My hand to the nations, and raise up My ensign
to the peoples; and they shall bring thy sons in their bosom, and thy
daughters shall be carried upon the shoulder; and kings shall be thy
nourishers, and their queens those that give thee suck (Isa. 49:22, 23);
"the nations" and "the daughters" denote goods; and "the peoples" and
"the sons" truths (as shown in Part First, where it may be seen that
"nations" denote goods, n. 1259, 1260, 1416, 1849; and that "daughters"
have a similar signification, n. 489-491; also that "peoples" denote
truths, n. 1259, 1260; and "sons" likewise, n. 489, 491, 533, 1147).
"Kings" therefore denote truths in general, by which they will be
nourished, and their "queens" the goods from which they will be
"suckled." Whether you say goods and truths, or those who are in goods
and truths, it is the same. \[6\] Again in the same Prophet: He shall
sprinkle many nations, upon him kings shall shut their mouth-for that
which was \[not\] told them have they seen; and that which they did not
hear have they understood (Isa. 52:15), where the Lord's coming is
spoken of; the "nations" denote those who are affected by goods, and
"kings" those who are affected by truths. In David: Now, O ye kings, be
intelligent; be instructed, ye judges of the earth; serve Jehovah with
fear, and exult with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and ye
perish in the way (Ps. 2:10-12). "Kings" denote those who are in truths;
who also from their truths are often called "king's sons;" "the Son"
here denotes the Lord, who is here called "the Son" because He is the
truth itself, and because all truth is from Him. \[7\] In John: They
shall sing a new song, Worthy art Thou who takest the book, and openest
the seals thereof; Thou hast made us unto our God kings and priests,
that we may reign upon the earth (Rev. 5:9-10); where they who are in
truths are called "kings." The Lord also calls such persons "the sons of
the kingdom," in Matthew: He that soweth the good seed is the Son of
man; the field is the world; the seed is the sons of the kingdom, and
the tares are the sons of the evil one (Matt. 13:37-38). In John: The
sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the
water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings that are from the
sun rising might be prepared (Rev. 16:12). That by the "Euphrates" is
not meant the Euphrates, nor by "the kings from the sun-rising" any
kings therefrom, is evident (what is meant by the "Euphrates" may be
seen above, n. 120, 1585, 1866); so that "the way of the kings that are
from the sun-rising" means the truths of faith that are from the goods
of love. \[8\] In the same: The nations that are saved shall walk in the
light of it, and the kings of the earth shall bring their glory and
honor into it (Rev. 21:24); where "the nations" denote those who are in
goods, and "the kings of the earth" those who are in truths, as may be
inferred from the fact that these words are prophetic, and not
historical. In the same: With the great harlot that sitteth upon many
waters the kings of the earth have committed whoredom, and have been
made drunken with the wine of her whoredom (Rev. 17:1-2). And again:
Babylon hath made all the nations drink of the wine of her whoredom, and
the kings of the earth have committed whoredom with her (Rev. 18:3, 9);
where in like manner it is evident that kings are not meant by "the
kings of the earth;" for the falsification and adulteration of the
doctrine of faith, that is, of truth, is treated of, and this is the
"whoredom;" " the kings of the earth" denote the truths that are
falsified and adulterated. \[9\] In the same: The ten horns which thou
sawest are ten kings, that have received no kingdom as yet, but they
receive authority \[potestas\] as kings with the beast for one hour.
These shall have one mind, and shall give their power and authority to
the beast (Rev. 17:12-13); that these "kings" are not kings, is evident
to everyone; for if so it would be wholly unintelligible that the ten
kings should receive authority as kings one hour. So too in another
passage: I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies
gathered together to make war with him that sat upon the horse, and with
his army (Rev. 19:19); that "he that sat upon the horse" is "the Word of
God," is openly stated in verse 13; and it is against this that the
kings of the earth are said to have been gathered together. "The beast"
denotes the goods of love, profaned; and "the kings" denote the truths
of faith, adulterated; these are called "the kings of the earth,"
because they are within the church. (That "the earth" is the church may
be seen above, n. 662, 1066, 1067, 1262.) The "white horse" denotes the
understanding of truth; and "he that sat upon the horse," the Word. This
meaning is still more manifest in Daniel (chapter 11), where the war
between "the king of the south" and "the king of the north" is treated
of; by which terms are signified the truths and falsities that had
fought, the combats being described here also in an historical manner by
this "war." \[10\] As "a king" signifies truth, it may be seen what is
meant in the internal sense when the Lord is called a King and also a
Priest; and also what it was in the Lord that was represented by kings,
and what by priests. Kings represented His Divine truth, and priests His
Divine good. All the laws of order by which the Lord governs the
universe as King, are truths; but all the laws by which He governs the
universe as and by which also He rules truths themselves, are goods; for
government from truths alone would condemn everyone to hell; but
government from goods lifts everyone out thence and uplifts him into
heaven (see n. 1728). Because in the Lord's case these two are
conjoined, they were anciently represented by kingship conjoined with
priesthood; as with Melchizedek, who was king of Salem and at the same
time priest to God Most High (Gen. 14:18); and afterwards with the Jews,
among whom the representative church was instituted in its own form, by
judges and priests, and afterwards by kings. \[11\] But as the kings
represented truths, which ought not to have command, for the reason, as
before said, that they condemn, therefore the desire to have kings was
so displeasing as to call for rebuke, and the nature of truth as
regarded in itself was described by the rights \[jus\] of the king (1
Sam. 8:11-18); and at an earlier day it was commanded by Moses (Deut.
17:14-18) that they should choose genuine truth which is from good, and
not spurious; and that they should not defile it by reasonings and
memory-knowledges \[scientifica\]. This is what is involved in the
directions concerning a king, given in Moses in the place just cited;
which no one can possibly see from the sense of the letter, but yet is
evident from the several points contained in the internal sense; so that
"king" and "kingship" evidently represented and signified nothing else
than truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2016.">2016.</span></span>

As regards the fact that all good and the derivative truth are from the
Lord: this is a constant verity. The angels are in the perception of it
to such a degree that they perceive that insofar as anything is from the
Lord, it is good and true, and that insofar as it is from themselves, it
is evil and false. They also confess this before novitiate souls, and
before spirits who are in doubt of it, nay, they go so far as to say
that it is by the Lord that they are withheld from the evil and falsity
that come from what is their own, and are kept in good and truth.
Moreover the very withholding and the very influx are perceptible to
them (see n. 1614). But as to man's supposing that he does good from
himself and thinks truth from himself, this is an appearance, because he
is in a state of no perception, and in a state of the greatest obscurity
in respect to influx; and therefore he infers this from the appearance,
nay, from the fallacy, from which he by no means suffers himself to be
withdrawn so long as he has belief in nothing but the senses, and so
long as he reasons from them whether it be so. But although the case is
as stated, man nevertheless ought to do good and to think truth as from
himself; for in no other way can he be reformed and regenerated (the
reason of which may be seen above, n. 1937, 1947). \[2\] The verse now
before us treats of the Lord's Human Essence that was to be united to
the Divine Essence; and that all good and truth would thereby come to
man from His Divine Essence through His Human Essence, is a Divine
arcanum which few believe, because they do not apprehend it, for they
suppose that the Divine good is able to reach to man without the Lord's
Human united to the Divine; but that this cannot be done, has been
already shown in a few words (n. 1676, 1990), to this effect, that man
has removed himself so far from the Supreme Divine, by the cupidities in
which he has immersed himself and by the falsities with which he has
blinded himself, that there could not possibly be any influx of the
Divine into the rational part of his mind except through the Human which
the Lord united in Himself to the Divine. Through His Human,
communication has been effected; for thereby the Supreme Divine has been
able to come to man. This the Lord says openly in many places, for He
says that He is "the way," and that "no one cometh to the Father but by
Him." This then is what is here affirmed: that from Him, namely, from
the Human united to the Divine, is all good and all truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2017.">2017.</span></span>

Verse 7. And I will set up My covenant between Me and thee and thy seed
after thee unto their generations, for an eternal covenant, to be to
thee for God, and to thy seed after thee. "I will set up My covenant
between Me and thee," signifies union; "and thy seed after thee,"
signifies conjunction with those who have faith in Him; "unto their
generations," signifies those things which are of faith; "for an eternal
covenant," signifies conjunction with these; "to be to thee for God,"
signifies the Lord's Divine in Himself; "and to thy seed after thee,"
signifies the Divine thence derived with those who have faith in Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2018.">2018.</span></span>

I will set up My covenant between Me and thee. That this signifies
union, is evident from the signification of a "covenant," as being union
(explained before, n. 665, 666, 1023, 1038); which union has been
treated of in this chapter, and many times before; and it has been shown
that Jehovah, who here speaks, was in the Lord, because He was one with
Him from first conception and from birth; for the Lord was conceived
from Jehovah, and hence His internal was Jehovah. This has been further
illustrated by what is similar in man (n. 1999), namely, that his soul
is one with his body, or his internal with his external, although they
are distinct from each other, and sometimes so distinct that the one
fights with the other, as is wont to be the case in temptations, in
which the internal reproves the external and desires to reject the evil
that is in it; and still they are conjoined, or are a one, because both
soul and body belong to the same man. Take for example one whose thought
differs from what he shows in his looks, speaks with his mouth, and acts
by his gesture. There is in him an interior which is at variance with
the external, but still they are one; for the thought is the man's as
much as are the external looks, mouth, and gestures; but there is a
union when the look, the speech of the lips, and the gestures accord
with the thought. So much for illustration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2019.">2019.</span></span>

And thy seed after thee. That this signifies conjunction with those who
have faith in Him, is evident from the signification of "seed," as being
faith (treated of, n. 1025, 1447, 1610); and also from the signification
of "after thee," as being to follow. To "walk after" someone is an
expression that is often made use of in the Word (as in Jer. 7:6; 8:2;
Ezek. 20:16; also Mark 8:34; Luke 9:23, 14:27). In this passage
therefore "thy seed after thee," signifies those who are in faith and
follow Him; in the internal sense, who are born of Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2020.">2020.</span></span>

Unto their generations. That this signifies the things that are of
faith, is evident from the signification of "generations," as being the
things which are generated and born of charity, that is, all the things
of faith, or what is the same, all who are regenerated by the Lord, and
thus in whom there is the faith of charity; concerning which, of the
Lord's Divine mercy hereafter. That in the internal sense "generations,"
and also "births," are such things, was shown in Part First (n. 613,
1041, 1145, 1330).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2021.">2021.</span></span>

For an eternal covenant. That this signifies conjunction with these, is
evident from the signification of a "covenant," as being conjunction
(explained before, n. 665, 666, 1023, 1038) and that it is with those
who are called his "seed" is evident from its immediately following, and
because a "covenant" is spoken of a second time in this verse. The
"covenant" first spoken of refers to the union of Jehovah with the Human
Essence, and the second mention of a "covenant" refers to the
conjunction with those who are the seed. In order that a more distinct
idea may be formed concerning the union of the Lord's Divine Essence
with His Human Essence, and concerning the Lord's conjunction with the
human race through the faith of charity, it may be well here and in what
follows to call the former Union, but the latter Conjunction. Between
the Lord's Divine Essence and His Human Essence there was a Union; but
between the Lord and the human race there is a Conjunction, through the
faith of charity, as is evident from the fact that Jehovah or the Lord
is Life, and that His Human Essence also was made Life, as shown above,
and between Life and Life there is Union. Whereas man is not Life, but a
recipient of life, as also has been shown before; and when Life flows
into a recipient of life, there is conjunction; for it is adapted to the
recipient as is the active to the passive, or as that which is in itself
alive to that which is in itself dead, and which lives therefrom. The
principal and the instrumental-as they are termed-do indeed appear to be
conjoined together as if they were a one, but still they are not a one;
for the former is by itself, and the latter is by itself. Man does not
live from himself, but the Lord in mercy adjoins man to Himself and
thereby causes him to live to eternity; and because the Lord and man are
thus distinct, it is called conjunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2022.">2022.</span></span>

To be to thee for God. That this signifies the Lord's Divine in Himself,
is evident from what has been said above respecting the Lord's Divine
Essence, that it was in Himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2023.">2023.</span></span>

And to thy seed after thee. That this signifies the Divine thence
derived with those who have faith in Him, is evident from the
signification of "seed," as being the faith of charity (see n. 1025,
1447, 1610); and also from the signification of "after thee," as being
to follow Him (explained just above, n. 2019). The Divine with those who
have faith in the Lord is love and charity. By Love is meant love to the
Lord; by Charity,"," love toward the neighbor. Love to the Lord cannot
possibly be separated from love toward the neighbor; for the Lord's love
is toward the universal human race, which He wills to save eternally and
to adjoin wholly to Himself, so that not one of them may perish. He
therefore who has love to the Lord, has the Lord's love, and thereby can
do no otherwise than love his neighbor. \[2\] But they who are in love
toward the neighbor are not all for that reason in love to the Lord, as
for example the well-disposed Gentiles who are in ignorance respecting
the Lord, but with whom the Lord is nevertheless present in charity (as
shown in Part First, n. 1032, 1059), and also others within the church;
for love to the Lord is in a higher degree. They who have love to the
Lord are celestial men, but they who have love toward the neighbor, or
charity, are spiritual men. The Most Ancient Church, which was before
the flood, and was celestial, was in love to the Lord, but the Ancient
Church, which was after the flood, and was spiritual, was in love toward
the neighbor, or in charity. This distinction between Love and Charity
will be observed when they are mentioned hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2024.">2024.</span></span>

Verse 8. And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
of thy sojournings, all the land of Canaan, for an eternal possession;
and I will be to them for God. "I will give unto thee, and to thy seed
after thee, the land of thy sojournings," signifies that the Lord
acquired to Himself all things by His own forces or powers, which are
"the land of the sojournings;" "I will give unto thee," signifies that
the things which are in the heavens and on the earth are His; "and to
thy seed after thee," signifies that He would give them to those who
should have faith in Him; "all the land of Canaan," signifies the
celestial or heavenly kingdom; "for an eternal possession," signifies to
eternity; "and I will be to them for God," signifies that God is one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2025.">2025.</span></span>

I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land of thy
sojournings. That this signifies that the Lord acquired to Himself all
things by His own forces or powers, which are "the land of the
sojournings," is evident from the signification of "sojourning," as
being to be instructed (see n. 1463). And as a man acquires life to
himself especially by means of instruction in memory-knowledges,
doctrinal matters, and the knowledges of faith, therefore "sojourning,"
signifies the life so acquired. As applied to the Lord, "sojourning"
signifies the life which He procured to Himself by means of knowledges,
combats of temptations, and victories therein; and as He procured for
Himself that life by His own forces, this is here signified by "the land
of the sojournings." \[2\] That the Lord procured all things to Himself
by His own forces, and by His own forces united the Human Essence to the
Divine Essence, and the Divine Essence to the Human Essence; and that He
alone thus became righteousness, is clearly evident in the Prophets. As
in Isaiah: Who is this that cometh from Edom, marching in the multitude
of his strength? I have trodden the winepress alone, and of the peoples
there was none with Me; I looked around, and there was no one helping;
and I was amazed, and there was no one upholding; therefore Mine arm
brought salvation unto Me (Isa. 63:1, 3, 5) "Edom" denotes the Lord's
Human Essence; "strength," and "arm," power that this was from what was
His own is clearly said, in that "there was no one helping," "no one
upholding," and that "His own arm brought salvation unto Him." \[3\] In
the same Prophet: He saw that there was not anyone, and He was amazed
that there was none to intercede; and His arm achieved salvation unto
Him, and His righteousness supported Him; and He put on righteousness as
a coat of mail, and a helmet of salvation upon His head (Isa. 59:16, 17)
meaning in like manner by His own power, and that thereby He became
righteousness. That the Lord is righteousness is stated in Daniel:
Seventy weeks are decreed to expiate iniquity, and to bring in the
righteousness of the ages, and to seal up vision and prophet, and to
anoint the holy of holies (Dan 9:24). And in Jeremiah: I will raise unto
David a righteous offshoot, and He shall reign as King, and shall act
intelligently, and shall do judgment and righteousness in the land. In
His days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell in confidence; and
this is His name whereby they shall call Him, Jehovah our righteousness
(Jer. 23:5, 6; 33:15, 16). For this reason He is also called "the
Habitation of righteousness," in Jeremiah (31:23; 50:7); and in Isaiah
(9:6), "Wonderful," and "Hero." \[4\] The reason why the Lord so often
attributes to the Father that which is His own, has been explained above
(n. 1999, 2004); for Jehovah was in Him, and consequently in everything
that was His. This can be illustrated by what is similar, though not
equal, in man. A man's soul is in him; and as it is in him, it is in the
veriest singulars of him, that is in the veriest singulars of his
thought, and of his action. Whatever has not his soul in it, is not his.
The Lord's soul was Life itself, or Being \[Esse\] itself, which is
Jehovah, for He was conceived from Jehovah; and consequently Jehovah or
Life itself was in His veriest singulars; and as Life itself, or Being
itself, which is Jehovah, was His, as the soul is man's, so that which
was Jehovah's was His, which is what the Lord says: that He "is in the
bosom of the Father" (John 1:18), and that "all things whatsoever that
the Father hath are His" (John 16:15, 17:10, 11). \[5\] From good, which
is Jehovah's, He united the Divine Essence to the Human Essence; and
from truth He united the Human Essence to the Divine Essence; thus He
did all things both in general and in particular from Himself; in fact
His Human was left to itself, in order that He might fight of Himself
against all the hells, and overcome them; and as He had life in Himself
that was His own-as already said-He overcame them by His own power and
by His own forces, as is also clearly stated in the Prophets, in the
passages that have been cited. Consequently, as He acquired all things
for Himself by His own forces, He became righteousness, emancipated the
world of spirits from infernal genii and spirits, and thereby delivered
the human race from destruction-for the human race is ruled by means of
spirits-and so redeemed it. For this reason He is so often called in the
Word of the Old Testament the Deliverer and the Redeemer, and the
Saviour, which is the meaning of His name Jesus.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2026.">2026.</span></span>

That by "I will give unto thee" is meant that the things which are in
the heavens and on the earth are His, follows from what has just been
said. In the sense of the letter, the words "I will give unto thee" mean
that God or Jehovah would give to the Lord; just as it is said in the
Word of the Evangelists that the Father gave unto Him all things that
are in heaven and on the earth. But in the internal sense, in which the
truth itself is presented in its purity, it means that the Lord acquired
them for Himself, because Jehovah was in Him, and in everything
belonging to Him, as before said. This may be further illustrated by
that which is like it; for it is as if the interior or rational man, or
the thought, should say that the corporeal would have rest or
tranquillity if it would desist from doing this or that: in this case he
that speaks is the same man as he that is spoken to, for both the
rational and the corporeal belong to the man, and therefore when mention
is made of the former, the latter also is understood. \[2\] Moreover
that the things in the heavens and on the earth are the Lord's, is
evident from very many passages in the Word, both in the Old Testament,
and also in the Evangelists (as Matt. 11:27; Luke 10:22; John 3:34, 35,
17:2; Matt. 28:18); and also from what has been shown in Part First (n.
458, 551, 552, 1607). And as the Lord rules the universal heaven, He
also rules all things on earth; for they have been so connected together
that He who rules the one rules all things; for on the heaven of angels
depends the heaven of angelic spirits, on this the world of spirits, and
on this again the human race. And in like manner on the heavens depend
all things that are in the world and in nature, for without influx from
the Lord through the heavens, nothing that is in nature and its three
Kingdoms would come forth and endure (see n. 1632).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2027.">2027.</span></span>

That "to thy seed after thee" signifies that He would give all these
things to those who should have faith in Him, is evident from the
signification of "seed," as being faith (see n. 1025, 1447, 1610), and
in fact the faith of charity (see n. 379, 389, 654, 724, 809, 916, 1017,
1162, 1176, 1258). They who place merit in the actions of their lives
have not the faith of charity, and therefore are not the seed here
meant; for thereby they desire to be saved, not because of the Lord's
righteousness, but because of their own. That there is no faith of
charity in them, that is, no charity, is evident from the fact, that
they set themselves before others, and thus regard themselves and not
others, except insofar as they are of service to them; and they either
despise or hate those who are not willing to render them service. Thus
by the love of self they dissociate, and never associate; and thus
destroy what is heavenly, namely, mutual love, which gives heaven its
stability; for heaven itself is in it, and all its consociation and
unanimity subsist and consist in it; for in the other life whatever
destroys unanimity is contrary to the order of heaven itself, and thus
conspires to the destruction of the whole. Such are they who place merit
in the actions of their lives, and claim righteousness for themselves.
Of these there are many in the other life. \[2\] They sometimes shine in
the face like little torches, but from an illusive fire that proceeds
from self-justification, and in fact they are cold. They are sometimes
seen running about and confirming self-merit from the literal sense of
the Word, for they hate the truths which are of the internal sense (n.
1877). Their sphere is a sphere of self-regard, and is thus destructive
of all ideas that do not regard self as a kind of deity. The sphere of
many of this sort together is so conflicting that there is nothing there
but enmity and hostility; for when everyone desires the same thing,
namely, to be served, he murders others in his heart. \[3\] Some of them
are among those who say that they have labored in the Lord's vineyard,
whereas they have at the same time continually had in mind their own
preeminence, glory, and honors, as well as gain; and even that they
might become the greatest in heaven and be served by the angels, in
heart despising others in comparison with themselves, and thus being
imbued with no mutual love, in which heaven consists, but with the love
of self, in which they place heaven; for they know not what heaven is.
(Respecting such see above, n. 450-452, 1594, 1679.) These are of those
who desire to be first, but become last (Matt. 19:30; 20:16; Mark
10:31); and who say that they have prophesied by the name of the Lord,
and have done many wonderful works; but to whom it is said, "I know you
not" (Matt. 7:22, 23). \[4\] Very different is the case with those who
from simplicity of heart have supposed that they merit heaven, and have
lived in charity; these have looked upon meriting heaven as something
that is promised, and they easily acknowledge it to be of the Lord's
mercy; for the life of charity is attended with this, because true
charity loves all truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2028.">2028.</span></span>

All the land of Canaan. That this signifies the heavenly kingdom, is
evident from the signification of the "land of Canaan," as being the
heavenly kingdom, as explained before (n. 1413, 1437, 1607).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2029.">2029.</span></span>

For an eternal possession. That this signifies what is eternal, is
evident without explication. They are called "possessors," and also
"heirs," not from merit, but from mercy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2030.">2030.</span></span>

And I will be to them for God. That this signifies that God is one, is
evident from the fact that the subject here treated of is the Lord's
Human Essence that was to be united to His Divine Essence, and thereby
itself likewise become God. Thus "I will be to them for God," signifies
in the internal sense that God is one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2031.">2031.</span></span>

Verse 9. And God said unto Abraham, And thou shalt keep My covenant,
thou and thy seed after thee, unto their generations. "God said unto
Abraham," signifies perception; "and thou shalt keep My covenant,"
signifies still closer union; "thou and thy seed after thee," signifies
that from Him there is conjunction with all who have faith in Him; "unto
their generations," signifies the things which are of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2032.">2032.</span></span>

God said unto Abraham. That this signifies perception, is evident from
the signification of "God said," in the historic Word as being to
perceive (explained before, n. 1602, 1791, 1815, 1819, 1822).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2033.">2033.</span></span>

Thou shalt keep My covenant. That this signifies still closer union, is
evident from the signification of a "covenant," as being union and
conjunction (treated of before, at verses 2, 4, and 7; also in Part
First, n. 665, 666, 1023, 1038). The repeated mention here of
"covenant," so frequently mentioned before, denotes a closer union. In
the historical sense, which relates to Abraham, nothing else can be said
than that he is to keep the covenant; but in the internal sense, in
which the Lord is treated of, what is historical vanishes, and the
things that can be predicated of Him succeed in its place, which relate
to a closer union. The unition of the Lord's Human Essence with His
Divine Essence was not effected all at once, but through the whole
course of His life, from infancy to the last of His life in the world.
Thus He ascended continuously to glorification, that is, to union;
according to what is said in John: Jesus said, Father glorify Thy name;
there came a voice from heaven: I have both glorified and will glorify
it again (John 12:28). (See what was said above, n. 1690, 1864.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2034.">2034.</span></span>

Thou and thy seed after thee. That this signifies that from Him there is
conjunction with all who have faith in Him, is evident from the
signification of "seed," as being faith, spoken of several times before;
and from the signification of "after thee," as being to follow Him
(explained above, n. 2019). The union of the Divine Essence with the
Human Essence, and of the Human Essence with the Divine Essence, has
already been treated of; and the subject here treated of is the
conjunction of the Lord with those who believe in Him, and therefore
there is a repetition of the word "thou;" for it is said, "Thou shalt
keep My covenant, thou and thy seed;" and from this repetition of the
words in connection with "seed" it is evident that in the internal sense
conjunction is signified, and in fact with those who are the seed, by
which is signified the faith of charity, as shown above (n. 1025, 1447,
1510; and that faith is charity itself may be seen in Part First, n.
30-38, 379, 389, 654, 724, 809, 916, 1017, 1076, 1077, 1162, 1176, 1258,
1798, 1799, 1834, 1844). \[2\] Moreover when speaking of His union with
the Father, the Lord speaks immediately and without a break of His
conjunction with the human race; because this was the cause of the
union, as is evident in John: That they all may be one, as Thou Father
art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may be one in us; the glory
which Thou hast given Me I have given them, that they may be one, even
as we are one, I in them, and Thou in Me, for I have made known unto
them Thy name, and will make it known, that the love wherewith Thou hast
loved Me may be in them (John 17:21, 22, 26) from which it is evident
that in the union of Himself with the Father the Lord had in view the
conjunction of Himself with the human race, and that He had this at
heart, because it was His love; for all conjunction is effected by means
of love, love being conjunction itself. \[3\] Again in the same gospel:
Because I live, ye shall live also in that day ye shall know that I am
in the Father, and ye in Me, and I in you; he that hath My commandments,
and keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me (John 14:19-21); from which in
like manner it is evident that in the union of His Human Essence with
His Divine Essence the Lord had in view the conjunction of Himself with
the human race, and that this was His end, and this His love, which was
such that the salvation of the human race, as held in the union of
Himself with His Father, was to Him the inmost joy. There is also here
described that which unites, namely, to have and to do His commandments,
and thereby to love the Lord. \[4\] Again: Father, glorify Thy name;
there came therefore a voice from heaven, I have both glorified and will
glorify it again. Jesus said, This voice hath not come for My sake, but
for your sakes. But I, when I shall be lifted up from the earth, will
draw all after Me (John 12:28, 30, 32) by "glorification" is meant
union, as before said; and that in the union of Himself with the Father
He regarded the conjunction of Himself with the human race, is openly
said in the words, "when I shall be lifted up, I will draw all after
Me." \[5\] That conjunction of the Infinite or Supreme Divine with the
human race was effected through the Lord's Human made Divine, and that
this conjunction was the cause of the Lord's coming into the world, is
an arcanum into which many inquire in their own minds, and because they
do not comprehend, they do not believe it; and as they do not believe
for the reason that they do not comprehend, it becomes a scandal or
stumbling-block to them. That this is so, I have learned from much
experience from those who come into the other life. Very many of
these-almost the greater part of those who had been men of talent in the
world-when they merely think that the Lord became a man, and in external
form was like other men, that He suffered, and that nevertheless He
rules the universe, at once fill the sphere with scandals, because this
had been a scandal or stumbling-block to them in the life of the body;
although at that time they had divulged nothing about it, and had adored
Him with outward sanctity. For in the other life the interiors are open,
and are made manifest by the sphere diffused from them (treated of in
Part First, n. 1048, 1053, 1316, 1504). In this way it is plainly
perceived of what faith they had been, and what they had thought
concerning the Lord. \[6\] Seeing that such is the case, it may be well
to explain the matter a little further. After all the celestial in man
had perished, that is, all love to God, so that there was no longer any
will of good, the human race had then been separated from the Divine;
for nothing effects conjunction except love, and when this had been
annihilated, there was disjunction; and when there is disjunction, then
destruction and extirpation follow. Therefore the promise was then made
respecting the Lord's coming into the world, who should unite the Human
to the Divine, and by this union should effect in Himself the
conjunction of the human race by means of the faith of love and of
charity. \[7\] From the time of the first promise (spoken of in Gen.
3:15) the faith of love in the Lord who was to come effected
conjunction. But when there was no longer any faith of love remaining in
the whole world, then the Lord came and united the Human Essence to the
Divine Essence, so that they were altogether one, as He Himself clearly
says; and at the same time He taught the way of truth, that everyone who
should believe in Him-that is, who should love Him and the things that
are His, and who should be in His love which is love toward the
universal human race, thus in love toward the neighbor-should be
conjoined and saved. \[8\] When, in the Lord, the Human was made Divine,
and the Divine Human, the result was an influx of the Infinite or
Supreme Divine with man that otherwise could not possibly have existed;
and an additional result was the dispersion of the direful persuasions
of falsity and the direful cupidities of evil with which the world of
spirits was brimful, and with which it was continually being filled full
from the souls arriving from the world; and they who were in those
persuasions and cupidities were cast into hell, and thereby were
separated. Unless this had been done, the human race would have
perished, for the Lord rules the human race by means of spirits. Nor
could they have been dispersed in any other way, for no operation of the
Divine was possible through man's rational things into those of internal
sense, because these are far below the Supreme Divine when not so
united; not to mention still deeper arcana that cannot be explained to
the apprehension of any man. (See what was said above, n. 1676, 1990,
that in the heaven of the celestial angels the Lord appears as a sun,
and in the heaven of the spiritual angels as a moon; and that the Sun is
the celestial of His love, and the Moon the spiritual of His love, n.
1053, 1521, 1529-1531 and that all things both in general and in
particular are under His view, n. 1274e, 1277e.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2035.">2035.</span></span>

Unto their generations. That this signifies the things which are of
faith, is evident from the signification of "generations," and of
"births," as being the things that are of faith (concerning which see
above, n. 613, 1145, 1255, 1330; and that those which are of love and
faith are related as by blood and marriage, n. 685, 917).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2036.">2036.</span></span>

Verse 10. This is My covenant, which ye shall keep between Me and you,
and thy seed after thee, that every male be circumcised unto you. "This
is My covenant which ye shall keep between Me and you," signifies a
token of the conjunction of all with the Lord; "and thy seed after
thee," signifies those who have faith in Him; "that every male be
circumcised unto you," signifies purity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2037.">2037.</span></span>

This is My covenant, which ye shall keep between Me and you. That this
signifies a token of the conjunction of all with the Lord, is evident
from the signification of a "covenant," as being conjunction, as
explained before. That it is here the token of conjunction, is evident
from the next verse, where it is called "a sign of a covenant:" "Ye
shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be for a sign
of a covenant between Me and you." All the external rites of the church
were signs of the covenant, and were to be sacredly observed, because
internal things were signified by them. Circumcision-which is treated of
here-was nothing but a representative and significative rite, and as
such is explained in what follows; nevertheless in various passages of
the Word such rites are called the "covenant," for the reason that
external things represented and thereby signified internal things. The
internal things are what belong to the covenant, because they are
effective of conjunction, and the external things are not so except by
means of the internal ones. The external things were merely signs of the
covenant, or tokens of the conjunction, by means of which they might
call to mind the internal things and thereby be conjoined by means of
these. (Respecting the signs of the covenant, see above, n. 1308.) All
the internal things that belong to the covenant, or that are effective
of conjunction, relate to love and charity, and proceed from love and
charity; for on these two things, namely, loving God more than one's
self, and loving the neighbor as one's self, "hang all the law and the
prophets," that is, the universal doctrine of faith (Matt. 22:34-39;
Mark 12:28-35).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2038.">2038.</span></span>

And thy seed after thee. That this signifies those who have faith in
Him, is evident from the signification of "seed," as being the faith of
charity, concerning which above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2039.">2039.</span></span>

That every male be circumcised. That this signifies purity, is evident
from the representation and derivative signification in the internal
sense of "circumcising." Circumcision, or the cutting off of the
foreskin, signified the removal and wiping away of those things that
were impeding and defiling celestial love, and which are the evils of
cupidities (especially the evils of the cupidities of the love of self)
and the derivative falsities. The reason of this signification is that
the organs of generation, in both sexes, represent celestial love. There
are loves of three kinds that constitute the celestial things of the
Lord's kingdom, namely, conjugial love, love for infants, and the love
for society, or mutual love. Conjugial love is the principal love of
all, because it has within it the end of greatest use, namely, the
propagation of the human race, and thereby of the Lord's kingdom, of
which it is the seminary. Love toward infants follows next, being
derived from conjugial love; and then comes the love for society, or
mutual love. Whatever covers up, obstructs, and defiles these loves, is
signified by the foreskin; and the cutting off of this, or circumcision,
was therefore made representative; for insofar as the evils of
cupidities, and the falsities derived from them are removed, insofar the
man is purified; and insofar celestial love can appear. How contrary to
celestial love, and how filthy, is the love of self, has been stated and
shown above (n. 760, 1307, 1308, 1321, 1594, 2045, 2057). From what has
now been said, it is clear that in the internal sense "circumcision"
signifies purity. \[2\] That circumcision is only a sign of covenant, or
of conjunction, may be plainly seen from considering that the
circumcision of the foreskin amounts to nothing at all without the
circumcision of the heart; and that it is the circumcision of the heart,
or purification from the filthy loves above referred to that is
signified by it, as is plainly evident from the following passages in
the Word. In Moses: Jehovah thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the
heart of thy seed, to love Jehovah thy God in thy whole heart, and in
thy whole soul, that thou mayest live (Deut. 30:6); from which it is
evident that to "circumcise the heart" is to be purified from filthy
loves, in order that Jehovah God, or the Lord, may be loved with all the
heart and with all the soul. \[3\] In Jeremiah: Break up your fallow
ground, and sow not among thorns; circumcise yourselves unto Jehovah,
and take away the foreskin of your heart, O man of Judah and inhabitants
of Jerusalem (Jer. 4:3-4); to "circumcise one's self to Jehovah, and
remove the foreskin of the heart," is to remove such things as obstruct
heavenly love; all which shows that the circumcision of the heart is an
interior thing that is signified by the circumcision of the foreskin. In
Moses: Ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your heart, and shall no
longer harden your neck, doing the judgment of the orphan and the widow,
and loving the stranger to give him bread and raiment (Deut. 10:16, 18);
where also it is clear that to "circumcise the foreskin of the heart" is
to be purified from the evils of filthy loves and from the falsities
derived from them. The celestial things of love are described by these
works of charity, namely, "doing the judgment of the orphan and the
widow," and "loving the stranger to give him bread and raiment." \[4\]
In Jeremiah: Behold, the days come in which I will visit upon everyone
that is circumcised in the foreskin, upon Egypt, and upon Judah, and
upon Edom, and upon the sons of Ammon, and upon Moab, and upon all that
are cut off at the corner, that dwell in the wilderness; for all the
nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised
in heart (Jer. 9:25-26); where it is evident that circumcision is
significative of purification, for they are called the "circumcised in
the foreskin," but still are reckoned among the uncircumcised nations,
as are even the Jews; and Israel is said to be "uncircumcised in heart."
And it is the same in Moses: If then their uncircumcised heart be
humbled (Lev. 26:41). \[5\] That by the "foreskin" and by "one that is
uncircumcised" is signified uncleanness, is evident in Isaiah: Awake,
awake, put on thy strength, O Zion; put on the garments of thy beauty, O
Jerusalem, the city of holiness; for henceforth there shall no more come
into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean (Isa. 52:1). By "Zion" is
meant the celestial church, and by "Jerusalem" the spiritual church,
into which what is "uncircumcised," that is, the "unclean," shall not
enter. \[6\] That circumcision is a sign of a covenant, or a token of
conjunction, is clearly evident from the fact that the like was
represented by means of the fruits of trees, which also were to be
circumcised, concerning which in Moses: When ye shall have come into the
land, and shall have planted all manner of trees of food, ye shall
circumcise the foreskin thereof, its fruit; three years shall they be
unto you as uncircumcised, it shall not be eaten; and in the fourth year
all the fruit thereof shall be holiness for praises unto Jehovah (Lev.
19:23-24); "fruits," like the "heart," represent and signify charity, as
may be seen from many passages in the Word; and thus their "foreskin"
signifies the uncleanness which obstructs and contaminates charity.
\[7\] Wonderful to say, when the angels who are in heaven have the idea
of purification from natural defilements, with the utmost rapidity there
is represented in the world of spirits something like circumcision; for
the angelic ideas pass over into representatives in the world of
spirits. In the Jewish Church some of the representative rites
originated in this source, and some did not. Those with whom that quick
circumcision was represented in the world of spirits, were in the desire
to be admitted into heaven; and before they were admitted, there was
this representation. This shows why Joshua was commanded to circumcise
the people, when, having passed over Jordan, they were entering the land
of Canaan; for the entrance of the people into the land of Canaan
represented this very admission of the faithful into heaven. \[8\] For
this reason circumcision was commanded a second time, concerning which
in Joshua: Jehovah said unto Joshua, Make thee swords of rocks, and
circumcise the sons of Israel the second time; and Joshua made him
swords of rocks, and circumcised the sons of Israel at the hill of the
foreskins; and Jehovah said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the
reproach of Egypt from off you; and he called the name of that place
Gilgal \[Rolling off\] (Joshua 5:2-3, 9); the "swords of rocks" signify
the truths with which they were to be imbued, in order that thereby they
might castigate and disperse filthy loves; for without the knowledges of
truth no purification is possible. (That a "stone" or "rock" signifies
truths, has been shown before, n. 643, 1298; and that a "sword" is
predicated of the truths by which evils may be castigated, is evident
from the Word.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2040.">2040.</span></span>

Verse 11. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it
shall be for a sign of a covenant between Me and you. "Ye shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin," signifies the removal of the
love of self and of the world; "and it shall be for a sign of a covenant
between Me and you," signifies a representative and significative of
purity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2041.">2041.</span></span>

Ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin. That this signifies the
removal of the love of self and of the world, is evident from the
representation and signification of "circumcision," as being
purification from filthy loves (explained above, n. 2039); and from the
signification of "flesh," as being what is man's own (treated of before,
n. 999). That which is man's own is nothing but the love of self and of
the world, thus is all the derivative cupidity; and how filthy this is
has been shown in Part First (n. 141, 150, 154, 210, 215, 694, 731,
874-876, 987, 1047). As this Own of man which is to be removed is
signified, the expression "flesh of the foreskin" is made use of. \[2\]
There are two so-called loves and their cupidities that obstruct the
influx of heavenly love from the Lord; for when these loves reign in the
interior and in the external man, and take possession thereof, they
either reject or suffocate, and also pervert and contaminate, the
inflowing heavenly love; for they are utterly contrary to heavenly love,
as will of the Lord's Divine mercy be shown hereafter. But insofar as
these loves are removed, so far the heavenly love flowing in from the
Lord begins to appear, nay, to give light in the interior man; and so
far he begins to see that he is in evil and falsity; next that he is
actually in uncleanness and filthiness; and finally that this has been
his Own. They who are becoming regenerate are those with whom these
loves are being removed. \[3\] Observation of this removal is possible
also with the unregenerate, for when the cupidities of these loves are
quiescent in them, as sometimes occurs when they are in holy meditation,
or when the cupidities are lulled, as happens when they are in
misfortunes, in sicknesses, and diseases, and especially at the moment
of death, then, because bodily and worldly things are lulled and as it
were dead, they observe something of heavenly light and the consequent
comfort. But with these persons there is not removal of the cupidities
in question, but only a lulling of them, for when they return into their
former state, they at once relapse into the same cupidities. \[4\] With
the evil also, bodily and worldly things can be lulled, and they can
then be as it were uplifted into a kind of heavenliness, as sometimes
takes place with souls in the other life, especially those newly
arrived, who intensely desire to see the glory of the Lord, because they
had heard so much about heaven while they lived in the world. The
external things above referred to are then lulled in them, and in this
way they are carried into the first heaven and enjoy their desire. But
they cannot remain long, because there is only a quiescence of the
bodily and worldly things, and not a removal of them, as with the angels
(concerning which, see n. 541, 542). Be it known that heavenly love is
continually inflowing into man from the Lord, and that nothing else
obstructs and impedes it, and causes its reception by the man
impossible, except the cupidities of those loves and the falsities
derived from them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2042.">2042.</span></span>

And it shall be for a sign of a covenant between Me and you. That this
signifies a representative and significative of purity, is evident from
what has been shown just above (n. 2039), namely, that circumcision was
nothing but a representative of purification from filthy loves. And as
it was only an external rite which represented and signified something
internal, it was not a covenant, but a sign of a covenant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2043.">2043.</span></span>

Verse 12. And a son of eight days shall be circumcised unto you, every
male in your generations, he that is born in the house, and he that is
bought with silver from every son that is a stranger who is not of thy
seed. "A son of eight days," signifies any beginning of purification
whatever; "shall be circumcised unto you," signifies the purification;
"every male," signifies those who are in the truth of faith "in your
generations," signifies the things which are of faith; "he that is born
in the house," signifies those who are celestial; "he that is bought
with silver," signifies those who are spiritual, who are within the
church; "from every son that is a stranger who is not of thy seed,"
signifies those who are outside the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2044.">2044.</span></span>

And a son of eight days. That this signifies any beginning of
purification whatever, is evident from the signification of "the eighth
day." A "week," which is seven days, signifies an entire period of any
state or time, as of reformation, of regeneration, of temptation,
whether of man in particular, or of the church in general; thus a period
is called a "week," whether it be one of a thousand years, of a hundred,
of ten, or of as many days, hours, minutes, and so on (as may be seen
from the passages cited in Part First, n. 728). And as the eighth day is
the first day of a new week, it signifies any beginning whatever. This
shows also that, as circumcision was itself a representative of
purification, so also was the time of it, namely, the eighth day; not
that they then entered into a purer state, and were purified on that
account, but for the reason that, as "circumcision" signified
purification, so "the eighth day" signified that this ought to be
effected at all times, and thus always, as from a new beginning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2045.">2045.</span></span>

Shall be circumcised unto you. That this signifies purification, is
evident from the representation and signification of "circumcision," as
being purification from filthy loves (explained above, n. 2039). They
who are in the loves of self and of the world cannot possibly believe
that they are in things so filthy and unclean as they actually are in,
for there is a certain pleasure and delight that soothes, favors, and
allures, and causes them to love that life, to prefer it to all other
life, and thereby to suppose that there is nothing of evil in it; for
whatever favors anyone's love and the life thence derived is believed to
be good. Hence also the rational consents, and suggests falsities which
confirm and cause such blindness that they see nothing of the nature of
heavenly love; and if they were to see it they would say in their hearts
that it is a wretched affair, or a thing of naught, or something of the
nature of a phantasy that takes hold of the mind, as in sickness. \[2\]
But that the life of the love of self and of the world, together with
its pleasures and delights, is filthy and unclean, may be seen by
everyone who is willing to think from the rational faculty with which he
is gifted. The love of self is the source of all the evils that destroy
civic society. From it as from an unclean pit spring all hatreds, all
revenges, all cruelties, nay, all adulteries; for he who loves himself,
despises, vituperates, or hates, all others who do not serve him, or do
him honor, or favor him; and when he hates, he breathes nothing but
revenges and cruelties, and this in proportion to the degree in which he
loves himself, so that this love is destructive of society and of the
human race. (That such is its nature may be seen also from what is said
of it in Part First, n. 693, 694, 760, 1307, 1308, 1321, 1506, 1594,
1691, 1862.) That in the other life the love of self is most filthy, and
that it is diametrically opposite to the mutual love in which heaven
consists, shall of the Lord's Divine mercy be told in what follows.
\[3\] And as the love of self is the source of hatreds, revenges,
cruelties, and adulteries, it is the source of all things that are
called sins, wickednesses, abominations, and profanations, and therefore
when this love is in the rational part of man, and is in the cupidities
and phantasies of his external man, the influx of heavenly love from the
Lord is continually repelled, perverted, and contaminated. It is like
foul excrement, which dissipates, nay, defiles, all sweet odor; it is
like an object that turns the continually inflowing rays of light into
dark and repulsive colors; and it is like a tiger, or a serpent, which
repels all fondling, and kills with bite and poison those who offer it
food; or like a vicious man who turns even the best intentions of
others, and their very kindnesses, into what is blameworthy and
malicious. Hence it is evident that these loves-of self and of the
world-are what are represented and signified by the foreskins that were
to be cut off.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2046.">2046.</span></span>

Every male. That this signifies those who are in the truth of faith, is
evident from the signification of a "male," as being truth (concerning
which, see n. 672, 749). The "male:"," by which is signified the truth
of faith, is named here because no one can be purified from those filthy
loves except one who is in truth. From truth he knows \[cognoscit\] what
is pure and what impure, and what is holy and what profane. Before he
has learned this, there are no mediums into which and through which the
heavenly love continually flowing in from the Lord can operate, as this
cannot be received except in truths; and therefore man is reformed and
regenerated by means of the knowledges of truth, and this not until he
has been imbued with them. Conscience itself is formed by means of the
truths of faith; for the conscience with which the regenerate man is
gifted is a conscience of what is true and right (see n. 977, 986 at the
end, 1033, 1076, 1077). This also is the reason why knives of stone, or
"swords of rocks," as they are called, were employed in circumcising.
(That these signify truths may be seen above, n. 2039, at the end.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2047.">2047.</span></span>

Throughout your generations. That this signifies the things which are of
faith, is evident from the signification of "generations" and of
"births," as being the things that are of faith (see n. 613, 1145, 1255,
2020, 2035).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2048.">2048.</span></span>

That "he that is born in the house" signifies those who are celestial,
and that "he that is bought with silver" signifies those who are
spiritual, and that they thus signify those who are within the church,
is evident from the signification of one "born in the house," as being
those who are within the house. A "house," in the Word, signifies what
is celestial, because this is the inmost; whence by the "house of God"
in a universal sense is signified the Lord's kingdom; in a sense less
universal, His church; and in a particular sense, the man himself in
whom there is the Lord's kingdom or church. When man is called a
"house," the celestial of faith in him is signified; and when he is
called a "temple," the truth of faith in him is signified; thus here by
one "born in the house" those who are celestial are signified. But that
"he that is bought with silver" signifies those who are spiritual, is
evident from the signification of "silver," as being truth, thus the
spiritual of faith (see Part First, n. 1551). \[2\] Those are called
celestial who are in love to the Lord; and as the Most Ancient Church,
which was before the flood, was in this love, it was a celestial church.
Those are called spiritual who are in love toward the neighbor and
thereby in the truth of faith, as was the Ancient Church, which was
after the flood. The distinction between the celestial and the spiritual
has been treated of many times in Part First. Everyone can see that
there are heavenly arcana in what is here said, namely, that those born
in the house were to be circumcised, and those bought with silver, and
also the sons that were strangers; and also from their being repeatedly
mentioned (as in verses 13, 23, and 27, which follow); which arcana do
not appear except from the internal sense, which shows that by those
born in the house and those bought with silver are signified the
celestial and the spiritual, thus those who are within the church; and
that by "a son that is a stranger who is not of thy seed" are signified
those who are outside the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2049.">2049.</span></span>

From every son that is a stranger who is not of thy seed. That this
signifies those who are outside the church, is evident from the
signification of "son that is a stranger," as being those who are not
born within the church, thus are not in the goods and truths of faith,
because not in the knowledges of them. "Sons that are strangers" also
signify those who are in external worship (concerning whom, n. 1097);
but where this is the meaning, those who are within the church are
treated of, whereas in the passage before us the Lord's church in the
universal is treated of, and therefore "sons that are strangers" signify
those who are not born within the church, as is the case with the
Gentiles. Gentiles, who are outside the church, may be in truths, but
not in the truths of faith. Their truths, like the precepts of the
Decalogue, are that parents are to be honored, that men are not to kill,
steal, commit adultery, or covet things that belong to others; also that
the Deity is to be worshiped. But the truths of faith are all doctrinal
things concerning eternal life, the Lord's kingdom, and the Lord
Himself, which cannot be known to the Gentiles because they have not the
Word. \[2\] These are they who are signified by "sons that are strangers
who are not of thy seed," and yet were to be circumcised, that is
purified, together with them. This shows that they can be purified,
equally with those within the church; as was represented by their being
circumcised. They are purified when they reject filthy loves, and live
with one another in charity; for then they live in truths, since all
truths are of charity; but in the truths already mentioned. They who
live in these truths readily imbibe the truths of faith, if not in the
life of the body, yet in the other life, because the truths of faith are
the interior truths of charity, and they then love nothing more than to
be admitted into the interior truths of charity. The interior truths of
charity are those in which the Lord's kingdom consists (see n. 932,
1032, 1059, 1327, 1328, 1366) \[3\] In the other life a memory-knowledge
of the knowledges of faith is of no avail, for the worst, nay, the
infernals, can be in the memory-knowledge of them, sometimes more than
others; but that which avails is a life according to the knowledges, for
all knowledges have life as their end. Unless knowledges were learned
for the sake of life, they would be of no use except that men might talk
about them, and thereby be esteemed learned in the world, be exalted to
honors, and gain reputation and wealth. From this it is evident that a
life of the knowledges of faith is no other than a life of charity; for
the Law and the Prophets, that is, the universal doctrine of faith
together with all its knowledges, consists in love to the Lord and in
love toward the neighbor; as is manifest to all from the Lord's words in
Matthew 22:34-39 and Mark 12:28-35. \[4\] But still doctrinal things,
that is, the knowledges of faith, are most necessary for forming the
life of charity, which cannot be formed without them. This is the life
that saves after death, and by no means any life of faith without it;
for without charity there cannot be any life of faith. They who are in
the life of love and charity are in the Lord's life, and by no other
life can anyone be conjoined with Him. Hence also it is evident that the
truths of faith can never be acknowledged as truths, that is, the
acknowledgment of them so much talked of is impossible, except
outwardly, and by the mouth, unless they are implanted in charity; for
inwardly or in the heart they are denied, since, as already said, they
all have charity as their end; and if this is not within them they are
inwardly rejected. When the exteriors are taken away-as is done in the
other life-the interiors are manifest in their true character, in that
they are utterly contrary to all the truths of faith. When men have had
no life of charity-that is, no mutual love-during their bodily life, it
is utterly impossible to receive it in the other life, because they are
averse to and hate it, for after death the same life remains with us
that we have lived here. When such persons merely approach a society
where there is the life of mutual love, they tremble, shudder, and feel
torture. \[5\] Such persons, although born within the church, are called
"sons that are strangers, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in
flesh," who are not to be admitted into the sanctuary, that is, into the
Lord's kingdom; and who are also meant in Ezekiel: No son that is a
stranger, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter
into My sanctuary (Ezek. 44:7, 9). Again: To whom art thou thus become
like in glory and in greatness among the trees of Eden? and thou shalt
be brought down with the trees of Eden into the lower earth, thou shalt
lie in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that are slain by the
sword (Ezek. 31:18); where Pharaoh is treated of, by whom are signified
memory-knowledges in general (n. 1164, 1165, 1186, 1462); by "the trees
of Eden" with which they should go down into the lower earth, are also
signified memory-knowledges, but those of the knowledges of faith. All
this shows what "the uncircumcised" is in the internal sense, namely,
one who is in filthy loves and the life of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2050.">2050.</span></span>

Verse 13. Circumcising he shall be circumcised that is born in thy
house, and he that is bought with thy silver; and My covenant shall be
in your flesh for an eternal covenant. "Circumcising he shall be
circumcised" signifies that they must wholly remove from themselves the
loves of self and of the world; "that is born in thy house, and that is
bought with thy silver," signifies those within the church, of both
kinds; "and My covenant shall be in your flesh," signifies the
conjunction of the Lord with man in his impurity, and also a
significative rite; "for an eternal covenant," signifies conjunction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[2009-1](ac041.htm#fr_57.md) Viderunt; probably a
misprint for videbunt, as we find it read in the True Christian
Religion, n. 782. \[Rotch ed.\]

<span id="fn_58"></span>[2009-2](ac041.htm#fr_58.md) Et memorare fecit
Nomen meum; but elsewhere, meminit Nominis mei; as n. 3305.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2051-2100](ac042.md)
