[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac048)  [Next](ac050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="2401.">2401.</span></span>

And said, Up, get you out of this place. That this signifies that they
should not remain in a state of evil, is evident from the signification
of "rising up," and of "getting out," and also of the "place." To "rise
up" often occurs in the Word, but excites little thought as to what it
further signifies, because it is a familiar expression. But in the
internal sense this expression involves elevation, as here, from evil to
good; for the mind is elevated when it recedes from evil (n. 2388). To
"get out" is to recede, or not to remain. And the "place" is a state of
evil (n. 2393). Thus the signification is evident. \[2\] The quality of
those who are in the knowledges of truth, but at the same time in a life
of evil, has been repeatedly stated before, namely, that so long as they
are in a life of evil they believe nothing; for to will evil and from
will to do evil, and at the same time to acknowledge truth in faith, is
not possible. This shows also that a man cannot be saved by thinking and
speaking what is true, nor even what is good, while he wills nothing
else, and from this his will does nothing else, than evil. It is the
very will of man that lives after death; not so his thought, except that
which flows from his will. \[3\] As therefore a man is such as his will
is, it is evident what must be his opinion of the truths of faith he has
learned, and even taught, seeing that they condemn him. So far is he
then from making them the basis of his thoughts, that he feels a
positive aversion for them; nay, insofar as he is permitted to do so,
he, like the devil's crew, blasphemes them. They who have not been
instructed concerning the life after death may suppose that it will be
easy for them to receive faith when they see that the Lord governs the
universe, and when they hear that heaven consists in loving the Lord and
the neighbor; whereas the truth is that the evil are as far from being
able to receive faith, that is, to believe from the will, as hell is
from heaven, for they are wholly in evil, and in the falsity thence
derived. That such persons are against the Lord and against the
neighbor, and therefore against good, and consequently against truth, is
known and perceived from their mere approach, or presence. There is a
horrible sphere that exhales from the life of their will and of their
derivative thought (n. 1048, 1053, 1316, 1504). \[4\] If by mere
instruction in the other life it were possible that men could be brought
to believe and to become good, there would not be a single person in
hell; for the Lord desires to raise all without exception to Himself
into heaven. For His mercy is infinite, because it is the Divine mercy
itself, that is extended toward the whole human race, and therefore
toward the evil as well as toward the good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2402.">2402.</span></span>

For Jehovah will destroy the city. That this signifies that they must
needs perish, is evident from the explication of nearly the same words
above (n. 2395, 2397).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2403.">2403.</span></span>

And he was in the eyes of his sons-in-law as one that jested. That this
signifies derision, is evident from the signification of "jesting," as
being to utter as it were a joke, a fable, or trifles, thus such things
as they would laugh at. "In their eyes," signifies that which was before
their rational, as is evident from the signification of the "eyes" (n.
212). This shows what is the character of those who are in the truth of
faith and not at the same time in the good of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2404.">2404.</span></span>

Verse 15. And when the dawn arose the angels pressed Lot to hasten,
saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters that are found, lest
thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city. "When the dawn arose,"
signifies when the Lord's kingdom is approaching; "the angels pressed
Lot to hasten," signifies that the Lord withheld them from evil and kept
them in good; "saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters that
are found," signifies the truth of faith and the affections of truth and
of good; "found," denotes that they are separated from evil; "lest thou
be consumed in the iniquity of the city," signifies lest they should
perish by the evils of falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2405.">2405.</span></span>

When the dawn arose. That this signifies when the Lord's kingdom is
approaching, is evident from the signification in the Word of the "dawn"
or "morning." As in this chapter the subject treated of is the
successive states of the church, that which is done in the evening is
first treated of, next that which is done in the night, and there now
follows that which is done in the morning twilight, and presently that
which is done after the sun is gone forth. The twilight is here
expressed by "when the dawn arose," and it denotes the time when the
upright are being separated from the evil; which separation is treated
of in this verse, and as far as verse 22, by Lot together with his wife
and daughters being led out and saved. That separation precedes Judgment
is evident from the Lord's words in Matthew: Before Him shall be
gathered all nations, and He shall separate them one from another, as
the shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats (Matt. 25:32). \[2\]
This time or state is called in the Word the "dawn," because the Lord
then comes; or what is the same, His kingdom then approaches. The case
is similar with the good, for at such a time there shines out with them
a semblance of the morning twilight or dawn; and therefore in the Word
the advent of the Lord is compared to the "morning," and is also called
the "morning." As in Hosea: After two days Jehovah will revive us, on
the third day He will raise us up, and we shall live before Him; and we
shall know, and we shall follow on to know Jehovah; His going forth is
as the dawn (Hos. 6:2-3). "Two days" denotes the time and state which
precedes; the "third day" denotes the Judgment, or the advent of the
Lord, and therefore the approach of His kingdom (n. 720, 901), which
advent or approach is compared to the "dawn." \[3\] In Samuel: The God
of Israel is as the light of the morning, the sun riseth, a morning
without clouds; from the brightness, from the rain, there is a growth
from the earth (2 Sam. 23:4). The "God of Israel" denotes the Lord; for
no other God of Israel was meant in that church, and He was represented
in each and all things of it. In Joel: The day of Jehovah cometh, for it
is nigh at hand; a day of darkness and of thick darkness, a day of cloud
and obscurity; as the dawn spread upon the mountains (Joel 2:1-2). Here
also the Lord's advent and His kingdom are treated of; it is said a "day
of darkness and of thick darkness," because the good are then being
separated from the evil, as here Lot from the men of Sodom; and after
the good have been separated, the evil perish. \[4\] That the Lord's
advent or the approach of His kingdom, is not merely compared to the
"morning," but is actually called the "morning," may be seen in Daniel:
A holy one said, How long shall be the vision, the continual sacrifice,
and the transgression that maketh waste? He said unto me, Until evening
and morning, two thousand three hundred, then shall the holy one be
justified. The vision of the evening and the morning which hath been
told is truth (Dan. 8:13-14, 26). "Morning" here manifestly denotes the
Lord's advent. In David: Thy people are willing offerings in the day of
thy strength, in honors of holiness, from the womb of the dawn thou hast
the dew of thy youth <span id="fr_65"></span>[2405-1](#fn_65.md) (Ps.
110:3). In this whole Psalm the subject treated of is the Lord, and His
victories in temptations, which are the "day of His strength," and the
"honors of His holiness;" "from the womb of the dawn," denotes Himself,
thus the Divine love from which He fought. \[5\] In Zephaniah: Jehovah
in the midst of her is righteous, He will not do perversity; in the
morning, in the morning will He give judgment for light (Zeph. 3:65).
The "morning" denotes the time and state of Judgment, which is the same
as that of the Lord's advent; and this is the same as the approach of
His kingdom. \[6\] Because the "morning" signified these things, in
order that the same might be represented, it was commanded that: Aaron
and his sons should light up the lamp, and should order it from evening
until morning before Jehovah (Exod. 27:21). The "evening" here denotes
the twilight before the morning (n. 2323). In like manner it was
commanded that the fire upon the altar should be kindled every morning
(Lev. 6:5); also that nothing of the paschal lamb and of the sanctified
things of the sacrifices should be left till the morning (Exod. 12:10;
23:18; 34:25; Lev. 22:29-30; Num. 9:12); by which was signified that
when the Lord came, sacrifices should cease. \[7\] In a general sense it
is called "Morning" both when the dawn appears, and when the sun rises;
and in this latter case "morning" denotes the Judgment as it concerns
both the good and the evil, as in this chapter: The sun was gone forth
upon the earth, and Lot came unto Zoar; and Jehovah caused it to rain
upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire (Gen. 19:23-24). In like
manner insofar as regards the Judgment upon the evil; in David: In the
mornings will I destroy all the wicked of the land, to cut off from the
city of Jehovah all the workers of iniquity (Ps. 101:8). And in
Jeremiah: Let that man be as the cities which Jehovah overthrew, and He
repenteth not; and let him hear a cry in the morning (Jer. 20:16). As in
the proper sense the "morning" signifies the Lord, His advent, and thus
the approach of His kingdom, it is evident what it signifies besides,
namely, the rise of a new church (for this is the Lord's kingdom on
earth), and this both in general and in particular, and even in the
least particular; in general, when any church on the globe is being
raised up anew; in particular, when a man is being regenerated, and
being made new (for then the Lord's kingdom is arising in him, and he is
becoming a church); and in the least particular, whenever the good of
love and faith is working in him; for in this consists the advent of the
Lord. Hence the Lord's resurrection on the third day in the morning
(Mark 16:2, 9; Luke 24:1; John 20:1) involves all these things (even in
the particular and the least particular) in regard to His rising again
in the minds of the regenerate every day, and even every moment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2406.">2406.</span></span>

The angels pressed Lot to hasten. That this signifies that the Lord
withheld them from evil and kept them in good is evident from the
signification of "pressing" and "hastening," as being to urge; and that
by these words is signified to be withheld from evil, is evident both
from the internal sense of these words and from what follows. The
internal sense is that when the church begins to fall away from the good
of charity, its people are at that time withheld from evil by the Lord
more strongly than when it is in the good of charity. The same is
evident from what follows, namely, that although the angels pressed Lot
to go out of the city, he still lingered; and that they then laid hold
of the hands of himself, his wife, and his daughters, and led them
forth, and set them without the city; by which is signified and
described the character of man in that state; for it is the second state
of this church that is here treated of. The first state is described in
the first three verses of this chapter; which state is such that they
are in the good of charity and acknowledge the Lord, and are confirmed
in good by Him. The second state is described here, which is such that
with the men of the church themselves evils begin to act against goods,
and that they are then powerfully withheld from evils and kept in goods
by the Lord; which state is treated of in this verse, and in the 15th,
16th, and 17th, that follow. \[2\] As regards this matter, few, if any,
know that all men without exception are withheld from evils by the Lord,
and this by a mightier force than man can ever believe. For the endeavor
of every man is continually toward evil, and this both from what is
hereditary, into which he is born, and from what is actual, which he has
procured for himself; and this to such a degree that if he were not
withheld by the Lord, he would rush headlong every moment toward the
lowest hell. But the mercy of the Lord is so great that at every moment,
even the least, the man is uplifted and held back, to prevent him from
rushing thither. This is the case with the good also, but with a
difference according to their life of charity and faith. Thus the Lord
combats continually with man, and for man with hell, although it does
not so appear to the man. That it is really so has been given me to know
by much experience, which of the Lord's Divine mercy will be related
elsewhere. (See also n. 929, 1581.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2407.">2407.</span></span>

Saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters that are found. That
this signifies the truth of faith and the affections of truth and of
good, and that "found" means separated \[from evil\] is evident from the
signification of "arising," as being to be elevated from evil (n. 2401);
also from the signification in this place of "wife," as being the truth
of faith (respecting which see under verse 26, where it is said of Lot's
wife that she was turned into a statue of salt) and also from the
signification of the "two daughters," as being the affections of truth
and of good (see n. 2362). That "found" denotes separated from evil, is
also evident, because they were set free. By these few words is this
second state of the church here described, namely, that they do not from
good suffer themselves to be led to truth, as before, but through truth
to good; and yet they are in an obscure affection of good; for in the
proportion that truth is made the leader, good is obscure; whereas in
the proportion that good is made the leader, truth is plain and evident
in its own light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2408.">2408.</span></span>

Lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city. That this signifies
lest they should perish in the evils of falsity, is evident from the
signification of "iniquity," as being evil; and from the signification
of "city," as being what is doctrinal, even if it is false (see n. 402).
What the evil of falsity is may be seen from what was said in volume 1
(n. 1212, 1679).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2409.">2409.</span></span>

Verse 16. And he lingered; and the men laid hold of his hand, and of the
hand of his wife, and of the hand of his two daughters; in the clemency
of Jehovah upon him, and they led him forth, and set him without the
city. "And he lingered," signifies opposition arising from the nature of
evil; "and the men laid hold of his hand, and of the hand of his wife,
and of the hand of his two daughters," signifies that the Lord
powerfully withheld them from evils, and thereby strengthened the goods
and truths signified by "Lot," his "wife," and his "daughters;" "in the
clemency of Jehovah upon him," signifies from grace and mercy; "and they
led him forth and set him without the city," signifies his state then.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2410.">2410.</span></span>

And he lingered. That this signifies opposition arising from the nature
of evil, is evident from what was said above (n. 2406); for the evil
which is in man continually reacts against the good which is from the
Lord. Evil from what is hereditary and from what is actual adheres to
man in each of His thoughts, nay, in the least things of his thoughts.
This drags him downward (but the Lord, by means of the good which he
instills, withholds him, and uplifts Him, so that the man is held
suspended between evil and good), and the consequence of this downward
tendency is that if even for the least moment the man were not withheld
from evils, he would of himself rush downward; and this he would do more
in the state in which is the man of the church now represented by Lot
than in the former state. This state is that he is beginning to think
and to act not so much from good as from truth; thus at some distance
from good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2411.">2411.</span></span>

And the men laid hold of his hand, and of the hand of his wife, and of
the hand of his two daughters. That this signifies that the Lord
powerfully withheld from evils, and thus strengthened the goods and
truths signified by "Lot, his wife, and his daughters," is evident from
the signification of the "men," as being the Lord (concerning which
above); from the signification of the "hand," as being power (see n.
878); also from the signification of "Lot," as being the good of charity
(see n. 2324, 2351, 2371, 2399); from the signification of "wife," as
being the truth of faith (treated of in the 26th verse); from the
signification of "daughters," as being the affections of good and of
truth (see n. 489-491, 2362); and finally from what was said above (n.
2388), namely, that good and truth flow in from the Lord in the
proportion that man is withheld from evil; consequently, that the goods
and truths signified by "Lot, his wife, and His two daughters," are in
the same proportion strengthened. \[2\] On reflection every man may know
this from his own experience; for in proportion as he is removed from
corporeal and worldly things, in the same proportion he is in a
spiritual idea, that is, is uplifted toward heaven; as is the case when
he is in any holy worship, when in any temptation, also when in
misfortune or sickness. It is well known that corporeal and worldly
things, that is, the loves of them, are then removed, the reason being
as stated, namely, that what is heavenly and spiritual from the Lord
continually flows in; but evil and its derivative falsity, and falsity
and its derivative evil, which flow in from corporeal and worldly
things, are what hinder its being received.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2412.">2412.</span></span>

In the clemency of Jehovah unto him. That this signifies from grace and
mercy, is evident from the signification of the "clemency of Jehovah,"
which can be nothing else than grace and mercy. That man's being
withheld from evil and kept in good by the Lord is of His pure mercy,
may be seen above (n. 1049). The reason both grace and mercy are
mentioned, is (as before explained, n. 598, 981) that they who are in
truth and from truth in good implore the Lord's grace only, whereas they
who are in good and from good in truth implore His mercy; and this
difference results from the difference that exists in their respective
states of humiliation and consequent adoration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2413.">2413.</span></span>

And they led him forth and set him without the city. That this signifies
his <span id="fr_66"></span>[2413-1](#fn_66.md) state at the time, is
evident from the signification of "leading forth," as being to withhold;
and from the signification of "setting without the city," as being away
from falsity; so that the state here referred to was that by his being
withheld from evils, goods and truths from the Lord were strengthened.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2414.">2414.</span></span>

Verse 17. And it came to pass when they were leading them forth abroad,
that he said, Escape for thy life; look not back behind thee, and stay
not in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.
"And it came to pass when they were leading them forth abroad,"
signifies the state when they were being withheld from falsity and evil;
"that he said, Escape for thy life" signifies that he should take
thought for his eternal life; "look not back behind thee," signifies
that he should not look to doctrinal things; "and stay not in all the
plain," signifies that he should not linger in any of these doctrinal
matters; "escape to the mountain," signifies to the good of love and of
charity; "lest thou be consumed," signifies that if he should do
otherwise he would perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2415.">2415.</span></span>

And it came to pass when they were leading them forth abroad. That this
signifies the state when they were being withheld from falsity and evil,
is evident from what was said just above (n. 2413; as also n. 2388,
2411).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2416.">2416.</span></span>

That he said, Escape for thy life. That this signifies that he should
take thought for his eternal life, is evident without explication. But
in what way he should take thought for his life, now follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2417.">2417.</span></span>

Look not back behind thee. That this signifies that he should not look
to doctrinal things, is evident from the signification of "looking back
behind him," when the city was behind him and the mountain before him.
For by "city" is signified what is doctrinal (n. 402, 2268, 2392); and
by "mountain," love and charity (n. 795, 1430). That this is the
signification will be evident in the explication at verse 26, where it
is said that his wife "looked back behind him," and became a pillar of
salt. Everyone may know that in this expression, "looking back behind
him," there is some Divine arcanum, and that it lies too deep to be
seen. For in looking back behind him there appears to be nothing
criminal, and yet it is a matter of importance so great that it is said
he should escape for his life, that is, should take thought for his
eternal life by not looking back behind Him. But what it is to look to
doctrinal things will be seen in what follows; in this place we shall
merely state what these doctrinal things are. \[2\] Doctrine is twofold:
that of love and charity, and that of faith. At first, while it is still
a little maid and a virgin, every church of the Lord has no other
doctrine, and loves no other, than that of charity; for this belongs to
life. But successively the church turns itself away from this doctrine,
until it begins to hold it cheap, and at length to reject it; and then
it acknowledges no other doctrine than that which is called the doctrine
of faith; and when it separates faith from charity, this doctrine
conspires with a life of evil. \[3\] Such was the case with the
Primitive Church, or that of the Gentiles, after the Lord's coming. In
its beginning it had no other doctrine than that of love and charity,
for this the Lord Himself taught (see n. 2371 at the end). But after His
time, successively, as love and charity began to grow cold, there arose
the doctrine of faith, and with it dissensions and heresies, which
increased as men came to lay stress on this doctrine. \[4\] The like was
the case with the Ancient Church that was after the flood, and was
extended through so many kingdoms (n. 2385): this church also in its
beginning knew no other doctrine than that of charity, because this
looked to and affected the life, and by so doing they had regard for
their eternal welfare. And yet after some time the doctrine of faith too
began to be cultivated with some, and at length to be separated from
charity; but those who did this they called "Ham," because they were in
a life of evil (see n. 1062, 1063, 1076). \[5\] The Most Ancient Church
which was before the flood and which in preeminence to all others was
called "Man," was in the very perception of love to the Lord and of
charity toward the neighbor; thus it had the doctrine of love and
charity inscribed on itself. But even then there were those who
cultivated faith, and when they separated it from charity they were
called "Cain;" for by "Cain" is signified such faith, and by "Abel,"
whom he killed, charity (see the explication of chapter 4). \[6\] This
shows that there are two doctrines, the one of charity, and the other of
faith, although in themselves the two are one; for the doctrine of
charity involves all things of faith. But when the doctrine comes to be
from those things alone which are of faith, it is then called twofold,
because faith is separated from charity. That these doctrines are
separated at the present day may be seen from the fact that it is
altogether unknown what charity is, and what the neighbor is. They who
are solely in the doctrine of faith are not aware that charity toward
the neighbor consists in anything beyond giving of their own to others,
and in feeling pity for anybody who may seem to need it, because they
call everybody the neighbor without distinction; and yet charity is all
good whatever there is in a man: in his affection, and in his zeal, and
from these in his life; and the neighbor is all the good in others by
which one is affected, consequently those who are in good; and this with
every possible distinction. \[7\] For example: that man is in charity
and mercy who exercises justice and judgment by punishing the evil and
rewarding the good. There is charity in punishing the evil, for to this
are we impelled by our zeal to amend them, and at the same time to
protect the good, lest these suffer injury at the hands of the evil. In
this way does a man consult the welfare of one who is in evil, or his
enemy, and express his good feeling toward him, as well as to others,
and to the common weal itself; and this from charity toward the
neighbor. The case is the same with all the other goods of life; for the
good of life is never possible unless it comes from charity toward the
neighbor, because it looks to this, and involves it. \[8\] Seeing then
that there is obscurity so great as regards the true nature of charity
and of the neighbor, it is clear that the doctrine of charity (the
doctrine of faith having assumed the first place) is among the things
that are lost; when yet it was this alone that was cultivated in the
Ancient Church; and that to such a degree that they reduced into classes
all the goods that belonged to charity toward the neighbor, that is, all
those who were in good; and this with many distinctions, to which they
also gave names, calling them the poor, the miserable, the oppressed,
the sick, the naked, the hungry, the thirsty, captives or those in
prison, strangers, orphans, and widows; some also they called the lame,
the blind, the deaf, the dumb, the maimed; besides many other names. In
the Word of the Old Testament the Lord has spoken in accordance with
this doctrine, on which account such terms so often occur there; and He
himself again spoke in accordance with the same doctrine, as in Matt.
25:35-36, 38-39, 40, 42-45; Luke 14:13, 21; and in many other places.
Hence it is that in the internal sense these names have quite a
different signification. In order therefore that the doctrine of charity
may be restored, it will of the Lord's Divine mercy be stated in the
following pages who those denoted by these names are, and what charity
is, and what the neighbor is, both generally and specifically.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2418.">2418.</span></span>

Stay not in all the plain. That this signifies that he should not linger
in any of these doctrinal matters, is evident from the signification of
a "plain," as being everything of a doctrinal nature, concerning which
presently. How the case stands with his not lingering in any of these
doctrinal matters shall be stated at verse 26, where Lot's wife is
treated of in that she looked back behind him. That in the Word a
"plain" signifies all things of a doctrinal nature, is evident in
Jeremiah: He that layeth waste shall come upon every city, and no city
shall escape, and the valley shall perish, and the plain shall be
destroyed (Jer. 48:8); where "city" denotes false doctrine; and the
"plain" all things that belong to that doctrine. In John: When the
thousand years are finished, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison,
and shall go forth to seduce the nations, Gog and Magog, to gather them
together to war, the number of whom is as the sand of the sea; and they
went up upon all the plain of the earth, and compassed the camp of the
saints about, and fire came down from God out of heaven, and consumed
them (Rev. 20:7-9); where "Gog and Magog" denote those who are in
external worship without internal, thus worship become idolatrous (n.
1151); the "plain of the earth," the doctrinal things of the church,
which they lay waste; the "camp of the saints," the goods of love and of
charity; their being "consumed by fire from God out of heaven" means the
same as when this is said of the men of Sodom and Gomorrah, in verse 24.
Again: the doctrinal things of charity are called the "cities of the
mountain," and the doctrinal things of faith the "cities of the plain,"
in Jeremiah 33:13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2419.">2419.</span></span>

Escape to the mountain. That this signifies to the good of love and of
charity, is evident from the signification of a "mountain," as being
love and charity (see n. 795, 1430).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2420.">2420.</span></span>

Lest thou be consumed. That this signifies that if he should do
otherwise he would perish, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2421.">2421.</span></span>

Verses 18, 19. And Lot said unto them, Nay I pray my lords. Behold I
pray thy servant hath found grace in thine eyes, and thou hast made thy
mercy great which thou hast done with me to make alive my soul; and I
cannot escape to the mountain, lest peradventure evil cleave to me, and
I die. "Lot said unto them, Nay I pray my lords," signifies weakness, so
that he could not; "Behold I pray thy servant hath found grace in thine
eyes," signifies humiliation from the affection of truth; "thou hast
made thy mercy great," signifies a semblance of humiliation from the
affection of good; "which thou hast done with me to make alive my soul,"
signifies on account of His desiring to save him; "and I cannot escape
to the mountain," signifies doubt as to his being able to have the good
of charity; "lest peradventure evil cleave to me, and I die," signifies
that then it could not but come to pass that he would be at the same
time in evil, and thereby would be condemned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2422.">2422.</span></span>

Lot said unto them, Nay I pray my lords. That this signifies weakness,
so that he could not, is evident from the affection in the very words,
as also from what follows. There is here treated of the third state of
the church represented in this chapter by Lot, which is that they no
longer think and act from the affection of good, but from the affection
of truth; which state succeeds, when the affection of good begins to be
diminished, and as it were to recede. Good is indeed present, but has
withdrawn itself more toward the interiors, and therefore is in
obscurity; and yet it manifests itself in a certain affection, which is
called the affection of truth. (What the affection of good is, and what
the affection of truth, may be seen above, n. 1997, and in what
presently follows, n. 2425.) That there are these states is not apparent
to man, still less what is the nature of them; but they are apparent to
the angels as in clear light, for the angels are in every good affection
of man; and they are apparent also to man himself when he comes into the
other life. It is in accordance with these affections, and the quality
of them, that the good are distinguished into societies (n. 685).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2423.">2423.</span></span>

That Behold I pray thy servant hath found grace in thine eyes, signifies
humiliation from the affection of truth; and that "thou hast made thy
mercy great" signifies a semblance of humiliation from the affection of
good, is evident from what has been said before concerning "grace" and
"mercy" (n. 598, 981). For they who are in the affection of truth cannot
humble themselves so far as to acknowledge from the heart that all
things are of mercy; and therefore, instead of "mercy" they say "grace;"
nay, the less of the affection of truth there is in them, the less of
humiliation there is in their mention of grace; whereas on the other
hand, the more of the affection of good there is in anyone, the more of
humiliation there is in his mention of mercy. This shows how much the
adoration, and consequently the worship, that exists with those who are
in the affection of truth differs from that which exists with those who
are in the affection of good. For in order that there may be worship,
there must be adoration; and in order that there may be adoration, there
must be humiliation; and this in all things of the worship both in
general and particular. What has been said will serve to show why both
"grace" and "mercy" are here mentioned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2424.">2424.</span></span>

Which thou hast done with me to make alive my soul. That this signifies
on account of His desiring to save him, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2425.">2425.</span></span>

And I cannot escape to the mountain. That this signifies doubt as to his
being able to have the good of charity, that is, to think and act from
that good, is evident from the signification of a "mountain," as being
love and charity (see n. 795, 1430). \[2\] As regards this doubt, the
case is this. Within the affection of truth of those who are in this
affection there is the affection of good, but so obscurely that they do
not perceive, thus do not know, what the affection of good is, and what
genuine charity is. They do suppose that they know, but it is from
truth, thus from memory-knowledge, and not from good itself.
Nevertheless they do the goods of charity, not in order to merit
anything thereby, but from obedience; and this insofar as they apprehend
that it is the truth. For they suffer themselves to be led by the Lord
out of their obscurity of good by means of the truth which appears to
them to be truth. For example: being ignorant what the neighbor is, they
do good to everyone whom they suppose to be the neighbor; especially to
the poor, because these call themselves poor on account of being
destitute of worldly wealth; to orphans and widows, because they are so
termed; to strangers, because they are such; and so on with all the rest
and this they do so long as they are ignorant what is signified by the
poor, by orphans, widows, strangers, and others. Nevertheless seeing
that in their affection of apparent truth there lies in obscurity the
affection of good, by which the Lord leads them to such action, they are
at the same time in good as to their interiors, and in this good the
angels are present with them, and are delighted there with their
appearances of truth by which such persons are affected. \[3\] But they
who are in the good of charity, and from this in the affection of truth,
do all things with discrimination, for they are in light; since the
light of truth is from no other source than good, because the Lord flows
in by means of good. These persons do not do good to the poor, to
orphans, to widows, and to strangers, for the mere reason that they are
so termed; for they know that those who are good, whether poor or rich,
are neighbors more than all others; since by the good, good is done to
others; and therefore insofar as these persons do good to the good, they
do it to others through them. They also know how to make distinctions
among goods, and so among good men. They call the general good itself
their neighbor in a greater degree, for in this there is regarded the
good of still greater numbers. As still more their neighbor to whom
charity is to be done they acknowledge the Lord's kingdom on earth,
which is the church; and the Lord's kingdom itself in the heavens even
still more. But they who set the Lord before all these-who adore Him
alone and love Him above all things-derive the neighbor in all these
degrees from Him; for the Lord alone is the neighbor in the highest
sense, thus all good is the neighbor insofar as it is from Him. \[4\]
But they who are in the opposite derive the degrees of the neighbor from
themselves, and acknowledge only those as neighbor who favor and serve
them-calling no others brethren and friends-and this with a distinction,
accordingly as they make one with them. All this shows what the neighbor
is, namely, that a man is our neighbor according to the love in which he
is; and that he is truly the neighbor who is in love to the Lord and in
charity toward his neighbor, and this with every possible difference;
thus it is the good itself with everyone that determines the point in
question.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2426.">2426.</span></span>

Lest peradventure the evil cleave to me, and I die. That this signifies
that then it could not but come to pass that he would be at the same
time in evil, and that thereby he would be condemned, is evident without
explication. What these words involve may be known from what has been
said and shown before (n. 301-303, 571, 582, 1001, 1327, 1328), namely,
that the Lord constantly provides that evil should not be commingled
with good; but that insofar as a man is in evil, so far is he removed
from good; for it is better for a man to be altogether in evil, than in
evil and at the same time in good. For if he is in evil and at the same
time in good, he must needs be damned eternally. It is the deceitful and
hypocrites within the church who are most in danger of this. Such
therefore is the meaning, in the internal sense, of "lest the evil
cleave to me, and I die."

<span class="margnote"><span id="2427.">2427.</span></span>

Verse 20. Behold I pray this city is near to flee thither, and it is a
little one; let me I pray escape thither-is it not a little one? And my
soul shall live. "Behold I pray this city is near to flee thither,"
signifies that he might be permitted \[to think and act\] from the truth
of faith; "and it is a little one," signifies from the little truth that
he had; "let me I pray escape thither," signifies that from this small
amount of truth it might be permissible to have regard to good; "is it
not a little one?" signifies might he not have some little truth; "and
my soul may live," signifies that so perchance he might be saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2428.">2428.</span></span>

Behold I pray this city is near to flee thither. That this signifies
that he might be permitted \[to think and act\] from the truth of faith,
is evident from the signification of a "city," as being what is of
doctrine, thus the truth of faith (see n. 402, 2268). It is said to be
"near," because truth is nearly related to good; on which account to
"flee thither" signifies that he might be permitted \[to think and act\]
from truth, seeing that he could not do so from good (n. 2422).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2429.">2429.</span></span>

It is a little one. That this signifies from the little truth that he
had, is evident from the signification of a "city," as being truth,
concerning which just above. Its being "little" signifies that there was
little of truth; here, from the little that he had, as is evident from
what precedes and what follows. \[2\] As regards the thing itself,
namely, that they who are in the affection of truth have little truth in
comparison with those who are in the affection of good, this is evident
from the fact that it is from the meager and obscure good appertaining
to them that they regard truth. The truth in a man is exactly according
to the good that is in him. Where there is little good, there is little
truth. They are in a like ratio and in a like degree, or, as we say,
they march with even step. This indeed may seem a paradox, but still the
case is so. Good is the very essence of truth, and truth without its
essence is not truth, although it appears as if it were; it is merely a
sounding brass, and is like an empty vessel. \[3\] In order that anyone
may have truth in himself, he must not only know it, but also
acknowledge it, and have faith in it; he then for the first time has
truth, because it then affects him, and remains. It is otherwise when he
only knows truth, and does not acknowledge it, and have faith in it; for
in this case he has not the truth in himself. This is the case with many
who are in evil: they are able to know truths, sometimes more than other
men; but still they have not the truth; nay, they have it so much the
less, because at heart they deny it. \[4\] It is provided by the Lord
that no one should have (that is, acknowledge and believe) more truth
than he receives of good. Hence it is here said of the city, by which
truth is signified, that it is a "little one," and again in this verse,
"Is it not a little one?" also in verse 22, that he called the name of
the city "Zoar," which in the original language means "little;" for the
reason that those are here treated of who are in the affection of truth,
and not so much in the affection of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2430.">2430.</span></span>

Let me I pray escape thither. That this signifies that from this small
amount of truth it might be permissible to have regard to good, is
evident from what precedes and what follows. It was said that he should
"escape to the mountain," by which is signified the good of love and of
charity (n. 2419); but it was answered that he could not do this, but
could escape to the city, by which is signified the truth of faith (n.
2428); thus that he could regard good from truth, or what is the same,
charity from faith. Moreover, that city was situated at the foot of the
mountain; and from it he afterwards went up and dwelt on the mountain,
but in a cave (verse 30).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2431.">2431.</span></span>

Is it not a little one? That this signifies might he not have some
little truth, is evident from what was said above (n. 2429), thus
without further explication. This question is asked for the reason that
the Lord alone knows how much good there is in the truth, and thus how
much truth there is in a man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2432.">2432.</span></span>

And my soul shall live. That this signifies that so perchance he might
be saved, is likewise evident without explication. That he also was
saved, because there was good in his truth, is evident from what
follows, namely, from the answer, "Behold, I have accepted thy face as
to this word also, that I will not overthrow the city of which thou hast
spoken" (verse 21); and afterwards, "The sun was gone forth upon the
earth, and Lot came unto Zoar" (verse 23); by which is meant that they
who are in the affection of truth, that is, who are in faith, are saved,
provided it is the faith of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2433.">2433.</span></span>

Verse 21. And He said unto him, Behold, I have accepted thy face as to
this word also, that I will not overthrow the city of which thou hast
spoken. "He said unto him, Behold, I have accepted thy face as to this
word also," signifies assent, provided that the interiors in the truth
derive anything from good; "that I will not overthrow the city of which
thou hast spoken," signifies that thus he would not perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2434.">2434.</span></span>

He said unto him, Behold, I have accepted thy face as to this word also.
That this signifies assent, provided that the interiors in the truth
derive anything from good, is evident from the signification of "face."
The term "face" is of frequent occurrence in the Word, and there
signifies the interiors, as before shown (n. 358, 1999); and also that
when the face is attributed to Jehovah or the Lord, it signifies Mercy,
Peace, Good (n. 222, 223); so that here it signifies the good which is
interiorly in truth; and therefore to "accept the face" denotes to
assent, provided that the interiors in the truth derive anything from
good. "As to this word," denotes as to this matter. That there is no
truth unless there is good within it, may be seen above (n. 1496, 1832,
1900, 1904, 1928, 2063, 2173, 2269, 2401, 2403, 2429); and that the
blessedness and happiness which a man has after death is not from truth,
but from the good that is in the truth (n. 2261); and hence the more
good there is in his truth, the more blessed and happy he is. That good
is within truth, and causes it to be truth, is evident also from the
goods and truths that exist even in worldly things. When a man learns
and acknowledges that anything in these is good, then whatever favors
this good he calls truth; but whatever does not favor it, he rejects and
calls falsity. He may indeed say that that is true <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2434-1](#fn_67.md) which does not favor the good in
question; but he is then making a pretense, while thinking differently.
And the case is the same in spiritual things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2435.">2435.</span></span>

That I will not overthrow the city of which thou hast spoken. That this
signifies that so he would not perish, namely, the man with whom there
is truth within which there is good, is evident from the signification
of a "city," as being truth (see n. 402, 2268, 2428). It has been
disputed from the most ancient times which is the firstborn of the
church, charity or faith; for the reason that man is regenerated and
becomes a church by means of the truths of faith. But they who have set
faith foremost and made it the firstborn, have all fallen into heresies
and falsities, and at length have extinguished charity altogether; as we
read of Cain, by whom such faith is signified, that at length he killed
his brother Abel, by whom is signified charity; and afterwards of
Reuben, the firstborn son of Jacob, by whom likewise faith is signified,
that he polluted his father's couch (Gen. 35:22; 49:4), and therefore
was held unworthy, and the primogeniture was given to Joseph (Gen. 48:5;
1 Chron. 5:1). \[2\] This was the source of all the contentions, and
also all the laws, respecting primogeniture that are mentioned in the
Word. The cause of there being such a controversy was that it was not
known, as even at this day it is not known, that a man has only so much
of faith as he has of charity; and that when a man is being regenerated,
charity presents itself to faith, or what is the same, good presents
itself to truth, and insinuates itself into it and adapts itself to it
in every particular, causing faith to be faith; and thus that charity is
the very firstborn of the church, although to man it appears otherwise
(see also n. 352, 367). But as these things will frequently be treated
of hereafter, of the Lord's Divine mercy we shall say more on the
subject as the occasion arises.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2436.">2436.</span></span>

Verse 22. Haste thee, escape thither, for I cannot do anything until
thou be come thither. Therefore he called the name of the city Zoar.
"Haste thee, escape thither," signifies that he should remain in it,
because he cannot go further; "for I cannot do anything until thou be
come thither," signifies that before the Judgment upon the evil, they
are to be saved who are in the affection of truth; "Therefore he called
the name of the city Zoar," signifies the affection of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2437.">2437.</span></span>

Haste thee, escape thither. That this signifies that he should remain in
it, because he could not go further (that is to say, in the truth of
faith and the affection of it, because he could not be in the very good
of charity and the affection of it), is evident from what precedes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2438.">2438.</span></span>

For I cannot do anything until thou be come thither. That this signifies
that before the Judgment upon the evil they are to be saved who are in
the affection of truth, is evident from the fact that the words "I
cannot do anything," refer to the Judgment upon the evil, which is
presently described by the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah; and that the
words "until thou be come thither," signify that they are first to be
saved who are in the affection of truth, and who are here represented by
Lot; which also is what is meant by Lot's coming to Zoar (verse 23).
\[2\] That the good and the just are saved before the evil and the
unjust perish, is evident also elsewhere in the Word, as where the Last
Judgment is treated of in Matthew, and it is said that the sheep were
separated from the goats, and the sheep were told to enter into the
Lord's kingdom before the goats were told to depart into eternal fire
(25:32, 34, 41). The like was also represented in the exodus of the sons
of Israel from Egypt-that they were saved before the Egyptians were
drowned in the Red Sea. \[3\] The same is also signified by the
declarations of the Prophets, that after the faithful had been brought
back from captivity, their enemies should then undergo their punishments
and perish. This is continually taking place in the other life, that is,
the faithful are first saved, and then the unfaithful are punished; or
what is the same, the faithful are elevated into heaven by the Lord, and
the unfaithful then cast themselves down into hell. The reason why these
two things do not take place at the same time is that unless the good
were carefully withdrawn from the wicked, they would easily perish by
the cupidities of evil and the persuasions of falsity, which the wicked
continually scatter around like poisons. But in general, before this
comes to pass, it is provided that evils should be separated from the
good, and that goods should be separated from the evil, so that the
former may by means of their goods be uplifted by the Lord into heaven,
and the latter by means of their evils may cast themselves down into
hell; concerning which subject of the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter, at
n. 2449, 2451.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2439.">2439.</span></span>

Therefore he called the name of the city Zoar. That this signifies the
affection of truth, is evident from the signification of Zoar," as being
the affection of good, namely, of the good of knowledge, that is, the
affection of truth (see n. 1589); and from the signification of "calling
a name," as being to know the quality (see n. 144, 145, 1754, 2009);
here that there was a little truth, for in the original language "Zoar"
means "little," or "small." In comparison with those who are in the
affection of good, they who are in the affection of truth have little
truth because they have little good (see above, n. 2429). \[2\] Moreover
that truths which are in themselves truths are with one person more
true, with another less true, and with some not true at all, and even
false, is evident from almost all things which in themselves are true;
for they are varied in the man with whom they are, in accordance with
his affections. For example, the doing of a good work or a good of
charity: in itself it is a truth that this is to be done; and with one
person it is a good of charity, because it proceeds from charity; with
another it is a work of obedience, because it proceeds from obedience;
with some it is work of self-merit, because by it they desire to merit
and to obtain salvation; but with others it is hypocritical, being done
in order that they may seem charitable; and so on. It is the same with
all other things that are called truths of faith. And this shows that
there is much truth with those who are in the affection of good, and
less truth with those who are in the affection of truth; for the latter
regard good as being more remote from themselves, whereas the former
regard good as being present in themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2440.">2440.</span></span>

Verse 23. The sun was gone forth upon the earth, and Lot came to Zoar.
"The sun was gone forth upon the earth," signifies the last period,
which is called the Last Judgment; "and Lot came to Zoar," signifies
that those are saved who are in the affection of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2441.">2441.</span></span>

The sun was gone forth upon the earth. That this signifies the last
period, which is called the Last Judgment, is evident from the
signification of the "rising of the sun," when the subject treated of is
the times and states of the church. That in the internal sense the times
of the day, and also the times of the year, signify the successive
states of the church, has been shown before (n. 2323); and that the dawn
or morning signifies the Lord's advent, that is, the approach of His
Kingdom (n. 2405) so that in the passage before us the rising of the
sun, that is, his "going forth upon the earth," signifies the Lord's
presence itself; and this for the reason that both the "sun" and the
"east" signify the Lord. (As to the "sun," seen. 31, 32, 1053, 1521,
1529-1531, 2120; as to the "east," n. 101.) \[2\] The reason why the
Lord's presence is the same as the last period, which is called the
Judgment, is that His presence separates the good from the evil, and
results in the good being elevated into heaven, and the evil casting
themselves down into hell; for in the other life the Lord is the Sun to
the universal heaven (see n. 1053, 1521, 1529-1531), for it is the
Divine Celestial of His love that so appears before their eyes and
actually makes the very light of heaven. In so far therefore as the
inhabitants of the spiritual world are in celestial love, so far are
they elevated into that celestial light which is from the Lord; but in
so far as they are remote from celestial love, so far do they cast
themselves away from this tight into infernal darkness. \[3\] This
therefore is the reason why the "rising of the sun," by which is
signified the presence of the Lord, involves both the salvation of the
good and the damnation of the evil; and this is why it is now said for
the first time that "Lot came to Zoar," that is, that they who are here
represented by Lot were saved; and presently that "Jehovah caused it to
rain upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire," that is, that the evil
were damned. \[4\] To those who are in the evils of the love of self and
of the world, that is, to those who are in hatreds against all things of
love to the Lord and of charity toward the neighbor, the light of heaven
actually appears as thick darkness; on which account it is said in the
Word that to such the "sun was blackened;" by which is signified that
they rejected everything of love and charity, and received everything
that is contrary thereto. As in Ezekiel: When I shall extinguish thee, I
will cover the heavens, and make the stars thereof black I will cover
the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not make her light to shine all
the luminaries of light in the heavens will I make black over thee, and
will set darkness upon thy land (Ezek. 31:7, 8). Every one can see that
by "covering the heavens," "blackening the stars," "covering the sun,"
and "blackening the luminaries of heaven," other things than these are
signified. \[5\] In like manner in Isaiah: The sun shall be darkened in
his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine (Isa.
13:10). And in Joel: The sun and the moon are blackened, and the stars
withdraw their shining (Joel 2:2, 10). It is therefore evident what is
signified by the Lord's words in Matthew, where He is speaking of the
last period of the church, which is called the Judgment: Immediately
after the affliction of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the
moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven
(Matt. 24:29) where by the "sun" is not meant the sun; nor by the
"moon," the moon; nor by the "stars," the stars; but by the "sun" are
signified love and charity; by the "moon," the faith thence derived; and
by the "stars," the knowledges of good and truth; which are said to be
"obscured," to "lose their light," and to "fall from heaven," when there
is no longer any acknowledgment of the Lord, nor any love to Him, nor
any charity toward the neighbor; and when these have become nought, the
love of self with its falsities takes possession of the man; for the one
thing is a consequence of the other. \[6\] Hence we read also in John:
The fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun; and it was given unto
him to scorch men with fire, and men were scorched with great heat, and
blasphemed the name of God (Rev. 16:8, 9) where also the last times of
the church are treated of, when all love and charity are being
extinguished; or, speaking according to the common mode, when there is
no longer any faith. The extinction of love and charity is meant by the
"pouring out of the vial upon the sun;" so that it was the love of self
and its cupidities by which men were then "scorched with fire," and
"scorched with great heat;" and from which came the "blaspheming of the
name of God." \[7\] By the "sun" the Ancient Church understood nothing
else than the Lord and the Divine Celestial of His love; and therefore
they were accustomed to pray toward the sun rising, while not thinking
at all about the sun. But after their posterity had lost this also,
together with the rest of their representatives and significatives, they
began to worship the sun itself and also the moon; which worship spread
to many nations, so much so that they dedicated temples to them, and set
up pillars; and because the sun and the moon then took on an opposite
signification, they came to signify the love of self and of the world,
which are diametrically contrary to heavenly and spiritual love. Hence
in the Word by the "worship of the sun and the moon" is meant the
worship of self and of the world. \[8\] As in Moses: Lest thou lift up
thine eyes unto heaven, and see the sun and the moon and the stars, all
the army of the heavens, and thou be driven to bow down unto them, and
serve them (Deut. 4:19). And again: If he have gone and served other
gods, and the sun and the moon, or any of the army of the heavens, which
I have not commanded, then thou shalt stone them with stones, and they
shall die (Deut. 17:3, 5). Into such idolatry was the ancient worship
turned when they no longer believed that anything internal was signified
by the rites of the church, but only what was external. \[9\] In like
manner in Jeremiah: At that time shall they spread out the bones of the
kings of Judah, of the princes, of the priests, of the prophets, and of
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, before the sun and the moon, and all the
army of the heavens, which they have loved, and which they have served
(Jer. 8:1-2). The "sun" here denotes the love of self and its
cupidities; their "spreading out the bones" signifies the infernal
things that belong to such worshipers. Again: He shall break the pillars
of the house of the sun, which are in the land of Egypt, and the houses
of the gods of Egypt shall he burn with fire (Jer. 43:13). The "pillars
of the house" denote the worship of self.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2442.">2442.</span></span>

And Lot came to Zoar. That this signifies that those who are in the
affection of truth are saved, is evident from the signification of
"Zoar," as being the affection of truth (see n. 2439). This shows that
those also are saved who are in faith, provided there is good in their
faith; that is, provided they are affected by the truths of faith for
the sake of good, for this is from good: all the life of faith is from
no other source. (That charity is the essential of faith, nay, that it
is faith itself, because it is the very substance of faith, may be seen
above, n. 379, 389, 654, 724, 809, 916, 1162, 1176, 1798, 1799, 1834,
1844, 2049, 2116, 2189, 2190, 2228, 2261, 2343, 2349, 2417).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2443.">2443.</span></span>

Verse 24. And Jehovah caused it to rain upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah
brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of heaven. "Jehovah caused it to
rain upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire," signifies the
hell of those who are in the evils of the love of self and the falsities
thence derived; "to rain" is to be damned; "brimstone" is the hell of
the love of self; "fire" is the hell of the falsities thence derived;
"from Jehovah out of heaven," signifies from the laws of order as to
truth, because they separate themselves from good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2444.">2444.</span></span>

Jehovah caused it to rain upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and
fire. That this signifies the hell of those who are in the evils of the
love of self and the falsities thence derived, is evident from the
signification of "raining," as being to be damned; of "brimstone," as
being the hell of the evils of the love of self; and of "fire," as being
the hell of the falsities thence derived, concerning which presently;
also from the signification of "Sodom," as being the evil of the love of
self; and of "Gomorrah," as being the falsity thence derived (see n.
2220, 2246, 2322). \[2\] Here "Gomorrah" is also mentioned, for the
first time in this chapter, for the reason that "Gomorrah" signifies the
falsity that comes from the evil of the love of self. For within the
church, whose last period or Judgment is here treated of, this evil is
that which chiefly acts against good, and its falsity is that which acts
against truth; and these two things are so conjoined that he who is in
the one is also in the other, and indeed in a like ratio and a like
degree. It does indeed appear otherwise, but yet is plainly so in the
other life, if not in the world. (As regards the love of self, its
nature, the vastness of the evils that come from it, and that it is the
source of the hells, see n. 693, 694, 760, 1307, 1308, 1321, 1594, 1691,
2041, 2045, 2051, 2057, 2219).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2445.">2445.</span></span>

That to "rain" denotes to be damned, is evident from the signification
of "rain." In the Word "rain" in the genuine sense signifies a blessing,
and therefore also salvation; but in the opposite sense a curse, and
therefore also damnation. That it signifies a blessing and therefore
salvation, is evident from many passages; but that in the opposite sense
it signifies a curse, and therefore damnation, is manifest from the
following. In Isaiah: There shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the
daytime from the heat, and for a refuge and a covert from flood, and
from rain (Isa. 4:6). In Ezekiel: Say to them that daub on what is
untempered, that it shall fall; there shall be an overflowing rain, and
ye hailstones shall fall; an overflowing rain shall there be in Mine
anger, and hailstones in wrath unto the consummation (Ezek. 13:11, 13).
In David: He made their rains hail, a fire of flames in their land, and
He smote their vine and their fig-tree (Ps. 105:32-33); concerning
Egypt, of which we read in Moses: Jehovah gave thunders and hail, and
fire quivered upon the land; and Jehovah made it rain hail upon the land
of Egypt (Exod. 9:23-24).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2446.">2446.</span></span>

That "brimstone" denotes the hell of the evils of the love of self, and
"fire" the hell of the falsities thence derived, is evident from the
signification in the Word of "brimstone" and the "fire" from it, as
being the love of self with its cupidities and the derivative falsities,
thus as being hell, for hell consists of such things. That "brimstone"
and "fire" have this signification is evident in David: Jehovah shall
rain upon the wicked snares, fire, and brimstone (Ps. 11:6). That fire
and brimstone are not here meant, but something else that is signified
by "fire and brimstone," is evident also from its being said that
Jehovah "rains snares." In Ezekiel: I will contend against him with
pestilence and with blood, and I will make it rain an overflowing rain,
and hailstones, fire and brimstone, upon him, and upon his troops, and
upon the many peoples that are with him (Ezek. 38:22); where God is
treated of, who lays waste the land of Israel, that is, the church. (The
signification of "God" may be seen above, n. 1151.) "Fire" denotes
falsities, "brimstone" the evils thence, and at the same time the hells
of those who lay waste. In John: They who adored the beast were cast
into a lake of fire burning with brimstone (Rev. 19:20); meaning hell.
Again: The devil was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where the
beast and the false prophet are; and they shall be tormented day and
night for ever and ever (Rev. 20:10); manifestly meaning hell. Again:
The abominable, and murderers, and adulterers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake that burneth
with fire and brimstone (Rev. 21:8); where also "fire and brimstone"
plainly denote hell. \[2\] That they denote the evils of the love of
self and the falsities thence derived, from which come the hells-in
Isaiah: The day of the vengeance of Jehovah, and the year of retribution
in the controversy of Zion; and the streams thereof shall be turned into
pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall
become burning pitch (Isa. 34:8-9); where "burning pitch," here
mentioned instead of "fire," denotes dense and direful falsities and "
brimstone" the evils from the love of self. Again: The pile thereof is
fire and much wood; the breath of Jehovah is like a stream of brimstone
kindling in it (Isa. 30:33); speaking of Topheth; the "stream of
kindling brimstone" denoting falsities from the evils of the love of
self. In Luke: In the day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and
brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all; even thus shall it be in
the day when the Son of man is revealed (Luke 17:29-30). That it will
not then rain fire and brimstone is obvious; but what is meant is that
the falsities and cupidities of the love of self, which are signified by
"fire and brimstone," and which make the hells, will then predominate.
\[3\] That in the Word "fire" signifies cupidities, and at the same time
the hells, and that in this case the "smoke" from the fire signifies the
falsity thence derived, and which is in those hells, may be seen above
(n. 1861); and in John: I saw the horses in the vision, and them that
sat upon them, having breastplates of fire and of brimstone; and the
heads of the horses were like the heads of lions, and out of their mouth
issued fire, smoke, and brimstone: by these three were the third part of
men killed, by the fire, and the smoke, and the brimstone (Rev.
9:17-18); "fire, smoke, and brimstone" denote evils and falsities of
every kind, of which as before said the hells consist.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2447.">2447.</span></span>

From Jehovah out of heaven. That this signifies from the laws of order
as to truth, because they separate themselves from good, cannot be seen
except from the internal sense, by which there is disclosed how the case
stands with punishments and damnations: that they in no wise come from
Jehovah, that is, from the Lord, but from the man himself, the evil
spirit, and the devil; and this from the laws of order as to truth,
because they separate themselves from good. \[2\] All order is from
Jehovah, that is, from the Lord, and according to this order are all
things directed by Him both in general and in particular, but in many
different ways, to wit, from Will, from Good-pleasure, from Leave, and
from Permission. The things that are from His will and good-pleasure are
from the laws of order as to good, and so also are many of those which
are from leave, and some of those which are from permission. But when a
man separates himself from good he casts himself into the rule of the
laws of order that are of truth separated from good, which are such that
they condemn; for all truth condemns man and casts him down into hell;
whereas the Lord from good, that is, from mercy, saves him, and uplifts
him into heaven. From this we see that it is man himself who condemns
himself. \[3\] The things done from permission are mostly of this
nature, as for example, that one devil punishes and torments another;
and innumerable other things of this kind. These things are from the
laws of order as to truth separated from good; for the devils could not
otherwise be held in bonds, and withheld from rushing upon all the well
disposed and good, and eternally destroying them. It is the prevention
of this which is the good the Lord has in view. The case herein is
similar to that which exists on earth, where a mild and clement king,
who intends and does nothing but good, must needs suffer his laws to
punish the evil and the wicked (although he punishes no one, but rather
grieves that they are such that their evils must punish them), for
otherwise he would leave his kingdom itself a prey to them; which would
be the height of rigor and of unmercifulness. \[4\] This shows that
Jehovah in no wise caused it to rain brimstone and fire, that is in no
wise condemned to hell; but that the men themselves who were in evil and
thence in falsity did this, because they had separated themselves from
good, and so had cast themselves into the rule of the laws of order that
come from truth alone. From all which it follows that this is the
internal sense of these words. \[5\] That in the Word "evil,"
"punishing," "cursing," "damnation," and many other such things are
attributed to Jehovah or the Lord, as here that He made it "rain
brimstone and fire," we read in Ezekiel: I will contend against him with
pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him fire and brimstone
(Ezek. 38:22). In Isaiah: The breath of Jehovah like a stream of
brimstone doth kindle it (Isa. 30:33). In David: Jehovah shall rain upon
the wicked snares, fire, and brimstone (Ps. 11:6). Again: There went up
a smoke out of His nostrils, and fire out of His mouth, coals did burn
from Him (Ps. 18:8). In Jeremiah: Lest My fury go forth like fire, and
burn, and there is none to quench it (Jer. 21:12). In Moses: A fire is
kindled in Mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell (Deut.
32:22); besides similar things in many other places. The reason why such
things are attributed in the Word to Jehovah or the Lord has been
explained in volume 1 (n. 223, 245, 589, 592, 696, 735, 1093, 1638,
1683, 1874); for such things are as far from coming from the Lord, as
good is far from evil, or as heaven is from hell, or what is Divine from
what is diabolical. Evil, hell, and the devil do these things; but by no
means the Lord, who is mercy itself and good itself; but because He
appears to do them, therefore for the reasons mentioned in the numbers
cited, they are attributed to Him. \[6\] From its being said in this
verse that Jehovah caused it to rain from Jehovah out of heaven, it
appears in the sense of the letter as if there were two; one on earth,
and one in heaven; but the internal sense teaches how this also is to be
understood, namely, that by the Jehovah first named is meant the Lord's
Divine Human and Holy proceeding (meant in this chapter by the "two
men") and by the Jehovah named in the second place is meant the Divine
Itself that is called the "Father" (spoken of in the preceding chapter);
and that this Trine is in the Lord, as He himself says in John: He that
hath seen Me hath seen the Father; believe Me, that I am in the Father,
and the Father in Me (John 14:9-11). And concerning the Holy proceeding,
in the same: The Comforter shall not speak from Himself but He shall
take of Mine, and shall declare it unto you (John 16:13-15). Thus
Jehovah is one, although two are here named; two being named for the
reason that all the laws of order are from the Lord's Divine Itself,
Divine Human, and Holy proceeding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2448.">2448.</span></span>

Verse 25. And He overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the
inhabitants of the cities, and the growth of the ground. "He overthrew
those cities," signifies that all truths were separated from them, in
order that they might have only falsities "and all the plain," signifies
all things that pertained to truths; "and all the inhabitants of the
cities," signifies that all goods were separated from them, in order
that they might have nothing but evils; "and the growth of the ground,"
signifies all that is of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2449.">2449.</span></span>

He overthrew those cities. That this signifies that all truths were
separated from them, in order that they might have only falsities, is
evident from the signification of "cities," as being doctrinal things,
thus truths, since these belong to doctrinal things (see n. 402, 2268,
2428); and which are said to be "overthrown" when there are falsities
instead of truths, in the present case when all truths have been
separated from them, as well as all goods, which are likewise treated of
in this verse because the subject is the last state of those within the
church who are in falsities and evils; and this is the state into which
they come, concerning the nature of which a few words shall be said.
\[2\] They who come into the other life are all brought again into a
life similar to that which they had in the body; and then with the good
evils and falsities are separated, in order that by means of goods and
truths they may be elevated by the Lord into heaven; but with the evil,
goods and truths are separated in order that by evils and falsities they
may be borne into hell (see n. 2119); precisely in accordance with the
Lord's words in Matthew: Whosoever hath, to him shall be given, that he
may have more abundance; but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken
away even that which he hath (Matt. 13:12). And elsewhere in the same:
Unto him that hath shall be given, that he may have abundance; but from
him that hath not, shall be taken away even that which he hath (Matt.
25:29; Luke 8:18; 19:24-26; Mark 4:24-25). The same things are also
signified by these words in Matthew: Let both grow together until the
harvest; and in the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers,
Gather together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them;
but gather the wheat into my barn. The harvest is the consummation of
the age; as therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so
shall it be in the consummation of the age (Matt. 13:30, 39-40). The
same are also signified by what is said of the net cast into the sea
that gathered fishes of various kinds, the good being collected into
vessels and the bad cast away; and of its being so at the consummation
of the age (verses 47 to 50). What the "consummation" is, and that it
involves like things as these in regard to the church, may be seen
above, n 1857, 2243.) The reason why evils and falsities are separated
from the good is that they may not hang between evils and goods, but may
be elevated by means of goods into heaven; and the reason why goods and
truths are separated from the evil is that they may not by means of any
goods that pertain to them seduce the upright, and also that by means of
their evils they may go away among the evil who are in hell. For such is
the communication in the other life, of all ideas of thought, and of all
affections, that goods are communicated among the good, and evils among
the evil (n. 1388-1390); so that unless the good and the evil were
separated, countless mischiefs would result, and moreover all
association together would be impossible; when yet all things are most
exquisitely consociated, in the heavens according to all the differences
of love to the Lord and of mutual love, and of the derivative faith (n.
685, 1394); and in the hells according to all the differences of
cupidities and of the derivative phantasies (n. 695, 1322). Be it known
however that the separation is not entire removal, for from no one is
that which he has had altogether taken away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2450.">2450.</span></span>

And all the plain. That this signifies all things that pertained to
those truths, is evident from the signification of a "plain," as being
everything of what is doctrinal, thus everything that pertains to truths
(see n. 2418).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[2405-1](ac049.htm#fr_65.md) Nativitatis; but
juventutis elsewhere, as T.C.R. 764. \[Rotch ed.\]

<span id="fn_66"></span>[2413-1](ac049.htm#fr_66.md) In this and following
numbers we have "he" and "his" in the explication, grammatically
referring to Lot, when in fact those are meant who are represented by
him as occasionally explained. \[Rotch ed.\]

<span id="fn_67"></span>[2434-1](ac049.htm#fr_67.md) Verum non sit,
apparently by a slip. \[Rotch ed.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2451-2500](ac050.md)
