[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac050)  [Next](ac052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="2501.">2501.</span></span>

That "Abraham" is the Lord in that state, is evident from the
representation of Abraham, as being the Lord; here the Lord in that
state (as also before, n. 1893, 1965, 1989, 2011, 2172, 2198).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2502.">2502.</span></span>

And dwelt between Kadesh and Shur. That this signifies His state
specifically, is evident from the signification of "dwelling," as being
to live (see n. 1293). What precedes also indicates this, namely, that
Abraham journeyed thence toward the land of the south, by which there is
signified the Lord's progression into the goods and truths of faith; and
as it is now said that he "dwelt between Kadesh and Shur," it follows
that nothing else is signified than the Lord's state specifically, which
is described by "Kadesh and Shur"-now to be explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2503.">2503.</span></span>

That "Kadesh" is the affection of interior truth that proceeds from
things rational, and "Shur" the affection of exterior truth that
proceeds from memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification of
"Kadesh and Shur." That "Kadesh" signifies truth about which there is
contention, was shown above (n. 1678), thus contention concerning truth
in regard to its origin, as to whether it is from the rational; as is
evident from what follows. But as with the Lord all truth was from a
celestial origin, "Kadesh" here signifies the affection of truth. With
every man of the church there are rational truths and truths of mere
memory \[vera scientifica\], the former being more interior, and the
latter more exterior. These are distinct from each other, precisely as
are man's two memories (see n. 2469-2473, etc.). From this it follows
that there are also two affections of truth-one more interior, as being
of rational things, and the other more exterior, as being of mere memory
truths. The affection of interior truth that proceeds from rational
things is here signified by "Kadesh;" and the affection of exterior
truth that proceeds from memory truths, by "Shur." (That "Shur"
signifies this truth may be seen above, n. 1928. That names in the Word
signify nothing else than actual things, has been shown above, n. 1224,
1264, 1876, 1888, and in many other places.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2504.">2504.</span></span>

And he sojourned in Gerar. That this signifies instruction thence in the
spiritual things of faith, is evident from the signification of
"sojourning," as being to be instructed (see n. 1463, 2025); and from
the signification of "Gerar," as being what is spiritual of faith. Gerar
is named in several places in Genesis (as chapter 10:19, 26:1, 6, 17,
20, 26); and in these it signifies faith, and this for the reason that
Gerar was in Philistia; and by "Philistia" is signified the mere
memory-knowledge of the knowledges of faith (see n. 1197, 1198); and it
was Gerar where the king of the Philistines dwelt. Hence it is that
faith itself is signified by "Gerar" (n. 1209); and by the "king of
Gerar," the truth itself of faith; for "king" in the internal sense is
truth (n. 1672, 2015, 2069). Thus by "Abimelech" is signified the
doctrine of faith, concerning which in what follows. \[2\] In general
there are intellectual things of faith, rational things of faith, and
memory-knowledges of faith. They thus proceed in their order from
interiors to exteriors. The things of faith which are inmost are called
intellectual; those which proceed from them or thence are the rational
things of faith; and those which proceed again from these are the
memory-knowledges of faith. They are-to use the language of the
learned-as prior to posterior, or what is the same, as higher to lower,
that is, as interior to exterior. It indeed appears to man as if the
memory-knowledge of faith were first, and that the rational then came
forth from it, and at length the intellectual; and this for the reason
that man advances in this way from his childhood. Nevertheless, although
man is not aware of it, the intellectual flows in continually into the
rational, and this into the faculty of knowing; <span
id="fr_72"></span>[2504-1](#fn_72) but in childhood obscurely, in adult
age more evidently, and at last in full light when the man has been
regenerated. Then it is apparent that this is the order, and still more
fully in the other life (see n. 1495). All these are called "spiritual
things;" which are distinguished in this way into degrees, and succeed
one another in such an order. The spiritual things of faith are all the
truths which are from good, that is, from a celestial origin. Whatever
is derived from the celestial is a spiritual thing of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2505.">2505.</span></span>

Verse 2. And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister; and
Abimelech king of Gerar sent and took Sarah. "Abraham said," signifies
the Lord's thought; "of Sarah his wife," signifies spiritual truth
conjoined with the celestial; "she is my sister," signifies rational
truth; "and Abimelech king of Gerar sent," signifies the doctrine of
faith ("Abimelech" signifies the doctrine of faith that looks to
rational things); "and took Sarah," signifies the affection of
consulting the rational.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2506.">2506.</span></span>

Abraham said. That this signifies thought, is evident from the
signification of "saying," in the historicals of the Word, as being to
perceive, as well as to think (see n. 1898, 1919, 2061, 2080, 2238,
2260, 2271, 2287).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2507.">2507.</span></span>

Of Sarah his wife. That this signifies spiritual truth conjoined with
the celestial, is evident from the signification of "Sarah" as a wife,
as being intellectual truth conjoined with the Divine good, or what is
the same, spiritual truth conjoined with the celestial (see n. 1468,
1901, 2063, 2065, 2172, 2173, 2198). What the spiritual is, and what the
celestial, has often been stated before (see n. 1155, 1577, 1824, 2048,
2088). That is called Celestial, which is of good, that is, which is of
love to the Lord and of charity toward the neighbor; and that Spiritual,
which is of truth, that is, which is of faith derived from those loves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2508.">2508.</span></span>

She is my sister. That this signifies rational truth, is evident from
the signification of a "sister," as being rational intellectual truth
(see n. 1495). That rational truth is a "sister," can be seen only from
the heavenly marriage; for the things which descend from this have
kinships among themselves like the relationships and connections on
earth (concerning which see n. 685, 917); and this with indefinite
variety. The heavenly marriage itself exists solely between the Divine
good and the Divine truth. From this there are conceived in man the
intellectual, the rational, and the faculty of knowing; for without
conception from the heavenly marriage man cannot possibly be imbued with
understanding, with reason, or with knowledge, and consequently cannot
be man. In proportion therefore as he receives from the heavenly
marriage, in the same proportion is he man. The heavenly marriage is in
the Lord Himself, thus the Lord is this marriage itself, for He is the
Divine good itself and at the same time the Divine truth. Angels and men
are in the heavenly marriage insofar as they are in love to the Lord and
in charity toward the neighbor, and insofar as they are thence in faith;
that is, insofar as they are in the Lord's good, and thence in truth;
and they are then called "daughters and sons," and in their relation to
one another "sisters and brothers;" but this with differences. The
reason why rational truth is called a "sister" is that it is conceived
from the influx of the Divine good into the affection of rational
truths; the good which is thence in the rational is called a "brother,"
and the truth which is thence, a "sister." But this will be better seen
from what is said by Abraham in verse 12 of this chapter: "and moreover
truly she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the
daughter of my mother; and she became my wife."

<span class="margnote"><span id="2509.">2509.</span></span>

And Abimelech king of Gerar sent. That this signifies the doctrine of
faith, is evident from what was said above (n. 2504), namely, that by
"Philistia" is signified the memory-knowledge of the knowledges of faith
(n. 1197, 1198); by "Gerar," which was in Philistia, faith (n. 1209,
2504); and by a "king," the truth itself of faith (n. 1672, 2015, 2069).
Hence by "Abimelech" is signified the doctrine of faith, but the
doctrine of faith looking to rational things; as will be manifest from
what now follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2510.">2510.</span></span>

That "Abimelech" is the doctrine of faith looking to rational things is
evident from the fact that he looked upon Sarah, not as Abraham's wife,
but as his sister; and by Sarah as a sister is signified rational truth
(n. 2508). The same is also manifest from what follows; for the doctrine
of faith is there treated of, as to whether it has its origin from the
rational, or from the celestial. Hence "Abimelech" signifies the
doctrine of faith looking to rational things. Doctrine is said to look
to rational things when nothing is acknowledged as truth of doctrine
except what can be comprehended by the reason, so that the consideration
of all the things which are of doctrine is from the rational. Yet that
the doctrine of faith is not from a rational but from a celestial
origin, is taught in the internal sense in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2511.">2511.</span></span>

And took Sarah. That this signifies the affection of consulting the
rational, is evident from the signification of Sarah as a "sister," as
being rational truth (see n. 2508); and also from the signification of
"taking" her, as being from affection toward her; thus, in the internal
sense, from the affection of consulting the rational. The things
contained in this verse involve the Lord's first thought respecting the
doctrine of faith, as to whether it would be well to consult the
rational or not. The reason why the first thought was of such a
character is that the Lord progressed according to all Divine order; and
whatever was of the human into which He was born, and which He derived
from the mother, must necessarily be put off in order that He might put
on the Divine; thus also this human thought, namely, as to whether the
rational was to be consulted in regard to the doctrinal things of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2512.">2512.</span></span>

Verse 3. And God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him,
Behold, thou wilt die because of the woman whom thou hast taken, for she
is married to a husband. "God came to Abimelech," signifies the Lord's
perception concerning the doctrine of faith; "in a dream by night,"
signifies that it was obscure; "and said to him," signifies thought
thence; "Behold, thou wilt die because of the woman," signifies that the
doctrine of faith would be null and void if the rational were consulted
in regard to its contents; "for she is married to a husband," signifies
that the doctrine of true faith, and the things therein, are conjoined
with the celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2513.">2513.</span></span>

God came to Abimelech. That this signifies the Lord's perception
concerning the doctrine of faith, is evident from the signification of
"God coming," and from the signification of "Abimelech." That "God
coming" signifies to perceive, is evident, for perception is nothing
else than the Divine advent or influx into the intellectual faculty.
(That "Abimelech" signifies the doctrine of faith was shown above, n.
2504, 2509, 2510.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2514.">2514.</span></span>

In a dream by night. That this signifies that the perception was
obscure, is evident from the signification of a "dream," and likewise of
"night." A "dream," when perception is treated of, signifies something
obscure in comparison with wakefulness; and still more when it is said
"a dream by night." The Lord's first perception is called obscure,
because it was in the human that He was to put off, and the shades of
which He was to disperse. The Lord's perception, although from the
Divine, was yet in the human, which is such that it does not immediately
receive the light itself, but gradually as the shades which are there
are dispersed. That He brought Himself into what was less obscure in
regard to the doctrine of faith, is signified by "God coming again to
Abimelech in a dream," as declared in verse 6, where there is no mention
of "night;" and that He afterwards came into clear perception is
signified in verse 8 by the words, "Abimelech rose early in the
morning."

<span class="margnote"><span id="2515.">2515.</span></span>

And said to him. That this signifies thought therefrom, namely, from the
perception, is evident from the signification of "saying," as being to
perceive, and also to think (as shown in n. 2506). As it is here said
that there was thought from the perception, it may be well to state in a
few words how the case is with thought. There are thoughts from
perception; thoughts from conscience; and thoughts from no conscience.
Thoughts from perception exist only with the celestial, that is, with
those who are in love to the Lord; such thought is the most internal
that exists with man; and it exists with the celestial angels in heaven,
for it is perception from the Lord by which and from which their thought
exists; and to think contrary to perception is impossible. Thoughts from
conscience are lower, and exist with the spiritual, that is, with those
who are in the good of charity and faith as to life and as to doctrine.
Moreover with these persons to think contrary to conscience is
impossible; for this would be to think against the good and truth which
are dictated to them from the Lord through conscience. \[2\] But
thoughts from no conscience exist with those who do not suffer
themselves to be inwardly directed by what is good and true, but only by
what is evil and false; that is, not by the Lord, but by themselves.
Such persons believe that they inwardly think just as do those who think
from conscience and perception, for the reason that they do not know
what conscience is, still less perception; but the difference is as
great as is that between hell and heaven. They who think without
conscience think from any cupidities and phantasies whatever; thus from
hell; and when it seems otherwise, it is from external decorum for the
sake of reputation. But they who think from conscience think from the
affections of good and truth; thus from heaven. But as regards the
Lord's thought, it transcended all human understanding, for it was
immediately from the Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2516.">2516.</span></span>

Behold, thou wilt die because of the woman. That this signifies that the
doctrine of faith would become null and void if the rational were
consulted as to its contents, is evident from the signification of
"Abimelech," who is here addressed, as being the doctrine of faith; from
the signification of "dying," as being to become null and void; and from
the signification of a "sister," who is here called "the woman," as
being the rational (see n. 2508). Hence now by "Abimelech dying because
of the woman" is signified that the doctrine of faith would become null
and void if the rational were consulted. \[2\] The reason why there is
no doctrine of faith from the rational, is that the rational is in
appearances of good and truth, which appearances are not in themselves
truths (as before shown, n. 2053, 2196, 2203, 2209). Moreover the
rational has under it fallacies which are from external sensuous things
confirmed by memory-knowledges, which induce obscurity in these
appearances of truth. The rational for the most part is merely human, as
also is evident from its birth; and this is why nothing doctrinal of
faith can begin from it, and still less be constructed from it; but must
be from the Lord's Divine Itself and Divine Human. This is its origin,
and indeed so entirely that the Lord is doctrine itself; on which
account also in the Word He is called the Word, the Truth, the Light,
the Way, the Door; and (what is an arcanum) all doctrine is from the
Divine good and the Divine truth, and has in itself the heavenly
marriage. Doctrine that has not this in it is not the genuine doctrine
of faith. Hence it is that in all the particulars of the Word (the
source of doctrine) there is an image of a marriage (see n. 683, 793,
801). \[3\] In the literal or external sense of the Word the doctrine of
faith does indeed appear as if it possessed much from the rational, and
even from the natural; but this is because the Word is for man, and has
been in this manner accommodated to him; but still in itself it is
spiritual from a celestial origin, that is, from Divine truth conjoined
with Divine good. That doctrine would become null and void if as to its
contents the rational were consulted, will be illustrated by examples in
what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2517.">2517.</span></span>

For she is married to a husband. That this signifies that the doctrine
of true faith is spiritual, and that its contents are conjoined with the
celestial, is evident from the signification of being "married to a
husband." "Husband," when mentioned in the Word, signifies good, and
"wife" then signifies truth. It is otherwise when the husband is called
the "man;" for then "man" signifies truth, and "wife" good (see n. 915,
and elsewhere). Here therefore her being "married to a husband"
signifies that truth is conjoined with good, and in such a manner that
the truth also is good. The same is also evident from the signification
of "Sarah as a wife," as being spiritual truth, and of "Abraham," as
being celestial good, both Divine (see n. 2501, 2507). And as "Sarah"
signifies Divine spiritual truth, the doctrine itself of true faith is
also meant by "Sarah a wife;" for the doctrine is from truths. It is
plain from this that her being "married to a husband" means that the
doctrine of true faith is spiritual, and that its contents are conjoined
with the celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2518.">2518.</span></span>

Verse 4. And Abimelech had not come near her; and he said, Lord, wilt
Thou slay also a righteous nation? "Abimelech had not come near her,"
signifies that in the doctrine of faith rational truth had not been
consulted in any manner; "and he said, Lord, wilt Thou slay also a
righteous nation?" signifies whether would the good and truth of
doctrine be extinguished.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2519.">2519.</span></span>

Abimelech had not come near her. That this signifies that in the
doctrine of faith rational truth had not been consulted in any manner,
is evident from the signification of "Abimelech," as being the doctrine
of faith (see n. 2504, 2509, 2510); and from the signification of
"coming near her," namely to Sarah as a sister, as being to touch, or in
any manner to consult rational truth, which is a "sister" (n. 1495,
2508). The reason why the rational had not been consulted in any manner,
is that which has been stated before, namely, that the doctrinal things
of faith are in their entirety from the Divine, which is infinitely
above the human rational. It is from the Divine that the rational
receives its good and its truth. The Divine can enter into the rational,
but not the rational into the Divine; as the soul can enter into the
body, and form it, but not the body into the soul; or as light can enter
into shade, and modify it variously into colors; but not shade into
light. But as it appears at first as if the rational ought to be
present, because the rational is the very thing that receives the
doctrine, it is here shown that the first subject of thought was,
whether it also should not be consulted at the same time. But the Lord
revealed and answered to Himself that doctrine would thus become null
and void; and therefore the rational was not consulted; which is here
signified by "Abimelech not coming near her."

<span class="margnote"><span id="2520.">2520.</span></span>

And he said, Lord, wilt Thou slay also a righteous nation? That this
signifies whether would the good and truth be extinguished, is evident
from the signification of "nation," as being good (see n. 1259, 1260,
1416); and as it is predicated of the nation of Abimelech, by whom is
signified the doctrine of faith, by a "righteous nation" is here
signified both good and truth; for both are of doctrine. \[2\] That this
was said from the zeal of affection or of love toward the whole human
race, is manifest. This love directed the Lord's thoughts while He was
still in the maternal human; and although He perceived from the Divine
that the doctrine of faith was from a celestial origin only,
nevertheless in order that the human race might be provided for, which
does not receive anything of which it cannot have some idea from its
rational, it is therefore said, " Wilt Thou slay also a righteous
nation?" by which is signified whether would the good and truth of
doctrine be extinguished. That man does not receive anything of which he
cannot have some idea from his rational, is evident from the ideas which
man cherishes respecting Divine arcana. Some idea from worldly things or
from things analogous to these always adheres to them, by which they are
retained in the memory, and by which they are reproduced in the thought;
for without an idea from worldly things man can think nothing at all. If
therefore truths from a Divine origin were set forth naked, they would
never be received, but would completely transcend man's comprehension,
and therefore his belief, and most especially with those who are in
external worship. \[3\] To illustrate this take the following examples:
The Divine Itself can be in nothing but the Divine, thus in nothing but
the Lord's Divine Human, and with man through this. If the rational were
consulted it would say that the Divine Itself can be in the human of
everyone. Again: Nothing is holy which does not proceed from the Lord,
thus from the Divine, which is one. If the rational were consulted it
would say that there may be what is holy from other sources also. \[4\]
Again: Man does not live, nor do good, nor believe truth, from himself,
nay, does not even think from himself; but the good and truth are from
the Lord, while the evil and falsity are from hell; and what is more,
hell, that is, they who are in hell, do not think from themselves, but
receive the Lord's good and truth in the manner indicated. If the
rational were consulted it would reject this, because it does not
comprehend it. In like manner it would reject the truth that no one is
rewarded on account of doing what is good and teaching what is true; and
that the external contributes nothing, but only the internal insofar as
there is the affection of good in doing what is good, and insofar as
there is from that the affection of truth in teaching what is true, and
this not from self. And so in a thousand other instances. \[5\] It is
because the human rational is of such a character that the Word has
spoken in accordance with man's apprehension, and also in accordance
with his genius. This therefore is the reason why the internal sense of
the Word is different from its literal sense; which is very evident in
the Word of the Old Testament, where most things have been written in
accordance with the apprehension and genius of the people who then
lived. On this account almost nothing is said concerning the life after
death, salvation, and the internal man. For the Jewish and Israelitish
people with whom the church then was, were of such a character that if
these things had been disclosed they would not only not have understood
them, but would also have derided them. And it would have been the same
if it had been disclosed to them that the Messiah or Christ was to come
to eternally save their souls: this also they would have rejected as a
matter of no moment; as is also evident from the same nation at the
present day; for if what is internal or spiritual is mentioned in their
presence even now, and it is said that the Messiah will not be the
greatest king on the earth, they deride it. \[6\] This is why the Lord
sometimes spoke like the Prophets, and taught the rest of what He had to
say by parables, as He Himself has declared in Matthew: Jesus said, I
speak unto them by parables, because seeing they see not, and hearing
they hear not, neither do they understand (Matt. 13:13). By "those who
see and hear" are meant those within the church who although they see
and hear, still do not understand. Also in John: He hath blinded their
eyes, and hardened their heart, lest they should see with their eyes,
and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should
heal them (John 12:40). Their being "converted" and "healed" implies
that nevertheless they would afterwards reject, and so would profane,
which involves eternal condemnation (see n. 301-303, 582, 1008, 1010,
1059, 1327, 1328, 2051, 2426). Nevertheless the Lord has disclosed the
interior things of the Word in many places, but only for the wise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2521.">2521.</span></span>

Verse 5. Said he not himself unto me, She is my sister? And she herself
also said, He is my brother: in the uprightness of my heart and in the
blamelessness of my hands have I done this. "Said he not himself unto
me," signifies exculpation for having so thought; "she is my sister,"
signifies that it was the rational which should be consulted; "and she
herself also said, He is my brother," signifies that the rational itself
so dictated that celestial good should be adjoined to it; "in the
uprightness of my heart," signifies that it was so thought from
innocence and simple good; "and in the blamelessness of my hands have I
done this," signifies from the affection of truth, and so with all
ability.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2522.">2522.</span></span>

Said he not himself unto me. That this signifies exculpation for having
so thought, is evident from the particulars in this verse, as also from
the signification of "saying," as being to think (see n. 2506).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2523.">2523.</span></span>

She is my sister. That this signifies that it was the rational which
should be consulted (that is, that he so thought), is evident from the
signification of "sister" in this chapter as being rational truth (see
n. 1495, 2508). In the internal sense of the Word the Lord's whole life
is described, such as it was to be in the world, even as to the
perceptions and thoughts, for these were foreseen and provided because
from the Divine; this being done for the additional reason that all
these things might be set forth at that time as present to the angels,
who perceive the Word according to the internal sense; and that so the
Lord might be before them, and at the same time how by successive steps
He put off the human, and put on the Divine. Unless these things had
been as if present to the angels, through the Word, and also through all
the rites in the Jewish Church, the Lord would have been obliged to come
into the world immediately after the fall of the Most Ancient Church,
which is called Man or Adam; for there was an immediate prophecy of the
Lord's advent (Gen. 3:15); and what is more, the human race of that time
could not otherwise have been saved. \[2\] As regards the Lord's life
itself, it was a continual progression of the Human to the Divine, even
to absolute union (as already frequently stated), for in order that He
might combat with the hells and overcome them, He must needs do it from
the Human; for there is no combat with the hells from the Divine. It
therefore pleased Him to put on the human like another man, to be an
infant like another, to grow up into knowledges \[in scientias et in
cognitiones\], which things are represented by Abraham's sojourning in
Egypt (chapter 12), and now in Gerar; thus it pleased Him to cultivate
the rational as another man, and in this way to disperse its shade, and
bring it into light, and this from His own power. That the Lord's
progression from the Human to the Divine was of this nature, can be
denied by no one if he only considers that He was a little child, and
learned to talk like one; and so on. But there was this difference: that
the Divine Itself was in Him, seeing that He was conceived of Jehovah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2524.">2524.</span></span>

And she herself also said, He is my brother. That this signifies that
the rational itself dictated that celestial good should be adjoined to
it, is evident from the signification of a "sister" (here meant by "she
herself") as being the rational (n. 1495, 2508); and from the
signification of a "brother," as being the good of truth (n. 367, 2508).
For the case herein is as follows: Divine good and Divine truth are
united to each other as if by marriage; for thence comes the heavenly
marriage, and thence comes marriage love also, even down to lower
nature. But the good and truth of the rational are not conjoined with
each other as by marriage, but by consanguinity, like brother and
sister; since the rational as to truth is conceived from the influx of
Divine good into the affection of knowledges \[scientiarum et
cognitionum\] (see n. 1895, 1902, 1910); and the good of the rational,
through the influx of Divine good into that truth, which then becomes
the good itself of charity, which is the "brother" of faith, or what is
the same, of truth (n. 367). \[2\] But in regard to the good and truth
of the rational, the procuring of this takes place in such a way that
its good is from Divine good, whereas its truth is not from Divine
truth; for the truth of the rational is procured by means of knowledges
\[scientias et cognitiones\], which are insinuated through the external
and internal senses, thus by an external way. Hence it is that there
adhere to its truths many fallacies from the senses, which cause the
truths not to be truths; nevertheless when Divine good flows into them,
and conceives them, they then appear as truths, and are acknowledged as
truths, although they are nothing but appearances of truth. The good
itself is then modified in these truths according to the shades there,
and becomes in quality like the truth. This is one arcanum which lies
hidden in these words, that the rational thus dictated that celestial
good should be adjoined to it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2525.">2525.</span></span>

In the uprightness of my heart. That this signifies that it was so
thought from innocence and simple good, is evident from the
signification of "uprightness," and of "heart." In the original tongue
"uprightness" is expressed by a word which signifies also integrity and
perfection, and also simplicity; moreover "heart" signifies love and
charity, which are of good, as is well known. Hence it is that "from the
uprightness of the heart" means from innocence and simple good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2526.">2526.</span></span>

And in the blamelessness of my hands have I done this. That this
signifies from the affection of truth, and so from all ability, is
evident from the signification of "blamelessness," and also of "hands."
In the original language "blamelessness" is expressed by a word which
also means cleanness and purity. "Hands" are predicated of truth, and
signify power, thus ability (n. 878). That "I have done this from the
uprightness of my heart and the blamelessness of my hands" signifies
that it was so thought from innocence and simple good, and from the
affection of truth, and thus from all ability, is because good is good
from innocence; and truth is truth from good; and when these are in
their order, there is then all ability. That these things are involved
in the words is plain; for there is not an upright, sound, or perfect
heart (by which good is signified) unless innocence be in the good, as
just said; from this it becomes simple good. And there are not
blameless, clean, or pure hands (which are predicated of truths) unless
good be in the truths, as also just said; that is, unless there be the
affection of truth. When the thought is from these, it is also from all
ability or power; which is likewise signified by "hands" (n. 878).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2527.">2527.</span></span>

Verse 6. And God said unto him in the dream, Yea, I know that in the
uprightness of thy heart thou hast done this; and I also withheld thee
from sinning against Me; therefore I did not suffer thee to touch her.
"God said unto him in the dream," signifies perception less obscure;
"Yea, I know that in the uprightness of thy heart thou hast done this,"
signifies here as before that it was so thought from innocence and from
simple good; thus that there was no fault; "and I also withheld thee
from sinning against Me," signifies that no harm resulted; "therefore I
did not suffer thee to touch her," signifies that the rational was not
at all consulted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2528.">2528.</span></span>

God said unto him in the dream. That this signifies perception less
obscure, is evident from what was said and explained above (n. 2514).
The name "God" is used in this chapter, but not "Jehovah," except in the
last verse, for the reason that spiritual things are treated of, that
is, the doctrinal things of faith. When this is the subject He is called
"God;" but when celestial things, or love and charity, are treated of,
He is then called "Jehovah" (see n. 709, 732, 2001).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2529.">2529.</span></span>

Yea, I know that in the uprightness of thy heart thou hast done this.
That this signifies that it was so thought from innocence and from
simple good, is evident from what was said above (n. 2525, 2526), where
are the same words. That it is not also said, as above, "in the
blamelessness of thy hands," is for the hidden reason that in the
affection of truth (which is signified by the "blamelessness of the
hands") there was something of the human; for truth was insinuated into
the Lord also through the human of His birth, but good from the Divine
alone; as is evident from the coming forth \[existentia\] of the
rational as to good and as to truth (n. 2524).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2530.">2530.</span></span>

And I also withheld thee from sinning against Me. That this signifies
that no harm resulted, that is, that in the doctrine of faith the
rational was not consulted (as also follows presently) is evident
without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2531.">2531.</span></span>

Therefore I did not suffer thee to touch her. That this signifies that
the rational was not at all consulted, is evident from the signification
of "suffering to touch," as being to consult (as is also meant by
"coming near her" in verse 4, n. 2519); and from the signification of
"Sarah as a sister," who is here meant, as being the rational (see n.
1495, 2508). \[2\] That it may be further known how the case is with the
doctrine of faith, as being spiritual from a celestial origin, be it
known that it is Divine truth from Divine good, and thus wholly Divine.
What is Divine is incomprehensible, because above all understanding,
even the angelic; but still this Divine, which in itself is
incomprehensible, can flow in through the Lord's Divine Human into man's
rational; and when it flows into his rational, it is there received
according to the truths which are therein; thus variously, and not with
one as with another. Insofar therefore as the truths with a man are more
genuine, so far the Divine which flows in is received more perfectly,
and so far the man's understanding is enlightened. \[3\] In the Lord's
Word are Truths themselves; but in its literal sense are truths which
are accommodated to the apprehension of those who are in external
worship; whereas in its internal sense are truths accommodated to those
who are internal men; that is, to those who are angelic as to doctrine
and at the same time as to life. Their rational is enlightened therefrom
to such a degree that their enlightenment is compared to the brightness
of the stars and the sun (Dan. 12:3; Matt. 13:43). Hence it is plain how
important it is that interior truths be known and received. These truths
may indeed be known, but by no means received, except by those who have
love to the Lord, or faith in Him; for as the Lord is the Divine good,
so He is the Divine truth; consequently He is doctrine itself, since
whatever is in the doctrine of true faith looks to the Lord, and looks
also to the heavenly kingdom and the church, and to all things of the
heavenly kingdom and the church. But all these are His, and are the
intermediate ends through which the last end, that is, the Lord, is
regarded. \[4\] That the Lord is doctrine itself as to truth and good,
and thus that it is He who alone is regarded in doctrine, He teaches
John: Jesus said, I am the way, the Truth, and the Life (John 14:6, 7);
where the "Way" is doctrine, the "Truth" all that is of doctrine, and
the "Life" the good itself which is the life of the truth. And that love
to Him or faith in Him is what receives, He also teaches in John: His
own received Him not; but as many as received Him, to them gave He power
to be the sons of God, even to them that believe on His name who were
born, not of bloods, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God (John 1:11-13). Those are "born of God" who are in love
and thence in faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2532.">2532.</span></span>

Verse 7. And now restore the man's wife; for he is a prophet, and shall
pray for thee, and thou shalt live; and if thou restore her not, know
thou that dying thou shalt die, thou and all that are thine. "And now
restore the man's wife," signifies that he should render up the
spiritual truth of doctrine without taint from the rational; "for he is
a prophet," signifies that thus it should be taught; "and he shall pray
for thee," signifies that it will thus be revealed; "and thou shalt
live," signifies that thus doctrine will have life; "and if thou restore
her not," signifies here as before that if he should not render up the
spiritual truth of doctrine without taint from the rational; "know thou
that dying thou shalt die," signifies there will be no doctrine of truth
and good; "and all that are thine," signifies all things that belong to
it together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2533.">2533.</span></span>

And now restore the man's wife. That this signifies that he should
render up the spiritual truth of doctrine without taint from the
rational, is evident from the signification of "wife," as being
spiritual truth (see n. 2507, 2510); and from the signification of the
"man," as being doctrine itself; for Abraham (by whom the Lord in that
state is represented), when called a "man," signifies celestial truth,
which is the same as doctrine from a celestial origin; for in the
internal sense a "man" is the intellectual (see n. 158, 265, 749, 915,
1007, 2517). Hence it is evident that to "restore the man's wife" is to
render up the spiritual truth of doctrine without taint. That it means
without taint from the rational, is because Abimelech, who was to
restore her, signifies doctrine that has regard to rational things, or
what is the same, the rational things of doctrine (n. 2510). \[2\] It
was said above that although the doctrine of faith is in itself Divine,
and therefore above all human and even angelic comprehension, it has
nevertheless been dictated in the Word according to man's comprehension,
in a rational manner. The case herein is the same as it is with a parent
who is teaching his little boys and girls: when he is teaching, he sets
forth everything in accordance with their genius, although he himself
thinks from what is more interior or higher; otherwise it would be
teaching without their learning, or like casting seed upon a rock. The
case is also the same with the angels who in the other life instruct the
simple in heart: although these angels are in celestial and spiritual
wisdom, yet they do not hold themselves above the comprehension of those
whom they teach, but speak in simplicity with them, yet rising by
degrees as these are instructed; for if they were to speak from angelic
wisdom, the simple would comprehend nothing at all, and thus would not
be led to the truths and goods of faith. The case would be the same if
the Lord had not taught in the Word in accordance with man's
comprehension, in a rational manner. Nevertheless in its internal sense
the Word is elevated to the angelic understanding; and yet that sense,
in its highest elevation in which it is perceived by the angels, is
infinitely below the Divine. It is hence manifest what the Word is in
its origin, and thus in itself; and that it thus everywhere involves
more things than the whole heaven is capable of comprehending, even as
to a small part, although in the letter it appears so unimportant and so
rude. \[3\] That the Lord is the Word, because the Word is from Him and
He is in the Word, is evident in John: In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and God was the Word; in Him was life, and
the life was the light of men; the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among
us; and we saw His glory, the glory as of the Only-begotten of the
Father, full of grace and truth (John 1:1, 4, 14; see also Rev. 19:11,
13, 16). And as the Lord is the Word, He is also doctrine; for there is
no other doctrine which is itself Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2534.">2534.</span></span>

For he is a prophet. That this signifies that thus it would be taught,
is evident from the signification of a "prophet." In the Word we
frequently read of a "prophet;" and in the sense of the letter "prophet"
signifies those to whom revelation is made, also abstractedly,
revelation itself; but in the internal sense a "prophet" signifies one
who teaches, and also abstractedly doctrine itself; and as the Lord (as
before said) is doctrine itself, that is, the Word which teaches, He is
called a "Prophet," as in Moses: A Prophet from the midst of thee, of
thy brethren, like unto me, will Jehovah thy God raise up; unto Him
shall ye be obedient (Deut. 18:15, 18). It is said "like unto me,"
because the Lord was represented by Moses, as well as by Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, David, and many more; and because they expected Him it is said in
John: The men, seeing the sign which Jesus did, said, This is of a truth
that Prophet that should come into the world (John 6:14). \[2\] It is
because the Lord is the "Prophet" in the highest sense, and that "the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Rev. 19:10), that in the
internal sense of the Word a "prophet" signifies one who teaches, and
also abstractedly, doctrine; which is plainly evident from the following
passages. In Luke: Thou child shalt be called the prophet of the Highest
(Luke 1:76). This was said by Zacharias of his son John the Baptist, who
himself said that he was not the prophet, but one preparing the way by
teaching and preaching concerning the Lord's coming: They asked him,
What art thou? Art thou Elias? But he said, I am not. Art thou that
prophet? he answered, No. They said therefore unto him, Who art thou? he
said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the
way of the Lord (John 1:21-23). \[3\] In Matthew: Many will say in that
day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied by Thy name? (Matt. 7:22), where
it is manifest that to "prophesy" is to teach. In John: Thou must
prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings
(Rev. 10:11); to "prophesy" denotes to teach; and what "peoples,
nations, tongues, and kings" mean, has been stated and shown before. In
the same: The nations shall trample the holy city forty-two months; but
I will give to My two witnesses that they shall prophesy a thousand two
hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth (Rev. 11:2-3); where also to
"prophesy" denotes to teach. In Moses: Jehovah said unto Moses, See, I
have made thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy
prophet (Exod. 7:1); where "prophet" denotes the one who should teach or
speak what Moses would say. In Joel: I will pour out My spirit upon all
flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy (Joel 2:28);
"shall prophesy" denotes shall teach. \[4\] In Isaiah: Jehovah hath
poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes;
the prophets and your heads, the seers, hath He covered; the vision of
all hath become like the words of a sealed book, which they give to him
that knoweth letters, saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he saith, I
cannot, for it is sealed (Isa. 29:10-11); where by "prophets" are meant
those who teach truth; and by "seers" those who see truth; who are said
to be "covered" when they know and see nothing of the truth. As in
ancient times those who taught were called "prophets," they were
therefore called also "seers," because to "see" signifies to understand
(n. 2150, 2325; that they were called "seers" may be seen 1 Sam. 9:9; 2
Sam. 24:11). They were also called "men of God," from the signification
of "man" (n. 158, 265, 749, 915, 1007, 2517; that they were called "men
of God," 2 Kings 1:9-16; 4:7, 9, 16, 21-22, 25, 27, 40, 42; 5:8, 14, 20;
13:19; 23:16-17). \[5\] That in the internal sense by "prophets" are
signified those who teach, is evident in Jeremiah in the whole of
chapter 23, and in Ezekiel in the whole of chapter 13, where "prophets"
are specifically treated of; as also in many other places where they are
mentioned. Hence also by "false prophets" are signified those who teach
falsities; as in Matthew: In the consummation of the age many false
prophets shall arise, and shall mislead many. There shall arise false
Christs and false prophets, and shall show great signs, and shall
mislead if possible even the elect (Matt. 24:11, 24); where by "false
prophets" no others are signified. In like manner by the "false prophet"
in Rev. 16:13; 19:20; 20:10. \[6\] This shows how greatly the internal
sense of the Word is obscured by the ideas that have been formed from
the representatives of the Jewish Church; for whenever a "prophet" is
mentioned in the Word, there at once occurs the idea of prophets such as
they were at that time; which idea is a great obstacle to perceiving
what is signified by them. Yet the wiser anyone is, the more easily is
the idea gathered from those representatives removed; as for example
where the "temple" is mentioned, they who think more wisely do not
perceive the temple at Jerusalem, but the Temple of the Lord; where
"Mount Zion," or "Zion," is mentioned, they do not perceive that
mountain at Jerusalem, but the Lord's kingdom; and where "Jerusalem" is
mentioned, they do not perceive the city that was in the tribes of
Benjamin and Judah, but the holy and heavenly Jerusalem.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2535.">2535.</span></span>

He shall pray for thee. That this signifies that it will thus be
revealed, is evident from the signification of "praying." Prayer,
regarded in itself, is speech with God, and some internal view at the
time of the matters of the prayer, to which there answers something like
an influx into the perception or thought of the mind, so that there is a
certain opening of the man's interiors toward God; but this with a
difference according to the man's state, and according to the essence of
the subject of the prayer. If the man prays from love and faith, and for
only heavenly and spiritual things, there then comes forth in the prayer
something like a revelation (which is manifested in the affection of him
that prays) as to hope, consolation, or a certain inward joy. It is from
this that to "pray" signifies in the internal sense to be revealed.
Still more is this the case here, where praying is predicated of a
prophet, by whom is meant the Lord, whose prayer was nothing else than
internal speech with the Divine, and at the same time revelation. That
there was revelation is evident in Luke: It came to pass when Jesus was
baptized, and prayed, that the heaven was opened (Luke 3:21). In the
same: It came to pass that He took Peter, James, and John, and went up
into the mountain to pray; and as He prayed, the fashion of His
countenance was altered, and His raiment became white and glistening
(Luke 9:28-29). In John: When He prayed, saying, Father glorify Thy
name, then came there a voice from heaven: I have both glorified, and
will glorify again (John 12:27-28); where it is plain that the Lord's
"praying" was speech with the Divine, and revelation at the same time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2536.">2536.</span></span>

And thou shalt live. That this signifies that thus doctrine will have
life, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2537.">2537.</span></span>

And if thou restore her not. That this signifies that if spiritual truth
were not rendered up without taint from the rational, is evident from
what has been said just above (n. 2533), where are the same words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2538.">2538.</span></span>

Know thou that dying thou shalt die. That this signifies that there will
be no doctrine of truth and good, is also evident from what was said
above (n. 2516); where also the words are similar. In like manner that
"all that are thine" signifies all the things that are of it, namely, of
the doctrine, together. That in the internal sense "all" signifies
everything or all things, is because in the Word persons signify actual
things; and thus "all that belonged to Abimelech" signifies everything
or all things that are of doctrine. From all this then it is evident
what is the internal sense of the words in this verse; namely, that He
should render up the spiritual truth of doctrine without taint from the
rational, and that thereby it would be taught and revealed to Him, and
thus doctrine would have life; but that if He should not render up
spiritual truth without taint from the rational, the doctrine of truth
and good would become null and void in respect to each and all things of
it. \[2\] In regard to doctrine the case is this: Insofar as there is
what is human (that is, what is of sense, of memory-knowledge, and of
the rational) as the ground of belief, so far the doctrine is null and
void. But insofar as what is of sense, of memory-knowledge, and of the
rational is removed, that is, insofar as doctrine is believed without
these things, so far doctrine lives; for so far the Divine flows in. It
is that which is proper to the human that hinders the influx and the
reception. But it is one thing to believe from what is of the rational,
of memory-knowledge, and of sense (that is, to consult such things in
order to believe), and quite another thing to confirm and corroborate by
means of things rational, of memory-knowledge, and of sense, that which
is believed. What the difference is will be made plain in what follows;
for these things also are treated of in this chapter in the internal
sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2539.">2539.</span></span>

Verse 8. And Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his
servants, and spoke all these words in their ears; and the men feared
greatly. "Abimelech rose early in the morning," signifies clear
perception, and the light of confirmation from celestial good; "and
called all his servants," signifies things rational and of
memory-knowledge; "and spoke all these words in their ears," signifies
an exhortation to the things thence derived that confirm, even until
they should become obedient; "and the men feared greatly," signifies
until they were also averse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2540.">2540.</span></span>

Abimelech rose early in the morning. That this signifies clear
perception, and the light of confirmation from celestial good, is
evident from the signification of "rising in the morning," also of
"Abimelech," and also of "early." What "morning" signifies has been
shown above (n. 2333, 2405): that it is here clear perception is
manifest in itself, as well as from the series; that the perception was
at first obscure (n. 2513, 2514); and that afterwards it was less
obscure (n. 2528). That "Abimelech" signifies the doctrine of faith
looking to rational things, may be seen above (n. 2509, 2510); and what
"early" signifies is manifest from the signification of "morning." As it
is here said that he "rose early in the morning," this not only
signifies clear perception, but also the light of confirmation from
celestial good; for it is celestial good from which comes the confirming
light of truth; all of which shows that this is the signification. \[2\]
The reason why the perception which the Lord had when in the Human, and
His thought concerning what is rational in the doctrine of faith, are so
much treated of in the internal sense, is that which has been stated
above; as well as that it is angelic to think with distinctiveness of
various things concerning the Lord's life in the world, and how He put
off the human rational, and made the rational Divine from His own power;
and at the same time concerning the doctrine of charity and faith, such
as it is when the rational mixes itself with it; besides many more
things dependent on these, which are interior things of the church and
of man. To the man whose mind and heart are set upon worldly and
corporeal things, these things appear as unimportant, and perchance as
of no advantage to him; yet to the angels, whose minds and hearts are
set upon celestial and spiritual things, these same things are precious;
and their ideas and perceptions respecting them are ineffable. This
shows that very many things which seem unimportant to man, because they
transcend his comprehension, are held in the highest estimation by the
angels, because they enter into the light of their wisdom; and on the
other hand, things that are most highly esteemed by man, because they
are of the world, and therefore come within his comprehension, are
unimportant to the angels, for they pass outside of the light of their
wisdom. And such is the case with the internal sense of the Word,
relatively to angels and to men, in many places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2541.">2541.</span></span>

And called all his servants. That this signifies rational things and
memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification in the Word of
"servants" (concerning which hereafter at verse 14, n. 2567). In a man
who is in the Lord's kingdom, or who is the Lord's kingdom, there are
celestial things, spiritual things, rational things, memory-knowledges,
and things of sense; and these are in subordination to one another.
Celestial and spiritual things hold the first place, and are the Lord's;
to these rational things are subordinate, and are subservient; to these
again memory-knowledges are subordinate and subservient; and lastly the
things of sense are subordinate and subservient to these, that is to
memory-knowledges. The things which are subservient, or which serve, are
relatively servants, and in the Word are called "servants." That there
is such a subordination, the man who thinks only from sense and
memory-knowledge is ignorant; and he who knows anything of them
nevertheless has a most obscure idea, because he is still in corporeal
things; but the angels have a most distinct idea; for thousands, nay
myriads, of ideas that to the angels are distinct, present nothing but a
single obscure idea to men. For example, in regard to Abimelech calling
his servants and speaking all the words in their ears, and the men
fearing greatly, the angels perceive deeper arcana than man can possibly
apprehend, or can even believe-namely, how the Lord reduced rational
things and memory-knowledges to obedience; and indeed in such manner
that He reduced to obedience not the rational things and
memory-knowledges themselves, but the affections that rose up against
the celestial and spiritual things of doctrine, for on the subjugation
of these the rational things and memory-knowledges were reduced to
obedience, and at the same time into order. To the angels, these are
among the most common things; but to man they are perchance among those
which are most obscure or unintelligible to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2542.">2542.</span></span>

And spoke all these words in their ears. That this signifies an
exhortation to the things thence derived that confirm, even until they
should become obedient, is evident from the series in the internal
sense, as well as from the signification of "ears." From the series:
There are many confirmatory things that support whatever the rational
acknowledges; for it is precisely from these confirmatory things that
its acknowledgment comes; and therefore it is that when rational things
are being reduced to obedience exhortation is made to the things that
confirm; for these are ever pressing in, and as it were rising up. From
the signification of "ears:" In the internal sense of the Word "ears"
signify obedience, by reason of the correspondence between hearing and
obeying; which correspondence is moreover latent in the very word
"hear," and still more in "hearken;" the origin of which correspondence
is from the other life, where they who are willing and obedient belong
to the province of the ear, and indeed correspond to the hearing itself;
which is an arcanum not yet known. But these things will become more
clearly manifest when in what follows, of the Lord's Divine mercy,
correspondence will be treated of. That "ears" have this signification
is evident from many passages in the Word. For the present we may adduce
a single passage from Isaiah: Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest peradventure they see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and their heart should
understand (Isa. 6:10). Here to "see with the eyes" is to understand;
and to "hear with the ears" is to perceive with affection, consequently
to obey. And nothing else is signified where the Lord says, "He that
hath an ear to hear, let him hear" (Matt. 11:15, 13:9, 43; Luke 8:8;
14:35).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2543.">2543.</span></span>

The men feared greatly. That this signifies even until they should
become averse, is evident from the signification here of "fearing;" and
from the signification of the "men." "Fearing," or "fear," like all
other emotions, though in appearance simple, involves in itself many
things, namely, in worldly matters the loss of life, of reputation, of
honor, and of gain; and in heavenly matters the loss of what is good and
true, and of the life thence derived. As fear involves these things it
also involves aversion to whatever endeavors to destroy them; and this
the more in proportion as the man is in the affection of what is good
and true. To this very affection aversion is the opposite or contrary,
and therefore by "fearing" is here signified to become averse. How great
was the Lord's aversion is evident from the zeal with which the things
in the next verse are said; which zeal was for doctrine, that it might
be free from contamination by anything rational or by anything of
memory-knowledge. (That "men" signify rational things and
memory-knowledges, or all intellectual things whatever, has been shown
above, n. 158, 265, 749, 915, 1007.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2544.">2544.</span></span>

Verse 9. And Abimelech called Abraham and said unto him, What hast thou
done unto us? And wherein have I sinned against thee that thou hast
brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? Thou hast done unto me
deeds that ought not to be done. "Abimelech called Abraham and said unto
him," signifies the Lord's thought from the doctrine of faith; "what
hast thou done unto us? And wherein have I sinned against thee?"
signifies self-conviction for having so thought; "that thou hast brought
on me and on my kingdom a great sin," signifies that thereby the
doctrine of faith and all doctrinal things would be in danger; "thou
hast done unto me deeds that ought not to be done," signifies horror.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2545.">2545.</span></span>

Abimelech called Abraham and said unto him. That this signifies the
Lord's thought from the doctrine of faith, is evident from the
representation of Abimelech, and also of Abraham, and from the
signification of "saying," which have all been explained several times.
What it is to think from the doctrine of faith cannot be explained to
the apprehension; for the perception of this can fall into angelic ideas
only; but to these it is presented in a light so great, attended with
heavenly representatives, that scarcely anything of it can be described;
as is evident when we say that the Lord's thought was from intellectual
truth, which was above that rational which He looked upon therefrom; but
that the perception from which He thought was from Divine truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2546.">2546.</span></span>

What hast thou done unto us? And wherein have I sinned against thee?
That this signifies self-conviction for having so thought, is evident
from the emotion and zeal in these words (see n. 2543), on account of
the faculties of reason and memory-knowledge desiring to rise up and
enter, and thus to have some share in the doctrine of faith, which is
Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2547.">2547.</span></span>

That thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin. That this
signifies that thereby the doctrine of faith and all doctrinal things
would be in danger, is evident from the signification of "Abimelech,"
here meant by "me," as being the doctrine of faith; and from the
signification of "kingdom," as being the truth of doctrine or that which
is doctrinal. That in the internal sense "kingdom" signifies the truths
of doctrine; and in the opposite sense, falsities of doctrine, is
evident from the Word; as in Jeremiah: He is the Former of all things,
and the scepter of His inheritance Jehovah Zebaoth is His name. Thou art
My hammer, weapons of war; and I will scatter nations in thee, and
destroy kingdoms in thee (Jer. 51:19-20), where the Lord is treated of,
who evidently will not scatter nations nor destroy kingdoms, but will
scatter and destroy the things signified by nations and kingdoms,
namely, the evils and falsities of doctrine. \[2\] In Ezekiel: Behold, I
will take the sons of Israel from among the nations whither they be
gone, and will gather them from every side, and bring them into their
own land; I will make them one nation in the land in the mountains of
Israel, and one king shall be king to them all; and they shall no more
be two nations, neither shall they any more be divided into two kingdoms
(Ezek. 37:21-22); here "Israel" denotes the spiritual church; and
"nation" the good of that church or of doctrine. (That "nations" denote
goods may be seen above, n. 1259, 1260, 1416, 1849.) "Kingdom" denotes
its truths. It is evident that something else than nations and kingdoms
is here meant by "nations and kingdoms," for it is said of the sons of
Israel or of the Israelites that they are to be "gathered and brought
back into the land," the fact being that when dispersed among the
nations they were transformed into Gentiles. \[3\] In Isaiah: I will
confound Egypt with Egypt, and they shall fight every man against his
brother, and every man against his companion, city against city, kingdom
against kingdom (Isa. 19:2), where "Egypt" denotes reasonings from
memory-knowledges concerning the truths of faith (n. 1164, 1165, 1186);
"city" denotes doctrine, here one that is heretical (n. 402, 2268,
2449); "kingdom" denotes the falsity of doctrine; so that "city against
city, and kingdom against kingdom" denotes that heresies and falsities
will fight among themselves; in like manner as is denoted by what the
Lord said in regard to the consummation of the age, in Matthew: Nation
shall rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom (Matt. 24:7);
denoting evils against evils, and falsities against falsities. \[4\]
That which Daniel prophesied in regard to the four kingdoms (chapter
2:37-46, 7:17 to the end); and concerning the kingdoms of Media and
Persia (chapter 8:20 to the end); and concerning the kingdoms of the
king of the south and the king of the north (chapter 11); and that which
John prophesied in the Revelation concerning kings and kingdoms, have no
other signification: "kingdoms" there merely mean the states of the
church in respect to truths and falsities. States of monarchs and of the
kingdoms of the earth in the sense of the letter, are in the internal
sense states of the church and of the Lord's kingdom; in which sense
there are none other than spiritual and celestial things; for regarded
in itself the Lord's Word is solely spiritual and celestial; but in
order that it may be read and apprehended by every man whatever, the
things of heaven are set forth by such things as are on earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2548.">2548.</span></span>

Thou hast done unto me deeds that ought not to be done. That this
signifies horror, is evident from the emotion in the words; as well as
from the series, namely, that the Lord was averse (n. 2543); that He
reproved Himself from zeal (n. 2546); and here that He felt horror.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2549.">2549.</span></span>

Verses 10, 11. And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou that
thou hast done this word? And Abraham said, Because I said, Surely there
is no fear of God in this place, and they will kill me on account of the
word of my wife. "Abimelech said unto Abraham," signifies further
thought from the doctrine of faith; "what sawest thou that thou hast
done this word?" signifies a looking into the cause; "Abraham said,"
signifies a perception which is an answer; "because I said surely there
is no fear of God in this place," signifies thought thence derived: that
they would have no respect for spiritual truth in the state in which
they were; "and they will kill me on account of the word of my wife,"
signifies that the celestial things of faith would thus also perish if
they were to think that spiritual truth alone could be conjoined with
celestial good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2550.">2550.</span></span>

Abimelech said unto Abraham. That this signifies further thought from
the doctrine of faith, is evident from what was said above (n. 2545),
where are nearly the same words. As the statement is here repeated, it
signifies further thought, and indeed concerning the cause. (What
thought from the doctrine of faith is may also be seen there.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[2504-1](ac051.htm#fr_72) See n. 1901 at the end
as compared with n. 1902. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2551-2600](ac052)
