[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac056)  [Next](ac058.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="2801.">2801.</span></span>

Verse 7. Isaac said unto Abraham his father; and he said, My father; and
he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood;
and where is the lamb for a burnt-offering? "Isaac said unto Abraham his
father; and he said, My father; and he said, Here am I, my son,"
signifies a conference of the Lord from love - of the Divine Truth with
the Divine Good; the Divine Truth is the "son," and the Divine Good is
the "father;" "and he said, Behold the fire and the wood," signifies
that love and righteousness are present; "where is the lamb for a
burnt-offering?" signifies where are they of the human race who are to
be sanctified?

<span class="margnote"><span id="2802.">2802.</span></span>

Isaac said unto Abraham his father; and he said, My father; and he said,
Here am I, my son. That this signifies the Lord conference from love -
of the Divine Truth with the Divine Good-is evident from the
signification of "Isaac the son," as being the Divine Truth; and from
the signification of "Abraham the father," as being the Divine Good;
which are treated of in what presently follows; and from the affection
that is in these words, as being from love on both sides. Hence it is
manifest that it is a conference of the Lord with His Father. That more
arcana lie hid in these words than can come to human perception, is
evident from the fact that the words "he said" occur four times in this
verse. It is usual in the Word, when any new thing is begun, to say,
"and he said" (see n. 2061, 2238, 2260). The same is evident from the
fact that the words are words of love; and when such come to the
perception of the celestial angels who are in the inmost sense, they
form for themselves from them most celestial ideas; for they form for
themselves luminous ideas from the affections in the Word, whereas the
spiritual angels do so from the significations of the words and of the
things (n. 2157, 2275); and thus from these words, in which there are
four distinct periods and affections of love, the celestial angels form
such things as can in no wise come down to human apprehension, nor can
be put into words; and this with ineffable abundance and variety. Hence
we can see what the quality of the Word is in its internal sense, even
where it appears simple in the letter, as in this verse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2803.">2803.</span></span>

That the Divine Truth is the "son," and the Divine Good the "father," is
evident from the signification of a "son," as being truth (see n. 489,
491, 533, 1147, 2633); and of a "father," as being good; and also from
the conception and birth of truth, which is from good. Truth cannot be
and come forth \[existere\] from any other source than good, as has been
shown many times. That the "son" here is the Divine Truth, and the
"father" the Divine Good, is because the union of the Divine Essence
with the Human, and of the Human Essence with the Divine, is the Divine
marriage of Good with Truth, and of Truth with Good, from which comes
the heavenly marriage; for in Jehovah or the Lord there is nothing but
what is infinite; and because infinite, it cannot be apprehended by any
idea, except that it is the being and the coming forth \[esse et
existere\] of all good and truth, or is Good itself and Truth itself.
Good itself is the "Father," and Truth itself is the "Son." But because
as before said there is a Divine marriage of Good and Truth, and of
Truth and Good, the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father,
as the Lord Himself teaches in John: Jesus saith unto Philip, Believest
thou not that I am in the Father and the Father in Me ? Believe Me that
I am in the Father and the Father in me (John 14:10-11). And again in
the same Evangelist: Jesus said to the Jews, Though ye believe not Me,
believe the works; that ye may know and believe that the Father is in
Me, and I in the Father (John 10:36, 38). And again: I pray for them for
all Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine; and that they all may be one, as
Thou Father art in Me, and I in Thee (John 17:9, 10, 21). And again: Now
is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in Him; if God be
glorified in Him, God shall also glorify Him in Himself. Father, glorify
Thy Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee (John 13:31-32; 17:1). \[2\]
From this may be seen the nature of the union of the Divine and the
Human in the Lord; namely, that it is mutual and alternate, or
reciprocal; which union is that which is called the Divine Marriage,
from which descends the heavenly marriage, which is the Lord's kingdom
itself in the heavens -thus spoken of in John: In that day ye shall know
that I am in My Father, and ye in Me, and I in you (John 14:20). And
again: I pray for them, that they all may be one, as Thou Father art in
Me and I in Thee, that they also may be one in us, I in them and Thou in
Me; that the love wherewith Thou hast loved Me may be in them, and I in
them (John 17:21-23, 26). That this heavenly marriage is that of good
and truth, and of truth and good, may be seen above (n. 2508, 2618,
2728, 2729 and following numbers). \[3\] And because the Divine Good
cannot be and come forth without the Divine Truth, nor the Divine Truth
without the Divine Good, but the one in the other mutually and
reciprocally, it is therefore manifest that the Divine Marriage was from
eternity; that is, the Son in the Father, and the Father in the Son, as
the Lord Himself teaches in John: And now O Father, glorify Thou Me with
Thyself, with the glory which I had with Thee before the world was (John
17:5, 24). But the Divine Human which was born from eternity was also
born in time; and what was born in time, and glorified, is the same.
Hence it is that the Lord so often said that He was going to the Father
who sent Him; that is, that He was returning to the Father. And in John:
In the beginning was the Word (the "Word" is the Divine Truth itself),
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same was in the
beginning with God. All things were made by Him, and without Him was not
anything made that was made. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us, and we saw His glory, the glory as of the Only-begotten of the
Father, full of grace and truth (John 1:1-3, 14; see also John 3:13;
6:62).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2804.">2804.</span></span>

And he said, Behold the fire and the wood. That this signifies that love
and righteousness were present, is evident from the signification of
"fire," as being love (see n. 934); and from the signification of "wood
for a burnt-offering," as being the merit of righteousness (see n.
2784).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2805.">2805.</span></span>

Where is the lamb \[pecus\] for a burnt-offering? That this signifies,
Where are they from the human race who are to be sanctified? is evident
from the representation of sacrifices, especially of burnt-offerings.
That burnt-offerings and sacrifices were representative of internal
worship, may be seen above (n. 922, 923); that they were made from the
flock and from the herd; that when made from the flock, they consisted
of lambs, sheep, she-goats, kids, rams, he-goats, and when from the
herd, of oxen, bullocks, or calves; and that these signified various
kinds of celestial and spiritual things (n. 922, 1823, 2180); also that
by means of them sanctifications were to be effected (n. 2776). It may
be seen from this, that by Isaac's inquiry, "Where is the lamb for a
burnt-offering?" is signified, Where are they from the human race who
are to be sanctified?-which is more plainly manifest from what follows,
that is, from the answer of Abraham his father, "God will see for
Himself the lamb for a burnt-offering" (verse 8); by which is signified
that the Divine Human will provide those who are to be sanctified. This
is also evident from the fact that a ram was afterwards seen behind
them, held by the horns in a thicket, which was offered for a
burnt-offering (verse 13), by which are signified those of the human
race who are of the Lord's spiritual church. And the same is evident
from what follows in verses 14 to 17.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2806.">2806.</span></span>

Verse 8. And Abraham said, God will see for Himself the lamb for a
burnt-offering, my son: and they went both of them together. "Abraham
said, God will see for Himself the lamb for a burnt-offering, my son,"
signifies the reply, that the Divine Human will provide those who are to
be sanctified; "and they went both of them together," signifies unition
still closer as far as possible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2807.">2807.</span></span>

Abraham said, God will see for Himself the lamb for a burnt-offering, my
son. That this signifies the reply that the Divine Human will provide
those who are to be sanctified, is evident from the signification of
"seeing for Himself," when predicated of God, as being to foresee and
provide; for "seeing," in the proximate internal sense, is to understand
(n. 2150, 2325); in a still more internal sense it is having faith (n.
897, 2325); but in the supreme sense it is foreseeing and providing; and
also from the signification of the "lamb for a burnt-offering," as being
those from the human race who are to be sanctified (see just above, n.
2805). That the spiritual are here meant by the "lamb for a
burnt-offering," is manifest from what follows. The beasts for the
burnt-offering and sacrifice signified various things: a lamb one thing,
a sheep another, a kid and a she-goat another, a ram and a he-goat
another; so also an ox, a bullock, and a calf, and the young of doves,
and turtledoves. That each signified a different thing is plainly
evident from its being expressly defined which kind should be sacrificed
on the several days, and at each festival; as at expiations, cleansings,
inaugurations, and at other times. These kinds would by no means have
been so expressly pointed out, unless each one had a special
signification. \[2\] It is manifest that all the rites or external kinds
of worship that existed in the Ancient Church, and afterwards in the
Jewish, represented the Lord, and especially the burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, because among the Hebrew nation these were the principal
things of worship. And because they represented the Lord, they at the
same time also represented those things which are the Lord's with men,
namely, the celestial things of love and the spiritual things of faith,
consequently the men themselves who are celestial or spiritual, or who
ought to be. Hence it is that by the "lamb" here are signified the
spiritual, that is, they who are of the Lord's spiritual church. That by
"God will see for Himself the lamb for a burnt-offering, my son," is
signified that the Divine Human will provide, is evident from the fact
that it is not here said that "Jehovah" will see, but that "God" will
see. When both are named, as in this chapter, by "Jehovah" is then meant
the same as by the "Father," and by "God" the same as by the "Son," and
thus here the Divine Human; and this because the spiritual man is
treated of, who has salvation from the Divine Human, as may be seen
above (n. 2661, 2716).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2808.">2808.</span></span>

They went both of them together. That this signifies unition still
closer as far as possible, is evident without explication. A closer
unition is signified because it is said a second time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2809.">2809.</span></span>

Verse 9. And they came to the place which God told him of; and Abraham
built there the altar, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his
son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood. "They came to the place
which God told him of," signifies the state at that time according to
perception from Divine Truth; "and Abraham built there the altar,"
signifies the preparation of the Lord's Human Divine; "and laid the wood
in order," signifies the righteousness that was adjoined to it; "and
bound Isaac his son," signifies the state of the Divine rational which
was thus, as to truth, about to undergo the last degrees of temptation;
"and laid him on the altar upon the wood," signifies in the Human Divine
to which the righteousness belonged.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2810.">2810.</span></span>

They came to the place which God told him of. That this signifies the
state at that time according to perception from Divine Truth, is evident
from the signification of "place," as being state (see above, n. 2786);
and from the signification of "saying," in the historical parts of the
Word, as being to perceive-explained often before. Here "God saying"
denotes perceiving from Divine Truth, because it is said "God," and not
"Jehovah" (n. 2586, 2807 at the end).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2811.">2811.</span></span>

And Abraham built there the altar. That this signifies the preparation
of the Lord's Human Divine, is evident from the signification of an
"altar," and of "building an altar." "Altars" signified all worship in
general, because they were the primary things of the worship of the
representative church (n. 921); and as they signified all worship in
general, they signified the Lord's Divine Human, for the Lord's Divine
Human is all worship and all doctrine; so much so as to be worship
itself and doctrine itself; as may be seen also from the Holy Supper,
which succeeded to altars, or to burnt-offerings and sacrifices (n.
2165, 2187, 2343, 2359), and which is the primary thing of external
worship, because it is the Lord's Divine Human which is there given.
That to "build an altar" is to prepare the Human Divine, is evident from
the above, and thus without explication. The final preparation of the
Lord's Human Divine for undergoing the last degrees of temptation is
treated of in this verse, and is described by Abraham laying the wood in
order, binding Isaac his son, and placing him on the altar upon the
wood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2812.">2812.</span></span>

And he laid the wood in order. That this signifies the righteousness
which was adjoined to it, is evident from the signification of the "wood
of a burnt-offering," as being the merit of righteousness (see above, n.
2784, 2798); and from the signification of "laying the wood in order
upon the altar," as being to adjoin that righteousness to the Human
Divine. The merit of righteousness is adjoined when it is there, and
when there is confidence from truth that it belongs to Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2813.">2813.</span></span>

And bound Isaac his son. That this signifies the state of the Divine
rational thus about to undergo as to truth the last degrees of
temptation, is evident from the signification of "binding," and also of
"Isaac his son." That to "bind" is to put on the state for undergoing
the last degrees of temptation, is evident from the fact that he who is
in a state of temptation is no otherwise than as bound or chained. That
"Isaac the son" is the Lord's Divine rational, here as to truth, may be
seen above (n. 2802, 2803). All the genuine rational consists of good
and truth. The Lord's Divine rational as to good could not suffer, or
undergo temptations; for no genius or spirit inducing temptations can
come near to Good Divine, as it is above all attempt at temptation. But
Truth Divine bound was what could be tempted; for there are fallacies,
and still more falsities, which break in upon and thus tempt it; for
concerning Truth Divine some idea can be formed, but not concerning Good
Divine except by those who have perception, and are celestial angels. It
was Truth Divine which was no longer acknowledged when the Lord came
into the world, and therefore it was that from which the Lord underwent
and endured temptations. Truth Divine in the Lord is what is called the
"Son of man," but Good Divine is what is called the "Son of God." Of the
"Son of man" the Lord says many times that He was to suffer, but never
of the Son of God. That He says this of the Son of man, or of Truth
Divine, is evident in Matthew: Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son
of man shall be delivered, unto the chief priests and scribes, and they
shall condemn Him, and shall deliver Him unto the Gentiles to mock and
to scourge, and to crucify (Matt. 20:18-19). Jesus said to His
disciples, Behold the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is delivered
into the hands of sinners (Matt. 26:45). In Mark: Jesus began to teach
them that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the
elders, and the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after
three days rise again (Mark 8:31). It is written of the Son of man, that
He shall suffer many things, and be set at nought. And the Son of man
shall be delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill Him; but
when He is killed He shall rise again on the third day (Mark 9:12, 31).
Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered unto
the chief priests and the scribes, and they shall condemn Him to death,
and shall deliver Him unto the Gentiles, and they shall mock Him, and
shall spit upon Him, and shall kill Him, and the third day He shall rise
again (Mark 10:33-34). The hour is come; behold the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners (Mark 14:41). In Luke: The Son of man
must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders and chief priests
and scribes, and be killed, and the third day rise again (Luke 9:22,
44). We go up to Jerusalem, where all the things that are written by the
prophets concerning the Son of man shall be accomplished; He shall be
delivered up unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and shamefully
entreated, and spit upon, and they shall scourge and kill Him, and the
third day He shall rise again (Luke 18:31-33). The angel said to the
women, Remember what He spake unto you when He was yet in Galilee,
saying that the Son of man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful
men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again (Luke 24:6-7). \[2\]
In all these places by the "son of man" is meant the Lord as to Truth
Divine, or as to the Word in its internal sense, which was rejected by
the chief priests and scribes, was shamefully entreated, scourged, spit
upon, and crucified, as may be clearly evident from the fact that the
Jews applied and arrogated everything to themselves according to the
letter, and were not willing to know anything about the spiritual sense
of the Word, and about the heavenly kingdom, believing that the Messiah
was to come to raise up their kingdom above all the kingdoms of the
earth, as they also believe at this day. Hence it is manifest that it
was Truth Divine which was rejected by them, shamefully treated,
scourged, and crucified. Whether you say Truth Divine, or the Lord as to
Truth Divine, it is the same; for the Lord is the Truth itself, as He is
the Word itself (n. 2011, 2016, 2533 at the end). \[3\] The Lord's
rising again on the third day also involves that Truth Divine, or the
Word as to the internal sense, as it was understood by the Ancient
Church, will be revived in the consummation of the age, which is also
the "third day" (n. 1825, 2788); on which account it is said that the
Son of man (that is, Truth Divine) will then appear (Matt. 24:30, 37,
39, 44; Mark 13:26; Luke 17:22, 24-26, 30; 21:27, 36). \[4\] That the
"Son of man" is the Lord as to Truth Divine, is evident from the
passages adduced, and further from the following. In Matthew: He that
soweth the good seed is the Son of man, the field is the world. In the
consummation of the age the Son of man shall send forth His angels, and
they shall gather out of His kingdom all things that offend (Matt.
13:37, 41-42); where the "good seed" is the truth; the "world" is men;
"He that soweth the seed" is the Son of man; and the "things that
offend" are falsities. In John: The multitude said, We have heard out of
the Law that the Christ abideth forever; and how sayest Thou that the
Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of man ? Jesus answered
them, A little while is the Light with you; walk while ye have the
Light, that darkness overtake you not; for he that walketh in the
darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have the Light, believe
in the Light, that ye may become the sons of Light (John 12:34-35);
where, when they asked who the Son of man is, Jesus answered concerning
the Light, which is the Truth, and that He is the Light or Truth in
which they should believe. (As regards the Light which is from the Lord,
and which is the Divine Truth, see above, n. 1053, 1521, 1529-1531,
1619-1632.) \[5\] But that the Son of God, or the Lord as to Good in His
Human Divine could not be tempted, as was said above, this is manifest
also from the Lord's answer to the tempter, in the Evangelists: The
tempter said, If Thou art the Son of God cast Thyself down; for it is
written, He shall give His angels charge concerning Thee, lest haply
Thou dash Thy foot against a stone. Jesus said unto him, It is written
again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God (Matt. 4:6-7; Luke 4:9-12).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2814.">2814.</span></span>

And laid him on the altar upon the wood. That this signifies in the
Human Divine to which righteousness belongs, is evident from the
signification of an "altar," as being the Lord's Divine Human (see just
above, n. 2811); and from the signification of the "wood of a
burnt-offering," as being the merit of righteousness (see n. 2784, 2798,
2812). The Truth Divine in the Lord's Human Divine, which underwent the
temptations, and which has been treated of, is not the Divine Truth
itself, for this is above all temptation; but it is rational truth, such
as the angels have, consisting in the appearances of truth, and is what
is called the "Son of man," but before the glorification. But the Divine
Truth in the Lord's glorified Divine Human is above appearances, nor can
it possibly come to any understanding, and still less to the
apprehension of man, nor even to that of angels, and thus not at all to
anything of temptation. It appears in the heavens as light which is from
the Lord. Concerning this Divine Truth, or the Son of man glorified, it
is thus written in John: Jesus said, Now is the Son of man glorified,
and God is glorified in Him: if God is glorified in Him, God shall also
glorify Him in Himself, and shall straightway glorify Him (John 13:31,
32). That a distinct idea may be had of this very deep arcanum, we may
call the Truth with the Lord which could be tempted, and which underwent
temptations, Truth Divine in the Lord's Human Divine; but the Truth
which could not be tempted, or undergo any temptation, because it was
glorified, the Divine Truth in the Lord's Divine Human; this distinction
has also been observed here and there in what goes before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2815.">2815.</span></span>

Verse 10. And Abraham put forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his
son. "Abraham put forth his hand," signifies temptation even to the
utmost of power; "and took the knife," signifies as to truth; "to slay
his son," signifies until whatever was from the merely human was dead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2816.">2816.</span></span>

Abraham put forth his hand. That this signifies temptation even to the
utmost of power, is evident from the series of things; for the Lord's
most grievous and inmost temptations are treated of. The verses which
precede treat of the preparation of the Human Divine for admitting and
enduring them: here the act is treated of, which is expressed in the
sense of the letter by "Abraham put forth his hand." That power is
signified by the "hand" may be seen above (n. 878); here the utmost of
power, because nothing but the act was wanting. It is according to the
internal sense, that the Lord's Divine led His Human into the most
grievous temptations (for by "Abraham" is meant the Lord as to His
Divine), and this even to the utmost of power. The truth is that the
Lord admitted temptations into Himself in order that He might expel
thence all that was merely human, and this until nothing but the Divine
remained. \[2\] That the Lord admitted temptations into Himself, even
the last, which was that of the cross, may be seen from the words of the
Lord Himself, in Matthew: Jesus began to show the disciples that He must
suffer many things, and be killed. Then Peter took Him, and began to
rebuke Him, saying, Spare Thyself, Lord; let this not be done unto Thee.
But He turned and said unto Peter, Get thee behind Me, Satan; thou art
an offense unto Me; for thou savorest not the things that are of God,
but those that are of men (Matt. 16:21-23). And more manifestly in John:
No one taketh My life from Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have power
to lay it down, and I have power to take it again (John 10:18). And in
Luke: Behooved it not the Christ to suffer these things, and to enter
into His glory? (Luke 24:26).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2817.">2817.</span></span>

And took the knife. That this signifies as to truth, is evident from the
signification of a "knife," as being the truth of faith (explained
above, n. 2799); and that the Lord's temptation was as to Truth Divine,
see above (n. 2813, 2814).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2818.">2818.</span></span>

To slay his son. That this signifies until whatever was from the merely
human was dead, is evident from the internal sense of these words; for
they signify the Lord's most grievous and inmost temptations, the last
of which was that of the cross, in which it is evident that what was
merely human also died. This could not be represented by Abraham's son
or Isaac, because to sacrifice sons was an abomination; but it was
represented so far as it could be, namely, even to the attempt, but not
to the act. Hence it is evident that by these words, "Abraham took the
knife to slay his son," is signified until all that was merely human was
dead. \[2\] That it was known from the most ancient time that the Lord
was to come into the world, and was to suffer death, is evident from the
fact that the custom prevailed among the Gentiles of sacrificing their
sons, believing that they were thus purified, and propitiated to God; in
which abominable custom they could not have placed their most important
religious observance, unless they had learned from the ancients that the
Son of God was to come, who would, as they believed, be made a
sacrifice. To this abomination even the sons of Israel were inclined,
and Abraham also; for no one is tempted except by that to which he is
inclined. That the sons of Jacob were so inclined is evident in the
Prophets; but lest they should rush into that abomination, it was
permitted to institute burnt-offerings and sacrifices (see n. 922, 1128,
1241, 1343, 2180).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2819.">2819.</span></span>

As regards the Lord's temptations in general, some were more external
and some more internal; and the more internal they were, the more
grievous. The inmost ones are described by the Evangelists (Matt.
26:37-39, 42, 44; 27:46; Mark 14:33-36; 15:34; Luke 22:42-44); but see
what has been said before respecting the Lord's temptations, namely:
That the Lord first contended from goods and truths which appeared as
goods and truths (n. 1661); That He contended against the evils of the
love of self and the world from Divine Love toward the whole human race
(n. 1690, 1691 at the end, 1789, 1812-1813, 1820); That He alone
contended from the Divine Love (n. 1812, 1813): That all the hells
fought against the Lord's love, which was for the salvation of the whole
human race (n. 1820): That the Lord endured the most grievous
temptations of all (n. 1663, 1668, 1787): That the Lord became
righteousness from His own power by means of temptations and victories
(n. 1813, 2025): That the union of His Human Essence with His Divine
Essence was effected by the Lord by means of temptations and victories
(n. 1737, 1813, 1921, 2025, 2026). See also what has been said before
concerning temptations in general (n. 59, 63, 227, 847): That temptation
is a combat concerning power, as to whether good or evil, truth or
falsity, is to reign supreme (n. 1923): That in temptations there are
indignations, and many other affections (n. 1917): That temptations are
celestial, spiritual, and natural (n. 847): That in temptations the evil
genii and spirits assail the things of the love, and thus the things of
the man's life (n. 847, 1820): What temptations effect (n. 1692 at the
beginning, 1717, 1740): That temptation is for the purpose that
corporeal things may be subdued (n.857): That the evils and falsities in
a man who is being regenerated are subdued by temptations, not abolished
(n. 868): That truth has the first place in combat (n. 1685): That man
combats from the goods and truths which he has acquired by knowledges,
though they be not in themselves goods and truths (n. 1661): That evil
spirits and genii excite the falsities and evils in a man, and hence
come temptations (n. 741, 751, 761). That in temptations man thinks that
the Lord is absent, whereas He is then more present (n. 840): That man
can by no means sustain the combats of temptations of himself, because
they are against all the hells (n. 1692 at the end): That the Lord alone
combats in man (n. 1661, 1692): That by means of temptations evil genii
and spirits are deprived of the power of doing evil and inspiring
falsity in man (n. 1695, 1717): That temptations come with those who
have conscience, and more acute ones with those who have perception (n.
1668): That temptations rarely exist at this day, but in their place
anxieties, which are of another character and from another source (n.
762): That men spiritually dead cannot sustain the combats of
temptations (n. 270): That all temptations are attended with despair
respecting the end (n. 1787, 1820): That after temptations there is
fluctuation (n. 848, 857): That the good learn by temptations that they
are nothing but evil, and that all things are of mercy (n. 2334): That
by temptations goods are conjoined more closely with truths (n. 2272):
That men are not saved by temptations if they yield in them, nor if they
think that they have merited by them (n. 2273): That in every temptation
there is freedom, and stronger than out of temptations (n. 1937).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2820.">2820.</span></span>

Verse 11. And the angel of Jehovah called unto him out of heaven, and
said, Abraham, Abraham; and he said, Here am I. "The angel of Jehovah
called unto him out of heaven," signifies consolation at that time from
the Divine Itself; "and said, Abraham, Abraham; and he said, Here am I,"
signifies a perception of consolation in the Divine Good of the rational
after temptation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2821.">2821.</span></span>

The angel of Jehovah called unto him out of heaven. That this signifies
consolation from the Divine Itself at that time, is evident from the
signification of "calling out of heaven," as being to console; as is
also manifest from what immediately precedes and what next follows; and
also from the signification of the "angel of Jehovah." (That when angels
are mentioned in the Word, by them is meant something in the Lord, and
that it appears from the series what of the Lord is meant, may be seen
above, n. 1925.) We read in like manner concerning the Lord, that when
He sustained the most grievous temptation in Gethsemane, an angel from
heaven was seen by Him strengthening Him (Luke 22:43). By the "angel
from heaven" here also in the internal sense is meant the Divine which
was in Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2822.">2822.</span></span>

And said, Abraham, Abraham; and he said, Here am I. That this signifies
a perception of consolation in the Divine Good of the rational after
temptation, is evident from the signification of "saying" in the
historical parts of the Word, as being to perceive-explained often
before. That it is here perception in the Divine Good of the rational,
is because the Divine Good of the rational of the Lord's Human is here
signified by "Abraham." What perception in the Divine Good of the
rational is, cannot be unfolded to the apprehension; for before it is
unfolded, an idea of the Lord's Divine Human must have been formed from
knowledge of many things; and before this has been formed, all things
belonging to the explication would fall into empty and obscure ideas,
which would either pervert the truths or bring them into things
incongruous. In this verse the Lord's first state after temptation is
treated of, which is a state of consolation; on which account it is now
no longer said "God," but "Jehovah;" for "God" is named when truth is
treated of, but "Jehovah" when good is treated of, from which comes
consolation (n. 2769). All consolation after temptation is insinuated
into good, for from good is all joy; and from the good it passes into
truth. On this account by "Abraham" is here signified the Divine good of
the rational, as in other places also, and also whenever "Jehovah" is
named in the same verse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2823.">2823.</span></span>

Verse 12. And He said, Put not forth thine hand upon the boy, and do not
anything unto him; for now I know that thou fearest God, and thou hast
not withheld thy son, thine only one, from Me. "He said, Put not forth
thine hand upon the boy," signifies that He should admit the temptation
no further into the Truth Divine which belonged to the rational; "and do
not anything unto him," signifies liberation; "for now I know that thou
fearest God," signifies glorification from the Divine love; "and hast
not withheld thy son, thine only one, from Me," signifies the unition of
the Human with the Divine by means of the last of temptation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2824.">2824.</span></span>

And He said, Put not forth thine hand upon the boy. That this signifies
that He should admit the temptation no further into the Truth Divine
which belonged to the rational, is evident from the signification of
"putting forth the hand," as being temptation even to the utmost of
power-explained just above (n. 2816); and from the signification of the
"boy," that is, of Isaac, as being the rational as to Truth Divine, into
which the temptations were admitted (see n. 2803, 2813, 2814, 2817).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2825.">2825.</span></span>

And do not anything unto him. That this signifies liberation, is evident
without explication; for when it is said that he should do nothing to
him, it means that the act should be interrupted, and thus that he will
be liberated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2826.">2826.</span></span>

For now I know that thou fearest God. That this signifies glorification
from the Divine love, is evident from the signification of "knowing,"
when predicated of the Lord's Divine, as being nothing else than to be
united, or what is the same, to be glorified; for it was being united to
the Human Divine by means of temptations (n. 1737, 1813); and from the
signification of "fearing God," or of the "fear of God," as being here
the Divine love. And because this is predicated of the Lord's Divine
rational as to truth, it is here said to fear "God," and not "Jehovah;"
for when truth is treated of, it is said "God;" but when good, "Jehovah"
(n. 2586,, 2769, 2822). That the Divine love is that by which the Lord
united His Human Essence to His Divine Essence, and the Divine Essence
to the Human, or what is the same, glorified Himself, may be seen above
(n. 1812, 1813, 2253). What "fearing God" signifies in the Word, may be
seen from a great many passages when understood as to the internal
sense. The "fear of God" there signifies worship, and indeed worship
either from fear, or from the good of faith, or from the good of love;
worship from fear when the non-regenerate, worship from the good of
faith when the spiritual regenerate, and worship from the good of love
when the celestial regenerate are treated of. \[2\] I. That the "fear of
God" in general signifies worship, is manifest in the book of Kings: The
sons of Israel feared other gods, and walked in the statutes of the
nations. The nations sent into Samaria feared not Jehovah in the
beginning, therefore Jehovah sent lions among them; and one of the
priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and dwelt in
Bethel, and taught them how they should fear Jehovah. Jehovah made a
covenant with the sons of Israel and commanded them, Ye shall not fear
other gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to
them; but ye shall fear Jehovah, and bow yourselves down unto Him, and
sacrifice to Him (2 Kings 17:7-8, 24-25, 28, 32-33, 35-37, 41); here
"fearing" manifestly denotes worshiping. In Isaiah: Because this people
have drawn nigh unto Me with their mouth, and have honored Me with their
lips, and their heart hath removed itself far from Me, and their fear of
Me is a commandment of men which hath been taught (Isa. 29:13); where
their "fear of Me" denotes worship in general; for it is said that the
fear was a commandment of men. In Luke: There was in a city a judge who
feared not God and regarded not man (Luke 18:2); "fearing not God" means
not worshiping Him. \[3\] II. That the "fear of God" signifies worship
from fear when the nonregenerate are treated of, is manifest from the
following passages in Moses: When the Law was promulgated upon Mount
Sinai, the people said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear;
but let not God speak with us, lest we die. And Moses said unto the
people, God is come to prove you, and that His fear may be before you,
that ye sin not (Exod. 20:19-20). And again: Now why shall we die? for
this great fire will consume us; if we hear the voice of Jehovah our God
anymore, then we shall die. Go thou near, and hear all that Jehovah our
God shall say; and speak thou unto us all that Jehovah our God shall say
unto thee; and we will hear it, and do it. And Jehovah said unto Moses,
Who will give them to have such a heart as this, to fear Me, and keep
all My commandments always (Deut. 5:25, 27-29); here the "fear of God
before you that ye sin not, and a heart to fear Me, and keep all My
commandments," signifies worship from fear, in respect to them, because
such was their quality; for they who are in external worship, and not in
internal, are driven to the observance of the law and to obedience by
fear; but still they do not come into internal worship or into holy fear
\[timor sanctus\] unless they are in the good of life, and know what is
internal, and believe it. In the same: If thou wilt not observe to do
all the words of this law that are written in this book, to fear this
glorious and fearful name, Jehovah thy God, Jehovah will make thy
plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, plagues great and sure,
and sore diseases and sure, and He will bring upon thee again all the
sickness of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of, and they shall cleave unto
thee (Deut. 28:58-60); here also to "fear the glorious and fearful name
of Jehovah God" is to worship from fear; and that this might exist among
those of such a character, all evils even to cursings were attributed to
Jehovah (n. 592, 2335, 2395, 2447). In Jeremiah: Thine own wickedness
shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee; know
therefore and see that it is an evil thing and a bitter that thou hast
forsaken Jehovah thy God, and that My fear is not in thee (Jer. 2:19).
In Luke: I say unto you, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, but
after that have no more that they can do; but I will warn you whom ye
shall fear; fear Him who after He hath killed, hath power to cast into
hell; yea, I say unto you, fear Him (Luke 12:4-5; Matt. 10:28); here
also "fearing God" involves worshiping from some fear, because fear
drove them to obedience, as before said. \[4\] III. That to "fear God"
or "Jehovah" signifies worship from the good of faith, where the
spiritual regenerate are treated of, is manifest from the following
passages. In Moses: The king shall write for himself a copy of this law
in a book before the priests the Levites, and it shall be with him, and
he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear Jehovah his God, to keep all the words of this law, and these
statutes, to do them (Deut. 17:18-19). In the internal sense "king"
denotes the truth of faith; for royalty represented the Lord's spiritual
kingdom (n. 1672, 1728, 2015, 2069). Hence to "fear Jehovah his God," is
to worship Him from the truth of faith; and because this is inseparable
from the good of charity, it is described by "keeping the words of the
law and the statutes to do them." In Samuel: Behold Jehovah hath set a
king over you. If ye will fear Jehovah and serve Him, and hearken unto
His voice, then shall both ye and the king that reigneth over you be
followers of Jehovah your God (1 Sam. 12:13-14); here also in the
internal sense "fearing Jehovah" denotes worshiping from the good and
truth of faith, as before, because a king or royalty is treated of.
\[5\] In Joshua: Now fear Jehovah, and serve Him in integrity and in
truth, and put away the gods which your fathers served (Josh. 24:14);
where also to "fear Jehovah" denotes worshiping from good and truth,
which is of the spiritual man; for "integrity" is predicated of the good
of faith (n. 612), and "truth" of the truth of faith. In Jeremiah: They
shall be My people, and I will be their God; and I will give them one
heart, and one way, that they may fear Me forever, for the good of them
and of their children after them; and I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them
good; and I will put My fear in their heart, that they shall not depart
from Me (Jer. 32:38-40); that "fearing God" here is worshiping from the
good and truth of faith, is evident from the series, and from the use of
the words "people" and "God." (That those are called "people" who are in
truth, may be seen above, n. 1259, 1260; and that "God" is named where
truth is treated of, n. 2586, 2769, 2807 at the end.) In Isaiah: The
strong people shall honor Thee, the city of the mighty nations shall
fear Thee (Isa. 25:3); where "fearing God" also denotes worshiping from
spiritual truth, for it is predicated of "people" and "city." (That a
"city" is doctrinal truth may be seen above, n. 402, 2268, 2450, 2451.)
\[6\] In David: What man is he that feareth Jehovah? Him shall He teach
the way that He shall choose (Ps. 25:12); where the "man that feareth
Jehovah" denotes him who worships Him; and that this is said of the
spiritual man is manifest from its being said, "him shall He teach the
way." (That a "way" is truth, may be seen above, n. 627, 2333.) And
again with similar meaning: Blessed is every one that feareth Jehovah,
that walketh in His ways (Ps. 128:1). In the same: They that fear
Jehovah shall glorify Him; all the seed of Jacob shall glorify Him, and
all the seed of Israel shall stand in awe of Him (Ps. 22:23); here to
"stand in awe of him" means to worship from the truth of faith; for the
"seed of Israel" is the spiritual of the church, or the good and truth
of faith (n. 1025, 1447, 1610). In Moses: Now Israel, what doth Jehovah
thy God require of thee, but to fear Jehovah thy God, to walk in all His
ways, and to love Him, and to serve Jehovah thy God, with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, to keep the commandments of Jehovah, and His
statutes (Deut. 10:12-13). Here is described what it is to "fear God,"
with the spiritual man, that is, "Israel;" namely, that it is to walk in
the ways of Jehovah, to love Him, to serve Him, and to keep His precepts
and His statutes. In John: I saw an angel flying in the midst of heaven,
having the everlasting Gospel, saying with a great voice, Fear God, and
give glory to Him, for the hour of His judgment is come (Rev. 14:6-7);
here to "fear God" denotes holy worship from the good and truth of
faith. In Luke: Jesus said to him that was palsied, Arise, take up thy
couch, and go unto thy house; and amazement took hold upon them all; and
they glorified God, and they were filled with fear (Luke 5:24-26); where
"fear" denotes holy fear, such as is that of those who are being
initiated into the good of love by the truth of faith. \[7\] IV. That to
"fear God" or "Jehovah" signifies worship from the good of love, when
the celestial regenerate are treated of. In Malachi: My covenant was
with Levi, of lives and peace; and I gave them to him that he might
fear, and he feared Me, and for My name was he broken. The law of truth
was in his mouth, and unrighteousness was not in his lips; he walked
with Me in peace and uprightness (Mal. 2:5-6); where the Lord is treated
of, who here in the internal sense is "Levi;" "Levi" signifies the
priesthood, and signifies love; "fear" here denotes the good of Divine
love; the "law of truth," truth; and "peace and uprightness," both.
\[8\] In Isaiah: There shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of
Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots; and the spirit of
Jehovah shall rest upon Him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of
Jehovah, and of His scent in the fear of Jehovah (Isa. 11:1-3); where
also the Lord is treated of. The "spirit of knowledge and of the fear of
Jehovah" denotes the Divine love of truth; and His "scent in the fear of
Jehovah," the Divine love of good. \[9\] In David: The precepts of
Jehovah are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of Jehovah is
pure, enlightening the eyes; the fear of Jehovah is clean, standing
forever; the judgments of Jehovah are truth, made righteous together
(Ps. 19:8-9); where "the fear of Jehovah is clean" denotes love; and
"the judgments of Jehovah are truth" denotes faith. (That
"righteousness" is predicated of the good of love, and "judgment" of the
truth of faith, may be seen above, n. 2235) and these are said to be
"made righteous together," when truth becomes good, or when faith
becomes charity. \[10\] In the same: Behold the eye of Jehovah is upon
them that fear Him, upon them that wait for His mercy (Ps. 33:18). And
again: Jehovah delighteth not in the strength of the horse, He taketh
not pleasure in the legs of a man. Jehovah taketh pleasure in them that
fear Him, in those that wait for His mercy (Ps. 147:10-11); the
"strength of the horse" denotes one's own power of thinking truth (that
a "horse" denotes the intellectual faculty, may be seen above,
2760-2762); the "legs of a man" denote one's own power of doing good;
"they that fear Jehovah" denote those who worship Him from the love of
truth; and "they that wait for His mercy," those who worship from the
love of good. Where good is spoken of in the Prophets, so also is truth;
and where truth is spoken of, so also is good, on account of the
heavenly marriage of good and truth in everything (see n. 683, 793, 801,
2516, 2712, 2713). \[11\] In the same: Jehovah will bless the house of
Israel, He will bless the house of Aaron, He will bless them that fear
Jehovah, both small and great (Ps. 115:12-13); here "they that fear
Jehovah" denote those who worship from the good of faith, which is the
"house of Israel," and from the good of love, which is the "house of
Aaron;" they are both named on account of the heavenly marriage, as said
above, in everything in the Word. \[12\] In Isaiah: The truth of thy
times shall be strength of salvations, wisdom, and knowledge; the fear
of Jehovah itself a treasure (Isa. 33:6); where "wisdom and knowledge"
denote the good of faith conjoined with its truth; and the "fear of
Jehovah," the good of love. In the same: Who is among you that feareth
Jehovah, hearkening to the voice of His servant (Isa. 50:10)? "he that
feareth Jehovah" denotes him that worships from love; "he that
hearkeneth to the voice of His servant," him that worships from faith.
When the one is of the other, then there is the heavenly marriage.
\[13\] From the passages which have been adduced from the Word it is
evident that the "fear of God" is worship, either from fear, or from the
good of faith, or from the good of love. But the more there is of fear
in the worship, the less there is of faith, and the less still of love;
and on the other hand, the more of faith there is in the worship, and
especially the more there is of love, the less there is of fear. There
is indeed a fear within all worship, but under another appearance and
another condition, and this is holy fear. But holy fear is not so much
the fear of hell and of damnation, as it is of doing or thinking
anything against the Lord and against the neighbor, and thus anything
against the good of love and the truth of faith. It is an aversion,
which is the boundary of the holy of love and the holy of faith on the
one side; and as it is not a fear of hell and damnation, as before said,
those have it who are in the good of faith; but those have less of it
who are in the good of love, that is, who are in the Lord. \[14\] V.
Therefore to "fear" signifies also to distrust, or not to have faith and
love, as in Isaiah: Thus saith thy Creator, O Jacob, and thy Former, O
Israel, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee I have called thee by thy
name, thou art Mine (Isa. 43:1, 5; 44:8). In Luke: The oath which He
sware to our father Abraham, that He would grant unto us, that we being
delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might serve Him without fear,
in holiness and righteousness before Him (Luke 1:73-74). In the same:
Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give
you the kingdom (Luke 12:32). In Mark: Jesus said unto the ruler of the
synagogue, Fear not, only believe (Mark 5:36; Luke 8:49-50). In the
same: Jesus said, Why are ye so fearful? How is it that ye have no
faith? (Mark 4:40). In Luke: The hairs of your head are all numbered;
fear not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows (Luke 12:7).
In these passages to "fear" is to distrust, or not to have faith and
love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2827.">2827.</span></span>

And thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only one, from Me. That this
signifies the unition of the Human with the Divine by the utmost of
temptation, is evident from the signification of "thy son," namely,
Isaac, as being the Divine rational (explained before), or the Divine
Human, for this begins in the rational (n. 2106, 2194); which is called
the "only one," because it was the only-begotten (see n. 2772); and from
the signification of "not withholding from me" as being to cause it to
be united, namely, to the Divine Itself. That the unition was effected
by the utmost of temptation, is manifest from all that precedes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2828.">2828.</span></span>

Verse 13. And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw, and behold a ram
behind, caught in a thicket by his horns; and Abraham went, and took the
ram, and offered him up for a burnt-offering in the stead of his son.
"Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw," signifies the Lord's thought and
mental view from the Divine; "and behold a ram," signifies the spiritual
from the human race; "behind, caught in a thicket," signifies entangled
in natural knowledge; "by his horns," signifies with all power as to the
truths of faith. "And Abraham went, and took the ram," signifies their
liberation by the Lord's Divine Human; "and offered him up for a
burnt-offering in the stead of his son," signifies their sanctification
and adoption.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2829.">2829.</span></span>

Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw. That this signifies the Lord's
thought and mental view from the Divine, may be seen above (n. 2789),
where are the same words. The thought and mental view from the Divine is
concerning all and each of the things that will take place to eternity,
with the Divine Providence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2830.">2830.</span></span>

And behold a ram. That this signifies the spiritual from the human race,
is evident from the signification of a "ram," as explained in what
follows. It is known within the church that the burnt-offerings and
sacrifices in the representative Jewish and Israelitish Church signified
the Lord's Divine Human; but the burnt-offerings and sacrifices from
lambs signified one thing, those from sheep and she-goats another, and
those also from kids, rams, and he-goats, and from oxen, bullocks, and
calves, and from turtledoves and the young of pigeons, other things; and
in like manner the meat-offerings and libations. In general they
signified the Divine celestial, Divine spiritual, and Divine natural
things which belong to the Lord; and hence they signified the celestial,
spiritual, and natural things which are from Him in His kingdom,
consequently in everyone who is a kingdom of the Lord; which may also be
seen from the Holy Supper, which succeeded the burnt-offerings and
sacrifices. The bread and wine therein signify the Lord's Divine Human;
the bread His Divine celestial, and the wine His Divine spiritual; they
consequently signify His love toward the universal human race; and on
the other hand the love of the human race to the Lord (n. 2343, 2359).
Hence it is manifest that the burnt-offerings and sacrifices involved
celestial worship from love to the Lord, and spiritual worship from
charity toward the neighbor and the derivative faith in the Lord (n.
922, 923, 1823, 2180). What the celestial is, and what the spiritual, or
what are the celestial and the spiritual in the Lord's kingdom or in His
church, has been frequently stated (see n. 1155, 1577, 1824, 2048, 2088,
2184, 2227, 2669, 2708, 2715). \[2\] That a "ram" therefore signifies
the Lord's Divine spiritual, and consequently the spiritual with man, or
what is the same, those of the human race who are spiritual, may be seen
from the burnt-offerings and sacrifices made from rams; in that when
Aaron and his sons were sanctified to perform the ministry, that is,
when they were inaugurated, they were to offer one bullock for sin, the
blood of which was to be sprinkled upon the horns of the altar, and the
rest poured at the bottom of it; also that one ram was to be killed, and
his blood sprinkled round the altar, and then the whole ram was to be
burnt for a burnt-offering; and that the blood of the other ram that was
killed was to be sprinkled upon the tip of Aaron's ear, and upon the
thumb of his hand and the great toe of his foot; and that after it was
waved, it was to be burnt upon the burnt-offering (Exod. 29:1-35; Lev.
8:1 to the end; 9:2 to the end). That all these rites were holy is
evident; but they were holy from their representing and signifying holy
things. Otherwise to slaughter a bullock and to sprinkle his blood upon
the horns of the altar and pour the rest at its base, and to slaughter
one ram and sprinkle his blood round the altar and then to burn him, and
to sprinkle the blood of the other ram upon the tip of Aaron's ear and
the thumb of his hand and the great toe of his foot, also to wave it,
and to burn it upon the burnt-offering - all these things would have had
no holiness and thus would have effected no worship unless they had
represented holy things. But what each particular represented can be
evident to no one except from the internal sense. That the bullock which
was for sin signified the Lord's Divine natural, and the ram His Divine
spiritual, and that it signified also those who are spiritual of the
human race, may be seen from the signification of a "bullock" and a
"ram" in the Word. Inaugurations into the priesthood were made by
spiritual things, for by spiritual things a man is introduced into
celestial things; or what is the same, by the truths of faith into the
good of love. In like manner when Aaron entered into the holy place, he
was to offer a bullock for sin, and a ram for a burnt-offering (Lev.
16:2, 3). \[3\] That the Nazirite, when the days of his Naziriteship
were fulfilled, was to offer a whole lamb a son of a year, for a
burnt-offering, and one ewe-lamb a daughter of a year, entire, for sin,
and one whole ram for peace-offerings (Num. 6:13-17), was because the
Nazirite represented the celestial man, who is a likeness of the Lord
(n. 51, 52, 1013). The celestial man is such that he is in celestial
love, that is, in love to the Lord, and thence in celestial truth (n.
202, 337, 2069, 2715, 2718); he was therefore to sacrifice a lamb and a
ewe-lamb, by which the celestial was signified; and also a ram, by which
the spiritual was signified. At the festivals, bullocks, rams, and lambs
were sacrificed-as on the first day of the feast of the unleavened
bread, two bullocks, one ram, and seven lambs, with their meat-offering,
for a burnt-offering (Num. 28:18-20). On the day of the firstfruits
also, two bullocks, one ram, and seven lambs, with their meat-offering,
for a burnt-offering (Num. 28:26-25). On the new moons, two bullocks,
one ram, and seven lambs, with their meat-offering, for a burnt-offering
(Num. 28:11, 12). In the seventh month, on the first of the month, one
bullock, one ram, and seven lambs, with their meat-offering. On the
fifteenth day of the seventh month, thirteen bullocks, two rams, and
fourteen lambs. (See also Num. 29:1, 2, 12-14, 17, 18, 20-22, 24,
26-36.) The "bullocks" and the "rams" signified spiritual things, but
the "lambs" celestial things; for at the feasts they had to be
sanctified and introduced by spiritual things. \[4\] As "rams" signified
the Divine spiritual of the Lord's Divine Human, as also the spiritual
things with man, therefore where the new temple and New Jerusalem, that
is, the Lord's spiritual kingdom, is spoken of, it is said in Ezekiel,
that when they had made an end of cleansing the altar there, they were
to offer a bullock for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-offering,
and were to offer the goat of the sin-offering every day for seven days,
and a bullock and a ram (Ezek. 43:23-25); and that on this day the
prince should prepare the bullock of the sin-offering for all the
people, and on the seven days of the feast seven bullocks, and seven
rams, with the meat-offering, for a burnt-offering (Ezek. 45:22-24); and
that on the day of the sabbath he should prepare six lambs and a ram
(Ezek. 46:4, 6). \[5\] That by the new temple and the New Jerusalem in
the universal sense is signified the Lord's kingdom, may be seen above
(n. 402, 940); in particular the New Church (n. 2117). That there are
not burnt-offerings and sacrifices there, may be known to everyone,
which shows that by these are signified the celestial things of love,
and the spiritual things of faith; for these are of the Lord's kingdom;
and thus such things are here signified by "bullocks," "rams," and
"lambs." That "bullocks" and "rams" signify spiritual things, is evident
from the several particulars in the internal sense; in general from
this, that by the "new temple" and the "New Jerusalem" the Lord's
spiritual kingdom is specifically signified, but by "Zion" the celestial
kingdom. \[6\] That a "ram" signifies that which is spiritual, or what
is the same, those who are spiritual, is plain also in Daniel; in that a
ram was seen by him standing before the river, which had two horns;
afterwards a he-goat of the goats, which smote him, broke his horns, and
trampled him down (Dan. 8:3, 4, and the following verses); where nothing
else is meant by the "ram" than the spiritual church, and by the
"he-goat of the goats" than those who are in faith separated from
charity, or in truth separate from good, who by successive steps uplift
themselves against good, and at length against the Lord-which is also
described. In Samuel: Samuel said to Saul, Hath Jehovah as great
pleasure in burnt-offerings and sacrifices as in hearkening to the voice
of Jehovah? Behold to hearken is better than sacrifice, and to obey than
the fat of rams (1 Sam. 15:22); where because obedience is treated of,
so is truth, which is spiritual; and these words were said to the king,
by whom also is signified truth (n. 1672, 2015, 2069). It is not
therefore said, "better than the fat of oxen," or of "lambs," but
"better than the fat of rams." \[7\] In David: When Israel went out of
Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language, Judah
became His sanctuary, Israel His dominion. The sea saw it, and fled, and
the Jordan turned back; the mountains leaped like rams, the hills like
the sons of the flock. What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleest?
thou Jordan, that thou turnest back; ye mountains, that ye skip like
rams? ye hills, like the sons of the flock? Thou travailest, O earth, at
the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob, who
turned the rock into a pool of waters, and the flint into a fountain of
waters (Ps. 114:1 to the end); here in the internal sense the subject
treated of is spiritual good after regeneration, and it is described in
respect to its quality; its celestial spiritual by the "mountains
leaping like rams;" and its celestial natural by the "hills like the
sons of the flock." (That "mountains" are the celestial things of love,
may be seen above, n. 795, 1430.) Everyone may know that in these, as in
the rest of the words of David, there are holy things, but in the
internal sense; and that something is signified by the mountains
skipping like rams, and the hills like the sons of the flock, and by the
earth travailing at the presence of the Lord; which things, without the
internal sense, are words of no meaning. \[8\] So with these words in
Moses: He maketh him ride on the high places of the earth, and to eat
the increase of the earth, and He maketh him to suck honey out of the
rock, and oil out of the flint of the rock; butter of kine and milk of
the flock, with fat of lambs, and of rams the sons of Bashan, and
he-goats with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and of the blood of grapes
thou shalt drink unmixed wine (Deut. 32:13-14); "rams the sons of
Bashan" denotes celestial spiritual things (what celestial spiritual
things are, may be seen above, n. 1824). In David: I will offer unto
Thee burnt-offerings of fatlings with the incense of rams, I will offer
bullocks with goats (Ps. 66:15); "burnt-offerings of fatlings" denotes
the celestial things of love; and the "incense of rams," the spiritual
things of faith. \[9\] In Ezekiel: Arabia and all the princes of Kedar
were the merchants of thy hand: in lambs, in rams, and he-goats (Ezek.
27:21); where Tyre is treated of, by which those are signified who are
in the knowledges of good and truth (n. 1201); "Arabia" denotes their
wisdom; the "princes of Kedar," their intelligence; "lambs," celestial
things; "rams," spiritual things; and "he-goats," natural things, which
follow in order. In Isaiah: All the flock of Kedar shall be gathered
together unto Thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto Thee; they
shall come up with acceptance on Mine altar, and I will adorn the house
of My adornment (Isa. 60:7); here the Lord's Divine Human is treated of;
the "flock of Kedar" denotes Divine celestial things; and the "rams of
Nebaioth," Divine spiritual things. From all this it is now evident that
a "ram" in the internal sense signifies the Lord's Divine spiritual, and
hence the spiritual in men, or what is the same, those of the human race
who are spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2831.">2831.</span></span>

Behind, caught in a thicket. That this signifies entangled in natural
knowledge, is evident from the signification of being "caught," as here
being entangled; and from the signification of a "thicket" or "tangle"
as being memory-knowledge-explained in what follows. That the spiritual
are held entangled in natural knowledge in regard to the truths of
faith, is as follows. The spiritual have not perception of good and
truth, as the celestial have, but instead of it conscience formed from
the goods and truths of faith which they have imbibed from infancy from
their parents and masters, and afterwards from the doctrine of faith
into which they were born. They who have no perception of good and truth
have to be confirmed by knowledges. Everyone forms for himself some idea
respecting the things he has learned, and also respecting the goods and
truths of faith; for without an idea, nothing remains in the memory
otherwise than as an empty thing. Confirmatory things are added thereto,
and fill up the idea of the thing, from other knowledges, even from
memory-knowledges. The confirmation of the idea itself by many things
causes not only that it sticks in the memory, so that it can be called
forth into the thought, but also that faith can be insinuated into it.
\[2\] As regards perception in general, since few know what perception
is, this must be declared. There is perception of what is good and true
in celestial and spiritual things; there is perception of what is just
and equitable in civil life; and there is perception of what is
honorable in moral life. As regards the perception of what is good and
true in celestial and spiritual things, the interior angels have this
perception from the Lord, the men of the Most Ancient Church had it, and
the celestial, who are in love to the Lord, have it. These know at once,
from a kind of internal observation, whether a thing is good and whether
it is true; for this is insinuated by the Lord, because they are
conjoined with Him by love. Spiritual men, however, have no such
perception of good and truth in celestial and spiritual things, but
instead of it have conscience which dictates; but as before said, this
conscience is formed from the knowledges of good and truth which they
have imbibed from their parents and masters, and afterwards from their
own study in doctrine and in the Word; and in these, even though not
entirely good and true, they put their faith. Hence it is that men can
have conscience from any doctrine whatever; even the Gentiles have
something not unlike conscience from their religion. \[3\] That the
spiritual have no perception of the good and truth of faith, but say and
believe that to be true which they have learned and apprehended, is
sufficiently evident from the fact that everyone says that his own dogma
is true, heretics more than others; and that they are not able to see
the truth itself, still less to acknowledge it, although thousands of
things should declare it. Let everyone explore himself and see if he is
able to perceive from any other source whether a thing is true; and if
when a thing most true is made manifest to him he still does not fail to
acknowledge it. As for example, one who makes faith the essential of
salvation, and not love: even if all should be read before him which the
Lord spoke concerning love and charity (see n. 2373), and if he should
know from the Word that all the Law and the Prophets hang upon love to
the Lord and charity toward the neighbor, he will nevertheless remain in
the idea of faith, and will say that this alone saves. It is otherwise
with those who are in celestial and spiritual perception. \[4\] As
regards the perception of what is just and equitable in civil life,
however, those in the world who are rational have this, and also the
perception of what is honorable in moral life. These two perceptions
distinguish one man from another, but by no means do such men for this
reason have the perception of the good and truth of faith, because this
perception is higher or more internal, and flows in from the Lord
through the inmost of the rational. \[5\] The reason also why the
spiritual have no perception of the good and truth of faith, is that
good and truth are not implanted in their will part, as with celestial
men, but in their intellectual part (see n. 863, 875, 927, 1023, 1043,
1044, 2256). Hence it is that the spiritual cannot arrive at the first
degree of the light in which the celestial are (n. 2718), but have what
is obscure in comparison (n. 1043, 2708 at the beginning, 2715). That
the spiritual are entangled in natural memory-knowledge in respect to
the truths of faith, follows from this. \[6\] That a "thicket" or
"tangle" in the internal sense signifies natural memory-knowledge, that
is, that knowledge which sticks fast in the exterior memory, may also be
seen from other passages in the Word. In Ezekiel: Behold, Asshur was a
cedar in Lebanon, with beautiful foliage, and a shady grove, and lofty
in height, and his branch was among the tangled boughs (Ezek. 31:3);
where Egypt, which is memory-knowledge, is treated of (n. 1164, 1165,
1186, 1462); "Asshur" denotes the rational (n. 119, 1186); which is also
the "cedar," and also "Lebanon," in the Word; "among the tangled boughs"
means among memory-knowledges, for the human rational is founded on its
memory-knowledges. \[7\] In the same: Thus saith the Lord Jehovih,
Because thou art exalted in stature, and he hath set his branch among
the tangled boughs, and his heart is lifted up in its height, strangers,
the violent of the nations, shall cut him down, and cast him out (Ezek.
31:10, 12); concerning Egypt; to "set the branch among the tangled
boughs" denotes sticking fast in memory-knowledges, and regarding
spiritual, celestial, and Divine things from them. In the same: To the
end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves in their
stature, neither set their branch among the tangled boughs, nor that all
that drink waters stand over them in their height, for they shall all be
delivered unto death, to the lower earth in the midst of the sons of
man, to them that go down to the pit (Ezek. 31:14); here those are
treated of who by reasonings from memory-knowledges desire to enter into
the mysteries of faith (that they are made altogether blind, may be seen
above, n. 215, 232, 233, 1072, 1911, 2196, 2203, 2568, 2588). To reason
from memory-knowledges is to "set the branch among the tangled boughs."
In the same: She had plants of strength for the scepters of them that
bare rule, and her height was exalted among the tangled boughs (Ezek.
19:11); this has a similar meaning. \[8\] In the same: The slain of
Israel shall be among their idols, round about their altars, and under
every green tree, and under every tangled oak (Ezek. 6:13); this treats
of the worship which those form to themselves who have faith in
themselves, and thus in the things which they hatch out from their
memory-knowledges; the "tangled oak" denotes the memory-knowledges in
such a state. (That "oaks" are apperceptions from memory-knowledges may
be seen above, n. 1442, 1443, 2144.) The like is found elsewhere in the
same Prophet: They saw every high hill, and every tangled tree, and
there they sacrificed their sacrifices (Ezek. 20:28); a "tangled tree"
denotes the things which are dictated not by the Word, but by one's own
memory-knowledge. (That worship was performed in groves, and was
significative according to the qualities of the trees, may be seen
above, n. 2722.) \[9\] In Isaiah: Wickedness burneth as the fire; it
devoureth the briars and thorns, and kindleth in the thickets of the
forest (Isa. 9:18); the "briars and thorns" denote falsity and cupidity;
the "thickets of the forest," memory-knowledges. In the same: Jehovah
Zebaoth shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon
shall fall by a mighty one (Isa. 10:34); the "thickets of the forest"
denote memory-knowledges and "Lebanon," things rational. In Jeremiah:
Set up a standard toward Zion, for I will bring evil from the north, and
a great destruction; a lion is gone up from his thicket, and a destroyer
of nations; he is on his way, he is gone forth from his place, to make
thy land a waste; thy cities shall be destroyed, without inhabitant
(Jer. 4:6-7); "from his thicket" denotes from memory-knowledge; and that
which ascends into Divine arcana from this makes the "land a waste,"
that is, lays waste the church. \[10\] The reason why in the Word
memory-knowledges are called "thickets," is that they are comparatively
of such a character, especially when the cupidities of the love of self
and of the world, and the principles of falsity, seek for them.
Celestial and spiritual love is that which disposes into order the
knowledges which are of the exterior memory; and the love of self and of
the world is that which perverts the order, and disturbs all things in
it. These things the man does not take notice of, because he places
order in perverted order, good in evil, and truth in falsity. On this
account these things are in entanglement; and also on this, that the
things of the exterior memory, where these knowledges are, compared with
those in the interior memory, where rational things are, are as in a
thicket, or as in a dark forest. How shady, opaque, and dark it is there
in comparison, a man cannot know so long as he is living in the body;
for he then supposes that all wisdom and intelligence are from this
source; but he will know in the other life, when he comes into the
things of his interior memory. That in the exterior memory, which is
proper to man while he is living in the world, nothing is less to be
found than the light of intelligence and wisdom; but that all is
relatively dark, disorderly, and entangled there, may be seen above (n.
2469-2494).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2832.">2832.</span></span>

By his horns. That this signifies with all power in regard to the truths
of faith, is evident from the signification of "horns." "Horns" are
mentioned in many places in the Word; and there signify the power of
truth from good; and in the opposite sense the power of falsity from
evil; here the meaning is that the spiritual who are signified by the
"ram" are entangled in natural memory-knowledge with all their might in
regard to truth, and hence that they are deprived of the power of
perceiving truths. For the more anyone consults natural
memory-knowledges, and sticks fast in them in his animus and mind in
regard to the things which are truths of faith, the more does he lose
the light of truth, and with the light, the life of truth. Everyone may
know this from experience, if he attends and reflects, from those who
say that they can believe nothing unless they comprehend that it is so
by means of the things of sense, or of memory-knowledge. If you explore
their quality, you will find that they believe nothing; and moreover
that nothing seems to them more wise than to ascribe everything to
nature. There are many also who say that they believe although they do
not comprehend; when nevertheless, in secret with themselves, they
reason equally as others do from the things of sense and
memory-knowledge concerning the truths of faith, as to whether a thing
is so. These either have a kind of persuasion breathed in from the love
of self and the world, or they do not believe at all. Their quality is
manifest from their life. Both classes are indeed in the Lord's
spiritual church, but they are not of the church. They who are of the
church are in a life of good, and have faith in truths; but the
spiritual have faith in other truths besides those which have been
impressed on them from infancy, and which they have afterwards confirmed
to themselves from doctrine or from some other source. Such is the state
of the spiritual, which state is here described by the "ram caught in
the thicket by his horns" (see just above, n. 2831). \[2\] That a "horn"
signifies the power of truth from good, is evident from the following
passages. In David: Thou art the glory of their strength, and in Thy
good pleasure wilt Thou exalt our horn; for our shield belongeth unto
Jehovah, and our king to the Holy One of Israel. My truth and My mercy
shall be with him, and in My name shall his horn be exalted; I will set
his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers (Ps.
89:17-18, 24-25); where "our horn" and "his horn" manifestly denote the
power of truth. The Lord's spiritual kingdom is there treated of; "our
king belongs to the Holy One of Israel" denotes that Divine truth
belongs to the Lord. (That a "king" is truth, and that the Lord's
royalty is the Divine Truth, may be seen above, n. 1672, 1728, 2015,
2069); to "put his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers"
denotes that strength is in the memory-knowledges and the knowledges of
truth. (That the "hand" and the "right hand" denote strength, see above,
n. 878; and also that the "sea" and the "rivers" denote
memory-knowledges and knowledges, n. 28, 2702.) In the same: I will love
Thee, O Jehovah, my strength; Jehovah is my rock, and my fortress, and
my deliverer, my God, my strong rock in whom I trust, my shield, and the
horn of my salvation (Ps. 18:1-2; 2 Sam. 22:2-3); the "horn of
salvation" denotes truth as to power; in this passage "strength,"
"rock," "fortress," "God," "strong rock," and "shield," are all
significative of the power of truth. \[3\] In the same: In Zion will I
make a horn to bud unto David, I will prepare a lamp for Mine anointed;
His enemies will I clothe with shame (Ps. 132:17-18); where the Lord is
treated of, who is "David" (n. 1888); a "horn" denotes the power of
truth; a "lamp," the light of truth. In Samuel: My heart hath exulted in
Jehovah, my horn is exalted in Jehovah, my mouth is enlarged against
mine enemies, because I have been glad in Thy salvation. Jehovah will
give strength unto His king, and will exalt the horn of His anointed (1
Sam. 2:1, 10); this is the prophecy of Hannah; the "horn" denotes the
power of truth. \[4\] In Moses: The firstling of his ox, honor is his,
and his horns are the horns of the unicorn; with them shall he push the
peoples all of them, to the ends of the earth (Deut. 33:17); this is the
prophecy of Moses concerning Joseph, where the "horns of the unicorn"
denote the great power of truth, as is manifest also from its being said
that he shall "push the peoples with them to the ends of the earth." So
too in David: My horn shalt Thou exalt like the unicorn's (Ps. 92:10).
And in the same: O Jehovah, save me from the mouth of the lion, and
answer me from the horns of the unicorn (Ps. 22:21); Divine truths, from
their height, are called the "horns of unicorns;" hence the "horn" is so
often said to be "exalted," for exaltation signifies power from the
interior. (That what is internal is represented by what is high, may be
seen above, n. 1735, 2148.) \[5\] In Jeremiah: The Lord hath cut off in
fierce anger all the horn of Israel, He hath drawn back His right hand
from before the enemy (Lam. 2:3); to "cut off all the horn of Israel"
denotes to deprive of truth which has power, which is also to "draw back
the right hand from before the enemy." In Ezekiel: In that day will I
make a horn to grow for the house of Israel, and I will give thee the
opening of the mouth in the midst of them (Ezek. 29:21); to "make the
horn to grow for the house of Israel," denotes to multiply the truths of
the spiritual church, which is "Israel;" the "opening of the mouth"
denotes the confession of them. \[6\] In Habakkuk: God will come from
Teman, and the Holy One from Mount Paran; His honor covered the heavens,
and the earth was full of His praise and His brightness shall be as the
light He; had horns out of His hand, and there was the hiding of His
strength (Hab. 3:3-4); where the Lord is treated of; that "He had horns
out of His hand, and there was the hiding of His strength," plainly
denotes the power of truth; that "Mount Paran" is the Divine Spiritual
or the Divine Truth of the Lord's Human, may be seen above (n. 2714),
which also is the "brightness" and the "light." \[7\] The Divine Truth
of the Lord's Human is thus described in John: I saw and behold in the
midst of the throne, and of the four animals, a Lamb standing as if
slain, having seven horns, which are the seven spirits of God sent forth
into all the earth (Rev. 5:6); the "seven horns" denote holy or Divine
truths. (That "seven" means holy, may be seen above, n. 716, 881.) The
"seven spirits sent forth into all the earth," are the holy preachings
of the same truths. \[8\] The "horns of the altars" signified nothing
else than truth in which is power. Of these it is said in Moses: Thou
shalt make horns upon the four corners of the altar; out of it shall its
horns be (Exod. 27:2; 38:2). So too upon the altar of incense, out of
which were to be horns (Exod. 30:2; 37:25). (That the altar was a
principal representative of the Lord and of His worship, may be seen
above, n. 921.) The altar was a representative of His Divine Good; the
horns were the representatives of His Divine Truth; that truth was from
good was represented by the horns being out of it, or out of the altar.
(That there is no other truth than that which is from good, may be seen
above, n. 654, 1162, 1176, 1608, 2063, 2261, 2429.) It is manifest from
this that "horns" in the genuine sense signify the power of truth which
is from good. \[9\] That Aaron and his sons, when initiated in the
ministry, took of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of
the altar with the finger (Exod. 29:12; Lev. 8:15); and that Aaron made
expiation upon the horns of the altar once in the year (Exod. 30:10);
and that when a priest sinned, he offered a bullock, and put of the
blood upon the horns of the altar of incense (Lev. 4:3, 7); also that
when a prince sinned, he offered a burnt-offering, and the blood was
sprinkled upon the horns of the altar of burnt-offering (Lev. 4:. 22,
25); and that it was the same when a soul sinned (verses 27, 30, 34, of
the same chapter); as also when the altar was expiated (Lev. 16:18,
19)-all these things signified truths from good; for all
sanctifications, inaugurations, and expiations were made by truths,
because truths introduce to good (n. 2830). That the "horns of the
altar" signified truths which are from good, may also be seen in John:
The sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the
golden altar which is before God (Rev. 9:13); the "horns of the golden
altar" manifestly denote truths from good, for thence came the voice
(that "gold" is good may be seen above, n. 113, 1551, 1552; and still
more the "golden altar"). \[10\] In Amos: In the day that I shall visit
the transgressions of Israel upon him, I will visit upon the altars of
Bethel, and the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and shall fall to
the ground (Amos 3:14); that the "horns of the altar were to be cut
off," was because truth from good was no longer represented there;
"Bethel" is the Divine Good, and is therefore called the "king's
sanctuary," and the "house of the kingdom" (Amos 7:13). The kings being
"anointed with oil from a horn" (1 Sam. 16:1, 13; 1 Kings 1:39)
represented in like manner truth from good. (The "oil" was good, n. 886;
but the "horn," truth; the "royalty" itself in the internal sense is
such truth, n. 1728, 2015, in which is power.) \[11\] That a "horn" in
the opposite sense signifies the power of falsity which is from evil, is
evident from the following passages. In Amos: Ye who rejoice in a thing
of naught, who say, Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?
(Amos 6:13); "horns" here denote the power of falsity. In Zechariah: I
lifted up mine eyes and saw, and behold four horns; and I said unto the
angel that talked with me, What are these? And he said to me, These are
the horns which have scattered Judah; Israel, and Jerusalem. And Jehovah
showed me four smiths; and I said, What come these to do? And He said,
saying, These are the horns which scattered Judah, so that no man doth
lift up his head; and these are come to terrify them, to cast down the
horns of the nations, which lifted up their horn against the land of
Judah, to scatter it (Zech. 1:18-21); the "horns" denote the power of
falsity, which vastates the church. In Ezekiel: Ye thrust with side and
with shoulder, and push all the diseased with your horns, till ye have
scattered them abroad (Ezek. 34:21); here the shepherds who seduce by
falsities are treated of; the "horns" denote the power of falsity; the
"shoulder," all power (n. 1085). In Jeremiah: Jehovah hath destroyed,
and hath not pitied, and He hath caused the enemy to rejoice over thee;
He hath exalted the horn of thine adversaries (Lam. 2:17). In the same:
The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken (Jer. 48:25); "horn"
here denotes powerful falsity. \[12\] In David: I said to them that were
glorying, Glory ye not, and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn; lift
not up your horn on high, speak not with a stiff neck. All the horns of
the wicked will I cut off, the horns of the righteous shall be lifted up
(Ps. 75:4-5, 10); the "horns of the wicked" denote the power of falsity
from evil; the "horns of the righteous," the power of truth from good.
\[13\] In Daniel: A fourth beast was seen, terrible and powerful and
strong exceedingly, and it had iron teeth; it devoured and brake in
pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet, and it had ten horns. I
considered the horns, and behold another little horn came up among them,
and three of the first horns were rooted up before it; and behold in
this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great
things. I held then because of the voice of the great words which the
horn spake; I desired certitude concerning the fourth beast, and
concerning the ten horns that were on his head, and concerning the other
which came up, and three fell before it; and concerning the same horn
that had eyes, and a mouth speaking great things; I held, and the same
horn made war with the saints. And he said, As for the fourth beast, it
shall be a fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all
the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down,
and break it in pieces. And as for the ten horns, out of this kingdom
shall ten kings arise, and another shall arise after them, and he shall
be diverse from the former ones, and he shall humble three kings; he
shall speak words against the Most High, and shall wear out the saints;
afterwards the judgment shall sit (Dan. 7:7-8, 11, 19-26). Here in the
internal sense the perverted state of the church is treated of. The
things which were here seen by Daniel, as the beast, the teeth of iron,
the horn in which were eyes, and the horns that spoke, and those which
made war with the saints, and that which spoke against the Most High,
signify the state of falsity and of heresies within the church. That
"horns" signify falsity powerful and prevailing, is evident from the
mere fact that eyes are attributed to them, that is, understanding (n.
2701); and that they spoke, even against the Most High. By the
"kingdoms" and "kings" are not signified kingdoms and kings, but
doctrinal things of falsity; as may be seen from their signification in
the Word as being doctrinal things of truth, and in the opposite sense
of falsity (see n. 1672, 2015, 2069, 2547). \[14\] Again in Daniel: A
ram was seen by him standing before the river, which had two horns; and
the horns were high, but one was higher than the other, and the higher
came up last. I saw the ram pushing with his horn westward, and
northward, and southward, so that no beasts could stand before him,
neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand; but he did
according to his will, and magnified himself. As I was considering,
behold a he-goat of the goats came from the west over the face of the
whole earth; this he-goat had a horn between his two eyes; he came to
the ram the lord of the horns, and ran upon him in the fury of his
power, and smote him, and brake his two horns; and there was no power in
the ram to stand before him. Afterwards the he-goat of the goats
magnified himself exceedingly and when he was strong, his great horn was
broken, and there came up four horns in place of it. Soon out of one of
them went forth a little horn, and grew exceedingly toward the south,
and toward the east, and toward beauty and it grew even to the army of
the heavens, and some of the army and of the stars it cast down to the
earth, and trampled upon them. The ram with the two horns, they are the
kings of Media and Persia; the he-goat is the king of Greece; the four
horns in place of one are four Kingdoms out of the nation (Dan. 8:1-27).
Here in the spiritual sense the state of the spiritual church is treated
of, which is the "ram" (n. 2830); and the state of that church is
described, how it gradually declines and is perverted. The "he-goat of
the goats" denotes those who are in faith separate from charity, or in
truth separate from good, who begin to uplift themselves against good,
and at length against the Lord. The "horns of the ram" are the truths of
the spiritual church both internal and external; the "horns of the
he-goat of the goats" are truths which have gradually degenerated into
falsities; and by the "kingdoms" and "kings" here mentioned are not
signified kingdoms and kings, but truths and falsities, as already said;
for the Lord's Word in its essence does not treat of worldly and
earthly, but of spiritual and heavenly things. \[15\] In John: And there
was seen another sign in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having
seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his heads seven diadems; his tail
drew a third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth
(Rev. 12:3, 4). And again: I saw a beast coming up out of the sea,
having seven heads and ten horns, and on his horns ten diadems, and upon
his heads names of blasphemy. It was given unto him to make war with the
saints, and to overcome them. And then I saw another beast coming up out
of the earth, and he had two horns like a lamb (Rev. 13:1-2, 7, 11).
Again in the same: I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet-colored beast,
full of names of blasphemy; having seven heads and ten horns; it was the
great Babylon. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman
sitteth; and they are seven kings; the ten horns are ten kings (Rev.
17:3, 5, 7, 9, 12-13). That by the "horns" here in like manner as in
Daniel are signified the powers of falsity, is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2833.">2833.</span></span>

And Abraham went, and took the ram. That this signifies their liberation
by the Lord's Divine Human, is evident from the representation of
Abraham, as being here the Lord as to His Divine Human (for when
Jehovah, or the angel of Jehovah, speaks with Abraham, then "Jehovah,"
or the "angel of Jehovah," is the Divine Itself, and "Abraham" is the
Divine Human); and also from the signification of a "ram," as being the
spiritual (n. 2830). It is hence manifest that Abraham's going and
taking the ram caught in the thicket by his horns, signifies the
liberation of the spiritual by the Lord's Divine Human. (That without
the Lord's coming into the world the spiritual could not possibly have
been saved, may be seen above, n. 2661, 2716; and that they have
salvation and liberation by the Lord's Divine Human, n. 2716.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2834.">2834.</span></span>

And offered him up for a burnt-offering in the stead of his son. That
this signifies their sanctification and adoration, is evident from the
signification of "offering for a burnt-offering," as being to be
sanctified (see n. 2776) and from the signification of "in the stead of
his son," as being adoption, namely, by the Lord's Divine Human, which
here is "Abraham" (n. 2833). The adoption of the spiritual is described
in John: Jesus said, I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abideth
in Me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; for without Me
ye can do nothing (John 15:5). (That a "vine" is the spiritual church
may be seen above, n. 1069.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2835.">2835.</span></span>

Verse 14. And Abraham called the name of that place, Jehovah-will-see,
as it is said to this day, In the mountain Jehovah will see. "And
Abraham called the name of that place," signifies the quality of their
state from the Lord's Divine Human; "Jehovah-will-see," signifies the
Lord's providence; "as it is said to this day," signifies what is
perpetual; "in the mountain Jehovah will see," signifies charity, by
means of which it was provided by the Lord that they should be saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2836.">2836.</span></span>

Abraham called the name of that place. That this signifies the quality
of their state (namely, of the spiritual) from the Lord's Divine Human,
is evident from the signification of "calling a name," as being to know
what the thing is, that is, its quality (see n. 144, 145, 1754, 1896,
2009); from the signification of "place," as being state (see n.
1273-1277, 1376-1381, 2625); and from the representation of Abraham, as
being the Lord as to His Divine Human (see n. 2833). Hence it is
manifest that "Abraham called the name of that place," signifies the
quality of the state of the spiritual from the Lord's Divine Human. That
the spiritual are saved by the Lord's coming into the world, was shown
above (n. 2661, 2716); also that they have illumination from the Lord's
Divine Human (n. 2716); and that it is provided that those should be
saved who are in the faith of charity, that is, in charity, follows in
this verse. This is the state which is signified by these words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2837.">2837.</span></span>

Jehovah-will-see. That this signifies the Lord's providence, is evident
from the signification of "seeing," when predicated of Jehovah or the
Lord, as being to foresee and provide (see n. 2807). (That "Jehovah" is
the Lord, may be seen above, n. 1343, 1736, 2156, 2329.) In the literal
sense this is the naming of a place, but in the internal sense it is the
quality of a state which is described; for times and spaces are merely
of nature; and therefore when the sense of the letter of the Word passes
from nature into heaven, the natural idea of those things altogether
perishes, and becomes the spiritual idea that corresponds to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2838.">2838.</span></span>

As it is said to this day. That this signifies what is perpetual, is
evident from the signification of "today" in the Word explained in what
follows. We read in several places in the Word, "even to this day," or
"to today;" as in what goes before, "He is the father of Moab even unto
this day; and the father of Ammon unto this day" (Gen. 19:37, 38); and
later in the same book, "The name of the city is Beersheba, even to this
day" (Gen. 26:33). Also this, "The sons of Israel eat not the sinew of
the part put out of place, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, even
to this day" (Gen. 32:32). And also this, "This is the pillar of
Rachel's grave even unto this day" (Gen. 35:20). "Joseph made it a
statute even to this day" (Gen. 47:26). In the historical sense these
things regard the time when Moses lived; but in the internal sense by
"this day" and by "today" there is signified perpetuity and eternity of
state. That "day" is state may be seen above (n. 23, 487, 488, 493,
893); and thus "today" also, which is time present. That which is of
time in the world, is eternal in heaven. That this might be signified,
"today" is added, or "to this day," although it appears to those who are
in the historical sense as if it involved nothing further. The like is
said elsewhere in the Word (as Josh. 4:9; 6:25; 7:26; Judges 1:21, 26;
and in other places). \[2\] That "today" signifies perpetuity and
eternity may be seen in David: I will tell of the decree: Jehovah hath
said unto Me, Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee (Ps. 2:7);
where "this day" manifestly denotes what is eternal. In the same:
Forever O Jehovah Thy Word is settled in the heavens, Thy truth is unto
generation and generation; Thou hast established the earth, and it
abideth; they abide this day according to Thy judgments (Ps. 119:89-91);
where also "this day" manifestly denotes what is eternal. In Jeremiah:
Before I formed Thee in the belly, I knew Thee; and before Thou camest
forth out of the womb, I sanctified Thee; I gave Thee for a prophet unto
the nations; I have set Thee this day over the nations and over the
kingdoms, and I have made Thee this day a defensed city, and an iron
pillar, and walls of brass (Jer. 1:5, 10, 18); here in the sense of the
letter Jeremiah is treated of, but in the internal sense the Lord is
meant; "I have set Thee this day, or today, over the nations and over
the kingdoms, and I have made Thee this day a defensed city" means that
it was from eternity. Of the Lord nothing else than what is eternal can
be predicated. \[3\] In Moses: Ye are standing this day all of you
before Jehovah your God, to enter into the covenant of Jehovah thy God,
and into His oath, which Jehovah thy God maketh with thee this day, that
He may establish thee this day unto Himself for a people; and He will be
a God unto thee; and not with you only, but with them who stand here
with us this day before Jehovah our God, and with them who are not with
us this day (Deut. 29:10, 12-14). In the sense of the letter here "this
day" is the time present when Moses spoke to the people; but that it
nevertheless involves the time to come and what is perpetual, is
evident; for to make a covenant with anyone, and with those who were
there, and not there, involves perpetuity, and the perpetuity itself is
what is meant in the internal sense. \[4\] That "daily" and "this day"
signify what is perpetual, is also evident from the sacrifice which was
made every day. This, on account of the signification of "day," "daily,"
and "this day," was called the continual or perpetual sacrifice (Num.
28:3, 23; Deut. 8:13; 11:31; 12:11). This is still more plainly evident
from the manna which rained from heaven, of which it is thus said in
Moses: Behold I will rain bread from heaven; and the people shall go out
and gather a portion day by day; and let no man leave of it till the
morning. What they left till the morning bred worms, and putrefied,
except what was kept the day before the Sabbath (Exod. 16:4, 19-20, 23).
This was because the manna signified the Lord's Divine Human (John 6:31,
32, 49, 50, 58). And because it signified the Lord's Divine Human, it
signified heavenly food, which is nothing else than love and charity
together with the goods and truths of faith. This food is given by the
Lord in the heavens to the angels every moment, and thus perpetually and
to eternity (see n. 2493). This also is what is meant in the Lord's
Prayer by "Give us this day our daily bread" (Matt. 6:11; Luke 11:3);
that is, every instant to eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2839.">2839.</span></span>

In the mountain Jehovah will see. That this signifies charity, by means
of which it is provided by the Lord that they should be saved, namely,
the spiritual, is evident from the signification of a "mountain," as
being love and charity (see n. 795, 796, 1430). That "Jehovah will see"
denotes the Lord's providence, or what is provided by the Lord, was said
just above (n. 2837). Here charity is spoken of, and not love, on
account of the difference between charity and love (see n. 2023). That
the spiritual are saved by charity, and not by faith separate from
charity, is evident from many passages in the Word. With charity and
with faith the case is this: charity without faith is not genuine
charity, and faith without charity is not faith. That there may be
charity, there must be faith; and that there may be faith, there must be
charity; but the essential itself is charity; for in no other ground can
the seed which is faith be implanted. From the conjunction of the two
mutually and reciprocally is the heavenly marriage, that is, the Lord's
kingdom. Unless faith is implanted in charity it is mere
memory-knowledge; for it goes no further than the memory; there is no
affection of the heart which receives it; but when it is implanted in
charity, that is, in the life, it becomes intelligence and wisdom.
Charity without faith, such as is with children and with upright
Gentiles, is only ground in which faith is implanted-if not in the life
of the body, still in the other life (see n. 1802, 2280, 2290-2309,
2419, 2589-2604).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2840.">2840.</span></span>

Verses 15, 16. And the angel of Jehovah called unto Abraham a second
time out of heaven, and said, By Myself have I sworn, saith Jehovah,
because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine
only one. "The angel of Jehovah called unto Abraham a second time out of
heaven," signifies still greater consolation of the Lord from the
Divine; "and said, By Myself have I sworn, saith Jehovah," signifies
irrevocable confirmation from the Divine; "because thou hast done this
thing," signifies the thing accomplished; "and hast not kept back thy
son, thine only one," signifies the unition of the Human with the Divine
by the utmost of temptation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2841.">2841.</span></span>

The Angel of Jehovah called unto Abraham a second time out of heaven.
That this signifies still greater consolation of the Lord, is evident
from the signification of "calling out of heaven," as being to console;
and from the signification of the "angel of Jehovah," as being the
Lord's Divine Itself (see above, n. 2821, where the same words occur).
This is said a "second time," because there is greater consolation. The
first consolation is contained in verses 12, 13, and 14, where the
subject is the Lord's providence that those from the human race who are
called the spiritual should be adopted. The second consolation, which is
greater, is contained in the verses that follow (17, 18, etc., to the
end), namely, that the spiritual should be multiplied as the stars of
the heavens, and as the sand upon the sea shore; and that not they only
should be saved, but also all who are in good. These were things of the
Lord's love, and therefore He had consolation from them. No one has
consolation except from the things which are of his love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2842.">2842.</span></span>

And said, By Myself have I sworn, saith Jehovah. That this signifies
irrevocable confirmation from the Divine, namely, concerning the things
which follow, is evident from the signification of "saying by Myself
have I sworn," and of "saith Jehovah;" all which involve confirmation,
and indeed from the Divine, that is, from Himself. The Divine cannot
confirm from any other source than from Itself; and what it confirms is
irrevocable, because it is eternal truth. Whatever Jehovah or the Lord
speaks is eternal truth (Matt. 24:35), for it comes from the very being
of truth. But His confirming it as it were by an oath (as here and
elsewhere in the Word) is not for the reason that it may be more true,
but for the reason that it is said to such as do not receive truth
Divine unless it is so confirmed; for they have no other idea of Jehovah
or the Lord than as of a man, who can say, and change, as we frequently
read in the Word; but in the internal sense it is very different.
Everyone may know that Jehovah or the Lord never confirms anything by an
oath; but when the Divine truth itself, and its confirmation, passes
down to a man of such nature, it is turned into the semblance of an
oath. The case herein is as it was with the devouring fire and smoke
that appeared upon Mount Sinai before the eyes of the people, when
Jehovah or the Lord came down (Exod. 19:18; Deut. 4:11-12; 5:19-21): His
glory in heaven, even mercy itself, appeared in this manner before the
people there, who were in evil and falsity (see n. 1861); and the case
is the same with many things called the sayings and doings of Jehovah
that are spoken of in the Word. It may be seen from this that the
expression, "by Myself have I sworn, saith Jehovah," is significative of
irrevocable confirmation from the Divine. \[2\] That to "swear," when
predicated of Jehovah, signifies to confirm with a man who is of such
nature, may be seen from many other passages in the Word; as in David:
Jehovah remembered His covenant forever, the word which He commanded to
a thousand generations; which He made with Abraham, and His oath unto
Isaac (Ps. 105:8-9). The case is the same with a covenant as with an
oath, in that Jehovah or the Lord does not make a covenant with man, but
when conjunction by love and charity is treated of, this is set forth in
act as a covenant (see n. 1864). In the same: Jehovah hath sworn, and
will not repent, Thou art a Priest forever, after the manner of
Melchizedek <span id="fr_82"></span>[2842-1](#fn_82) (Ps. 110:4.md). This
is said concerning the Lord, and "Jehovah hath sworn" denotes
irrevocable confirmation from the Divine, that is, that it is eternal
truth. \[3\] In the same: I have made a covenant with My chosen, I have
sworn unto David My servant, Thy seed will I establish forever, and
build up thy throne to generation and generation (Ps. 89:3-4). This also
is concerning the Lord: to "make a covenant with the chosen," and to
"swear unto David," denote irrevocable confirmation or eternal truth;
"David" denotes the Lord (n. 1888); to "make a covenant" regards the
Divine good; to "swear," the Divine truth. In the same: My covenant will
I not profane nor alter the thing that is gone out of My lips; once have
I sworn by My holiness, I will not lie unto David (Ps. 89:34-35); where
also "David" denotes the Lord; the "covenant" here likewise has regard
to the Divine good; and the "thing that has gone out of My lips," to the
Divine truth, and this on account of the marriage of good and truth
which is in everything in the Word (see n. 683, 793, 801, 2516, 2712).
\[4\] In the same: Jehovah hath sworn unto David in truth, He will not
turn from it. Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne, if
thy sons will keep My covenant, and My testimony that I shall teach them
(Ps. 132:11-12); "Jehovah hath sworn unto David in truth" manifestly
denotes the confirmation of eternal truth; and therefore it is said, "He
will not turn from it; "that by David is meant the Lord has been stated
already; the oath was still "to David," because he was of such a
character that he believed that the confirmation was concerning himself
and his posterity; for David was in the love of himself and of his
posterity, and hence believed that it was concerning him; that is, as
said above, that his seed should be established forever, and his throne
to generation and generation; but this was said of the Lord. \[5\] In
Isaiah: This is as the waters of Noah unto Me; for as I have sworn that
the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn
that I would not be wroth with thee (Isa. 54:9); where to "swear"
denotes making a covenant and confirming it by an oath. That it was a
covenant, and not an oath, may be seen in Genesis 9:11. In the same:
Jehovah hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come
to pass (Isa. 14:24). In the same: Jehovah hath sworn by His right hand,
and by the arm of His strength (Isa. 62:8). In Jeremiah: Hear ye the
word of Jehovah, all Judah, that dwell in the land of Egypt; behold I
have sworn by My great name, saith Jehovah, that My name shall no more
be named in the mouth of any man of Judah, saying, As the Lord Jehovih
liveth, in all the land of Egypt (Jer. 44:26). By Myself have I sworn,
saith Jehovah, that Bozrah shall become a desolation (Jer. 49:13). In
the same: Jehovah Zebaoth hath sworn by His soul, Surely I will fill
thee with men as with the locust (Jer. 51:14). In Amos: The Lord Jehovih
hath sworn by His holiness, that behold the days shall come (Amos 4:2).
In the same: Jehovah hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I
will never forget any of their deeds (Amos 8:7). \[6\] In these
passages, "Jehovah swearing by His right hand," "by His great name," by
"Himself," by His "soul," by His "holiness," by the "excellency of
Jacob," signifies the confirmation there is in Jehovah or the Lord. A
confirmation by Jehovah can be given only from Himself. The "right hand
of Jehovah," the "great name of Jehovah," the "soul of Jehovah," the
"holiness of Jehovah," the "excellency of Jacob," signify the Lord's
Divine Human: "swearing" thereby was confirmation. \[7\] Jehovah or the
Lord "swearing" to give the land to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or to
their posterity, signifies in the internal sense the confirmation that
He would give the heavenly kingdom to those who are in love to Him and
faith in Him. It is they who are meant in the internal sense of the Word
by the sons and the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or of the
fathers; which was also actually represented by the fact that the land
of Canaan was given to their posterity, and that the church at that time
with them represented the Lord's heavenly kingdom, as the land itself
also did. (That "land" and the "land of Canaan" in the internal sense is
the Lord's kingdom, may be seen above, n. 1413, 1437, 1607.) It is from
this that it is said in Moses: That ye may prolong your days upon the
ground which Jehovah sware unto your fathers, to give unto them, and to
their seed, a land flowing with milk and honey; that your days may be
multiplied, and the days of your children, upon the ground which Jehovah
sware unto your fathers, to give them, as the days of the heavens upon
the earth (Deut. 11:9, 21). From these passages it must now be evident
that Jehovah's "swearing" was representative of confirmation, and indeed
of an irrevocable one. This is still more plainly manifest in Isaiah: By
Myself have I sworn, the word of righteousness is gone forth from My
mouth, and shall not return, that to Me every knee shall bow, every
tongue shall swear (Isa. 45:23). \[8\] Moreover it was enjoined upon
those who were of the representative Jewish Church, that when they
confirmed covenants by an oath, and likewise vows, also promises, and
sureties, they should "swear by the name of Jehovah." The reason why
this was enjoined upon them, although it was only permitted, was that
the confirmation of the internal man also would thus be represented; so
that oaths at that time in the name of Jehovah, were as other things
were, namely, representative. That it was enjoined, that is, permitted,
is evident in Moses: Thou shalt fear Jehovah thy God, and Him shall thou
serve, and shalt swear by His name; ye shall not go after other gods
(Deut. 6:13-14). Again in the same: Thou shalt fear Jehovah thy God, Him
shalt thou serve and to Him shalt thou cleave, and shalt swear by His
name (Deut. 10:20). In Isaiah: He who blesseth himself in the earth
shall bless himself in the God of truth, and he that sweareth in the
earth shall swear by the God of truth (Isa. 65:16). In Jeremiah: If thou
wilt return, O Israel, saith Jehovah, unto Me shall thou return; and if
thou wilt put away thine abominations from before Me, waver not; and
thou shalt swear, Jehovah liveth, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness (Jer. 4:1-2). In the same: If learning they will learn the
ways of My people, to swear by My name, then they shall be built up in
the midst of My people (Jer. 12:16). That they also swore "by the name
of Jehovah," or swore "to Jehovah," may be seen in Isaiah: Hear ye this,
O house of Jacob, that are called by the name of Israel, and are come
forth out of the waters of Judah, that swear by the name of Jehovah, and
have made mention of the God of Israel, not in truth, and not in
righteousness (Isa. 48:1). In the same: In that day there shall be five
cities in the land of Egypt that speak the language of Canaan, and swear
to Jehovah Zebaoth (Isa 19:18). In Joshua: The princes of the
congregation sware to the Gibeonites by Jehovah the God of Israel (Josh.
9:18-19). \[9\] From this it is evident that they were permitted to
swear by the name of Jehovah, or by Jehovah; yet it is evident that this
was nothing else than a representative of the confirmation of the
internal man. But it is known that internal men, that is, those who have
conscience, have no need to confirm anything by an oath; and that they
do not thus confirm. To them oaths are a cause of shame. They can indeed
say with some asseveration that a thing is so, and can also confirm the
truth by reasons; but to swear that it is so, they cannot. They have an
internal bond by which they are bound, namely, that of conscience. To
superadd to this an external bond, which is an oath, is like imputing to
them that they are not upright in heart. The internal man is also of
such a character that he loves to speak and act from freedom, but not
from compulsion; for with them the internal compels the external, but
not the reverse. On this account they who have conscience do not swear;
still less do they who have perception of good and truth, that is,
celestial men. These do not even confirm themselves or one another by
reasons, but merely say that a thing is so, or is not so (n. 202, 337,
2718); wherefore they are still further removed from taking an oath.
\[10\] For these reasons, and because oaths were among the
representatives which were to be abrogated, the Lord taught that we are
not to swear at all, in these words in Matthew: Ye have heard that it
has been said, Thou shalt not forswear thyself; but shalt perform unto
the Lord thine oaths. But I say unto you, Swear not at all neither by
the heaven, for it is God's throne; nor by the earth, for it is His
footstool nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great king;
neither shalt thou swear by thy head, for thou canst not make one hair
white or black. But let your speech be, Yea, yea; nay, nay; for
whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil (Matt. 5:33-37). By these
words is meant that we are not to swear at all by Jehovah, nor by
anything which is of Jehovah or the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2843.">2843.</span></span>

Because thou hast done this thing. That this signifies the thing
accomplished, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2844.">2844.</span></span>

And hast not withheld thy son, thine only one. That this signifies the
unition of the Human with the Divine by the utmost of temptation, is
evident from what was said above (n. 2827), where the same words occur,
except that we do not here read "from Me," by which is signified that
there will be a still further unition. That there was always a further
unition of the Lord's Human Essence with His Divine Essence, even to a
plenary unition, may be seen above (n. 1864, 2033).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2845.">2845.</span></span>

Verse 17. That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
multiply thy seed, as the stars of the heavens, and as the sand which is
upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall inherit the gate of thine
enemies. "That in blessing I will bless thee," signifies fructification
from the affection of truth; "and in multiplying I will multiply,"
signifies derivations of truth therefrom; "thy seed," signifies the
spiritual, who being in the good of faith are saved by the Lord's Divine
Human; "as the stars of the heavens," signifies the multitude of the
knowledges of good and truth; "and as the sand which is upon the sea
shore," signifies the multitude of corresponding memory-knowledges; "and
thy seed shall inherit the gate of thine enemies," signifies that
charity and faith shall come into the place where evil and falsity were
before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2846.">2846.</span></span>

That in blessing I will bless thee. That this signifies fructification
from the affection of truth, is evident from the signification of "being
blessed," as meaning to be enriched with celestial and spiritual good
(see n. 981, 1096, 1420, 1422); here, to be made fruitful from the good
of faith, or what is the same, from the affection of truth, because the
spiritual are treated of. It is here said by Jehovah to Abraham, "in
blessing I will bless thee," and by Abraham is represented the Lord as
to His Divine Human, as before in this chapter; and yet the Lord Himself
could not be blessed, because He is blessing itself; but He is said to
be blessed, when in accordance with His love those abound who are saved;
and therefore in the internal sense these are here signified, as is also
evident from what immediately follows. Fructification is here spoken of,
because this is predicated of affection; but multiplication, as next
follows, is predicated of the truths which are therefrom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2847.">2847.</span></span>

In multiplying I will multiply. That this signifies the derivations of
truth therefrom, is evident from the predication of "being multiplied,"
as being concerning truth; here therefore as meaning the derivations of
truth from affection, as was said just above. (That being "fructified"
is predicated of good, and being "multiplied," of truth, may be seen
above, n. 43, 55, 913, 983.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2848.">2848.</span></span>

Thy seed. That this signifies the spiritual who are saved in the good of
faith by the Lord's Divine Human, is evident from the signification of
"seed," as being the faith of charity (concerning which see n. 1025,
1447, 1610, 1941); or what is the same, those of the human race who are
in the faith of charity, that is, who are spiritual. They are also
called by the Lord the "seed," and the "sons of the kingdom," in
Matthew: He who soweth the good seed is the Son of man, but the seed are
the sons of the kingdom (Matt. 8:37-38).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2849.">2849.</span></span>

As the stars of the heavens. That this signifies the multitude of the
knowledges of good and truth, is evident from the signification of the
"stars," as being the knowledges of good and truth (see n. 1808, 2495).
The spiritual are they who in the Word are in various places compared to
the stars, and this owing to the knowledges of good and truth which they
have; but the celestial are not so compared, because they have not
knowledges but perceptions; moreover the stars illumine the night, and
the spiritual have a light of night (as from the moon and stars) in
comparison with the light of day in which the celestial are. (That the
spiritual have comparative obscurity may be seen above, 1043, 2708 at
the beginning, 2715.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2850.">2850.</span></span>

And as the sand which is upon the sea shore. That this signifies the
multitude of corresponding memory-knowledges, is evident from the
signification of the "sea," as being memory-knowledges in general, or a
gathering of them (see n. 28, 2120); and from the signification of
"sand," as being memory- knowledges specifically or in particular.
Memory-knowledges are compared to "sand," because the little stones of
which sand is made, in the internal sense signify memory-knowledges (n.
643, 1298). It is here said that they shall be multiplied "as the stars
of the heavens," and also "as the sand of the sea shore," because the
stars or knowledges have relation to the rational, but the sand of the
sea shore or memory-knowledges to the natural. When the things of the
rational man, namely, the goods and truths of knowledges, agree with
those of the natural man, namely, with memory-knowledges, so that they
make a one, or mutually confirm each other, they then correspond. To
this correspondence the Lord reduces the rational and natural things of
man when he regenerates him, or makes him spiritual. From this cause it
is that both the stars of the heavens and the sand of the sea shore are
here mentioned; otherwise one would have been sufficient.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[2842-1](ac057.htm#fr_82.md) Poenituit...juxta
verbum meum, Malchizedech; but poenitebit...juxta modum Malchizedechi,
n. 6148. \[Rotch ed.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2851-2900](ac058.md)
