[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac061)  [Next](ac063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="3051.">3051.</span></span>

And went to Aram-naharaim. That this signifies the knowledges of truth
therefrom, is evident from the signification of "Aram" or "Syria," as
being the knowledges of good (see n. 1232, 1234); but "Aram-naharaim,"
or "Syria-of-the-rivers," signifies the knowledges of truth, from
naharaim or "rivers;" because "rivers" signify the intelligence which is
of the knowledges of truth, as may be seen from the passages of the Word
collected above (n. 108, 109, 2702); and from many others, concerning
which, of the Lord's Divine mercy elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3052.">3052.</span></span>

To the city of Nahor. That this signifies kindred doctrinal things, is
evident from the signification of a "city," as being doctrine (see n.
402, 2449); and from the representation of "Nahor," as being what is
akin; for Nahor was the brother of Abram, and from him came Bethuel,
from whom was Rebekah. Memory-knowledges and doctrinal things are
distinct from each other in this way: doctrinal things come from
memory-knowledges, for they look to use, and are procured from
memory-knowledges by means of reflection. They are here said to be
"kindred," by reason of their derivation from things Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3053.">3053.</span></span>

Verse 11. And he made the camels kneel down, without the city, by the
well of waters, about the time of evening, about the time that the
drawers go out. "He made the camels kneel down," signifies a holy
disposing of general memory-knowledges; "without the city," signifies
removal from doctrinal things; "by the well of waters," signifies for
receiving the truths of faith; "about the time of evening," signifies a
state of more obscurity at that time; "about the time that the drawers
go out," signifies a state of instruction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3054.">3054.</span></span>

He made the camels kneel down. That this signifies a holy disposing of
general memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification of "making
to kneel down," as being to dispose themselves to what is holy; and from
the signification of "camels," as being general memory-knowledges (see
above, n. 3048).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3055.">3055.</span></span>

Without the city. That this signifies removal from doctrinal things, is
evident from the signification of a "city," as being doctrine (see n.
402, 2449); thus "without the city" evidently means outside of doctrinal
things; thus removal from them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3056.">3056.</span></span>

About the time of evening. That this signifies a state of more obscurity
at that time, is evident from the signification of "time," as being
state (see n. 2625, 2788, 2837); and from the signification of "evening"
as being what is obscure; for "evening" in the Word signifies the state
which precedes the last state of a church that is coming to its close,
which last state is called "night;" and it also signifies the first
state of a church just rising, which state is called "morning" (see n.
2323); in either sense it denotes what is obscure, which is signified by
"evening," but it here denotes the obscurity that precedes the morning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3057.">3057.</span></span>

About the time that the drawers go out. That this signifies a state of
instruction, is evident from the signification of "time," as being state
(see just above, n. 3056); and from the signification of a "drawer,"
that is, one who draws water, as being to be instructed-to be explained
in what follows. What has now been told (from n. 3054) is what is
signified in the internal sense by the things related historically in
this verse; but what these particulars involve in a series is not easily
made plain to one who has not been instructed concerning the natural
man, and concerning the memory-knowledges and doctrinal things therein,
and also how truths are elevated therefrom into the rational, and become
rational; and still less if he does not know what is the quality of the
rational relatively to the natural, that is, the quality of the things
in the rational relatively to those in the natural. \[2\] The things in
the rational are not apparent to man while he lives in the body; for
those in the natural are what come to perception, and seldom those in
the rational, except by a certain kind of light illuminating the things
in the natural, or as an inflowing capacity by which the ideas of
thought are disposed into order; and also as a faculty of perceiving
that which the mind is considering. Unless these and other things be
known, what is contained in this verse can with difficulty be explained
to the apprehension, as that there is a holy disposing of the general
memory-knowledges, and then a removal from doctrinal things for
receiving the truths of faith; and that when this is taking place there
is an obscure state, and that such is the state of instruction.
Nevertheless we may briefly state as much as can be apprehended, and
here, how the case is with a man then he is being reformed by the Lord;
for the reformation of a man is a kind of image of what took place with
the Lord then He was in the world (as was said above, n. 3043). \[3\]
When a man is being reformed, the general things in his natural man are
disposed by the Lord to correspondence with those which are in heaven.
(What correspondence is, and that it is between spiritual things and
natural things, may be seen above, n. 2987, 2989-2991, 3002.) General
things are first disposed, in order that particulars may be successively
insinuated into them by the Lord, and singulars into the particulars;
for if the general things are not in order, there cannot come forth
order in the particulars, because the particulars enter into the
generals, and confirm them; still less can there be order in the
singulars, because these enter into the particulars as into their
generals, and illustrate them. These are the things that are meant by a
holy disposing of general memory-knowledges; and this is meant in the
internal sense by "making the camels kneel down;" for so they submit
themselves for the reception of influx. \[4\] When the general
memory-knowledges are being disposed in this way, doctrinal things are
removed, as they are conclusions from these knowledges; for there flows
in through the rational as it were a dictate that this is true, and this
not true; but in this way-that it is true because it agrees with the
orderly disposition of the general memory-knowledges; and that it is not
true because it disagrees; there is no other influx as to truths.
Doctrinal things are indeed there before, but they are not doctrinal
things until they are believed, but are merely memory-knowledges; and
therefore when the man thinks about them, no conclusion is drawn from
them, but only concerning them, from other things. This is what is meant
by removal from doctrinal things, and it is what is here signified in
the internal sense by "without the city." But this is the state that is
called an obscure state, and is signified by the "time of evening;"
whereas when doctrinal things have been confirmed, so that they are
believed, then comes the "morning," or a state of light. The other
things contained in this verse are evident from what has been already
stated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3058.">3058.</span></span>

That to "draw waters" signifies instruction, and likewise enlightenment
from it (as in what follows in this chapter), comes from the fact that
in the internal sense "waters" signify the truths of faith (see n.
2702); and therefore to "draw waters" is nothing else than to be
instructed in the truths of faith, and thereby to be enlightened; as
also in other passages of the Word. In Isaiah: With joy shall ye draw
waters out of the fountains of salvation. In that day shall ye confess
unto Jehovah (Isa. 12:3-4). To "draw waters" is to be instructed, to
understand, and to be wise. Again: Bring ye waters to meet him that is
thirsty, ye inhabitants of the land of Tema (Isa. 21:14). To "bring
waters to meet him that is thirsty" means to instruct. Again: The
afflicted and the needy seek waters, and there are none, and their
tongue faileth for thirst (Isa. 41:17). "They that seek waters," are
they who desire to be instructed in truths. That "there are none,"
signifies that no one has truths. Moreover by the "drawers of water"
were represented in the Jewish Church those who continually desire to
know truths, but for no other end than to know them, while caring
nothing for the use. Such were accounted among the lowest, and were
represented by the Gibeonites (concerning whom see Joshua 9:21, 23, 27).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3059.">3059.</span></span>

Verses 12-14. And he said, O Jehovah God of my lord Abraham, cause to
meet I pray before me this day; and do mercy with my lord Abraham.
Behold I stand by the fountain of waters; and the daughters of the men
of the city come out to draw waters. And let it come to pass that the
damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher I pray thee that I may
drink, and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also,
her hast Thou appointed for Thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know
that Thou hast done mercy with my lord. "He said," signifies
communication; "Jehovah God of my lord Abraham," signifies of the Divine
Itself which is the Father, with the Divine Human which is the Son;
"cause to meet I pray before me this day," signifies providence from
eternity; "and do mercy," signifies an influx of love; "with my lord,
Abraham," signifies the Divine Human. "Behold I stand by the fountain of
waters," signifies the state of the conjunction of truth Divine with the
Human; "and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw
waters," signifies the affections of truth, and instruction through
them; "and let it come to pass that the damsel to whom I shall say,"
signifies an affection in which is innocence; "let down thy pitcher I
pray thee," signifies the submission of memory- knowledges; "that I may
drink," signifies instruction in truth therefrom; "and she shall say,
Drink," signifies the reciprocal thereto; "and I will give thy camels
drink also," signifies the consequent enlightenment of all the
memory-knowledges in the natural man; "her hast Thou appointed for thy
servant Isaac" signifies the conjunction of truth Divine with Divine
good in the rational; "and thereby shall I know that Thou hast done
mercy with my lord," signifies that from the Divine love there is a
marriage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3060.">3060.</span></span>

He said. That this signifies communication, is evident from the
signification of "saying" in the historical portions of the Word, as
being to perceive and to will (concerning which often before); and
because it signifies these, it also signifies to communicate, for from
perceiving and willing comes communication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3061.">3061.</span></span>

Jehovah God of my lord Abraham. That this signifies of the Divine Itself
which is the Father, with the Divine Human which is the Son (that is,
communication), is evident from what has been so often said and shown
above, namely, that "Jehovah God" is the Divine Itself of the Lord,
which is called the "Father;" and that by Abraham is represented His
Divine Human (n. 2833, 2836). It may be seen above, that in the Word of
the Old Testament "Jehovah" is the Lord Himself (n. 1736, 1815, 2921);
and that the Most Ancient Church before the flood and the Ancient Church
after the flood understood by "Jehovah" no other than the Lord (n. 1343,
1676, 1990, 2016, 3035). Also that in the Lord is the Trinity-the Divine
Itself, the Divine Human, and the proceeding Divine Holy-and these are a
one (n. 1999, 2149, 2156, 2288, 2329, 2447). That all the Trinity in the
Lord is Jehovah (n. 2156, 2329); and that each and all things in the
Lord are Jehovah (n. 1902, 1921). That the Lord is one with the Father,
and that no other is understood in heaven by the Father (n. 14, 15,
1725, 1729, 1733, 1815, 2005, 2018, 2025, 2803, 3038). That the Lord is
the universal heaven, for He is the all there; and that from Him is the
all of innocence, of peace, of love, of charity, of mercy, of conjugial
love; and all good and truth. That Moses and the Prophets, thus the Word
in every particular, is concerning Him; and that all the rites of the
church represented Him (n. 2751). That the Lord as to the Divine Human
is called the "Son" (n. 2628). That the Divine Human of the Lord was not
only conceived, but was also born of His Divine Essence, which is
Jehovah (n. 2798); and that thereby the Lord as to the Human was made
Jehovah, and Life of Himself (n. 1603, 1737). \[2\] That the Lord was
from eternity, is plainly evident from the Word (see n. 2803), although
He was afterwards born in time; for He spoke by Moses and the Prophets;
He likewise had appeared to many, and it is there said that He was
Jehovah. But this deepest of arcana could be revealed to none but those
who are in Divine perception, thus to scarcely any but the men of the
Most Ancient Church, who were celestial and in this perception. From
these I have heard that Jehovah Himself was the Lord as to the Divine
Human when He descended into heaven and flowed in through heaven; for
heaven represents one man as to all his members, and is therefore also
called the Grand Man (n. 684, 1276, 2996, 2998, 3021). The Divine Itself
in heaven, that is, in the Grand Man, was the Divine Human, and was
Jehovah Himself thus clothed with the Human. \[3\] But when mankind
became such that the Divine Itself, clothed as the Divine Human, could
no longer affect them (that is, when Jehovah could no longer come to
man, because man had so far removed himself), then Jehovah, who is the
Lord as to the Divine Essence, descended and took upon Himself a Human,
by conception Divine, and by birth from a virgin such as is that of
another man; but this He expelled, and by Divine means made Divine the
Human that was born, from which proceeds all the Holy. Thus the Divine
Human became an essence by itself which fills the universal heaven, and
which also makes it possible for those to be saved who could not be
saved before. This then is the Lord, who as to the Divine Human is alone
Man, and from whom man has it that he is man (n. 49, 288, 477, 565,
1894).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3062.">3062.</span></span>

Cause to meet I pray before me this day. That this signifies providence
from eternity, is evident from the signification of "causing to meet,"
as being to provide; and from the signification of "this day," as being
from eternity (see n. 2838) and moreover it is evident that what is here
treated of, and for which supplication was made, is of Providence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3063.">3063.</span></span>

And do mercy. That this signifies an influx of love is evident from the
essence of mercy, as being love. Love is itself turned to mercy and
becomes mercy when anyone who is in need of help is regarded from love
or charity; hence mercy is the effect of love toward the needy and
miserable. But here by "mercy" in the internal sense is meant love; and
by "doing mercy" is meant an influx of love, because it is from the
Lord's Divine Itself into His Divine Human; for it was the Lord's Divine
love through which He made His Human Divine; for love is the very being
of life, and no one has Divine love but the Lord. (See what has been
said before concerning the Lord's love, namely: That His life was love
toward the universal human race, n. 2253: That from this love He fought,
n. 1690, 1789, 1812, 1813, 1820: That it transcends all understanding,
n. 1799, 2077: That the Lord is Divine love itself, n. 2077, 2500, 2572:
That "Jehovah" is love, n. 1735: That nothing lives but love, n. 1589:
That whoever has mutual love has the Lord's life, n. 1799, 1802, 1803:
That love and charity are the celestial itself, n. 1419, 1824.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3064.">3064.</span></span>

With my lord Abraham. That this signifies the Divine Human, is evident
from the representation of Abraham here, as being the Lord's Divine
Human (see n. 2833, 2836).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3065.">3065.</span></span>

Behold I stand by the fountain of waters. That this signifies the state
of conjunction of truth Divine in the Human, is evident from the
signification of a "fountain," as being truth (see n. 2702); here truth
Divine, because the Lord is treated of. The state of conjunction itself
is signified by "standing by the fountain;" that this conjunction was in
the Human, is evident from the series.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3066.">3066.</span></span>

And the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw waters. That
this signifies the affections of truth and instruction through them, is
evident from the signification of "daughters," as being affections (see
n. 489-491, 2362); and from the signification of "the men of the city,"
as being truths. (The inhabitants of a city are frequently called in the
Word the "men of the city," and frequently the "inhabitants of the
city;" when they are called the "men of the city," truths are signified,
and when they are called the "inhabitants," goods are signified; what
"men" signify, may be seen above, n. 265, 749, 915, 1007, 2517; and what
"inhabitants," n. 2268, 2451, 2712; what a "city," n. 402, 2450, 2943.)
The signification of the above words is evident also from the
signification of "drawing water," as being to be instructed (see above,
n. 3058). Hence it is evident that by the "daughters of the men of the
city coming out to draw waters," are signified the affections of truth,
and instruction through them. No one is ever instructed by means of
truths, but by means of the affections of truth; for truths apart from
affection do indeed come to the ear as sound, but do not enter into the
memory; that which causes them to enter into the memory and to abide in
it, is affection. For the good of affection is like soil, in which
truths are sown as seeds; but such as the soil is (that is, such as the
affection is), such is the produce of that which is sown. The end or use
determines the quality of the soil, or of the affection, and thus the
quality of the produce of what is sown; or, if you prefer to say so, the
love itself determines it; for in all things the love is the end and the
use, for nothing is regarded as the end and use except that which is
loved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3067.">3067.</span></span>

And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say. That this
signifies an affection in which is innocence, is evident from the
signification of a "damsel." In the Word the affections of good and of
truth are called "little children," "damsels," "girls," and "daughters;"
but in all cases with a difference as to state: when "daughter" is
named, affection in general is signified; when "girl" is named,
affection in which is charity is signified; but when it is said
"damsel," affection in which is innocence is signified, because the age
of girlhood is next to that of infancy, which in the internal sense is
innocence. The case is the same with "boy," or "little boy," by which is
signified a state in which is innocence (see n. 430).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3068.">3068.</span></span>

Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee. That this signifies the submission of
memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification of "letting down,"
as being to submit; and from the signification of a "pitcher," as being
memory-knowledges. That a "water-jar" or "pitcher" signifies
memory-knowledges, comes from the fact that "water" signifies truth (n.
680, 739, 2702); and a pitcher is a vessel containing water, just as
memory-knowledge is a vessel in which is truth; for every
memory-knowledge is a vessel for truth, and every truth is a vessel for
good. Memory-knowledge without truth is an empty vessel; and so too is
truth without good; but memory-knowledge in which there is truth, and
truth in which there is good, are full vessels. Affection which is of
love is that which conjoins so that they may be within in order; for
love is spiritual conjunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3069.">3069.</span></span>

That I may drink. That this signifies instruction in truth therefrom, is
evident from the signification of "drinking," as being to be instructed.
In the Word throughout mention is made of "drinking;" and where the good
and truth of faith are treated of, there "drinking" signifies being
instructed in them and receiving them. As in Isaiah: The new wine shall
mourn, the vine languisheth, all the glad of heart shall sigh; they
shall not drink wine with a song, strong drink shall be bitter to them
that drink it (Isa. 24:7, 9); "not drinking wine with a song," denotes
not being instructed from the affection of truth and not being delighted
thereby; that "strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it,"
denotes aversion. In the same: It shall be as when a thirsty one
dreameth, and behold he drinketh; but he awaketh, and behold he is
weary, and his soul hath appetite (Isa. 29:8); a "thirsty one" denotes
one who desires to be instructed; "drinking," being instructed, but in
things that are vain. \[2\] In Jeremiah: We have drunk our water for
silver; our wood cometh for a price (Lam. 5:4); "drinking waters for
silver" denotes being instructed not without cost, and also attributing
truth to one's self. That it is given free of cost, and thus that it is
not from one's self, but from the Lord, is thus taught in Isaiah: Ho
everyone that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no
silver; come ye, buy (Isa. 55:1). Also in John: Jesus said, If anyone
thirst, let him come unto Me and drink; whosoever believeth in Me, out
of his belly shall flow rivers of living water (John 7:37-38); where by
"drinking" is signified being instructed, and receiving. In Luke: They
shall say, We did eat and drink in Thy presence, and Thou didst teach in
our streets; but the Lord says, I know you not whence ye are; depart
from Me, all ye workers of iniquity (Luke 13:26-27); where "eating and
drinking in the Lord's presence," denotes instructing and preaching the
good and truth of faith from knowledges that are from the Word, which is
meant by the words, "Thou didst teach in our streets." But as they did
this from themselves, for the sake of their own honor and gain, and thus
from no affection of good and truth, and were thus in knowledges of
truth but in a life of evil, it is said, "I know you not whence ye are;
depart from Me all ye workers of iniquity." \[3\] In the same: Jesus,
speaking to the disciples, said, That ye may eat and drink at My table
in My kingdom (Luke 22:30). That they do not eat and drink in the
kingdom of the Lord, and that there is no table there, is plain to
everyone; so that by "eating and drinking at the Lord's table in His
kingdom," something else is signified, namely, enjoying the perception
of good and truth. So too with what the Lord says in Matthew: I say unto
you, that I will not drink henceforth of this product of the vine, until
that day when I shall drink it with you in My Father's kingdom (Matt.
26:29); where "drinking" signifies instructing to the life concerning
truths, and giving perception of good and truth. These words of the
Lord: Be not anxious for your life \[anima\], what ye shall eat, or what
ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on (Matt. 6:25,
31; Luke 12:29); are significative of spiritual things, namely, that the
all of faith as to good and truth is given by the Lord. In John: Jesus
said to the woman of Samaria, Everyone that drinketh of this water shall
thirst again; but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him
shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall become in
him a fountain of water springing up unto eternal life (John 4:7-14);
where "drinking" manifestly denotes being instructed in good and truth,
and receiving them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3070.">3070.</span></span>

And she shall say, Drink. That this signifies the reciprocal thereto, is
evident from its being a response, and confirmation, consequently what
is reciprocal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3071.">3071.</span></span>

And I will give thy camels drink also. That this signifies the
enlightenment of all memory-knowledges in the natural man therefrom, is
evident from the signification of "camels," as being general
memory-knowledges, thus these knowledges in general, or all (see above,
n. 3048); and from the signification of "giving to drink," as being to
enlighten. That "drawing water" denotes to instruct, was shown above (n.
3058); thus to "give to drink" denotes to enlighten; for enlightenment
comes from instruction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3072.">3072.</span></span>

Her hast Thou appointed for Thy servant Isaac. That this signifies the
conjunction of truth Divine with Divine good in the rational, is evident
from the signification of "appointing," that is to say, for a wife, as
being to conjoin by a covenant of marriage, and from the representation
of Isaac, as being the Divine good of the rational (see n. 3024). That
"she," or Rebekah, represents the truth Divine that is to be conjoined
with the Divine good of the rational, has been stated above in several
places; and the same is evident from the particulars in the internal
sense of this chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3073.">3073.</span></span>

And thereby shall I know that Thou hast done mercy with my lord. That
this signifies that the marriage is from Divine love, is evident from
the signification of "mercy," as here in the internal sense being the
Divine love (see n. 3063). And because the subject treated of is the
betrothing of Rebekah to Isaac, that is, of the conjunction of Divine
truth with the Divine good of the rational; by "doing mercy with my
lord" nothing else is signified than a marriage, thus a marriage from
Divine love. This also is the conclusion of his supplication, and the
end that was had in view.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3074.">3074.</span></span>

What is contained in these three verses in the internal sense, may in
some measure be seen from the explication. But as these things are
disconnected, that which they involve in their series cannot appear
unless they are all collected together into a single idea, and the
mental view is then withdrawn from the sense of the letter; for so long
as the attention is there, not only is the idea confused, but the mind
is also held in doubt; and so far as it is in doubt, it is obscured. A
summary description is here given of the process in which truth appears
by means of memory-knowledges, and is elevated from them out of the
natural man into the rational, and becomes rational truth (in the Lord,
Divine); namely, that this is effected by the influx of the Divine love
into the Human, from which comes the affection of truth in which is
innocence. By virtue of such an influx, the memory-knowledges in the
natural man were enlightened, and the truths made their appearance that
were to be elevated into the rational and there conjoined with the good
of the Divine love. The same things are described more particularly in
what follows. But he who does not know that all things in general and in
particular are disposed, even in the natural man, by an influx of love,
and from this of an affection in which there is innocence, can have but
a very obscure idea, if any, of what was said above and of what has now
been said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3075.">3075.</span></span>

Verses 15, 16. And it came to pass that scarcely had he done speaking,
when behold Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel the son of Milcah,
the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her
shoulder. And the damsel was exceeding good to look upon, a virgin,
neither had any man known her; and she went down to the fountain, and
filled her pitcher, and came up. "And it came to pass that scarcely had
he done speaking" signifies the effect of will; "when behold Rebekah
came out," signifies the affection of truth from doctrinal things; "who
was born to Bethuel the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's
brother," signifies all the origin of this affection; "with her pitcher
upon her shoulder," signifies receptions of truth, and endeavor; "and
the damsel was exceeding good to look upon," signifies the beauty of the
affection of truth; "a virgin, neither had any man known her," signifies
pure from all falsity; "and she went down to the fountain," signifies
truth Divine; "and filled her pitcher," signifies the vessels of
reception; "and came up," signifies elevation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3076.">3076.</span></span>

And it came to pass that scarcely had he done speaking. That this
signifies the effect of will, is evident from what immediately follows,
that is, that all things in general and particular came to pass
according to his prayer, or were accomplished as he wished. That
"speaking" signifies willing may be seen above (n. 2626, 3037).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3077.">3077.</span></span>

And behold Rebekah came out. That this signifies the affection of truth
from doctrinal things, is evident from the representation of Rebekah, as
being the truth Divine that was to be conjoined with the Divine good of
the rational; but here, before she was betrothed, she puts on the
representation of the affection of truth from doctrinal things; for from
this comes truth, truth not being truth unless it has life, and its life
is affection which is of love. That Rebekah represents the truth Divine
that was to be conjoined with the Divine good of the rational, is
evident from the several things contained in this chapter in the
internal sense, and also from the fact that Isaac represents the Lord's
Divine rational (n. 1893, 2066, 2083, 2630); thus Rebekah, who became
wife to Isaac, represents that in the rational which was conjoined as a
wife to a husband; and it may be seen that this is Divine truth. For in
the same way Abraham represented the Divine good itself, and Sarah his
wife the Divine truth itself conjoined with the Divine good (n. 1468,
1901, 2063, 2065, 2904); and it is the same with Isaac and Rebekah, but
in the Lord's Divine Human, namely, in His rational. In general, by a
husband in the Word is signified good, and by a wife its truth (n. 1468,
2517). Moreover the essence of all marriage also (that is, conjugial
love) is from the Divine marriage of good and truth, and of truth and
good, in the Lord (n. 2508, 2618, 2728, 2729, 2803). That the affection
of truth is from doctrinal things, is because it is said that she "came
out," that is, from the city; and that by a "city" are signified
doctrinal things, may be seen above (n. 402, 2451). Moreover truths are
from doctrinal things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3078.">3078.</span></span>

Who was born to Bethuel the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's
brother. That this signifies all the origin of this affection, is
evident from the representation of Bethuel, and also of Milcah, and of
Nahor, and of Abraham. What each represents specifically cannot be set
forth and presented to the apprehension, for the reason that the first
affection of truth did indeed derive its origin from the Divine things
acquired by the Lord in the natural man (n. 3019), but still things from
the mother were there, which could not be separated in a moment, and the
affection was from them also. The quality of this affection in its
origin is described in the internal sense by the words, "born to Bethuel
the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother." \[2\] Every
affection, although it appears simple and as one thing, nevertheless
contains within it things so innumerable that it cannot be comprehended
by any idea, still less be described; for in every affection there is
the man's whole life that has been acquired from his infancy even to the
time of life when he is in the affection; nay, there are other things
besides, namely, those which he has inherited from father and mother,
grandparents and great-grandparents; for the affection is the whole man
such as he is. In the other life, by a manifestation of the affection
there is sometimes presented to view how much there is in anyone of the
love of self, and how much of the love of the world; and how much of the
love of principles, and for what end and use; also how much of the love
of good and truth, and what is the quality of that good and truth, and
also how the good and truth are disposed, that is, how far conjoined,
approximating, or separate; thus how much they agree or disagree with
heavenly order. As just stated, all these things are presented to view
by a manifestation of the affection, because the affection is the whole
man. That such is the case appears incredible to man, and yet it is
true.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3079.">3079.</span></span>

With her pitcher upon her shoulder. That this signifies receptions of
truth, and endeavor, is evident from the signification of a "pitcher,"
as being memory-knowledge, and thus a receptacle of truth (see n. 3068);
and from the signification of the "shoulder," as being all power, and
thus endeavor (see n. 1085). That "pitchers" or "water-jars," also
vessels in general, signify in the internal sense things which are in
the position of being a receptacle (as are memory-knowledges and
knowledges in relation to truths, and as are truths themselves in
relation to good), may be seen from many passages in the Word. The
"vessels" of the temple and of the altar have no other signification,
and because they signified such things they were also holy, their
holiness being from no other source. \[2\] And when Belshazzar, with his
great men and his wives, was drinking wine out of the vessels of gold
and of silver that Nebuchadnezzar his father had brought from the temple
of Jerusalem, and they were praising the gods of gold, silver, brass,
iron, wood, and stone, it was because of such signification of the
vessels that the writing then appeared on the wall of his palace (Dan.
5:2, etc.). The "vessels of gold and of silver" denote the knowledges of
good and truth, which were profaned; for the Chaldeans denote those who
are in knowledges, but such as have been profaned by the falsities that
are in them (n. 1368); so that the knowledges serve them to worship gods
of gold and silver; for Belshazzar is called king of the Chaldeans in
this same chapter (verse 30). \[3\] That "vessels" signify the externals
of spiritual things, is also plain from other passages in the Word, as
in Isaiah: As the sons of Israel bring their offering in a clean vessel
into the house of Jehovah (Isa. 66:20); where the Lord's kingdom is
treated of. The "offering in a clean vessel" is representative of the
external man relatively to the internal; that which brings the gift is
the internal man; the "clean vessel" is the external man that is in
agreement, thus it denotes the things in the external man, which are
memory-knowledges, knowledges, and doctrinal things. \[4\] In Jeremiah:
The cry of Jerusalem is gone up, and their nobles have sent their little
ones to the waters; they came to the pits, they found no waters, they
returned with their vessels empty, they are ashamed (Jer. 14:2-3);
"empty vessels" denote knowledges wherein there is no truth, and also
truths wherein there is no good. Again: Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babel,
hath devoured me, he hath troubled me, he hath made me an empty vessel
(Jer. 51:34); where an "empty vessel" has a similar meaning. That it is
Babel that lays waste, may be seen above (n. 1327, at the end). In
Moses: As the valleys are they planted, as gardens by the river's side;
waters shall flow from his buckets, and his seed shall be at many waters
(Num. 24:6-7). This is Balaam's parable concerning Jacob and Israel;
"waters flowing from his buckets," signify that truths flow from
knowledges. \[5\] In the parable of the ten virgins, five of whom took
oil in their vessels with their lamps, while the foolish did not (Matt.
25:4), by the "virgins" are signified affections. That the wise "took
oil in their vessels," denotes that there was good in truths, and thus
charity in faith. That "oil" denotes good, may be seen above (n. 886);
"lamps" denote love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3080.">3080.</span></span>

And the damsel was exceeding good to look upon. That this signifies the
beauty of the affection of truth, is evident from the signification of a
"damsel," as being an affection in which is innocence (see n. 3067).
That "exceeding good to look upon" signifies beauty (here the beauty of
the affection of truth, because it is said of the damsel) comes from the
fact that all beauty is from good in which there is innocence. Good
itself when it flows in from the internal man into the external, makes
beauty; and from this is all human beauty. This may likewise be seen
from the fact that no one is affected by the face of another, but by the
affection which beams forth from the face; and that they who are in good
are affected by the affection of good which is there, and in the measure
in which there is innocence in the good. Thus it is the spiritual in the
natural which affects, but not the natural without the spiritual. In
like manner they who are in good are affected by little children, who
appear to them beautiful in proportion to the innocence of charity in
their faces, gestures, and speech. (That goodness and charity are what
form and cause beauty, may be seen above, n. 553.) Hence then it is that
the "damsel exceeding good to look upon" signifies the beauty of the
affection of truth in which there is good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3081.">3081.</span></span>

A virgin, neither had any man known her. That this signifies pure from
all falsity, is evident from the signification of a "virgin." A "virgin"
is often mentioned in the Word, and there signifies the Lord's kingdom,
and likewise the church, and consequently everyone who is a kingdom of
the Lord or who is a church; and this from the conjugial love in chaste
virgins. In the spiritual sense conjugial love is the affection of good
in truth, and the affection of truth from good, from which affections,
conjoined as it were in marriage, comes conjugial love (see n. 2508,
2618, 2727-2729). And because as before said this is seen in a virgin,
the kingdom of the Lord, which is also compared to marriage and is
called a marriage, is called a "virgin." That by "a man had not known
her," is signified pure from all falsity, is because by a "man" in the
Word is signified not only rational truth, but also in the opposite
sense falsity (see n. 265, 749, 1007); thus to be "known by a man" is to
be contaminated with falsity, and "not to be known by a man" is to be
pure from falsity: by a "man" is not here meant a husband \[vir
conjugii\]. \[2\] That by a "virgin" in the Word are signified those who
are in the kingdom of the Lord, or what is the same, those in whom the
kingdom of the Lord is, is evident in John: These are they who were not
defiled with women, for they are virgins; these are they who follow the
Lamb whithersoever He goeth, for they are without spot before the throne
of God (Rev. 14:4-5). Here those are plainly called "virgins" who follow
the Lamb, that is, who are in the Lord's kingdom; and they are also said
to be "without spot." \[3\] In the proper sense, those are "virgins" who
are in love to the Lord, that is, the celestial, and thus those who are
in the affection of good. Those also are called "virgins" who are in
charity toward the neighbor, that is, the spiritual, and thus who are in
the affection of truth; as may be seen from passages in the Word. Thus
in Isaiah: The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee, and hath
mocked thee; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head after thee
(Isa. 37:22). This is said to the king of Asshur; the "virgin daughter
of Zion" denotes the celestial church; the "daughter of Jerusalem," the
spiritual church. \[4\] In Jeremiah: Again will I build thee, and thou
shalt be built, O virgin of Israel; again shalt thou deck thy timbrels,
and shalt go forth in the dance of them that make merry. Their soul
shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at all.
Then shall the virgin be glad in the dance, and the young men and the
old together (Jer. 31:4, 12-13). The "virgin of Israel" denotes the
spiritual church; the affection of truth from good in this church is
described here, as in other places, by "timbrels and dances." In the
same: The ways of Zion do mourn, her priests do sigh, her virgins are
sad. The Lord hath trodden the winepress, for the virgin daughter of
Judah. Behold my sorrow; my virgins and my young men are gone into
captivity (Lam. 1:4, 15, 18). "Virgins" denote the affections of good
and of truth. And again in the same: The women in Zion were ravished,
the virgins in the cities of Judah (Lam. 5:11). Here the "virgins"
denote the affections of good. \[5\] In Amos: They shall run to and fro
to seek the word of Jehovah, and shall not find it. In that day shall
the fair virgins and the young men faint for thirst (Amos 8:12-13). The
"fair virgins" denote the affections of truth; the "young men," truths,
or what is the same, those who are in them; concerning these it is said
that "they shall run to and fro to seek the word of Jehovah, and shall
not find it," and consequently "they shall faint for thirst." \[6\] In
Zechariah: Jehovah their God shall preserve them in that day, as the
flock of His people; for how great is His goodness and how great is His
beauty: corn shall make the young men grow \[germinare\], and new wine
the virgins (Zech. 9:16-17); "young men" denoting truths, and "virgins,"
affections. In David: The King's daughter is all glorious within; her
clothing is of inweavings of gold. She is led unto the King in broidered
work; the virgins, her companions, that follow her, are brought unto
Thee (Ps. 45:13-14). The "King's daughter" denotes the Lord's spiritual
kingdom; the "virgins, her companions, that follow her," denote the
affections of truth. \[7\] In the same: They have seen Thy goings, O
God, the goings of my God in, the sanctuary. The singers went before,
the players on the harp followed after, in the midst of the damsels
playing the timbrels (Ps. 68:24-25). The "damsels playing the timbrels"
also denote the affections of truth, the term "virgin" being used in
distinction from to express innocence. "Virgins" are so called from
conjugial love, and thus denote those who are in innocence; for
conjugial love is innocence itself (see n. 2736). In John therefore in
the passage quoted from Revelation, they are said to "follow the Lamb
whithersoever He goeth;" for by the "Lamb" is meant the Lord as to
innocence; and all who are in heaven are called "virgins" from the
innocence which is in their good. According to the amount and quality of
the innocence in good, they "follow the Lamb."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3082.">3082.</span></span>

And she went down to the fountain. That this signifies Divine truth, is
evident from the signification of the "fountain," as being Divine truth
(see n. 2702, 3065).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3083.">3083.</span></span>

And filled her pitcher. That this signifies vessels of reception, is
evident from the signification of a "pitcher," which, being a vessel for
the reception of water, is in the internal sense a recipient of the
knowledges of truth, and also of truth itself, which is signified by
"water." (That "water" in the internal sense denotes knowledges, and
also truth, may be seen above, n. 28, 680, 2680, 2702, 3058.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3084.">3084.</span></span>

And came up. That this signifies elevation, is evident from the
signification of "coming up," as being to be elevated. Being elevated is
said of passing from what is lower to what is higher, and also therefore
of passing from what is exterior to what is interior, which is the same
thing; for what is lower or higher in a human idea is exterior or
interior in the angelic idea; for instance, heaven, which appears to man
higher, but to angels interior; and the natural with man-this is
exterior relatively to his spiritual; and so again is the spiritual
relatively to the celestial; or what is the same, memory-knowledge,
which is of the natural man, is exterior relatively to truth, and truth
is exterior relatively to good; and therefore memory-knowledge
relatively to truth is called a veil and also clothing, and truth
likewise is so called relatively to good; and it is from this that one
is said to "go up" to Jerusalem, but to "go down" from Jerusalem; also
to "go up from Jerusalem to Zion," and to "go down from Zion to
Jerusalem;" for by what is round about Jerusalem are signified the
exteriors of the church, but by Jerusalem the interiors, and by Zion the
inmosts. As in the passage before us in the internal sense there is
described the first of the elevation of truth out of the natural man to
the rational, it is therefore said first that the affection of truth
represented by Rebekah "went down to the fountain," and then that she
"came up;" for, as before said (n. 3074), the Divine love flows into the
affection of good, and from this into the affection of truth, and
vivifies and enlightens the things that are in the natural man, and then
disposes them in order (this is signified by "going down"); and by
virtue of this, truths are raised out of the natural man into the
rational, and are conjoined with the good there (this is signified by
"going up").

<span class="margnote"><span id="3085.">3085.</span></span>

In these two verses is described the affection of truth as to origin, as
to quality, and as to the first of initiation; as to origin, by the
words, "Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel the son of Milcah, the
wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother," by which in the internal sense is set
forth all the origin of this affection (as may be seen, n. 3077, 3078);
as to quality, by the words, "her pitcher was upon her shoulder; and the
damsel was exceeding good to look upon," by which is described the
quality (see n. 3079-3081); as to the first of initiation, by the words,
"she went down to the fountain, and filled her pitcher, and came up" (as
may be seen, n. 3082-3084). \[2\] But as before said, these things are
not only beyond ordinary apprehension, but are also beyond that of more
cultivated men-that is to say, such things as are contained in the
internal sense in this chapter and in some that follow. The reason of
this is that it scarcely enters the mind of anyone that there is a
continual Divine influx through the internal man into the external; that
is, an influx of celestial and spiritual things through the rational man
into the natural, or what is the same, into the natural things of the
external man; and that by this influx truths are continually called
forth from the natural man, are elevated, and are implanted in the good
which is in the rational. As it is not known that this takes place, how
should all the process be known, and in what manner it is effected; a
process of wisdom so great (because from the Divine) that it can never
be explored as to a ten-thousandth part; the things that can be seen
being only the most general? \[3\] And as such is the case, let no one
wonder that the things here contained in the internal sense cannot be
described to the apprehension, and that what are described transcend the
apprehension; for they treat of this process and describe it. And
besides, the internal sense is principally for the angels; and this in
order that through the Word there may be communication between heaven
and man; and by the angels such things as are referred to above are
accounted as things most delightful, because heavenly food is nothing
else than all that which is of intelligence and wisdom; and to them the
blessedness of wisdom and intelligence is whatever treats of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3086.">3086.</span></span>

That some idea, although a most general one, may be formed of what is
here contained in the internal sense, be it known that this whole
chapter treats of the truth Divine that was to be conjoined with the
Divine good; to wit that Divine good flowed into the natural man, that
is, into the memory-knowledges, the knowledges, and the doctrinal things
therein, for these are of the natural man insofar as they are in its
memory; and that by this influx it enlightened, vivified, and disposed
into order all things therein; for all light, life, and order in the
natural man are from influx from the Divine, as may be known to everyone
if he attends to it. By means of this influx there comes forth
affection; first, the general affection of truth, treated of in these
two verses in regard to its origin (n. 3077, 3078); its quality (n.
3079-3081); and the first of initiation (n. 3082-3084); but in the
verses now immediately following, the process is further described in
the internal sense, namely, the exploration of that truth, also the
separation of the things from the mother, which at first were adjoined
to it, and so on. \[2\] But I know that these are arcana too deep to
fall within apprehension; and this as before said for the reason that
they are things unknown; but as the internal sense describes them, and
this as to all their circumstances, they must needs be set forth, no
matter how much they may appear to be above the apprehension. At the
very least it may in this way be seen what great arcana there are in the
internal sense of the Word; also that the arcana are such as scarcely to
be seen in the light of the world, in which man is during his life in
the body, but that they always appear more distinctly and clearly in
proportion as man comes from the light of the world into the light of
heaven, into which he comes after death; thus into the light in which
blessed and happy souls are, that is, the angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3087.">3087.</span></span>

Verses 17-20. And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me I pray
sip a little water from thy pitcher. And she said, Drink, my lord; and
she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and made him drink.
And she finished making him drink, and she said, I will draw for thy
camels also, until they have done drinking. And she hasted, and emptied
her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw, and
drew for all his camels. "The servant ran to meet her, and said,"
signifies exploration from Divine good; "let me I pray sip a little
water from thy pitcher," signifies inquiry whether anything of truth
from this source can be conjoined; "and she said, Drink, my lord,"
signifies reciprocation; "and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon
her hand," signifies submission of the recipients from power; "and made
him drink," signifies initiation. "And she finished making him drink,"
signifies what is successive; "and she said, I will draw for thy camels
also, until they have done drinking," signifies reciprocation as to the
enlightenment of all the memory-knowledges in the natural man. "And she
hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough," signifies the
separation of the affection of truth which was being initiated into
Divine good; "and ran again unto the well," signifies a lower affection
of truth; "and drew for all his camels," signifies whereby the general
memory-knowledges were enlightened.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3088.">3088.</span></span>

The servant ran to meet her, and said. That this signifies exploration
from Divine good, is evident from the signification of "running to meet
her," as being an exploration as to whether the case was as he had
spoken in his heart (the internal sense so dictates); also from the
signification of "saying," as being to perceive (often shown before) and
thus to explore. That this was from Divine good, is because the servant
here acts in the stead of his lord, that is, of Abraham and also of
Isaac; for he that is sent puts on the personality of him who sends.
This is often the case in the Word, as when angels are spoken of who are
first mentioned as angels, and are afterwards called "Jehovah" (as the
angel who appeared to Moses in the bush, Exod. 3:2, 4; and the angel
that appeared to Gideon, Judges 6:11-12, 14). For the same reason
Rebekah addresses him as "my lord" in the next verse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3089.">3089.</span></span>

Let me I pray sip a little water from thy pitcher. That this signifies
inquiry whether anything of truth from this source could be conjoined,
is evident from the signification of "sipping," as being similar to that
of "drinking;" but diminutively, because exploring is implied. (That "to
drink", is to perceive may be seen above, n. 3069.) In the internal
sense "to drink" also denotes to be communicated and to be conjoined,
and is predicated of what is spiritual, as "to eat" is predicated of
what is celestial (n. 2187, 2343). The same is further evident from the
signification of "water," as being truth (see n. 680, 739, 2702). Here
therefore the words "let me I pray sip a little water from thy pitcher,"
signify exploring whether anything of truth from this source could be
conjoined. The "pitcher" is the recipient, in which and out of which is
truth (n. 3068, 3079). That there was an exploration is because the
first affection of truth was attended with something from the maternal,
which was to be separated (n. 3040, 3078). With a man about to be
regenerated the case is that his first affection of truth is very
impure; for there is in it an affection of use and an end for the sake
of himself, for the sake of the world, for the sake of glory in heaven,
and the like, which ends regard himself, but not the community, the
Lord's kingdom, and still less the Lord. Such an affection necessarily
precedes; nevertheless it is successively purified by the Lord, till at
last falsities and evils are removed and are cast as it were into the
circumference; and yet they had been of service as means.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3090.">3090.</span></span>

And she said, Drink, my lord. That this signifies reciprocation, is
evident from the assent or consent. What the reciprocation of truth is
when it is to be conjoined with good, is apparent from marriages; for
marriage comes from the fact that there is consent on both sides. This
has its origin from the marriage of good and truth; on the side of good
there is will, and on that of truth there is consent, and from this
comes the conjunction. Although this reciprocation is not apparent with
man when he is being regenerated, that is, when he is entering into the
heavenly marriage, it nevertheless takes place. The same is more
manifest from the fact that when a man is being regenerated, there is
effected a likeness of a marriage between the will and the
understanding; good being of the will, and truth of the understanding.
Therefore the ancients instituted a marriage between the will and the
understanding, and between the several things of the will and those of
the understanding (n. 54, 55).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3091.">3091.</span></span>

And she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand. That this
signifies submission of the recipients from power, <span
id="fr_85"></span>[3091-1](#fn_85) is evident from the signification of
"letting down," as being submission; from the signification of a
"pitcher" as being a recipient (see n. 3068, 3079); and from the
signification of the "hand," as being power (see n. 878). The submission
of the recipients, from power, consists in the doctrinal things, the
knowledges, and the memory-knowledges (which are the recipients, n.
3068, 3079), applying themselves. There is a chain of subordination,
thus of application, and consequently of submission, from the First of
life, or the Lord. As the things which are in a lower place ought to
serve the higher, they must be in submission; for without their
submission there is no conjunction. The "power" here spoken of is from
truth; this causes the things which are below to submit. In the Word
power is especially attributed to truth; and therefore the "hands,"
"arms," and "shoulders" (by which in the internal sense powers are
signified) are predicated of truth (see n. 878, 1085); and the power
which appears to be from truth is itself from good, through truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3092.">3092.</span></span>

And made him drink. That this signifies initiation, is evident from the
signification of "giving to drink" \[potare\], in that it is almost the
same as that of "drinking" \[bibere\]; but "drinking" here involves more
activity on the part of him who drinks. That "drinking" is receiving,
and also being conjoined, may be seen above (n. 3069, 3089); thus
"making him drink" \[facere potare\] denotes to give an opportunity to
receive, which is the first of initiation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3093.">3093.</span></span>

And she finished making him drink. That this signifies what is
successive of initiation, is evident from the fact that "finished," or
"to finish," involves the end of the act that precedes and the beginning
of the act that follows, and thus what is successive; and also from the
signification of "making to drink," as being to be initiated (of which
just above, n. 3092).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3094.">3094.</span></span>

And she said, I will draw for thy camels also, until they have done
drinking. That this signifies reciprocation as to the enlightenment of
all the memory-knowledges in the natural man is evident from the
signification of "camels" as being general memory-knowledges in the
natural man (see n. 3048, 3071); and from the signification of
"drawing," that is, "drawing water," as being to instruct and also to
enlighten (see n. 3058, 3071). It is evident that this is reciprocation
because she said that she would do this, and also did it; that is, drew
water for the camels. The enlightenment that is here treated of is on
the part of truth, although it is from good through truth. As regards
the enlightenment of memory-knowledges in the natural man the case is
this: All enlightenment is from good; for the good which is of love is
comparatively as the sun's flame, from which are heat and light; but
truth is as the object through which the flame shines, by which there is
enlightenment from light; and such as is the light therefrom, such is
the enlightenment. \[2\] There is nothing else that receives good but
truth, and such as is the truth, such is the reception, and such is the
consequent enlightenment. When therefore there is enlightenment by means
of truth, the enlightenment appears to be from the truth, as if it were
its own; although it is of good, which thus gives light through the
truth. Moreover the enlightenment of good by means of truth penetrates
still further, and affects more deeply, and produces a lower affection
of truth, which will be spoken of presently. The light of heaven is from
the Divine good of the Lord through His Divine truth; and because it is
through the Divine truth in His Human, it penetrates not only to those
who are celestial, but also to the spiritual, and enlightens with wisdom
and intelligence all who are in heaven. And because this is the source
of wisdom and intelligence, therefore the Divine good and the Divine
truth in the Lord's Human are so much treated of in the internal sense
of the Word; and in the present passage, this sense treats of the first
enlightenment of truth from good, and of good through truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3095.">3095.</span></span>

And she hasted and emptied her pitcher into the trough. That this
signifies the separation of the affection of the truth which was being
initiated into Divine good, is evident from the signification of
"emptying the pitcher," as being to separate the truth; for by a
"pitcher," as a containing vessel, is signified not merely the
memory-knowledge in which is truth, but also the truth in which is good
(see n. 3068, 3079); and here, because initiation is treated of, it
signifies the truth which was being initiated into Divine good. And
because truth itself cannot possibly be conjoined with good except
through its affection (see n. 3024 at the beginning, 3066), for in
affection is the life through which is conjunction, therefore here it is
the affection of truth that is meant. The meaning of the passage is also
evident from the signification of a "trough," or "watering place," as
being the good of truth; for the water in the trough signifies truth
(see n. 739, 2702), and the trough itself signifies the same as wood,
namely, good (see n. 2784, 2812). The good of truth is that which is
produced from good by means of truth, and is like an offspring born of
truth as a mother, and of good as a father. All the genuine good in the
natural man is from this, that is, from the marriage of good and truth
in the rational. This good is that which is called the good of truth,
and is signified in the Word by a "trough," or "watering place."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3096.">3096.</span></span>

And she ran again unto the well to draw. That this signifies a lower
affection of truth, is evident from the signification of a "well," as
being truth (see n. 2702), but truth that is lower; and as the
initiation of truth is here treated of, a lower affection of truth is
signified, as just said (n. 3094). The difference of signification in
the internal sense between a "fountain" and a "well" may be seen in the
number already cited (n. 2702), namely, that the term "fountain" is used
when a purer and a higher truth is treated of, but "well" when a truth
not so pure and also lower; as is the case in this chapter likewise, in
which it is sometimes said a "fountain" and sometimes a "well." Natural
truth is lower truth; and the affection of natural truth is a lower
affection of truth; from this affection, proximately, are the general
memory-knowledges enlightened; and that this enlightenment penetrates
further and affects more deeply, may be seen above (n. 3094).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3097.">3097.</span></span>

And drew for all his camels. That this signifies that general
memory-knowledges were enlightened thereby, is evident from the
signification of "drawing," as being to instruct, and also to enlighten
(see n. 3058, 3071); and from the signification of "camels," as being
general memory-knowledges (n. 3048).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3098.">3098.</span></span>

The things contained in the internal sense from n. 3088 to this point,
are also such as can be apprehended by those only who have been
instructed concerning the internals of man, and who are in truths; for
through truths and according to truths, comes enlightenment. The subject
here is the first initiation of truth into good; for as before said good
itself flows into the natural through the rational, thus by an internal
way, and enlightens the things which are therein; whereas truth itself
inflows into the natural through the sensuous part, especially that of
hearing and sight, and thus by an external way. Truth has its rise from
this source, as may be known to everyone who reflects; but the
conjunction of good and truth is not there, but is in the rational;
therefore truth is called forth therefrom, thus out of the natural
sphere into the spiritual; for the truth that is to be conjoined with
good is spiritual. How the case is with the truth that is first called
forth thence, is treated of in these verses (n. 3087-3097).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3099.">3099.</span></span>

Verses 21, 22. And the man, marveling at her, withheld himself, to know
whether Jehovah had prospered his way or not. And it came to pass when
the camels had done drinking, that the man took a jewel of gold, of half
a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands, ten of gold their
weight. "And the man, marveling at her, withheld himself," signifies a
state of perception as to those things; "to know whether Jehovah had
prospered his way or not," signifies concerning Divine truth, what it
was; "and it came to pass when the camels had done drinking," signifies
acknowledgment from enlightenment in general memory-knowledges; "that
the man took a jewel of gold," signifies Divine good; "of half a shekel
weight," signifies sufficient for initiation; "and two bracelets,"
signifies Divine truth; "for her hands," signifies the power of the
affection of truth; "ten of gold their weight," signifies what is full
for initiation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3100.">3100.</span></span>

The man marveling at her, withheld himself. That this signifies a state
of perception as to those things, is evident from the signification of
"marveling," and of "withholding himself" (when he saw that those things
which he spoke in his heart had come to pass), as being somewhat of
acknowledgment, and at the same time of waiting to see whether it was
not so; for he marveled because he acknowledged that it had so come to
pass, and he withheld himself because he waited to see whether it was
not so; this is the state of perception which is signified.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[3091-1](ac062.htm#fr_85) That is, with all
their might. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3101-3150](ac063)
