[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac071)  [Next](ac073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="3551.">3551.</span></span>

I have done according as thou spokest unto me. That this signifies
obedience, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3552.">3552.</span></span>

Arise I pray thee, sit, and eat of my hunting. That this signifies the
truth of the affection of such good, is evident from the signification
of "arising," as involving somewhat of elevation (see n. 2401, 2785,
2912, 2927, 3171); and from the signification of "sitting," as involving
somewhat of tranquillity; from the signification of eating," as being
appropriation (n. 2187, 3168); and from the signification of "hunting,"
as being the truth which is from good (n. 3501), hence in the present
case the affection of that good from which is truth, for the things
signified by "arising," "sitting," and "eating," in the internal sense
belong to affection, and therefore only affection is mentioned to denote
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3553.">3553.</span></span>

That thy soul may bless me. That this signifies conjunction, is evident
from the signification of "to be blessed," as being conjunction (see n.
3504, 3514, 3530).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3554.">3554.</span></span>

And Isaac said unto his son. That this signifies the perception of the
rational represented by Isaac concerning the natural which is
represented by Jacob; and that "to say" denotes to perceive, has often
been shown before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3555.">3555.</span></span>

How is it that thou hast hastened to find it, my son? That this
signifies production so speedy, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3556.">3556.</span></span>

And he said, Because Jehovah thy God made it come to meet my face. That
this signifies providence, is also evident without explication. The
providence here treated of is that during regeneration good and the
derivative truth are thus disposed in order with man, that is, that they
appear outwardly, or are there presented, with a face like that of
genuine good and its derivative genuine truths; when nevertheless they
are not such, but as before said are domestic good and the derivative
truths that are of service merely for the regenerating of man, thus for
introducing goods and truths of a grosser nature, because such are
conducive to the end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3557.">3557.</span></span>

Verses 21-23. And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near I pray, and I will
feel thee my son, whether thou be my very son Esau, or not. And Jacob
came near to Isaac his father; and he felt him, and said, The voice is
Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau. And he recognized
him not, because his hands were hairy like his brother Esau's hands; and
he blessed him. "And Isaac said unto Jacob," signifies perception
concerning this natural; "come near I pray, and I will feel thee my
son," signifies inmost perception from presence; "whether thou be my
very son Esau, or not," signifies that it was not natural good; "and
Jacob came near to Isaac his father," signifies a state of presence;
"and he felt him," signifies thence all perception; "and said, The voice
is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau," signifies that
in this case the intellectual part is of truth which is within, but the
will part is of good which is without, thus they are of inverted order;
"and he recognized him not, because his hands were hairy as his brother
Esau's hands," signifies that from the will part that was without it was
perceived that it was natural good; "and he blessed him," signifies the
consequent conjunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3558.">3558.</span></span>

And Isaac said unto Jacob. That this signifies perception concerning
this natural, is evident from the signification of "saying," as being to
perceive, concerning which above; and from the representation of Jacob
as being the natural as to truth, here only the natural, because he also
represented apparently, or in an external form simulated, Esau; thus
also the natural as to good, which is Esau, and likewise his hunting,
which is the truth that is of that good (n. 3501). The reason why "he
said" is so often repeated, is also because what is new thus begins, or
a new perception (n. 2061, 2238, 2260).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3559.">3559.</span></span>

Come near I pray, and I will feel thee my son. That this signifies
inmost perception from presence, is evident from the signification of
"coming near" as being presence; and from the signification of
"feeling," as being an inmost and complete perception (n. 3528).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3560.">3560.</span></span>

Whether thou be my very son Esau, or not. That this signifies that it
was not natural good, is evident from the doubt expressed in these words
and in those which presently follow; and as it is the rational which
perceives what and of what quality the natural is, there is signified a
perception that it was not natural good, or Esau.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3561.">3561.</span></span>

And Jacob came near to Isaac his father. That this signifies a state of
presence, is evident from what goes before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3562.">3562.</span></span>

And he felt him. That this signifies all perception, is evident from the
signification of "feeling," as being an inmost and complete perception
(see above, n. 3528, 3559), here, all perception, because the perception
of all things is from that which is inmost, that is, they who are in
inmost perception are in the perception of all things which are beneath;
for the things which are beneath are nothing but derivations and
compositions therefrom, inasmuch as the inmost is the all in all of the
things beneath it; for unless whatever is beneath is from things
interior; or what is the same, from things superior, as an effect from
its efficient cause, it does not come into existence. And this shows why
the end makes a man happy or unhappy in the other life; for the end is
the inmost of every cause, insomuch that unless the end is in the cause,
nay, unless it is the all thereof, the cause is not; and in like manner
the end is the inmost of every effect, for the effect is from such
cause; and because this is so, whatever pertains to man derives its
being from the end which is in him, and hence in the other life his
state is such as is his end (see n. 1317, 1568, 1571, 1645, 1909, 3425).
From this it may be seen that as feeling signifies inmost perception, it
therefore signifies all perception.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3563.">3563.</span></span>

And said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of
Esau. That this signifies that in this case the intellectual part is of
truth which is within, but that the will part is of good which is
without, thus that they are of inverted order, is evident from the
predication of "voice" as being of truth, and from the predication of
"hand" as being of good (that "voice" is predicated of truth is evident
from what was adduced in volume 1, n. 219-220); and from its being said,
"the voice is Jacob's voice," by whom is represented natural truth, as
has been repeatedly shown above. And the reason why "hand" is predicated
of good is that by "hand" is signified power and faculty (n. 878, 3541),
which is derived from no other source than good, all the power and
faculty of truth being therefrom, although it appears to be from truth;
the same is evident also from its being said, "the hands are the hands
of Esau," by whom good is represented, as also has been shown above.
That these things are of inverted order is evident from the fact that it
is according to order for good which is of the will to be within, and
for truth which is of the understanding to be without. However, as
before said, these things are such that they cannot be so well set forth
to the apprehension, because few are in any knowledge concerning such
things; for even if they should be most clearly set forth, yet when
knowledge is wanting they are not apprehended and yet it is necessary to
state how the case is, because this is the subject here treated of.
\[2\] The good of the natural comes forth from no other source in man
than interior good, that is, from the good of the rational; that the
natural has good from no other source is evident; but the influx causes
the good in the natural to be such as the natural is; and as this is the
only source of the good of the natural, the truth of the natural is from
the same source; for where good is, there is truth, both being necessary
in order that there may be anything; but the influx causes the truth
therein to be such as is that into which it flows. The influx takes
place in this way: The good of the rational flows into the natural in
two ways; through the shortest way, into the good itself of the natural,
thus immediately; and through the good of the natural into the truth
there; this good and this truth are what is represented by Esau and his
hunting. The good of the rational also flows into the natural by a way
less short, namely, through the truth of the rational, and by this
influx forms something like good, but it is truth. \[3\] It is according
to order that the good of the rational should inflow into the good of
the natural and at the same time into its truth, immediately; and also
through the truth, of the rational into the good of the natural, thus
mediately; and in like manner into the truth of the natural both
immediately and mediately; and when this is the case, then the influx is
according to order. Such influx exists with those who have been
regenerated; but as before said there is another influx before they have
been regenerated, namely, that the good of the rational does not flow
immediately into the good of the natural, but mediately through the
truth of the rational, and thus presents something like good in the
natural, but which is not genuine good, and consequently not genuine
truth; yet it is such that inmostly it really has good from the influx
through the truth of the rational; but no further. Therefore also good
comes forth there under another form, namely, outwardly like the good
which is represented by Esau, but inwardly like the truth which is
represented by Jacob; and as this is not according to order, it is said
to be of inverted order; but yet in respect to the fact that man can be
regenerated in no other way, it is according to order. \[4\] I am aware
that these things, even though clearly stated, and consequently possible
of clear perception on the part of those who are in the knowledge of
such things, are yet obscure to those who do not know what influx is;
and still more so to those who do not know that the rational is distinct
from the natural; and still more so to those who have not any distinct
idea about good and truth. But what the quality of natural good is, and
of natural truth, in the state previous to regeneration, can appear
solely from the affections at that time. When man is affected with
truth, not for the sake of ends of life, but for the sake of other ends,
such as that he may become learned, and this from a certain affection of
emulation, or from a certain affection of childish envy, and also from a
certain affection of glory; then are the good of the natural and the
truth of the natural in such an order as is here represented by Jacob,
consequently relatively to each other they are in inverted order; that
is, the will part which is of good is without, and the intellectual part
which is of truth is within. \[5\] But in the state after regeneration
it is otherwise; for then man is not only affected with truth for the
sake of ends of life, but still more is he affected with the good itself
of life; and the former affections, namely those of emulation, of
childish envy, and of glory, separate themselves, and this until it
appears as if they were dissipated; for then the good which is of the
will is within, and the truth which is of the understanding is without;
yet still in such a manner that truth acts as a one with good, because
from good. This order is genuine; and the former order tends to the
forming of this order, inasmuch as the will part, which is then without,
admits many things that are serviceable to regeneration, and is like a
sponge that absorbs both clear and muddy waters; thus also it admits
things that would otherwise be rejected, which yet serve as means, and
also for forming ideas about goods and truths, and for other uses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3564.">3564.</span></span>

And he recognized him not, because his hands were hairy like his brother
Esau's hands. That this signifies that from the will part which was
without it was perceived that it was natural good, is evident from the
fact that he did not recognize Jacob to be Jacob, that is, the truth
which Jacob represents; but he perceived Esau, that is, the natural good
which was without; and this because of the influx spoken of above (n.
3563), for between interior good and exterior good there is
communication, because there is parallelism (n. 1831-1832, 3514); but
not between good and truth, unless the influx of good into truth is such
as has been described just above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3565.">3565.</span></span>

And he blessed him. That this signifies the consequent conjunction, is
evident from the signification of being blessed," as being conjunction
(n. 3504, 3514, 3530); but in this state the conjunction was no other
than that which was described above (n. 3563). With the truth
represented by Jacob there was inmost conjunction, but not mediate
conjunction; thus through the end which is the inmost good, and which
was that thus and no otherwise it could be effected. When there is this
end, then for the first time there is a conjunction of the inmost things
with the outermost; mediate conjunction comes successively, and is
produced by the end; for in the end lies concealed all the progression,
inasmuch as the Lord acts through the ends, and through them
successively disposes the intermediate things into order; from which
comes the conjunction which is signified by Isaac blessing Jacob.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3566.">3566.</span></span>

Verses 24, 25. And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I
am. And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's
hunting, that my soul may bless thee; and he brought it near to him, and
he did eat, and he brought him wine, and he drank. "And he said, Art
thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am," signifies the state of the
affection of natural truth, that from the external form it then believed
itself to be natural good; "and he said, Bring it near to me, and I will
eat of my son's hunting" signifies a longing to conjoin with itself
natural truth through good; "that my soul may bless thee," signifies
conjunction; "and he brought it near to him, and he did eat," signifies
the conjunction of good first; "and he brought him wine, and he drank,"
signifies the conjunction of truth afterwards.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3567.">3567.</span></span>

And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am. That this
signifies the state of natural truth, that from the external form it
then believed itself to be natural good, is evident from Isaac's
inquiry, "Art thou my very son Esau?" by which in the internal sense
nothing can be signified than the influx of the rational from good into
the natural truth represented by Jacob; and from the reply, "and he
said, I am," as signifying that it then believed itself to be good. (See
what is said above, n. 3550.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3568.">3568.</span></span>

And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's hunting.
That this signifies a longing to conjoin with itself natural truth
through good, is evident from the signification of "eating," as being to
conjoin and appropriate (n. 2187, 2343, 3168, 3513); and from the
signification of "my son's hunting," as being the truth of good (n.
3309, 3501, 3508). That a longing is signified, is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3569.">3569.</span></span>

That my soul may bless thee. That this signifies conjunction, is evident
from the signification of "being blessed," as being conjunction (n.
3504, 3514, 3530, 3565).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3570.">3570.</span></span>

And he brought it near to him, and he did eat. That this signifies the
conjunction of good first; and that "he brought him wine and he drank"
signifies the conjunction of truth afterwards, is evident from the
signification of "eating," as being to be conjoined and appropriated in
respect to good (concerning which just above, n. 3568); and from the
signification of "wine," as being the truth which is from good (n. 1071,
1798); and from the signification of "drinking," as being to be
conjoined and appropriated in respect to truth (n. 3168). In regard to
the circumstance that the good of the rational, represented by Isaac,
conjoins with itself good first, and truth afterwards, and this through
the natural, which is Jacob, the case is this: When the natural is in
the state in which it is outwardly good and inwardly truth (n. 3539,
3548, 3556, 3563), it then admits many things which are not good, but
which nevertheless are useful, being means to good in their order. But
the good of the rational does not conjoin and appropriate to itself from
this source anything but that which is in agreement with its own good;,
for good receives nothing else, and whatever disagrees, it rejects. The
rest of the things in the natural it leaves, in order that they may
serve as means for admitting and introducing more things that are in
agreement with itself. \[2\] The rational is in the internal man, and
what is there being transacted is unknown to the natural, for it is
above the sphere of its observation; and for this reason the man who
lives a merely natural life cannot know anything of what is taking place
with him in his internal man, that is, in his rational; for the Lord
disposes all such things entirely without the man's knowledge. Hence it
is that man knows nothing of how he is being regenerated, and scarcely
that he is being regenerated. But if he is desirous to know this, let
him merely attend to the ends which he proposes to himself, and which he
rarely discloses to anyone. If the ends are toward good, that is to say,
if he cares more for his neighbor and the Lord than for himself, then he
is in a state of regeneration; but if the ends are toward evil, that is
to say, if he cares more for himself than for his neighbor and the Lord,
let him know that in this case he is in no state of regeneration. \[3\]
Through his ends of life a man is in the other life; through ends of
good in heaven with the angels; but through ends of evil in hell with
devils. The ends in a man are nothing else than his loves; for that
which a man loves he has for an end; and inasmuch as his ends are his
loves, they are his inmost life (n. 1317, 1568, 1571, 1645, 1909, 3425,
3562, 3565). The ends of good in a man are in his rational, and these
are what are called the rational as to good, or the good of the
rational. Through the ends of good, or through the good therein, the
Lord disposes all things that are in the natural; for the end is as the
soul, and the natural is as the body of this soul; and such as the soul
is, such is the body with which it is encompassed; thus such as the
rational is as to good, such is the natural with which it is invested.
\[4\] It is known that the soul of man commences in the ovum of the
mother, and is afterwards perfected in her womb, and is there
encompassed with a tender body, and this of such a nature that through
it the soul may be able to act in a manner suited to the world into
which it is born. The case is the same when man is born again, that is,
when he is being regenerated. The new soul which he then receives is the
end of good, which commences in the rational, at first as in an ovum
there, and afterwards is there perfected as in a womb; the tender body
with which this soul is encompassed is the natural and the good therein,
which becomes such as to act obediently in accordance with the ends of
the soul; the truths therein are like the fibers in the body, for truths
are formed from good (n. 3470). Hence it is evident that an image of the
reformation of man is presented in his formation in the womb; and if you
will believe it, it is also the celestial good and spiritual truth which
are from the Lord that form him and then impart the power to receive
each of them successively, and this in quality and quantity precisely as
like a man he looks to the ends of heaven, and not like a brute animal
to the ends of the world. \[5\] That the rational as to good through the
natural conjoins with itself good first, and truth afterwards, which is
signified by Jacob's bringing dainties and bread to Isaac and his
eating, and bringing him wine and his drinking, may also be illustrated
by the offices which the body performs for its soul. It is the soul
which gives to the body to have appetite for food, and also to enjoy the
taste of it, the foods being introduced by means of the delight of
appetite and the delight of taste, thus by means of external good; but
the foods which are introduced do not all enter the life, for some serve
as menstruums for digesting; some for tempering; some for opening; some
for introducing into the vessels; but the good foods selected are
introduced into the blood, and become blood, out of which the soul
conjoins with itself such things as are of use. \[6\] The case is the
same with the rational and the natural: to appetite and taste correspond
the desire and the affection of knowing truth; and knowledges correspond
to foods (n. 1480); and because they correspond, they are circumstanced
in like manner; the soul (which is the good of the rational) gives to
long for and to be affected with the things which are of
memory-knowledge and of doctrine, and introduces them through the
delight of the longing and the good of the affection. But the things
which it introduces are not all such as to become the good of life; for
some serve as means for a kind of digesting and tempering; some for
opening and introducing; but the goods which are of life it applies to
itself, and thus conjoins them with itself, and from them forms for
itself truths. From this it is evident how the rational disposes the
natural, in order that it may serve it as the soul or what is the same,
may serve the end, which is the soul, to perfect itself, that it may be
of use in the Lord's kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3571.">3571.</span></span>

Verses 26-29. And Isaac his father said unto him, Come near I pray, and
kiss me, my son. And he came near, and kissed him; and he smelled the
smell of his garments, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my
son is as the smell of a field which Jehovah hath blessed. And God shall
give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fat things of the earth, and
a multitude of corn and new wine. Peoples shall serve thee, and peoples
shall bow down themselves to thee. Be thou a master to thy brethren, and
let thy mother's sons bow down themselves to thee; cursed are they that
curse thee, and blessed are they that bless thee. "And Isaac his father
said unto him, Come near I pray," signifies a degree of perception still
more interior; "and kiss me, my son" signifies whether it can be united;
"and he came near, and kissed him," signifies presence and unition; "and
he smelled the smell of his garments," signifies that which was grateful
from the truth of good which he perceived; "and blessed him," signifies
conjunction thus; "and said, See, the smell of my son," signifies that
which was grateful from the truth of good; "is as the smell of a field,"
signifies as from good ground out of which is truth; "which Jehovah hath
blessed," signifies that it is multiplied and made fruitful from the
Divine; "and God shall give thee of the dew of heaven," signifies from
Divine truth; "and of the fat things of the earth," signifies from
Divine good; "and a multitude of corn," signifies the derivative natural
good; "and new wine," signifies the derivative natural truth; "peoples
shall serve thee," signifies the truths of the church, or spiritual
churches; "and peoples shall bow down themselves to thee," signifies the
truths of good; "Be thou a master to thy brethren," signifies the
dominion at first appearing to be that of the affection of natural truth
over the affections of natural good; "and let thy mother's sons bow down
themselves to thee," signifies over all other affections of truth;
"cursed are they that curse thee," signifies that he who disjoins
himself shall be disjoined; "and blessed are they that bless thee,"
signifies that he who conjoins himself shall be conjoined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3572.">3572.</span></span>

And Isaac his father said unto him, Come near I pray. That this
signifies a degree of perception still more interior, is evident from
the signification of "saying that he should come near," as being a
degree of more interior perception from presence; "to come near" has no
other signification.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3573.">3573.</span></span>

And kiss me my son. That this signifies whether it can be united, is
evident from the signification of "kissing;" as being unition and
conjunction from affection. "Kissing," which is an outward thing,
signifies nothing else than the affection of conjunction, which is an
inward thing; they also correspond. As is evident from what has been
said above, the subject here treated of in the supreme sense is the
glorification of the natural in the Lord, that is, how the Lord made the
natural in Himself Divine; but in the representative sense the subject
is the regeneration of the natural in man, thus the conjunction of the
natural with the rational; for the natural is not regenerated until it
has been conjoined with the rational. This conjunction is effected by
the immediate and mediate influx of the rational into the good and truth
of the natural; that is to say, from the good of the rational
immediately into the good of the natural, and through this into the
truth of the natural; and mediately through the truth of the rational
into the truth of the natural, and thence into the good of the
natural-which conjunctions are here treated of. \[2\] These conjunctions
are impossible except by means provided by the Divine, and indeed by
such as are utterly unknown to man, and of which he can scarcely have
any idea by means of the things of the world's light, that is, which are
of the natural lumen with him; but only by means of the things which are
of the light of heaven, that is, which are of rational light.
Nevertheless all these means have been disclosed in the internal sense
of the Word, and are manifest before those who are in that sense, thus
before the angels, who see and perceive innumerable things on this
subject, of which scarcely one can be unfolded and explained in a manner
suited to the apprehension of man. \[3\] But from effects and the signs
thereof it is in some measure manifest to man how the case is with this
conjunction; for the rational mind (that is, man's interior will and
understanding) ought to represent itself in the natural mind just as
this mind represents itself in the face and its expressions, insomuch
that as the face is the countenance of the natural man, so the natural
mind should be the countenance of the rational mind. When the
conjunction has been effected, as is the case with those who have been
regenerated, then whatever man interiorly wills and thinks in his
rational presents itself conspicuously in his natural, and this latter
presents itself conspicuously in his face. Such a face have the angels;
and such a face had the most ancient people who were celestial men, for
they were not at all afraid that others should know their ends and
intentions, inasmuch as they willed nothing but good; for he who suffers
himself to be led by the Lord never intends or thinks anything else.
When the state is of this character, then the rational as to good
conjoins itself immediately with the good of the natural, and through
this with its truths; and also mediately through the truth that is
conjoined with itself in the rational with the truth of the natural, and
through this with the good therein; and in this way the conjunction
becomes indissoluble. \[4\] But how far man is at this day removed from
this state, thus from the heavenly state, may be seen from the fact that
it is believed to be of civil prudence to speak, to act, and also to
express by the countenance, something else than what one thinks and
intends, and even to dispose the natural mind in such a manner that
together with its face it may act contrary to the things which it
interiorly thinks and wills from an end of evil. To the most ancient
people this was an enormous wickedness, and such persons were cast out
from their society as devils. From these things, as from effects and
their signs, it is evident in what consists the conjunction of the
rational or internal of man as to good and truth with his natural or
external man; and thus what is the quality of a man-angel, and what the
quality of a man-devil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3574.">3574.</span></span>

And he came near, and kissed him. That this signifies presence and
unition, is evident from the signification of "coming near," as being
presence; and from the signification of "kissing," as being unition or
conjunction from affection (n. 3573). That "kissing" has this
signification is evident also from the following passages in the Word.
In David: Serve Jehovah with fear. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and
ye perish in the way, for His anger will soon be kindled. Blessed are
all they that put their trust in Him (Ps. 2:11-12); where the Lord is
treated of, whose Divine Human is the " Son;" to "kiss Him" is to be
conjoined with Him through the faith of love. Again: Mercy and truth are
met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other (Ps.
85:10); "righteousness and peace have kissed each other" denotes their
conjunction together. In Hosea: Ephraim spoke horror, and became guilty
in Baal; and now they sin more and more and have made them a molten
image of their silver, even idols in their own intelligence, all of them
the work of the craftsmen; they say to them, Let the sacrificers of men
kiss the calves (Hos. 13:1-2); "Ephraim" denotes intelligence, here,
man's own intelligence, that is, those who believe themselves to be
wise, and who desire to be wise, not from the Lord; the "molten image of
their silver" denotes good falsified; "all of them the work of the
craftsmen" denotes self-intelligence. They who are such are said to
"kiss the calves," that is, to embrace magic and to adjoin themselves
thereto. In the first book of Kings: Jehovah said to Elijah, I have
caused to be left seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not
bowed unto Baal, and every mouth that hath not kissed him (1 Kings
19:18); where "to kiss" denotes to join one's self from affection, thus
to worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3575.">3575.</span></span>

And he smelled the smell of his garments. That this signifies that which
was grateful from the truth of good which he perceived, is evident from
the signification of the "smell," as being that which is grateful (n.
925), and of "smelling," as being to perceive that which is grateful;
and from the signification of "garments," as being truth (n. 297, 1073,
2576); and because they were Esau's, who is here meant by "his," and by
Esau is represented the good of the natural, therefore it is the truth
of good which is signified. The truth of good is that which is produced
in the natural by means of the immediate and mediate influx of the
rational (see above n. 3573); this truth was that which was desired; but
because it could not be produced by immediate influx from the good of
the rational, unless at the same time by mediate influx (that is,
through the truth of the rational), and as this could not be produced
except by means of a number of means, which are what are here described
by "Esau" and "Jacob" in the internal sense, therefore by "smelling the
smell of his garments" is signified the truth of good which was
perceived.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3576.">3576.</span></span>

And he blessed him. That this signifies conjunction thus, is evident
from the signification of "being blessed," as being conjunction (n.
3504, 3514, 3530, 3565). From these particulars which are related
concerning Esau and Jacob it is evident that the good of the rational
conjoined itself inmostly with the good of the natural, and through the
good therein with truth; for Isaac represents the rational as to good;
Rebekah, the rational as to truth; Esau, the good of the natural; and
Jacob, the truth of it. That the rational as to good, signified by
"Isaac," conjoined itself inmostly with the good of the natural,
signified by "Esau," and not with the truth of the natural, signified by
"Jacob," except mediately, is evident from the fact that Isaac had Esau
in mind when he pronounced the blessing on Jacob; nor did he then think
of Jacob, but of Esau. He who pronounces a blessing, blesses him of whom
he is thinking, and not then him of whom he is not thinking. All the
blessing that is uttered with the mouth goes forth from within, and has
life in it from the will and thought of him who blesses, and therefore
it essentially belongs to him for whom he wills, and of whom he thinks.
He who takes it away and thus makes it his own is like one who steals
something which should be restored to another. That when Isaac blessed
he thought of Esau and not of Jacob, is evident from all that goes
before, as from verses 18 and 19, where Isaac says to Jacob, "Who art
thou my son?" and Jacob said unto his father, "I am Esau thy firstborn;"
and from verses 21, 22, and 23, where Isaac said to Jacob, "Come near I
pray, and I will feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau, or
not;" and after he had felt him, he said, "The voice is Jacob's voice,
but the hands are the hands of Esau, and he recognized him not;" also
from verse 24, "And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I
am;" and at last when he kissed him, he smelled the smell of his
garments," namely, Esau's; and when he then blessed him, he said, "See,
the smell of my son;" from all which it is evident that by the son whom
he blessed no other was meant than Esau; and therefore also when he
heard from Esau that it was Jacob, "Isaac shuddered with exceeding great
shuddering" (verse 33), "and said, Thy brother came with fraud" (verse
35); but the reason why Jacob retained the blessing, according to what
is said in verses 33 and 37, is that the truth represented by Jacob was
apparently to have the dominion for a time, as has been shown several
times above. \[2\] But after the time of reformation and regeneration
has been completed, then the good itself which had lain inmostly
concealed, and from within had disposed each and all things that had
appeared to be of truth, or that truth had attributed to itself, comes
forth and openly has the dominion. This is signified by what Isaac said
to Esau: "By thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother, and
it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt
break his yoke from upon thy neck" (verse 40), the internal sense of
which words is that so long as truth is being conjoined with good, good
is apparently made to take a lower place; but that it will be in the
prior place, and then there will be a conjunction of the rational with
the good of the natural, and thereby with the truth; and thus truth will
come to be of good; consequently Esau will then represent the good
itself of the natural, and Jacob the truth itself thereof, both
conjoined with the rational; thus in the supreme sense the Lord's Divine
natural; Esau, as to the Divine good, and Jacob as to the Divine truth,
therein.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3577.">3577.</span></span>

As the smell of a field. That this signifies as from good ground out of
which comes truth, is evident from the signification of the "smell of a
field," as being the perception of truth from good, like the exhalation
from the harvest in a field (that "field" denotes good ground may be
seen above, n. 3500). The reason why "smell" signifies perception, is
that the delights of good and the pleasant things of truth which are
perceived in the other life, manifest themselves there by corresponding
odors (see n. 1514, 1517-1519); and from this and also from the
correspondences it is evident that smell is nothing else than the
perceptive, but the natural perceptive that corresponds to the spiritual
perceptive.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3578.">3578.</span></span>

Which Jehovah hath blessed. That this signifies that it is multiplied
and made fruitful from the Divine, is evident from the signification of
"Jehovah blessing," as being to be multiplied as to truth and to be made
fruitful as to good (see n. 2846, 3406).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3579.">3579.</span></span>

And God shall give thee of the dew of heaven. That this signifies from
Divine truth, and that "of the fat things of the earth" signifies from
Divine good, is evident from the signification of the "dew of heaven,"
as being truth (of which in what follows); and from the signification of
"fat things," as being good (n. 353), both Divine in the supreme sense,
in which they are predicated of the Lord. With the multiplication of
truth and fructification of good the case is this: When the rational
flows into the natural, it there presents its good in a general form;
through this good it produces truths therein, almost as the life in man
builds up fibers, and disposes them into forms according to uses. This
good, through these truths disposed into heavenly order, produces
further good; and through this good further truths, which are
derivations. Such a natural idea may be had of the formation of truth
from good, and further of good through truth, whereby again truth is
formed; but a spiritual idea cannot be had except by those who are in
the other life, for there ideas are formed from the light of heaven, in
which is intelligence. \[2\] That "dew" signifies truth is evident also
from the Word elsewhere, as in Zechariah: The seed of peace, the vine
shall give her fruit and the earth shall give her produce, and the
heavens shall give their dew (Zech. 8:12); speaking of a new church,
where the "vine giving its fruit" denotes the spiritual of the church or
the truth of faith, giving good; and the "earth giving its produce," the
celestial of the church or the good of charity, giving truth; these are
the "dew which the heavens shall give." In Haggai: Because of Mine house
that lieth waste over you the heavens are closed from dew, and the earth
is closed from her produce (Hag. 1:9-10); where the "dew of the heavens
and the produce of the earth," which were restrained, have a like
signification. \[3\] In David: From the womb of the dawning, thou hast
the dew of thy birth (Ps. 110:3); concerning the Lord; the "dew of
birth" denoting the celestial of love. In Moses: Blessed of Jehovah be
his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the
deep lying beneath (Deut. 33:13); concerning Joseph; the "precious
things of heaven" are spiritual things (n. 3166), which are signified by
"dew;" the "deep lying beneath" signifies natural things. Again: Israel
dwelt securely, alone at the fountain of Jacob, in a land of corn and
new wine, yea his heavens dropped down dew (Deut. 33:28); where also the
"dew which the heavens dropped" denotes the spiritual things which are
of truth. \[4\] In the genuine sense "dew" is the truth of good which is
from a state of innocence and peace; for by "morning" or "day-dawn,"
when the dew descends, are signified these states (see n. 2333, 2405,
2540, 2780); hence also the manna which was from heaven was with the dew
that descended in the morning, as may be seen from Moses: In the morning
the dew was laid round about the camp; and when the laying of the dew
withdrew, behold on the faces of the wilderness a small round thing,
small as the hoar frost on the ground (Exod. 16:13-14). When the dew
fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it (Num. 11:9). As
the manna was heavenly bread, in the supreme sense it signified the Lord
as to the Divine good; hence with men the celestial of love, for this is
from the Divine of the Lord (n. 276, 680, 1798, 2165, 2177, 3464, 3478);
the "dew" in which and with which the manna descended, in the supreme
sense denotes the Divine truth; and in the relative sense, the spiritual
truth with men; "morning" is the state of peace in which these goods are
(n. 92, 93, 1726, 2780, 3170). \[5\] Inasmuch as "dew" signifies the
truth which is from good, or what is the same, the spiritual which is
from the celestial, therefore also in the Word spiritual truth is
compared to "dew;" for things which signify serve also for comparison
with the same thing, as in Isaiah: Thus hath Jehovah said unto me, I
will be still, and I will behold in My dwelling-place; like serene heat
upon light; like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest (Isa. 18:4). In
Hosea: O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do
unto thee? For your holiness is as a cloud of the dawn, and as the dew
that falleth in the morning (Hos. 6:4; 13:3). Again: I will be as the
dew unto Israel; he shall blossom as the lily, and shall fix his roots
as Lebanon (Hos. 14:5). In Micah: The remnant of Jacob shall be in the
midst of many peoples as dew from Jehovah, as drops upon the herb (Micah
5:7). In David: Like the goodly oil upon the head that came down upon
the border of Aaron's garments; like the dew of Hermon that cometh down
upon the mountains of Zion; for there Jehovah commanded the blessing of
life forevermore (Ps. 133:2-3). And in Moses: My doctrine shall drop as
the rain, My word shall distil as the dew; as the small rain upon the
grass; and as drops upon the herb (Deut. 32:2); where "dew" denotes the
multiplication of truth from good, and the fructification of good
through truth; and as the dew is that which every morning renders the
field and vineyard fruitful, good itself and truth are signified by
"corn and new wine," concerning which in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3580.">3580.</span></span>

And a multitude of corn. That this signifies the derivative natural
good, and that "new wine" signifies the derivative natural truth, is
evident from the signification of "corn," as being good; and from the
signification of "new wine," as being truth; which when predicated of
the natural signify natural good and truth, and then "bread and wine"
are predicated of the rational. (That "bread" is celestial good, see
above, n. 276, 680, 1798, 2165, 2177, 3464, 3478; and that "wine" is
what is spiritual, thus truth from good, n. 1071, 1798.) \[2\] That
"corn and new wine" have this signification, may be seen also from the
following passages in the Word. In Haggai: The heavens are closed from
dew, and the earth is closed from her produce. And I called for a
drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and
upon the new wine; and upon that which the ground bringeth forth (Hag.
1:10-11); where "drought" denotes a lack of dew and of rain, thus a lack
of truth derived from any good; "drought upon the corn" is a lack of
good and "drought upon the new wine" is a lack of truth. In Moses:
Israel shall dwell securely, alone at the fountain of Jacob in a land of
corn and new wine; yea, his heavens shall drop down dew (Deut. 33:28);
"alone" denotes those who are not infested by evils and falsities (n.
139, 471); a "land of corn and new wine" denotes the good and truth of
the church. \[3\] In Hosea: I will be as the dew unto Israel; he shall
bud forth as the lily, and shall fix his roots as Lebanon; his branches
shall go forth, and his honor shall be as the olive tree, and his smell
as Lebanon; they that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall
vivify the corn, and blossom as the vine; his memory shall be as the
wine of Lebanon (Hos. 14:5-7); where "corn" denotes spiritual good and
wine," spiritual truth. In Isaiah: The curse shall devour the earth. The
new wine shall mourn, the vine shall languish, all the glad of heart
shall sigh (Isa. 24:6-7); where the vastation of the spiritual church is
treated of; the "new wine mourning" denotes that truth shall cease.
\[4\] In Jeremiah: Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob. And they shall come and
sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together unto the goodness of
Jehovah, to the corn and to the new wine, and to the oil, and to the
sons of the flock and of the herd (Jer. 31:11-12); the "corn and new
wine" denote good and the derivative truth; "oil," the good from which
they come, and which is from them; "the sons of the flock and of the
herd," the truth which thus comes therefrom; and as these things have
such a signification, they are called "the goodness of Jehovah." \[5\]
In Hosea: She did not know that I gave her the corn, and the new wine,
and the oil, and multiplied unto her silver and gold which they made for
Baal. Therefore will I return and take away My corn and My new wine in
their appointed season, and I will pluck away My wool and My flax (Hos.
2:8-9); where the church perverted is treated of; and it is manifest
that by "corn" is not meant corn; nor by "new wine," new wine; neither
by "oil," "silver," "gold," "wool," and "flax," are such things meant,
but those which are spiritual; that is, those of good and truth. \[6\]
In like manner where a new church is treated of, in the same Prophet: I
will betroth thee unto Me in faithfulness and thou shalt know Jehovah.
And it shall come to pass in that day that I will hearken to the
heavens; and these shall hearken to the earth; and the earth shall
hearken to the corn, and the new wine, and the oil; and these shall
hearken to Jezreel (Hos. 2:20-22); where "Jezreel" denotes a new church.
In Joel: Awake ye drunkards and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of wine,
because of the new wine, for it is cut off from your mouth. The field is
wasted, the land mourneth; for the corn is wasted, the new wine is dried
up, the oil languisheth (Joel 1:5, 10). \[7\] Again: Rejoice ye sons of
Zion, and be glad in Jehovah your God; for He hath given you the early
rain for righteousness; and He will cause to come down for you the rain,
the early rain and the latter rain in the first. And the floors shall be
filled with pure corn, and the vats shall overflow with new wine and oil
(Joel 2:23-24). Again in the same Prophet: And it shall come to pass in
that day that the mountains shall drop down sweet wine, and the hills
shall flow with milk, and all the brooks of Judah shall flow with
waters, and a fountain shall go forth out of the house of Jehovah (Joel
3:18); where the Lord's kingdom is treated of; and by "sweet wine," by
"milk," and by "waters," are signified spiritual things whose abundance
is thus described. \[8\] In Zechariah: Jehovah their God shall save them
in that day as the flock of His people. For how great is His goodness!
and how great is His beauty! corn shall make the young men to flourish,
and new wine the virgins (Zech. 9:16-17). In David: Thou dost visit the
earth, and delightest in it; Thou greatly enrichest it; the stream of
God is full of waters; Thou preparest them corn; the meadows are clothed
with flocks; the valleys also are covered over with corn; they shout for
joy, they also sing (Ps. 65:9, 13). From all this we can see what is
signified by "corn and new wine."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3581.">3581.</span></span>

Peoples shall serve thee. That this signifies the truths of the church,
and that "peoples shall bow down themselves to thee" signifies the
truths of good, is evident from the mention of serving," as being
concerning truths (n. 2567, 3409); and from the signification of
"peoples," as being truths (n. 1259, 1260, 2928, 3295). By the "peoples"
first mentioned are signified the truths of the church, which are called
spiritual truths; and by the "peoples" mentioned the second time are
signified the truths of good, which are spiritual goods, and are called
truths relatively, the goods of charity being such truths. Because there
is this distinction, the "peoples" mentioned in the first place and in
the second are not expressed in the Hebrew tongue by the same word, but
yet by a word somewhat akin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3582.">3582.</span></span>

Be thou a master to thy brethren. That this signifies the dominion at
first appearing to be of that of the affection of natural truth over the
affections of natural good, is evident from the signification of being
"a master," as being dominion and from the signification of "brethren,"
as being the affections of good, here, of natural good (n. 367, 2360,
3303). (Concerning the apparent dominion at first of truth over good,
see n. 3324-3325, 3330, 3332, 3336, 3470, 3539, 3548, 3556, 3563, 3570.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3583.">3583.</span></span>

And let thy mother's sons bow down themselves to thee. That this
signifies over all other affections of truth, is evident from the
signification of "sons," as also being truths (see n. 489, 491, 533,
1147, 2623, 3373); and from the signification of mother," as being the
affection of spiritual truth, and thence the church; because the church
is and is so called from truth and the affection thereof (n. 289, 2691,
2717).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3584.">3584.</span></span>

Cursed are they that curse thee. That this signifies that he who
disjoins himself shall be disjoined; and that "blessed are they that
bless thee" signifies that he who conjoins himself shall be conjoined,
is evident from the signification of "being cursed" as being to be
disjoined; and of "being blessed," as being to be conjoined (n. 3504,
3514, 3530, 3565). These things are predicated of truths, and by "those
who curse" are signified falsities which separate themselves from
truths; and by "those who bless" are signified truths which adjoin
themselves to other truths; for with truths and goods the case is that
they form a society together, at last making as it were one city; and in
such a manner they also consociate. This originates from the form of
heaven, in which the angels are ranged in order according to the
relationships and affinities of good and truth, and thus together
constitute one kingdom or one city, from which truths and goods flow in
with man, and are disposed in him into a similar form, and this by the
Lord alone. But how the case herein is, will be more plainly evident
from the correspondence of the Grand Man, which is heaven, with each and
everything that is in man; which correspondence will of the Lord's
Divine mercy be described at the close of the chapters. From all this it
is now evident what is involved in the blessing of Isaac pronounced to
Jacob, but meant with respect to Esau; namely, the fructification of
good through the multiplication of truth, and again the fructification
of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3585.">3585.</span></span>

Verses 30-33. And it came to pass as Isaac made an end of blessing
Jacob, and Jacob was scarcely yet gone out from the faces of Isaac his
father, that Esau his brother came from his hunting. And he also made
dainties, and brought unto his father; and he said unto his father, Let
my father arise and eat of his son's hunting, that thy soul may bless
me. And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am
thy son, thy firstborn, Esau. And Isaac shuddered with exceeding great
shuddering, and said, Who then is he that hath hunted hunting, and
brought it to me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest and blessed
him? Yea, and he shall be blessed. "And it came to pass as Isaac made an
end of blessing Jacob," signifies when the first conjunction had been
thus effected; "and Jacob was scarcely yet gone out from the faces of
Isaac his father," signifies progression and change of state; "that Esau
his brother came from his hunting," signifies the truth of good and its
arrival; "and he also made dainties, and brought unto his father,"
signifies things desirable and delightful to the Divine rational; "and
he said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son's
hunting," signifies that it should appropriate to itself the truth of
natural good; "that thy soul may bless me," signifies that there might
be conjunction; "and Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And
he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn, Esau," signifies a state of
perception concerning natural good and the derivative truth; "and Isaac
shuddered with exceeding great shuddering," signifies a great alteration
in respect to the inversion of the state; "and said, Who then is he that
hath hunted hunting, and brought it to me," signifies an inquisition
concerning that truth; "and I have eaten of all before thou camest,"
signifies that it was appropriated; "and blessed him; yea, and he shall
be blessed," signifies that it had been conjoined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3586.">3586.</span></span>

And it came to pass as Isaac made an end of blessing Jacob. That this
signifies when the first conjunction had been thus effected, is evident
from the signification of "blessing," as being conjunction (see above,
n. 3504, 3514, 3530, 3565, 3584); thus "as Isaac made an end of
blessing" signifies when conjunction had been effected; that the first
conjunction was with truth, represented by Jacob, is evident from what
has been already said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3587.">3587.</span></span>

And Jacob was yet scarcely gone out from the faces of Isaac his father.
That this signifies progression and change of state, is evident from the
signification of "going out from the faces," as being when those things
ceased which were represented by Jacob, thus when the state was changed;
for the subject is now Esau, and in the internal sense the good of the
natural, how as before said this comes forth from the inmost and
manifests itself; and when reformation has been accomplished by the
ministry of truth, has the dominion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3588.">3588.</span></span>

That Esau his brother came from his hunting. That this signifies the
truth of good and its arrival is evident from the representation of
Esau, as being the good of the natural (concerning which see above);
from the signification of "coming," as being arrival; and from the
signification of "hunting," as being the truth which is from good (n.
3501).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3589.">3589.</span></span>

And he also made dainties, and brought unto his father. That this
signifies things desirable and delightful to the Divine rational, is
evident from the signification of dainties," as being the delightful
things which are of good and the pleasant things which are of truth (n.
3502, 3536), the delightful things which are of good are the desirable
things, and the pleasant things which are of truth are the delightful
things; for the affection of good is that which desires, and then the
affection of truth is that which delights.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3590.">3590.</span></span>

And he said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son's
hunting. That this signifies that the Divine rational should appropriate
to itself the truth of natural good, is evident from the representation
of Isaac, who here is the "father," as being the good of the rational
(concerning which frequently above) from the signification of "eating,"
as being to appropriate (see n. 2187, 2343, 3168, 3513); and from the
signification of "hunting," as being the truth of natural good (see just
above, n. 3588).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3591.">3591.</span></span>

That thy soul may bless me. That this signifies that there might be
conjunction, is evident from the signification of "being blessed," as
being conjunction (see also above, n. 3504, 3514, 3530, 3565, 3584).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3592.">3592.</span></span>

And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? and he said, I am thy
son, thy firstborn, Esau. That this signifies a state of perception
concerning natural good and the derivative truth, is evident from what
was said above (n. 3548-3550), at verses 18 and 19, where similar words
occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3593.">3593.</span></span>

And Isaac shuddered with exceeding great shuddering. That this signifies
a great alteration in respect to the inversion of the state, is evident
from the signification of "shuddering," as being an alteration; that it
is in respect to the inversion of the state, is evident from what has
been said above concerning the two states of the man who is being
regenerated-the state before he has been regenerated, and the state
after he has been regenerated-namely, that in the state before he has
been regenerated, truths apparently have the dominion; while in the
state after he has been regenerated, truths give place, and good
receives the dominion (on which subject see what has been frequently
shown above, n. 1904, 2063, 2189, 2967, 2979, 3286, 3288, 3310, 3325,
3330, 3332, 3336, 3470, 3509, 3539, 3548, 3556, 3563, 3570, 3576, 3579).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3594.">3594.</span></span>

And said, Who then is he that hath hunted hunting, and brought it to me.
That this signifies an inquisition concerning that truth, is evident
from the representation of Jacob, in reference to whom it is here said,
"Who is he," as being the natural as to truth (concerning which above);
and from the signification of "hunting," as being truth from good (n.
3501); here, an inquisition concerning that truth, as to whether it was
from good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3595.">3595.</span></span>

And I have eaten of all before thou camest. That this signifies that it
had been appropriated, is evident from the signification of "eating," as
being to be appropriated (n. 2187, 2343, 3168, 3513).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3596.">3596.</span></span>

And blessed him; yea, and he shall be blessed. That this signifies that
it has been conjoined, is evident from the signification of "being
blessed," as being to be conjoined (n. 3504, 3514, 3530, 3565, 3584).
How the case is with the appropriation and conjunction of the truth
represented by Jacob may be seen from what has been said above. But as
these subjects are of such a nature as to transcend the apprehension of
the natural man, and cannot be seen except in the light in which is the
rational or internal man, in which light at the present day there are
but few, because few are being regenerated, therefore it is better to
illustrate them no further, for the illustration of things unknown and
transcending the apprehension does not bring them into light, but into
more shade. Moreover such things are to be built upon ideas of natural
truths, through which they are to be apprehended, and at the present day
these also are wanting. This is the reason why the words just preceding
have been explained so briefly, and merely as to the internal sense of
the expressions. \[2\] From what has been said it may be seen what is
involved in the statement that Isaac asked hunting of his son, that he
might eat of it before he blessed him, and that he did not bless him
till after he had eaten, and thus that after eating followed the
blessing of him who prepared and brought the dainties-as is also evident
from Isaac's words (here concerning Jacob), "he brought to me, and I
have eaten of all before thou camest, and blessed him; yea, and he shall
be blessed." The reason referred to appears from the internal meaning of
the rituals of the Ancient Church; for with them eating signified
appropriation and conjunction-conjunction that is to say with him with
whom or of whose bread they had eaten. Food in general signified what is
of love and charity, that is, the same as celestial and spiritual
food-bread what is of love to the Lord, and wine what is of charity
toward the neighbor. When these had been appropriated, the persons were
conjoined; thus they spoke to each other from affection, and were
consociated together. Feasts with the ancients were nothing else, nor
was anything else represented in the Jewish Church by their eating
together of the holy things, nor was anything else represented in the
primitive Christian Church by their dinners and suppers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3597.">3597.</span></span>

Verses 34-40. When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with an
exceeding great and bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, me
also, O my father. And he said, Thy brother came with fraud, and hath
taken away thy blessing. And he said, Is it not that his name is called
Jacob? And he hath supplanted me these two times; he hath taken away my
birthright, and behold now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said,
Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me? And Isaac answered and said
unto Esau, Behold I have made him thy master, and all his brethren have
I given to him for servants; and with corn and new wine have I sustained
him; and what then shall I do for thee, my son? And Esau said unto his
father, Hast thou but this one blessing, my father? Bless me, me also, O
my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept. And Isaac his father
answered and said unto him, Behold of the fat things of the earth shall
be thy dwelling, and of the dew of heaven from above. And upon thy sword
shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass
when thou shalt have the dominion that thou shalt break his yoke from
upon thy neck. \[2\] "When Esau heard the words of his father" signifies
the observation of natural good from Divine good; "he cried with an
exceeding great and bitter cry" signifies its great alteration in
respect to the inversion of the state; "and said unto his father, Bless
me, me also, O my father" signifies that it longed for conjunction, even
although by what had gone before truth had been conjoined; "and he said,
Thy brother came with fraud" signifies what is inverted of order; "and
hath taken away thy blessing" signifies conjunction in that manner.
\[3\] "And he said, Is it not that his name is called Jacob" signifies
its quality; "and he hath supplanted me these two times" signifies that
it had inverted order; "he hath taken away my birthright" signifies the
loss of the priority; "and behold now he hath taken away my blessing"
signifies the loss of the conjunction; "and he said, Hast thou not
reserved a blessing for me" signifies whether there was for it anything
in respect to conjunction in that former state. \[4\] "And Isaac
answered and said unto Esau" signifies instruction; "behold I have made
him thy master" signifies that in that state it should have the
dominion; "and all his brethren have I given to him for servants"
signifies that to the affection of truth at that time there had
apparently been subordinated the affections of good; "and with corn and
new wine have I sustained him" signifies, as before, its good and truth;
and "what then shall I do for thee, my son" signifies that in that state
there is nothing else for good. \[5\] "And Esau said unto his father"
signifies the observation of natural good; "hast thou but this one
blessing, my father" signifies whether in that case anything else could
be adjoined from natural good; "bless me, me also, O my father"
signifies that it longed for conjunction even although thereby truth had
been conjoined; and "Esau lifted up his voice and wept" signifies a
further state of alteration. \[6\] "And Isaac his father answered and
said unto him" signifies perception concerning natural good, that it
would be made Divine; "behold, of the fat things of the earth shall be
thy dwelling" signifies that life is from the Divine good; "and of the
dew of heaven from above" signifies that it is from the Divine truth.
\[7\] "And upon thy sword shalt thou live, and thou shalt serve thy
brother" signifies that so long as truth is being conjoined with good,
good will in appearance be in a lower place; "and it shall come to pass
when thou shalt have the dominion" signifies that it shall be in the
prior place; "that thou shalt break his yoke from upon thy neck"
signifies that the conjunction would then be through good, and that
truth would be of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3598.">3598.</span></span>

Inasmuch as the things contained in verses 34 to 38 are such as have
been already unfolded, and what they involve may be seen from what has
been already said, it is therefore needless any further to unfold them
in respect to the internal sense, except that merely the things
contained in verses 39 and 40, relating to the blessing of Esau by Isaac
his father, shall be illustrated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3599.">3599.</span></span>

And Isaac his father answered and said unto him. That this signifies
perception concerning natural good, that it would be made Divine, is
evident from the signification of Isaac, as being the Lord's Divine
rational as to the Divine good therein (n. 3012, 3194, 3210); and from
the signification in the historicals of the Word of "saying," as being
to perceive, which has already been frequently treated of; and from the
representation of Esau, to whom he spoke, as being natural good,
concerning which also much has been already said. That it should be made
Divine, is evident from the blessing, now to be considered. It was said
above that Esau represents the Lord's Divine natural as to Divine good,
and Jacob His Divine natural as to Divine truth; but here, that Esau
represents the natural good which was to be made Divine; and in what
goes before, that Jacob represented the natural truth which also was to
be made Divine. How the case herein is may be seen from what was said
above (n. 3494, 3576); but that it may become still clearer, a few words
shall be added. \[2\] The natural good which Esau first represents is
the natural good of the Lord's infancy, which was Divine from the
Father, but human from the mother; and insofar as it was from the mother
it was imbued with hereditary evil; and being such, it could not be at
once in an order capable of receiving the Divine that was inmostly
within it; but had first to be reduced into order by the Lord. The case
is the same with the truth represented by Jacob; for where there is good
there must be truth in order for there to be anything; all that which is
of thought, even with infants, is of truth, adjoined to the will part
which is of good. Wherefore after the Lord had reduced the natural as to
good and as to truth in Himself into order, so that it might receive the
Divine, and that thus He Himself might inflow from His Divine, and after
by successive steps He had expelled all the human that was from the
mother; then Esau represents the Lord's Divine natural as to good, and
Jacob His Divine natural as to truth. \[3\] But Esau and Jacob represent
the Divine good and Divine truth of the Lord's Divine natural as
conjoined with each other like brothers, which Divine good and Divine
truth considered in themselves are nothing else than one simultaneous
power for the formation and reception of actual good and truth. This
actual good and truth are treated of later. From all this it is evident
what great arcana are contained in the internal sense of the Word, which
arcana are such that not even their most general points fall into the
understanding of man; as possibly may be the case with the things just
stated; and how then can the innumerable particulars relating thereto do
so? Yet are they well adapted to the understanding and apprehension of
the angels, who concerning these and the like things receive from the
Lord heavenly ideas illustrated by representatives of ineffable
loveliness and bliss; from which some conception may be formed of the
nature of angelic wisdom, yet remotely, because such things are in the
shade of the human understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3600.">3600.</span></span>

Behold of the fat things of the earth shall be thy dwelling. That this
signifies that life is from Divine good; and that "of the dew of heaven
from above" signifies that it is from Divine truth, is evident from the
signification of "fatness," as being good (n. 353), here, Divine good,
because it is spoken of the Lord; and from the signification of
"dwelling," as being life (see above, n. 1293, 3384), and that
"dwelling" is predicated of good (n. 2268, 2451, 2712); and from the
signification of the "dew of heaven," as being truth derived from the
good of a state of peace and innocence (n. 3579), here, Divine truth,
because it is spoken of the Lord. Similar words were spoken to Jacob,
namely, "God shall give thee of the dew of heaven and of the fat things
of the earth" (verse 28) but there "dew" (thus truth) is spoken of in
the first place; and the "fat things of the earth" (thus good) in the
second; and also that "God should give" of them; whereas here in
relation to Esau, the "fat things of the earth" (thus good) are spoken
of in the first place; and in the second place the "dew of heaven" (thus
truth); and it is not said that "God would give," but that "his dwelling
should be of them;" which also shows that Jacob represents truth, and
Esau good; also that truth as apparently in the former place is first;
but that this is the inverse of order, according to what has already
been frequently shown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3601-3650](ac073.md)
