[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac073)  [Next](ac075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="3651.">3651.</span></span>

Everyone may see that these words contain arcana, and that unless these
arcana are disclosed it is impossible to know what is meant by "them
that are in Judea fleeing to the mountains;" by "him that is upon the
housetop not going down to take anything out of his house;" and by "him
that is in the field not returning back to take his garment." Unless the
internal sense were to teach what these words signify and enfold within
them, the investigators and interpreters of the Word might be led away
and fall into opinions altogether foreign to the truth; or it might even
happen that those who at heart deny the holiness of the Word might come
to the conclusion that such expressions merely describe flight and
escape on the approach of an enemy; consequently that there is nothing
more holy contained therein; when yet by these words of the Lord there
is fully described a state of the devastation of the church in respect
to the goods of love and the truths of faith; as may be seen from the
following explication of the words in question.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3652.">3652.</span></span>

According to the internal sense, the signification is as now follows.
When therefore ye shall see the abomination of desolation; signifies the
devastation of the church, which occurs when the Lord is no longer
acknowledged; consequently when there is no love and no faith in Him;
also when there is no longer any charity toward the neighbor; and
consequently when there is not any faith of good and truth. When this is
the case in the church, or rather in the region where the Word is in
existence-that is, when men are such in the thoughts of the heart, even
if not in the doctrine of their lips-then there is "desolation," and the
things just mentioned are its "abomination;" so that the words "when ye
shall see the abomination of desolation" signify when anyone observes
such things; and what is to be done in such a case is told in what now
follows in verses 16 to 18. \[2\] Which was told of by Daniel the
prophet; in the internal sense signifies by the prophets; for where any
prophet is mentioned by name in the Word, it is not the prophet that is
meant, but the prophetic Word itself; because names never penetrate into
heaven (see n. 1876, 1888); and yet the same is not signified by one
prophet as by another. What is signified by "Moses," "Elias," and
"Elisha," may be seen in the preface to chapter 18 and in n. 2762; but
by "Daniel" is signified everything prophetic concerning the Lord's
advent, and concerning the state of the church; in the present case
concerning its last state. The subject of devastation is largely treated
of in the Prophets, and by it in the sense of the letter is signified
the devastation of the Jewish and Israelitish Church, but in the
internal sense there is signified the devastation of the church in
general, thus also the devastation which is now at hand. \[3\] Standing
in the holy place; signifies devastation as to all things which are of
good and truth; the "holy place" is a state of love and faith (that
"place" in the internal sense is state, see above, n. 2625, 2837, 3356,
3387); the holy of this state is the good which is of love, and the
derivative truth which is of faith; and nothing else than these is meant
by "holy" in the Word, because these things are from the Lord, who is
the Holy itself, or the Sanctuary. Let him that readeth understand;
signifies that these things are to be well observed by those who are in
the church, especially by those who are in love and faith; who now come
to be treated of. \[4\] Then let them that are in Judea flee into the
mountains; signifies that they who are of the church will not look
elsewhere than to the Lord, thus to love to Him, and to charity toward
the neighbor (that by "Judea" is signified the church, will be shown
below; that by a "mountain" is signified the Lord Himself, but by
"mountains" love to Him, and charity toward the neighbor, may be seen
above, n. 795, 796, 1430, 2722). According to the sense of the letter
the meaning would be that when Jerusalem was besieged, as it came to be
by the Romans, then they should not betake themselves thither, but to
the mountains, according to what is written in Luke: When ye see
Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that her devastation is at
hand. Then let them that are in Judea flee upon the mountains; and let
them that are in the midst of her depart out; and let not them that are
in the regions enter therein (Luke 21:20-21); \[5\] but in this passage
the case is the same with Jerusalem, namely, that in the sense of the
letter it is Jerusalem which is understood, while in the internal sense
it is the Lord's church (see n. 402, 2117); for each and all of the
things recorded in the Word concerning the Jewish and Israelitish people
are representative of the Lord's kingdom in the heavens, and of His
kingdom on earth; that is, of the church, as has been often shown. Hence
it is that by "Jerusalem" in the internal sense is nowhere meant
Jerusalem, nor by "Judea," Judea. But these matters were of such a
nature as to be capable of representing the celestial and spiritual
things of the Lord's kingdom, and the events took place for the sake of
the representation. In this way the Word could be so written as to be
adapted to the apprehension of the man who should read it, and also to
the understanding of the angels who are with the man. This likewise was
the reason why the Lord spoke in the same manner; for had He spoken
otherwise, His Word would not have been adapted to the understanding of
those who read it, especially at that time; nor to the understanding of
the angels; thus it would neither have been received by man, nor
understood by the angels. \[6\] Let him that is upon the housetop not go
down to take anything out of his house; signifies that such as are in
the good of charity should not betake themselves to those things which
belong to doctrinal matters of faith. In the Word the "housetop"
signifies the higher state of man, thus his state as to good; but those
things which are below it signify the lower state of man, thus his state
as to truth (n. 710, 1708, 2233, 2234, 3142, 3538). As regards the state
of a man of the church, the case is this: While he is being regenerated
he learns truths for the sake of good, for he has the affection of truth
on this account; but after he has been regenerated he acts from truth
and good. After the man has arrived at this state he ought not to betake
himself to his former state, for if he should do this he would reason
from truth concerning the good in which he is, and would thereby pervert
his state, for all reasoning ceases, and ought to cease, when a man is
in a state to will what is true and good; for he then thinks and acts
from the will, consequently from conscience, and not as before from the
understanding; and if he should again think and act from this, he would
fall into temptations in which he would succumb. This then is what is
signified by "Let him that is upon the housetop not go down to take
anything out of his house." \[7\] And let him that is in the field not
return back to take his garment; (that is, his tunic), signifies that
such as are in the good of truth should not betake themselves from the
good thereof to what is doctrinal of truth. In the Word a "field"
signifies this state of man in respect to good (what is meant by "field"
may be seen above, n. 368, 2971, 3196, 3310, 3317, 3500, 3508); and a
"garment" or "tunic" signifies that which clothes good, that is, what is
doctrinal of truth, for this is as clothing to good (that a "garment"
has this signification may be seen above, n. 297, 1073, 2576, 3301).
Everyone can see that in these words deeper things are hidden than those
which appear in the letter, for they were spoken by the Lord Himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3653.">3653.</span></span>

From all this it is now evident that in these verses there is fully
described the state of devastation of the church in respect to the goods
of love and the truths of faith, and that at the same time there is
given an exhortation to those who are in these goods and truths in
regard to what they ought then to do. There are three kinds of men
within the church; namely, those who are in love to the Lord; those who
are in charity toward the neighbor; and those who are in the affection
of truth. Those who belong to the first class, who are in love to the
Lord, are specifically signified in the words, "let them that are in
Judea flee into the mountains." Those in the second class, who are in
charity toward their neighbor, are specifically signified in the words,
"let him that is upon the housetop not go down to take anything out of
his house." Those in the third class, who are in the affection of truth,
are specifically signified in the words, "and let him that is in the
field not return back to take his garment." (See what has been said and
explained above in regard to these words, n. 2454; and what is meant by
"returning back," and "looking behind him.")

<span class="margnote"><span id="3654.">3654.</span></span>

That in the internal sense of the Word "Judea" does not signify Judea;
nor in like manner "Jerusalem," Jerusalem, may be seen from many
passages in the Word. "Judea" is not so frequently mentioned in the Word
as is the "land of Judah," and by the "land of Judah," as well as by the
"land of Canaan," is signified the Lord's kingdom (consequently also the
church, for the church is the Lord's kingdom on earth), and this for the
reason that the Lord's celestial kingdom was represented by Judah, or by
the Jewish nation, and His spiritual kingdom by Israel, or the
Israelitish people; and inasmuch as it was so represented, therefore
also when mention is made in the Word of that nation and people, in the
internal sense there is nothing else signified thereby. \[2\] That this
is the case will appear from what of the Lord's Divine mercy will be
said hereafter concerning Judah and the land of Judah; and in the
meantime from the following few passages in the Prophets. In Isaiah: My
beloved had a vineyard in the horn of a son of oil; and he made a hedge
about it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with a
noble vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also hewed out a
winepress therein; and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and
it brought forth wild grapes. And now O inhabitant of Jerusalem, and man
of Judah, judge I pray you between Me and My vineyard. I will make it a
desolation. For the vineyard of Jehovah Zebaoth is the house of Israel,
and the man of Judah is the plant of His delights; and He looked for
judgment, but behold a festering; for righteousness, but behold a cry
(Isa. 5:1-3, 6-7). In this passage, in the sense of the letter, the
perverted state of the Israelites and Jews is treated of, but in the
internal sense the perverted state of the church as represented by
Israel and Judah. The "inhabitant of Jerusalem" is the good of the
church (that "inhabitant" signifies good, or what is the same, those who
are in good, may be seen above, n. 2268, 2451, 2712, 3613; and that
"Jerusalem" signifies the church, see n. 402, 2117). The signification
of the "house of Israel" is similar (that "house" signifies good may be
seen above, n. 710, 1708, 2233, 2234, 3142, 3538; and that "Israel"
signifies the church, n. 3305); in like manner the "man of Judah," for
by "man" is signified truth (n. 265, 749, 1007, 3134, 3310, 3459), and
by "Judah" good, but with the difference that the "man of Judah"
signifies truth from the good of love to the Lord (which is called
celestial truth), that is, those who are in such truth. \[3\] In the
same: And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble
the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from
the four wings of the earth. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and
the enemies of Judah shall be cut off. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and
Judah shall not straiten Ephraim. Jehovah shall accurse the tongue of
the Egyptian sea, and with the vehemence of His breath shall shake His
hand over the river. And there shall be a highway for the remains of His
people, which shall be left from Asshur (Isa. 11:12-13, 15-16). The
subject here treated of in the sense of the letter is the bringing back
of the Israelites and Jews from captivity, but in the internal sense it
is concerning a new church in general and with every individual in
particular who is being regenerated or is becoming a church. The
"outcasts of Israel" denote the truths of such persons; the "dispersed
of Judah," their goods; "Ephraim," their intellectual part in that it
will no longer be resistant; "Egypt," memory-knowledges; and "Asshur,"
the derivative reasoning, which they have perverted; the "outcasts," the
"dispersed," the "remains," and "those who are left," denote the truths
and goods which survive. (That "Ephraim" denotes the intellectual part,
will be made manifest elsewhere; and that "Egypt" is memory-knowledge,
n. 1164-1165, 1186, 1462, 2588, 3325; that "Asshur" is reasoning, n.
119, 1186; and that "remains" are goods and truths from the Lord stored
up in the interior man, n. 468, 530, 560, 561, 660, 661, 798, 1050,
1738, 1906, 2284.) \[4\] In the same: Hear ye this, O house of Jacob,
called by the name of Israel, and they have come forth out of the waters
of Judah. For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves
upon the God of Israel (Isa. 48:1-2); where the "waters of Judah" denote
the truths which are from the good of love to the Lord; the truths
thence derived are the very goods of charity, which are called spiritual
goods, and constitute the spiritual church, the internal of which is
"Israel," and the external the "house of Jacob;" hence it is manifest
what is signified by the "house of Jacob called by the name of Israel,"
and by their "coming forth out of the waters of Judah." \[5\] In the
same: I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an
inheritor of My mountains; and Mine elect shall possess it, and My
servants shall dwell there (Isa. 65:9); "out of Judah an inheritor of
mountains" in the supreme sense denotes the Lord, and in the
representative sense those who are in love to Him, thus in the good of
love to the Lord and of love to the neighbor. (That "mountains" signify
these goods was shown above, n. 3652.) \[6\] So in Moses: Judah is a
lion's whelp; from the prey my son thou art gone up; he stooped down, he
couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up? (Gen.
49:9); where it is clearly manifest that in the supreme sense by "Judah"
is meant the Lord, and in the representative sense those who are in the
good of love to Him. So in David: When Israel went forth out of Egypt,
the house of Jacob from a barbarous people, Judah became His sanctuary,
Israel His dominion (Ps. 114:1-2); in this passage also "Judah" denotes
celestial good, which is the good of love to the Lord; and "Israel,"
celestial truth, or spiritual good. \[7\] So in Jeremiah: Behold the
days come, saith Jehovah, that I will raise unto David a righteous
offshoot, and He shall reign as king, and prosper, and shall execute
judgment and righteousness in the earth. In His days Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell securely; and this is His name whereby He
shall be called: JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS (Jer. 23:5, 6; 33:15, 16);
where the Lord's advent is treated of, "Judah" denoting those who are in
the good of love to the Lord; "Israel," those who are in the truth of
this good. That by "Judah" is not meant Judah, nor by "Israel" Israel,
is evident from the fact that neither Judah nor Israel was saved. In
like manner in the same: I will cause the captivity of Judah and the
captivity of Israel to return, and will build them as at the first (Jer.
33:7). In the same: In those days, and in that time, saith Jehovah, the
sons of Israel shall come, they and the sons of Judah together; going
and weeping shall they go, and shall seek Jehovah their God; and they
shall seek Zion in the way with their faces thitherward (Jer. 50:4-5).
Again: At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah; and
all the nations shall be gathered unto it, for the name of Jehovah, to
Jerusalem; neither shall they walk any more after the stubbornness of
their evil heart. In those days the house of Judah shall walk to the
house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the
north upon the land (Jer. 3:17-18). \[8\] Again: Behold the days come,
saith Jehovah, that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of
Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast. And I will make
a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah;
this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after
those days; I will put My law in the midst of them, and will write it on
their heart (Jer. 31:27, 31, 33). That Israel or the house of Israel is
not here meant, is very evident, because they were dispersed among the
Gentiles, and were never brought back out of captivity; consequently
neither was Judah nor the house of Judah meant, but thereby were
signified, in the internal sense, those who are of the Lord's spiritual
and celestial kingdom. With these is made a new covenant, and on their
heart is the law written; a "new covenant" denoting conjunction with the
Lord by means of good (see n. 665, 666, 1023, 1038, 1864, 1996, 2003,
2021, 2037); the "law written on their heart," denoting the consequent
perception of good and of truth, and also conscience. \[9\] So in Joel:
And it shall come to pass in that day that the mountains shall drop new
wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the streams of Judah
shall flow with waters; and a fountain shall go forth out of the house
of Jehovah, and shall water the stream of Shittim. Egypt shall be a
waste, and Edom shall be for a wilderness of a waste for the violence
done to the sons of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in
their land. But Judah shall abide forever, and Jerusalem to generation
and generation (Joel 3:18, 20); from all the particulars in this passage
also it is manifest that by "Judah" is not meant Judah, nor by
"Jerusalem," Jerusalem, but those who are in the holy of love and of
charity; for these "shall abide forever, and to generation and
generation." \[10\] So in Malachi: Behold I send Mine angel who shall
prepare the way before Me; and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come
to His temple, even the angel of the covenant whom ye desire. Then shall
the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto Jehovah, as in the
days of eternity, and as in former years (Mal. 3:1, 4); where the Lord's
advent is treated of. That at that time the offering of Judah and
Jerusalem was not pleasant unto Jehovah, is evident; and from this it is
manifest that by "Judah and Jerusalem" are signified such things as are
of the Lord's church. The case is the same everywhere in the Word where
mention is made of "Judah," of "Israel," and of "Jerusalem." From all
this then it is evident what is signified by "Judah" in Matthew, namely,
the Lord's church, in the present case vastated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3655.">3655.</span></span>

The subject treated of in the preceding verses from the evangelist, was
the first and second state of the church's perversion. That the first
state consisted in their beginning no longer to know what is good and
what is true, and in disputing together about them, whence came
falsities, may be seen above (n. 3354); and that the second state
consisted in their despising what is good and true, and also in being
averse thereto, and thus in the dying out of faith in the Lord,
according to the degrees of the cessation of charity, may be seen above
(n. 3487, 3488). So that the subject treated of in this preface is the
third state of the church, which is its state of desolation in respect
to good and truth. GENESIS 28 1. And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed
him, and commanded him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a woman
of the daughters of Canaan. 2. Arise, go to Paddan-aram, to the house of
Bethuel thy mother's father, and take thee from thence a woman of the
daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother. 3. And God Shaddai will bless
thee, and will make thee fruitful and multiply thee, and thou shalt be a
company of peoples. 4. And He will give thee the blessing of Abraham, to
thee and to thy seed with thee, to cause thee to inherit the land of thy
sojournings, which God gave unto Abraham. 5. And Isaac sent away Jacob;
and he went to Paddan-aram, to Laban the son of Bethuel the Aramean, the
brother of Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau. 6. And Esau saw that
Isaac blessed Jacob, and sent him to Paddan-aram, to take him from
thence a woman, and in blessing him commanded him, saying, Thou shalt
not take a woman of the daughters of Canaan. 7. And Jacob hearkened to
his father and to his mother, and went to Paddan-aram. 8. And Esau saw
that the daughters of Canaan were evil in the eyes of Isaac his father.
9. And Esau went to Ishmael, and took Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael,
Abraham's son, the sister of Nebaioth, over his women to himself for a
woman. 10. And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran. 11.
And he lighted upon a place, and passed the night there, for the sun was
set; and he took of the stones of the place, and placed them for his
pillows, and lay down in that place. 12. And he dreamed, and behold a
ladder set on the earth, and its head reaching to heaven; and behold the
angels of God ascending and descending on it. 13. And behold Jehovah
standing upon it; and He said, I am Jehovah the God of Abraham thy
father, and the God of Isaac; the land whereon thou liest, to thee will
I give it, and to thy seed. 14. And thy seed shall be as the dust of the
earth, and thou shalt break forth to the sea, and to the east, and to
the north, and to the south; and in thee shall all the families of the
ground be blessed, and in thy seed. 15. And behold I am with thee, and
will keep thee whithersoever thou goest, and will bring thee back to
this ground; for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I
have spoken to thee. 16. And Jacob awoke out of his sleep, and he said,
Surely Jehovah is in this place; and I knew it not. 17. And he feared,
and said, How terrible is this place! This is none other than the house
of God, and this is the gate of heaven. 18. And Jacob rose up early in
the morning, and took the stone that he had placed for his pillows, and
set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the head of it. 19. And he
called the name of that place Bethel; but the name of the city was Luz
at the first. 20. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me
and will keep me in this way wherein I walk, and will give me bread to
eat, and raiment to put on. 21. And I return in peace to my father's
house, Jehovah shall be to me for God. 22. And this stone which I have
set up for a pillar, shall be God's house; and all that Thou shalt give
me, tithing I will tithe it to Thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3656.">3656.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. In the supreme sense this chapter treats of the Lord, how
He began to make His natural Divine both as to truth and as to good; and
the means by which He effected this are described in general. But in the
representative sense it treats of how the Lord regenerates or makes new
the natural of man both as to truth and as to good; the process in
general is in like manner described (verses 1-10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3657.">3657.</span></span>

In the internal supreme sense there is described how the Lord began to
make His natural Divine as to truth from the ultimate of order, that
thereby He might make disposition of the intermediates, and might
conjoin each and all things with the First; that is, with His Divine
Itself. But in the internal representative sense there is described how
the Lord regenerates the human natural also from the ultimate of order,
and thereby disposes the intermediates, in order that through the
rational He may conjoin them with Himself (verses 11-22).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3658.">3658.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE. Verses 1, 2. And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed
him, and commanded him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a woman
of the daughters of Canaan. Arise, go to Paddan-aram, to the house of
Bethuel, thy mother's father, and take thee from thence a woman of the
daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother. "And Isaac called Jacob,"
signifies perception by the Lord of the quality in respect to the good
of truth; "and blessed him," signifies that thus conjunction would be
effected; "and commanded him, and said unto him," signifies reflection
and consequent perception; "thou shalt not take a woman of the daughters
of Canaan," signifies provided that it be not conjoined with the
affections of falsity and evil; "arise" signifies provided it should
elevate that good thence; "go to Paddan-aram," signifies the knowledges
of such truth; "to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father, and take
thee from thence a woman of the daughters of Laban thy mother's
brother," signifies collateral external good, and the derivative truth
that was to be conjoined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3659.">3659.</span></span>

And Isaac called Jacob. That this signifies perception by the Lord of
the quality in respect to the good of truth, is evident from the
signification of "calling" anyone as being to perceive the quality (n.
3609); and from the representation of Isaac, as being the Lord as to the
Divine good of the Divine rational (n. 1893, 2066, 2072, 2083, 2630,
3012, 3194, 3210); and from the representation of Jacob, as being the
Lord as to natural truth (n. 1893, 3305, 3509, 3525, 3546, 3576, 3599).
But here, and in what follows in this chapter, Jacob represents the good
of this truth; from which it is evident that by the words, "Isaac called
Jacob," is signified perception by the Lord of the quality in respect to
the good of truth. \[2\] The reason why Jacob here represents the good
of this truth, is that he has now carried off the birthright of Esau,
and also his blessing, and has thereby put on the person of Esau, but
still no further than in respect to the good of the truth which he had
before represented; for all truth, whatsoever it be and whatsoever its
quality, has good within it, inasmuch as truth is not truth except from
good; it is from this that it is called truth. By the birthright which
he took, and by the blessing, he obtained over Esau the privilege that
his posterity should succeed to the promise made to Abraham and Isaac
concerning the land of Canaan, and thus that by him should be
represented the Lord's Divine natural, as by Isaac was represented the
Divine rational, and by Abraham His Divine Itself. In order therefore
that the representative might fall upon one person, it was permitted
that he should thus take from Esau the birth-right, and afterwards the
blessing. Hence it is that Jacob now represents the good of the natural,
but here at first the good of that truth, namely, of the truth which he
had represented just before. Esau is also still further treated of, as
in the following verses (6-8) of this chapter, to the intent that there
might be represented the good of truth and the interior truth of good of
the Lord's natural, which could not as yet be represented by Jacob. What
and of what quality is the good of truth here represented by Jacob, will
appear from what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3660.">3660.</span></span>

And blessed him. That this signifies that thus conjunction would be
effected, is evident from the signification of being "blessed," as being
to be conjoined (see n. 3504, 3514, 3530, 3565, 3584). The reason why
Isaac the father now blesses Jacob the son, although he had come with
guile and taken the blessing from Esau, and Isaac had shuddered at that
deed (as appears from the preceding chapter, verses 33 and 35), is that
Isaac now perceived that it was the posterity of Jacob, and not that of
Esau, that was to possess the land of Canaan; and therefore the blessing
was confirmed by Isaac. But the guile at which Isaac shuddered signified
and foretold what was deceptive in the posterity of Jacob in regard to
the representatives; that is to say, that they were very far from
sincerely or at heart representing the Divine or celestial things of the
Lord's kingdom, and were thus utterly unlike the Ancient Church, being
merely in externals separate from what is internal, and not even in
these, inasmuch as they so often fell away into open idolatries. \[2\]
What is meant by being conjoined, or by conjunction, here signified in
the internal sense by being "blessed," was shown above, namely, that the
natural as to good and as to truth should be adjoined to the rational,
or what is the same thing, the external man to the internal; for in
order that the Lord might make His natural Divine, He had to implant
therein such good and truth as would correspond with the good and truth
of the Divine rational. Without corresponding goods and truths no
conjunction is possible. There are innumerable goods and truths of the
natural, or such as are proper to the natural man; so innumerable that
man can scarcely know their most general kinds, in spite of the fact
that when mention is made of natural good and truth it appears to man as
one simple thing; for the whole natural and all that is in it is nothing
else than this good and truth. And this being the case, it is evident
that there are goods and truths of the natural in which the goods and
truths of the rational can be, and that there are goods and truths of
the natural in which the goods and truths of the rational cannot be;
consequently, that there are goods and truths of the natural which can
be adjoined to the goods and truths of the rational by correspondence.
Such goods and truths are treated of in this and the following chapters.
\[3\] To know these goods and truths, and to distinguish them from one
another, and also to view their qualities, and thus how they are adapted
for conjunction, does not so well appear to man so long as he does not
think from what is interior, or from enlightenment by the light of
heaven; for in this case such things appear to him to be both obscure
and undelightful. But nevertheless they are suited to the apprehension
and understanding of angels, and even to the apprehension of spirits;
for the thoughts of angels and spirits are not distracted by cares for
worldly, corporeal, and earthly things, as they had formerly been when
they lived as men in the world. Angels and spirits are in the
pleasantness of intelligence and the bliss of wisdom when such things
are present with them from the internal sense of the Word; for then what
is Divine shines upon them, because in the supreme sense the Lord is
treated of, and in the representative sense the church and regeneration;
and thereby they are in the Lord's Divine sphere, and in that of His
ends and uses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3661.">3661.</span></span>

And commanded him, and said unto him. That this signifies reflection and
consequent perception, is evident from the signification in the
historicals of the Word of "commanding," as being to reflect; and from
the signification of "saying," as being to perceive (see n. 1791, 1815,
1819, 1822, 1898, 1919, 2080, 2619, 2862). Reflection is the mental view
of a thing in regard to its nature and quality, and from this comes
perception.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3662.">3662.</span></span>

Thou shalt not take a woman of the daughters of Canaan. That this
signifies provided that it be not conjoined with the affections of
falsity and evil, is evident from the signification of "taking a woman,"
as being to be associated or conjoined; from the signification of
"daughters," as being affections (n. 568, 2362, 3024); and from the
signification of "Canaan," as being falsity and evil (n. 1093, 1140,
1141, 1167, 1205, 1444, 1573, 1574, 1868).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3663.">3663.</span></span>

Arise. That this signifies provided it should elevate that good thence,
is evident from the signification of "arising," as implying some
elevation (n. 2401, 2785, 2912, 2927, 3171); in the present case an
elevation from such things as are signified by the "daughters of
Canaan," to such things as are signified by the "daughters of Laban,"
concerning which in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3664.">3664.</span></span>

Go to Paddan-aram. That this signifies the knowledges of such truth, is
evident from the signification of "Aram," or "Syria," as being
knowledges (see n. 1232, 1234, 3249). That "Paddan-aram" signifies the
knowledges of truth is because it was in Syria of the rivers, where
Nahor, Bethuel, and Laban dwelt; and that by "Syria" are signified the
knowledges of truth may be seen above (n. 3051). Paddan-aram is also
mentioned above (25:20), and again below (31:18); in which places
likewise it signifies the knowledges of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3665.">3665.</span></span>

To the house of Bethuel, thy mother's father, and take thee from thence
a woman of the daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother. That this
signifies collateral external good, and the derivative truth that was to
be conjoined, is evident from the representation of Bethuel, as being
the good of the Gentiles of the first class (see n. 2865); from the
representation of Laban, as being the affection of good in the natural
man, that is the affection of external good, and properly the collateral
good of a common stock (n. 3129, 3130, 3160, 3612); and from the
signification of "taking a woman of his daughters," as being to be
associated to or conjoined with the derivative affections of truth. That
"taking a woman" denotes to be conjoined, is manifest, and that
"daughters" are affections, may be seen above (n. 568, 2362, 3024).
Hence it is evident what these words signify, namely, that the good of
the natural, here represented by Jacob, was to be conjoined with the
truths derived from collateral external good. \[2\] The case herein is
this: When man is being regenerated, he is at first led by the Lord as
an infant, then as a child, afterwards as a youth, and at last as an
adult. The truths he learns as an infant child are altogether external
and corporeal, for as yet he is unable to apprehend interior truths.
These truths are no other than knowledges of such things as contain, in
their inmost, things Divine; for there are knowledges of things that do
not contain anything Divine in their inmost; and there are knowledges
that do contain it. The knowledges that do contain what is Divine are
such that they can admit interior truths more and more, successively,
and in order; whereas the knowledges which do not contain what is Divine
are such that they do not admit, but reject these interior truths; for
the knowledges of external and corporeal good and truth are like ground,
which according to its quality admits seeds of one nature and not of
another, bringing to maturity one kind of seeds, and suffocating
another. Knowledges which contain in their inmost what is Divine, admit
into them spiritual and celestial truth and good, possessing this
capacity from the Divine which is within, and which disposes; but the
knowledges which do not contain in them what is Divine, admit only what
is false and evil, such being their nature. Those knowledges of external
and corporeal truth which admit spiritual and celestial truth and good,
are here signified by the "daughters of Laban of the house of Bethuel;"
but those which do not thus admit them, are signified by the "daughters
of Canaan." \[3\] The knowledges which are learned from infancy to
childhood are like most general vessels, which are to be filled with
goods, and in proportion as they are filled the man is enlightened. If
the vessels are such as to admit into them genuine goods, then the man
is enlightened from the Divine that is within them, and this
successively more and more; but if they are such that genuine goods
cannot be in them, then the man is not enlightened. It does appear that
he is enlightened, but this is from a fatuous light, which is that of
falsity and evil, whereby he is more and more darkened in respect to
good and truth. \[4\] Such knowledges are manifold, and so manifold that
their genera can scarcely be counted; still less can their species be
discriminated; for they are derived in many ways from the Divine through
the rational into the natural. For some flow in immediately through the
good of the rational, and thence into the good of the natural; and also
into the truth of this good, and thence further into the external or
corporeal natural, where also they divide into various streams. And some
flow in mediately through the truth of the rational into the truth of
the natural, and also into the good of this truth, and thence further
into the external or corporeal natural (see n. 3573, 3616). They are
like nations, families, and houses, and like the blood-relationships and
the connections therein, there being in them some which descend in a
direct line from the first father, and some which descend in a line more
and more indirect or collateral. In the heavens these things are most
distinct, for all the societies therein, and thus the proximities, are
distinguished according to the genera and species of good and truth (n.
685, 2508, 2524, 2556, 2739, 3612). These societies and proximities were
represented by the most ancient people, who were celestial men, by their
dwelling together classified in this manner into nations, families, and
houses (n. 470, 471, 483, 1159, 1246); and for this reason it was
enjoined that they who were of the representative church should contract
marriages within the families of their own nation; for in this way they
could represent heaven, and the conjunction of its societies as to good
and truth-as was the case here with Jacob, in that he was to go to the
house of Bethuel, his mother's father, and take him a woman of the
daughters of Laban, his mother's brother. \[5\] With regard to these
very knowledges of external or corporeal truth which are from collateral
good, and which as before said contain in them what is Divine, and thus
are capable of admitting genuine goods-such as are the knowledges with
young children who are afterwards regenerated-they are in general such
as are contained in the historicals of the Word, such as what is said
therein concerning paradise, concerning the first man in it, concerning
the tree of life in its midst, and concerning the tree of knowledge,
where was the serpent that practiced the deception. These are the
knowledges that contain within them what is Divine, and admit into them
spiritual and celestial goods and truths, because they represent and
signify these goods and truths. Such knowledges also are all other
things in the historicals of the Word, as what is said concerning the
tabernacle and the temple and concerning the construction of these; in
like manner what is said concerning the garments of Aaron and of his
sons; also concerning the feasts of tabernacles, of the firstfruits of
harvest, of unleavened bread, and concerning other like things. When
such knowledges as these are known and thought of by a young child, the
angels who are with him think of the Divine things which they represent
and signify; and because the angels are affected therewith, their
affection is communicated, and causes the delight and pleasure which the
child experiences therein; and prepares his mind to receive genuine
truths and goods. Such and very many others are the knowledges of
external and corporeal truth that are derived from collateral good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3666.">3666.</span></span>

Verses 3-5. And God Shaddai will bless thee, and will make thee fruitful
and multiply thee, and thou shalt be a company of peoples. And He will
give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed with thee, to
cause thee to inherit the land of thy sojournings, which God gave unto
Abraham. And Isaac sent away Jacob; and he went to Paddan-aram, to Laban
the son of Bethuel the Aramean, the brother of Rebekah, the mother of
Jacob and Esau. "And God Shaddai will bless thee," signifies the
temptations of that truth and good through which there is conjunction;
"and will make thee fruitful and multiply thee," signifies the
derivative goods and truths; "and thou shalt be a company of peoples,"
signifies abundance; "and He will give thee the blessing of Abraham,"
signifies the conjunction of the Divine Itself with the good and truth
of the natural; "to thee and to thy seed with thee," signifies with the
good and its derivative truth; "to cause thee to inherit the land of thy
sojournings," signifies the life of instructions; which God gave unto
Abraham," signifies which is from the Divine; "and Isaac sent away
Jacob," signifies the beginning of manifestation; "and he went to
Paddan-aram," signifies here as before the knowledges of that truth; "to
Laban the son of Bethuel the Aramean," signifies collateral good; "the
brother of Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau," signifies the
affinity from the mother, with the good of truth which is "Jacob," and
with the truth of good which is "Esau."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3667.">3667.</span></span>

And God Shaddai will bless thee. That this signifies the temptations of
that truth and good through which there is conjunction, is evident from
the signification of "God Shaddai," as being temptations (concerning
which signification in what follows); and from the signification of
being "blessed," as being conjunction (see n. 3504, 3514, 3530, 3565,
3584). Inasmuch as by Jacob is now represented the good of truth, as
before shown (n. 3659), therefore that good and truth are here meant by
"thee." The reason why "God Shaddai" signifies temptations, is that in
ancient times they distinguished the Supreme God (that is, the Lord) by
various names, and this in accordance with His attributes, and in
accordance with the goods which are from Him, and also in accordance
with the truths, the multiplicity of which is a fact that is known to
everyone. They who were of the Ancient Church by all these appellations
understood only one God, namely, the Lord, whom they called Jehovah; but
after the church had declined from good and truth, and at the same time
from this wisdom, they began to worship as many gods as there were
appellations of the one God; insomuch that every nation, and at last
every family, acknowledged one of them for its own god; hence came the
many gods of which mention is often made in the Word. \[2\] The same
thing took place in the family of Terah the father of Abraham, and also
in the house of Abraham himself, who worshiped other gods (as may be
seen above, n. 1356, 2559), and especially the God Shaddai (n. 1992).
That the worship of this God remained in that house, is evident also
from these words in Moses: I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto
Jacob, in God Shaddai, but by My name Jehovah I was not known to them
(Exod. 6:3). This is the reason why it was said to Abraham: "I am God
Shaddai; walk before Me, and be perfect" (Gen. 17:1); and why it is here
said by Isaac to Jacob, "God Shaddai will bless thee." That this is the
case is also clearly evident from what follows in this chapter, in that
after the Lord had said to Jacob in a dream, "I am Jehovah the God of
Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac" (verse 13), still Jacob
afterwards said, "If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way
wherein I walk, and will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, and
I return in peace to my father's house, then Jehovah shall be to me for
God" (verses 20, 21); from which it is evident that neither did the
house of Jacob acknowledge Jehovah; but that Jacob would acknowledge Him
as his God if He would be his benefactor-just as is the case at this day
in Christian Gentilism. \[3\] But as specifically regards God Shaddai,
the Lord had been so called in the Ancient Church with respect to
temptations and to blessings and benefits after temptations, as was
shown in volume 2 (n. 1992). This is the reason why by "God Shaddai" in
the internal sense are signified temptations. That by temptations is
effected a conjunction of good and truth, see what has already been
stated and shown concerning temptations (n. 2819).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3668.">3668.</span></span>

And will make thee fruitful and multiply thee. That this signifies the
derivative goods and truths, is evident from the mention of "being
fruitful," as having reference to good; and of "being multiplied," as
having reference to truth (n. 43, 55, 913, 983, 2846, 2847).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3669.">3669.</span></span>

And thou shalt be a company of peoples. That this signifies abundance,
is evident without explication; a "company of peoples" is specifically
predicated of truths, for by "peoples" in the Word are signified those
who are in truth (n. 1259, 1260, 2928, 3581), whereas by "nations" are
signified those who are in good (n. 1259, 1260, 1416, 1849). It is here
said a "company of peoples," because the subject treated of is the good
of truth represented by Jacob; for the good which is from truth is one
thing, and the good from which is truth is another; the good which is
from truth is that which is here called "Jacob," and the good from which
is truth is that which is called "Esau." The good which is from truth is
inverse to the good from which is truth. Those who are being
regenerated, before their regeneration is completed, are in the good
which is from truth; whereas the same when regenerated are in the good
from which is truth. That their state is inverse may be seen above (n.
3539, 3548, 3556, 3563, 3570, 3576, 3603).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3670.">3670.</span></span>

And He will give thee the blessing of Abraham. That this signifies the
conjunction of the Divine Itself with the good and truth of the natural,
is evident from the signification of a "blessing," as being conjunction
(n. 3660, 3667); and from the representation of Abraham, as being the
Lord's Divine Itself which is called the "Father" (concerning which see
n. 2011, 3251, 3439). And inasmuch as these words are spoken to Jacob,
by whom there would be represented the Lord's Divine natural as to the
Divine good and truth therein, therefore the conjunction of the Divine
Itself with the good and truth of the natural is what is signified, in
the internal sense, by "He will give thee the blessing of Abraham." In
the sense of the letter, it is the possession of the land of Canaan that
is meant by the "blessing of Abraham," and also by the words which
follow: "to cause thee to inherit the land of thy sojournings, which God
gave unto Abraham;" and according to this sense do all apprehend the
words who believe that the historicals of the Word do not contain within
them things more heavenly and secret: and especially so do the Jewish
nation, who on the strength of these words claim for themselves
privileges above every other nation and people. Their fathers understood
the words in the same manner, and especially were they so understood by
Jacob, whose quality is evident from what was said just above (n. 3667),
in that he would not have known Jehovah, nor have been willing to
acknowledge Him, unless He had given him corporeal and worldly
blessings. But that neither Abraham, nor Isaac, nor Jacob was meant, and
that by Jacob is represented the Lord as to the natural which He would
make Divine, is abundantly manifest from the explications given above.
That it is immaterial what is the quality of the man who represents, as
to whether he is evil or good, and that evil men equally with good men
can represent and have represented the Lord's Divine, may be seen above
(n. 665, 1097, 1361). \[2\] The same may be seen from the
representatives which exist even to this day; for all kings, whoever
they may be, and of whatever quality, by the royalty itself that
appertains to them represent the Lord; in like manner all priests,
whoever and of whatever quality they may be, by the priestly office
itself. The royal and the priestly office itself is holy, whatever be
the quality of him who ministers therein; and this is the reason why the
Word taught by an evil man is equally holy, and also the sacrament of
baptism and the Holy Supper, and other such things. And from this it is
also evident that no king can possibly claim for himself anything of the
sanctity that belongs to his royalty; nor any priest anything of the
sanctity that belongs to his priesthood. Insofar as either claims
anything thereof to himself, or attributes it to himself, so far he
brands himself with the character of a spiritual thief, or with the mark
of spiritual theft; and also insofar as he does evil, that is, acts
contrary to what is just and equitable, and contrary to what is good and
true, so far a king puts off the representative of holy royalty, and a
priest the representative of holy priesthood, and represents the
opposite. For this reason in the representative Jewish Church there were
so many laws enjoined concerning the holiness in which priests
especially should be during their ministration-on which subject, of the
Lord's Divine mercy, more will be said in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3671.">3671.</span></span>

To thee and to thy seed with thee. That this signifies with the good and
its derivative truth, is evident from the representation of Jacob, who
is here meant by "thee," as being the good of truth, or the good which
is from truth (concerning which see above); and from the signification
of "seed," as being the good and truth of faith (n. 1025, 1447, 1610,
2848, 3373). "With thee" signifies that it was adjoined to the good of
truth which is "Jacob." With good and truth the case is the same as with
seeds and the ground; interior good is as the seed which brings forth,
but only in good ground; exterior good and truth are as the ground in
which the seed brings forth; this seed (that is, interior good and
truth) cannot otherwise be rooted. For this reason man's rational is
first of all regenerated, for therein are seeds, and afterwards the
natural, in order that it may serve as ground (n. 3286, 3288, 3321,
3368, 3493, 3576, 3620, 3623); and since the natural is as ground, good
and truth are capable of being made fruitful and multiplying in the
rational, which could not be the case unless they had ground somewhere,
in which they might take root like seed. From this comparison it may be
seen as in a mirror how the case is with regeneration and with many of
its arcana. \[2\] To understand good and truth and to will them is of
the rational; the perceptions of good and truth therefrom are as seed;
but to know them and bring them into act is of the natural. The very
memory-knowledges and works are like ground, and when man is affected
with the memory-knowledges which confirm good and truth; and especially
when he feels a delight in bringing them into act, the seeds are
therein, and grow as in their ground. By this means good is made
fruitful, and truth is multiplied, and they continually ascend from this
ground into the rational, and perfect it. The case is otherwise when man
understands good and truth, and also inwardly perceives some inclination
of will thereto, but yet does not love to know them, and still less to
do them. In this case good cannot be made fruitful nor truth be
multiplied, in the rational.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3672.">3672.</span></span>

To cause thee to inherit the land of thy sojournings. That this
signifies the life of instructions, is evident from the signification of
"inheriting," as being to have another's life (n. 2658, 2851); in the
present case, life from the Divine, which is signified by the words
which presently follow; and from the signification of "sojournings," as
being instructions (n. 1463, 2025); "land" signifies where life is. The
life of instructions here treated of is the life of good from truth,
which is here represented by Jacob; for when man lives according to the
truths in which he is instructed, he is then in the life of
instructions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3673.">3673.</span></span>

Which God gave unto Abraham. That this signifies which is from the
Divine, is evident from the representation of Abraham, as being the Lord
as to the Divine which in the Word is called the "Father" (n. 2011,
3251, 3439). That "God gave" signifies that it was appropriated to the
Lord, is evident; for that which is given is his to whom it is given.
Hence it is manifest that by the words "which God gave unto Abraham," is
signified life which is from the Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3674.">3674.</span></span>

And Isaac sent away Jacob. That this signifies the beginning of
manifestation \[existentia\] is evident from the fact that Jacob now
begins to represent the good of truth, thus the beginning of the
manifestation of the Lord's Divine natural; for this is contained in
what follows concerning the sojourning of Jacob with Laban. Wherefore by
"Isaac sent away Jacob" is signified the beginning of manifestation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3675.">3675.</span></span>

And he went to Paddan-aram. That this signifies the knowledges of that
truth, is evident from the signification of Paddan-aram, as being the
knowledges of truth (see n. 3664).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3676.">3676.</span></span>

To Laban, the son of Bethuel the Aramean. That this signifies collateral
good, is evident from the representation of Laban, as being collateral
good of a common stock (concerning which see also above, n. 3665); and
from the representation of Bethuel, as being the good of the Gentiles of
the first class (see n. 2865, 3665), from which as from a common stock
comes the good which is represented by Laban. The reason why Bethuel is
here surnamed the "Aramean," is that by "Aram" or "Syria" are signified
the knowledges of good and truth (see n. 1232, 1234, 3249), which are
here treated of. External truth, from which is the good here represented
by Jacob, is nothing else than knowledges; for these are the truths
which are learned first of all, and are also accounted as truths by
those who are in the beginning of regeneration. Yet knowledges are not
truths in themselves, but from the Divine things within them; and when
these Divine things shine forth, the knowledges for the first time
become truths. Meanwhile they are like general vessels, through which
and in which truths can be received, like those spoken of above (n.
3665), and like all the memory-knowledges that are first learned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3677.">3677.</span></span>

The brother of Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau. That this
signifies the affinity from the mother with the good of truth which is
"Jacob" and with the truth of good which is "Esau," is evident from the
representation of Rebekah, as being the Lord's Divine rational as to
Divine truth (of which frequently above); and from the representation of
Jacob, as being the good of truth, or the good which is from truth in
the natural; and from the representation of Esau, as being the truth of
good, or the good from which is truth in the natural (see above, n.
3669). And because all the goods and truths that are in the natural or
external man are conceived and born of the rational or internal man;
that is, of the good of the rational as a father, and of the truth
thereof as a mother (n. 3314, 3573, 3616), therefore by the above words
is signified the affinity from the mother with the good of truth which
is "Jacob" and with the truth of good which is "Esau." \[2\] Moreover
they are circumstanced in precisely the same way; but to explain these
things to the apprehension is very difficult, because even the most
general facts in regard to the subject are at this day unknown-as for
instance, what spiritual good is and what its truth, and that there are
innumerable genera of good and its truth, and still more innumerable
species, also that they are conjoined with each other by degrees as it
were of consanguinity and affinity. These most general things being
unknown, a description of the degrees and affinities would fall into
mere shade, and the more so because the learned of the day do not desire
to know such things, for they love to stray in the mere shell; and to
dispute, not concerning the quality of such things, but whether they
exist or not; and so long as they are in this state they desire to know
nothing whatever concerning these innumerable kinds of good and truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3678.">3678.</span></span>

Verses 6-9. And Esau saw that Isaac blessed Jacob, and sent him to
Paddan-aram, to take him from thence a woman, and in blessing him
commanded him, saying, Thou shalt not take a woman of the daughters of
Canaan. And Jacob hearkened to his father and to his mother, and went to
Paddan-aram. And Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan were evil in the
eyes of Isaac his father. And Esau went to Ishmael, and took Mahalath,
the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son, the sister of Nebaioth, over his
women to himself for a woman. "And Esau saw that Isaac blessed Jacob,"
signifies the thought of natural good concerning conjunction by the good
of truth, which is "Jacob;" "and sent him to Paddan-aram," signifies the
beginning of manifestation through the knowledges of this good; "to take
him from thence a woman," signifies conjunction thereby through the
affection of truth; "and in blessing him commanded him, saying,"
signifies reflection and thence perception in order that conjunction
might be effected; "thou shalt not take a woman of the daughters of
Canaan," signifies that he should not be conjoined with the affections
of falsity and evil; "and Jacob hearkened to his father and to his
mother," signifies obedience and affection; and went to Paddan-aram,"
signifies here as above to become imbued with those knowledges of good
and truth; "and Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan were evil in the
eyes of Isaac his father," signifies the Lord's foresight and providence
that the affections of that truth with which natural good had been
heretofore conjoined would not conduce to conjunction; "and Esau went to
Ishmael, and took Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son,"
signifies the conjunction of this good with truth from a Divine origin;
"the sister of Nebaioth, over his women to himself for a woman,"
signifies the affection of celestial truth more interiorly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3679.">3679.</span></span>

And Esau saw that Isaac blessed Jacob. That this signifies the thought
of natural good concerning conjunction through the good of truth which
is "Jacob," is evident from the signification of "seeing," as being to
think; for thinking is nothing else than seeing inwardly, or internal
sight; and from the representation of Esau, as being the good of the
natural (see n. 3300, 3302, 3322, 3494, 3504, 3576, 3599); from the
signification of being "blessed," as being conjunction (n. 3504, 3514,
3530, 3565, 3584); from the representation of Isaac, as being the Lord's
Divine rational as to Divine good (treated of above); and from the
representation of Jacob, as being the good of truth (n. 3669, 3677).
From all this it is evident that by "Esau saw that Isaac blessed Jacob,"
is signified the thought of natural good concerning conjunction through
the good of truth. \[2\] What is meant by the thought of natural good
concerning conjunction through the good of truth cannot be fully
explained to the apprehension, but yet must be briefly explained. The
thought of natural good is the thought of the rational or internal man
within the natural or external man, and indeed from the good of the
latter; for it is the rational or internal man which thinks, and not the
natural or external man; the former, or internal man, is in the light of
heaven, in which light there is intelligence and wisdom from the Lord
(n. 3195, 3339, 3636, 3643); but the external man is in the light of the
world, in which there is no intelligence, and not even life; and
therefore unless the internal man were to think within the external, it
would not be possible to think at all. And yet thought appears to man to
be in his external man, inasmuch as he thinks from those things which
have entered in by the senses and are of the world. \[3\] The case is
the same as with the sight of the eye. The sensuous man supposes that
the eye sees of itself, when yet the eye is merely an organ of the body
by which the internal man sees those things which are out of the body,
or which are in the world. It is also the same as with speech. The
sensuous man would suppose that the mouth and tongue speak of
themselves; and they who think somewhat more deeply, that the larynx and
interior organs speak by breath from the lungs; when yet it is the
thought which speaks by means of these organs, for speech is nothing but
thought speaking. There are many such fallacies of the senses. The case
is the same in regard to all apparent life in the external man in that
it is the life of the internal man therein as in its material and
corporeal organ. \[4\] With respect to thought, the case is this: So
long as man lives in the body he thinks from the rational in the
natural, but with a difference accordingly as the natural corresponds to
the rational, or does not so correspond. When the natural corresponds,
the man is rational, and thinks spiritually; but when the natural does
not correspond, the man is not rational, nor can he think spiritually;
for with the man whose natural corresponds to his rational the
communication is opened, so that the light of heaven from the Lord can
flow in through the rational into the natural, and enlighten it with
intelligence and wisdom; hence the man becomes rational and thinks
spiritually. But with the man whose natural does not correspond to the
rational the communication is closed, and there only flows in somewhat
of light in general round about, and through chinks through the rational
into the natural; and the result is that the man is not rational, and
does not think spiritually; for a man thinks according to the influx of
the light of heaven that he enjoys. This shows that every man thinks
according to the state of correspondence in respect to good and truth of
the natural with the rational. \[5\] But spirits and angels do not think
in the same way as man; their thought is indeed also terminated in a
natural, for they have with them all the natural memory and its
affections, but are not allowed to use this memory (see n. 2475-2479);
yet although they are not allowed to use it, it nevertheless serves them
as a plane, or as a foundation, in order that the ideas of their thought
may be terminated therein. Hence it is that the ideas of their thought
are more interior, and their speech is not as with man from forms of
words, but from forms of actual things; showing that their thought also
is such as is the correspondence of their natural with their rational;
and that there are spirits who are rational, who think spiritually, and
also those who are not rational, who do not think spiritually; and this
exactly in accordance with their affections and consequent thoughts of
things in the life of the body; that is, with the state of life they had
acquired in the world. \[6\] From this it may in some measure appear
what the thought of natural good is, namely, that it is thought in the
good of the natural. According to the idea of spirits that is called the
thought of natural good which according to the idea of men is called
thought in the good of the natural. In this latter, that is, in the good
of the natural, the rational thinks when it has regard to good as the
end. Thus the thought of natural good concerning conjunction through the
good of truth, is thought in the natural concerning the end, namely, how
truth can be conjoined therewith; and this according to Divine order by
the common way; which, as has often been said above, is from such things
as are external, and thus which are the ultimate or last in order; for
all the regeneration of the natural commences from these. These last or
ultimate things are the first knowledges, such as are those of infants
and children, concerning which see above (n. 3665). \[7\] In the
beginning the truth of good, which is "Esau," is not conjoined in the
external form with the good of truth, which is "Jacob;" for the good of
truth is inverse in respect to the truth of good (n. 3669); but still
they are inmostly conjoined, that is, in respect to ends. For the end of
the truth which is from good is that truths may be adjoined to it
according to order; and this also is the end of the good which is from
truth; and inasmuch as the end conjoins, therefore they are conjoined
(n. 3562, 3565). The inverse of order is at first only a means that has
respect to the end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3680.">3680.</span></span>

And sent him to Paddan-aram. That this signifies the beginning of
manifestation \[existentia\] through the knowledges of this good, is
evident from the signification of "sending him," as being the beginning
of manifestation (n. 3674); and from the signification of "Paddan-aram,"
as being the knowledges of truth (n. 3664). They are called the
knowledges of good, because all truths are knowledges of good; and
truths which are not from good, or which do not look to good as the end,
are not truths; but insofar as they look to doctrine, they are called
the knowledges of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3681.">3681.</span></span>

To take him from thence a woman. That this signifies conjunction thereby
through the affection of truth, is evident from the signification of a
"woman," as being the affection of truth (n. 1468, 2517, 3236) to
receive which is to be adjoined thereto.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3682.">3682.</span></span>

And in blessing him commanded him, saying. That this signifies
reflection and thence perception in order that conjunction might be
effected, is evident from the signification of being "blessed," as being
conjunction (n. 3504, 3514, 3530, 3565, 3584); and from the
signification of "commanding and saying," as being reflection and
consequent perception (n. 3661).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3683.">3683.</span></span>

Thou shalt not take a woman of the daughters of Canaan. That this
signifies that he should not be conjoined with the affections of falsity
and evil, is evident from the signification of "taking a woman," as
being to be associated and conjoined; and from the signification of the
"daughters of Canaan," as being the affections of falsity and evil (see
above, n. 3662).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3684.">3684.</span></span>

And Jacob hearkened to his father and to his mother. That this signifies
obedience and affection, is evident from the signification of
"hearkening" or "listening to anyone" as being to obey (n. 2542); and
when to the father and mother, it signifies obedience from affection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3685.">3685.</span></span>

And went to Paddan-aram. That this signifies to become imbued with the
knowledges of that good and truth, is evident from the signification of
"going" and "journeying," as being the order and plan of life (see n.
1293, 3335); here therefore to become imbued with according to order,
namely, with the knowledges of that good and truth which are signified
by "Paddan-aram" (see n. 3664, 3675).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3686.">3686.</span></span>

And Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan were evil in the eyes of Isaac
his father. That this signifies the Lord's foresight and providence,
that the affections of that truth with which natural good had been
heretofore conjoined would not conduce to conjunction, is evident from
the signification here of "seeing," as being foresight and providence
(see n. 2837, 2839); and from the representation of Esau, as being the
Lord in respect to the Divine good of the natural (concerning which see
above); from the signification of the "daughters of Canaan," here the
daughters of Heth, as being the affections of truth from a ground not
genuine (n. 3470, 3620, 3621, 3622); and from the signification of
"being evil in the eyes of Isaac his father," as being not to conduce to
conjunction, namely, through the good of the natural, which is "Esau,"
with the good of the rational, which is "Isaac." From all this it is
evident that by these words is signified the Lord's foresight and
providence, that the affections of that truth, because not from a
genuine ground, would not conduce to conjunction. How the case herein
is, may be seen from the explication at chapter 26, verses 34, 35, where
the daughters of Heth are treated of whom Esau had taken to himself for
women; and at chapter 27, verse 46, where it is said of Jacob that he
should not take to himself a woman of the daughters of Canaan \[Heth\].
That by the "daughters of Canaan" are here signified the affections of
truth from a ground not genuine, and above by the "daughters of Canaan,"
the affections of falsity and evil (n. 3662, 3683), is because the
Hittites were of the Church of the Gentiles in the land of Canaan, and
were not so much in falsity and evil as were the other nations there-the
Canaanites, Amorites, and Perizzites. Hence also by the Hittites there
was represented the Lord's spiritual church among the Gentiles (n. 2913,
2986). \[2\] That the Most Ancient Church, which was celestial and
existed before the flood, was in the land of Canaan, may be seen above
(n. 567); and that the Ancient Church, which was after the flood, was
also in that land, and moreover in a number of other kingdoms, see above
(n. 1238, 2385). From this it came to pass that all the nations in that
land, and likewise all the regions and all the rivers thereof, became
representative; for the most ancient people, who were celestial men, by
means of all the objects which they saw, perceived such things as are of
the Lord's kingdom (n. 920, 1409, 2896, 2897, 2995); thus also by means
of the regions and rivers of that land. After their times these
representatives remained in the Ancient Church, thus also the
representatives of the places in that land. The Word in the Ancient
Church (n. 2897-2899), also had thence the names of places
representative, as had also the Word after their time which is called
"Moses and the Prophets;" and because this was so, Abraham was commanded
to go thither, and a promise was made him that his posterity should
possess that land; and this not because of their being better than other
nations, for they were among the worst of all (n. 1167, 3373), but in
order that by them a representative church might be instituted, in which
no attention should be paid to person or to place, but to the things
that were represented (n. 3670); and that thereby also the names used in
the Most Ancient and the Ancient Church might be retained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3687.">3687.</span></span>

And Esau went to Ishmael, and took Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael,
Abraham's son. That this signifies the conjunction of this good with
truth from a Divine origin, is evident from the representation of Esau,
as being the good of the natural (concerning which see above); and from
the representation of Ishmael, Abraham's son, as being truth from a
Divine origin. That Ishmael represents the Lord's spiritual church,
consequently truth, may be seen above (n. 1949-1951, 2078, 2691, 2699,
3268); and that Abraham represents the Lord's Divine called the
"Father," see above (n. 2011, 3251, 3439). Hence by "Mahalath the
daughter of Ishmael the son of Abraham," is signified truth from a
Divine origin. That "taking a wife" signifies to be associated and
conjoined, is manifest; and from this it is evident that by "Esau going
to Ishmael, and taking Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son,"
is signified the conjunction of this good with truth from a Divine
origin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3688.">3688.</span></span>

The sister of Nebaioth, over his women to himself for a woman. That this
signifies the affection of celestial truth more interiorly, is evident
from the signification of "sister," as being intellectual or rational
truth (see n. 1495, 2508, 2524, 2556, 3386); from the representation of
Nebaioth, as being the good which is of the spiritual church (n. 3268);
from which the "sister of Nebaioth" signifies the affection of celestial
truth; or what is the same thing, the affection of spiritual good; from
the signification of "women," or the "daughters of Heth," as being the
affections of truth from a ground not genuine (n. 3470, 3620-3622,
3686); and from the signification of "taking a woman," as being to be
associated and conjoined. From this it is evident that by these words,
together with those immediately preceding, there is signified the
conjunction of the good represented by Esau with truth from a Divine
origin, thus with the affection of celestial truth more interiorly.
\[2\] How these things are circumstanced has indeed been already stated,
but they are such as are understood with difficulty so long as the most
general things of the subject are unknown. Moreover at the present day
the world cares not for such things, because earthly things and not
heavenly ones are the objects of its care, for the reason as they
allege, that they see and know the former things, while the latter they
neither see nor know. But inasmuch as the things contained in the
internal sense of the Word are not merely to be disclosed, but are also
to be explained, we may illustrate by an example how the case is with
the truth of good that Esau represents and the good of truth that Jacob
represents; and at the same time how the case is with the fact that
before the man has been regenerated the good of truth is the inverse of
the truth of good; but that they are afterwards conjoined; thus how the
case is with all that has been said before. \[3\] Let the following
serve as the example: A man who is such as to be capable of being
regenerated-for the Lord foresees, and since He foresees, He also
provides for this-at first, like an infant child, does not yet know what
works of charity toward his neighbor are, because he does not as yet
know what charity is, nor what his neighbor is, and therefore as he
knows from the Word that he ought to give to the poor, and that whoever
gives to the poor has a reward in heaven, he does good to beggars more
than to others, because he believes that they are the poor who are meant
in the Word, not considering that such as beg in the streets for the
most part live an impious and wicked life, despise whatever belongs to
Divine worship, and surrender themselves to mere sloth and idleness.
Nevertheless he who is in the first state of regeneration does good to
such persons from his heart; and these good deeds are the goods of
external truth from which regeneration begins; the truth of good, which
is interior, flows thus into these acts, and does the work according to
the knowledges in which the child is. \[4\] But afterwards, when he is
more enlightened, he is desirous to do good to all whom he believes to
be in want and distress; but as yet hardly makes a distinction between
the pious and the impious who are in this state, believing everyone to
be his neighbor in the same respect and degree. But when he is further
enlightened in these matters, he then makes the distinction, and renders
aid only to the upright and good, knowing that to aid the wicked is to
do harm to many, inasmuch as by his benefits and services he supplies
the wicked with the means of injuring others. At last, when he is
regenerate, he does good only to the good and pious, because he is then
affected not with the person of him to whom he does good, but with the
good that is in him; and inasmuch as the Lord is present in what is good
and pious, he thereby through his affection for what is good testifies
his love to the Lord. When the man is in this charity from the heart, he
is regenerate. \[5\] From this it is evident that his former state was
inverse in respect to this state, inasmuch as he had believed that to be
good which was not good; but still at the beginning of regeneration he
must needs do that good, because his knowledge of the matter then goes
no further; and because the interior good of charity could not flow into
any other truth than that which was of the knowledge thereof; and it is
also evident that interior good had always been present and had wrought
this, but was not able to manifest itself until by knowledges the man
had been successively enlightened concerning the true nature of goods
and truths. From this it is in some measure evident what the good of
truth is which Jacob here represents; and what the truth of good which
Esau represents; and that at first these are inverse, but afterwards are
conjoined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3689.">3689.</span></span>

Verses 10, 11. And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.
And he lighted upon a place, and passed the night there, for the sun was
set; and he took of the stones of the place, and placed them for his
pillows, and lay down in that place. "And Jacob went out from Beersheba"
signifies life more remote from Divine doctrinal things; "and went
toward Haran," signifies the good and truth of that degree; "and he
lighted upon a place," signifies the state; "and passed the night there,
for the sun was set," signifies life in what is obscure; "and he took of
the stones of the place," signifies the truths of that state; "and
placed them for his pillows," signifies communication of a most general
nature with the Divine; "and lay down in that place," signifies the
tranquillity of the state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3690.">3690.</span></span>

And Jacob went out from Beersheba. That this signifies life more remote
from Divine doctrinal things, is evident from the signification of
"going," as being to live (see n. 3335, 3685); thus "going out"
signifies living more remotely; and from the signification of
"Beersheba" as being Divine doctrine (see n. 2723, 2858, 2859, 3466);
hence it is evident that by "Jacob went out from Beersheba" is signified
life more remote from Divine doctrinal things. Life is said to be more
remote when it is in external truths, and is lived according to them, as
is the life of the infancy and childhood of those who are being
regenerated (concerning whom see above, n. 3688). \[2\] In order to show
further what this life is, and what its quality, it may be expedient to
add a few words. All the histories of the Word are truths more remote
from essential Divine doctrinal things, but still are of service to
little children and older children, in order that thereby they may be by
degrees introduced into the interior doctrinal matters of truth and
good; and at last to Divine things themselves; for within them, in their
inmost, is the Divine. While children are reading them and are affected
by them from innocence, the angels who are with them are in a happy
celestial state, being affected from the Lord with the internal sense,
consequently with those things which the historical facts represent and
signify; and it is the celestial happiness of the angels that flows in
and causes the delight with the children. In order that this first state
may exist, that is, the first state of infancy and childhood of those to
be regenerated, the histories of the Word were given, and were so
written that all things therein both in general and in particular
contain within them things Divine. \[3\] How far removed these
historical matters are from Divine doctrinal things can be seen from the
following example from them. When anyone first knows only that God
descended on Mount Sinai, and gave tables to Moses, on which were
written the Ten Commandments, and that Moses broke those tables, and
that God wrote like commandments on other tables; while delighted solely
with this history, he is in the life of external truth remote from
Divine doctrinal things; but afterwards when he begins to be delighted
and affected with the commandments or precepts themselves therein
contained, and lives according to them, he is then in the life of truth,
yet still remote from the Divine doctrinal things themselves. For a life
according to the commandments is only a moral life, the precepts whereof
are known to all who live in human society, from civil life itself and
the laws thereof-as that the Deity is to be worshiped, and parents
honored; and that murder, adultery, and theft must not be committed.
\[4\] But he who is being regenerated is led by degrees from this more
remote life (that is, moral life), into a life nearer to Divine
doctrinal things; that is, into spiritual life. When this comes to pass
the man begins to wonder why such commandments or precepts were sent
down from heaven in so miraculous a manner, and written on tables by the
finger of God, when yet they are known to every people, and are also
written in the laws of those who have never heard anything from the
Word. If when he comes into this state of thought he is among those who
are capable of being regenerated, he is brought by the Lord into a still
more interior state, namely, into a state of thinking that deeper things
lie concealed therein, with which as yet he is unacquainted; and when he
reads the Word in this state, he finds everywhere in the Prophets, and
especially in the Evangelists, that each one of these precepts contains
within it things still more heavenly. \[5\] For example, in respect to
the honoring of parents, he now sees that when men are born anew, that
is, when being regenerated, they receive another Father, and then become
His sons, and that it is He who is to be honored; thus that this is the
sense that lies hidden within this precept. And by degrees he learns
that this new Father is the Lord; and at last that He is to be honored
by being worshiped, and that He is worshiped when He is loved. When one
who is being regenerated is in this truth, and in a life according to
it, he is in Divine doctrine, and is then in an angelic state, and from
this state looks at the things he before knew as following on in order,
and as flowing from the Divine as it were according to the steps of a
ladder, above which is Jehovah or the Lord; and on the steps whereof are
His angels ascending and descending; thus he sees the things with which
he had previously been delighted as more remote from him according to
degrees. The case is the same with the other precepts of the Decalogue
(see n. 2609). From this it is now evident what is meant by a life more
remote from Divine doctrinal things, which is here signified by "Jacob
went out from Beersheba."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3691.">3691.</span></span>

And went toward Haran. That this signifies to the good and truth of that
degree, is evident from the signification of "Haran," as being external
good and truth, for by "Haran" is signified what is external, and by
"Laban" who dwelt there, good and truth; thus by "Haran" is here meant
external good and truth. (That this is the signification of "Haran" may
be seen above, n. 1430, 3612.) It follows that by "Jacob went forth from
Beersheba and went to Haran," in the internal sense is signified that he
betook himself further from Divine doctrinal things; thus to external
good and truth. \[2\] It is said "to good and truth of that degree,"
because goods and truths are perfectly distinguished from each other
according to degrees; interior goods and truths being in a higher
degree, and exterior ones in a lower degree. In a higher degree are the
goods and truths of the rational; in a lower degree are the goods and
truths of the natural; and in the lowest are the sensuous goods and
truths of the body. Interior goods and truths, or those of a higher
degree, flow into exterior goods and truths, or those of a lower degree,
and exhibit therein an image of themselves, almost as man's interior
affections exhibit themselves in the countenance and its changes. From
this it is manifest that interior goods and truths are completely
separate from exterior goods and truths, or what is the same, those in a
higher degree from those in a lower one; so separate that it is possible
for the interior ones, or those in a higher degree, to exist quite apart
from the exterior ones, or those in a lower degree. He who has not a
distinct notion of degrees cannot have a distinct notion of interior and
exterior goods, nor how the case is with man's soul, or with his spirit
and body, nor how it is with the heavens in the other life. \[3\] That
there are three heavens is known, and that one heaven is more interior
than another, and that the third heaven is inmost. These heavens are
most distinct from each other according to degrees. They who are in the
inmost or third heaven are nearest the Lord; they who are in the
interior or second heaven are more remote; and they who are in the
exterior or first heaven are still more remote. No other communication
between these heavens is possible than such as is that of man's inmosts
with his exteriors; for the man who is in love to the Lord and in
charity toward his neighbor is a little heaven that in an image
corresponds to the three heavens, and he receives the influx of good and
truth out of the three heavens from the Lord according to the same
degrees. The relative nature of these degrees to one another may be seen
from the two cases adduced above (n. 3688, 3690). \[4\] They who are in
real love to the Lord, so as to have a perception of it, are in a higher
degree of good and truth, and are in the inmost or third heaven; thus
are nearer to the Lord, and are called celestial angels. They who are in
charity toward the neighbor so as to have a perception of charity, and
not so much a perception of love to the Lord, are in a lower degree of
good and truth, and are in the interior or second heaven; thus are more
remote from the Lord, and are called spiritual angels. But they who are
in charity toward the neighbor merely from the affection of truth, so as
not to have a perception of charity itself toward the neighbor, except
from the truth with which they are affected, are in a still lower degree
of good and truth, and are in the exterior or first heaven; thus are
still more remote from the Lord, and are called good spirits. \[5\] From
this it may in some measure be evident how the case is in respect to
degrees; namely, that those things which are in a higher degree exhibit
themselves in an image in those which are in the degree next lower. In
love to the Lord there is a proximate image of the Lord, which is called
a "likeness," wherefore they who are in love itself to the Lord are
called His "likenesses." In charity there is also an image of the Lord
(only more remote), for in true charity the Lord is present; and
therefore they who are therein are called His "images" (n. 50, 51,
1013); while they who are in the affection of truth, and thence in a
certain species of charity toward the neighbor, are also images of the
Lord, but still more remotely. The three heavens are distinguished into
these degrees, and according to these degrees the Lord flows in with
Divine good and truth, thus with wisdom and intelligence, and with
heavenly joy and happiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3692.">3692.</span></span>

And he lighted upon a place. That this signifies the state, is evident
from the signification of "place," as being state (see n. 1273-1275,
1377, 2625, 2837, 3356, 3387).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3693.">3693.</span></span>

And passed the night there, for the sun was set. That this signifies
life in what is obscure, is evident from the signification of "night,"
as being a state of shade (n. 1712); thus "passing the night" signifies
living in this state; and from the signification of the "sun being set,"
as being to be in what is obscure; for it is then "evening," and that
"evening" signifies that which is obscure, may be seen above (n. 3056).
By that which is obscure is here meant obscurity of intelligence in
respect to truth, and obscurity of wisdom in respect to good; for the
light which the angels have from the Lord has within it intelligence and
wisdom, and is also thence derived (see n. 1521, 1524, 1529, 1530, 3138,
3167, 3195, 3339, 3341, 3636, 3637, 3643); and therefore insofar as they
are in light, so far they are also in intelligence and wisdom; but
insofar as they are not in light, thus insofar as they are in shade, so
far they are not in intelligence and wisdom (n. 2776, 3190, 3337). It is
for this reason that in common speech "light" is predicated of the
things of the understanding. Man is not aware of this reason, and
therefore believes that these terms are used merely by way of
comparison. Men use many other forms of expression that flow from a
perception of such things as exist in the other life, in which they are
as to their spirits, and that have been received in conversation because
they are interiorly acknowledged, but are blotted out of notice by the
things of the body, which are of such a nature as to extinguish the
things of perception in which man's interior man is. \[2\] That in the
Word the "setting of the sun" signifies the falsity and evil in which
they are who have no charity and faith; thus that it signifies also the
last time of the church, may be seen above (n. 1837); and also that it
signifies obscurity in respect to those things which are of good and
truth, such as exists with those who are in a degree more remote from
Divine doctrinal things, may be seen above (n. 3691). That the "setting
of the sun," or the "sun being set," has these significations, may be
seen from the following passages in the Word. In Micah: Night unto you
instead of vision; and darkness unto you instead of divination; and the
sun shall go down upon the prophets, and the day shall be black over
them (Micah 3:6); "the sun shall go down upon the prophets" signifies
that they have no longer any truth and understanding of truth;
"prophets" denote those who teach the truths of doctrine (see n. 2534).
In Amos: It shall come to pass in that day that I will cause the sun to
go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the day of light; and I
will turn your feast into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation
(Amos 8:9-10); "to cause the sun to go down at noon" denotes obscurity
as to truth with those who are in the knowledges of good and truth (that
"noon" signifies a state of light, or of the knowledges of truth, see
above, n. 1458, 3195). \[3\] In Isaiah: Thy sun shall no more go down,
neither shall thy moon withdraw itself; for Jehovah shall be thine
everlasting light (Isa. 60:20); where the Lord's kingdom is treated of;
the "sun shall no more go down" denotes that they shall be in the life
of good and in wisdom, because in the Lord's celestial love and light;
"the moon shall not withdraw itself" denotes that they shall be in the
life of truth, and in intelligence, because in the Lord's spiritual love
and light. (That in the other life the Lord is a sun to the celestial
angels, and a moon to the spiritual angels, and that hence they have
wisdom and intelligence, see above, n. 1053, 1521, 1529-1531, 2441,
2495, 3636, 3643.) From this it is evident what is meant in the internal
sense of the Word by the rising" and "setting" of the sun. \[4\] In
David: O Jehovah my God Thou art very great Thou hast put on glory and
honor; who covereth Himself with light as with a garment; He stretcheth
out the heavens like a curtain; he made the moon for appointed
festivals; He knoweth the going down of the sun. Thou disposest the
darkness that it may become night (Ps. 104:1-2, 19-20); here in like
manner the "moon" denotes intelligence, and the "sun" wisdom, from the
Lord; the "going down of the sun" denotes the obscurity of each; "to
dispose the darkness that it may become night," signifies the moderating
of a state of obscurity. That the angels have changes of state between
the highest degree of light and a less degree, or between the highest
degree of wisdom and a less degree, and that these changes of state are
as the morning when the sun rises, and as midday when it is in its
greatest altitude, and as the evening when it sets, and afterwards as
morning again, will of the Lord's Divine mercy be shown elsewhere. \[5\]
In Joshua: From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great
river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the
great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your border (Josh.
1:4); where there is described the extension of the land of Canaan, by
which is signified in the internal sense the Lord's kingdom (see n.
1607, 3038, 3481); (that the "river Euphrates" is one border of it, that
is, of things spiritual and celestial, see above, n. 1866; and that the
great sea" and the "going down of the sun" is another, by which is
represented the ultimate, which is relatively obscure; also that all the
borders and all the places in that land are representative, n. 1585).
\[6\] In Moses: If in taking a pledge thou shalt take for a pledge thy
neighbor's garment, thou shalt restore it unto him before the sun goeth
down; for that is his only covering, it is his garment for his skin,
wherein he shall sleep (Exod. 22:26-27). And again If he be a poor man,
thou shalt not lie down upon his pledge; thou shalt surely restore to
him the pledge before the sun goeth down, and he shall bless thee, and
it shall be righteousness unto thee before Jehovah thy God (Deut.
24:12-13). That in this law, as in all the rest, there is what is
representative and significative of the Divine law, which is that of
good and truth in the Lord's kingdom, from which this law comes, is
manifest from its particulars. That it contains as the very ground of
the law that a man's companions ought not to be deprived of external
truths, which are the doctrinal things according to which they live, and
their rituals; and that such truths are the "garment," may be seen above
(n. 297, 1073, 2576). "Restoring the pledge before the sun "went down,"
denotes before truth perishes with him; and because this truth is
external, it is said that "the garment is for his skin in which he shall
sleep." \[7\] Again: The soul that hath touched what is unclean shall be
unclean until the even, and shall not eat of the holy things; but when
he has bathed his flesh in water, and the sun is down, he shall be
clean; and afterwards he shall eat of the holy things (Lev. 22:6-7). And
again: He that is not clean, toward evening shall bathe himself in
waters; and when the sun is down, he shall enter into the midst of the
camp (Deut. 23:10-11). That this law also has its origin in the laws of
good and truth, or the laws of order in the Lord's kingdom, is evident;
otherwise it would never have been commanded that the unclean person
should be unclean until the evening, and should then wash himself with
waters, and after the sun was down should be clean. The law of order in
the Lord's kingdom from which the above law comes, is that when good and
angelic spirits lapse into a state of the love of self, and thereby into
a state of falsity, they are then remitted a little into their natural
or lower state, and are there imbued with knowledges of good and truth
that bear upon the matter in question, which is signified by "washing
themselves with waters in the evening." (That "washing with waters"
denotes to be purified from falsities, may be seen above, n. 3147, 3148;
and that "waters" are the knowledges of truth, n. 28, 680, 739, 2702,
3058.) And after they have been in that obscure state which is signified
by the "going down of the sun," they return into their former state,
which is signified by their "being clean," and "entering into the midst
of the camp," on which subject of the Lord's Divine mercy something
shall be said elsewhere from experience. From what has been said it is
now evident that when mentioned in the Word the "going down of the sun"
with the good signifies an obscure state as to truth; and with the evil
a state of falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3694.">3694.</span></span>

And he took of the stones of the place. That this signifies the truths
of that state, is evident from the signification of "stones," as being
lower truths, such as are those of the natural man (see n. 643, 1298).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3695.">3695.</span></span>

And placed them for his pillows. That this signifies communication of a
most general nature with the Divine, is evident from the signification
of "pillows" for the head or the neck, as being communication with
external things, thus communication of a most general nature; for that
the nape or the neck signifies the communication of interior things with
exterior things, or what is the same, of higher things with lower, and
thereby conjunction, may be seen above (n. 3542, 3603). Hence those
things which are under the nape or neck, that is, pillows, here signify
the communication of inmost or Divine things with outermost ones, which
communication is also of a most general nature; for that which is
external is relatively general, and that which is outermost is most
general; for the singulars of interior things appear as a one, thus as a
general, in exterior things. These moreover are the things that are
represented and signified by the "ladder set on the earth, whose top
reached to heaven, with the angels of God ascending and descending upon
it," concerning which presently.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3696.">3696.</span></span>

And lay down in that place. That this signifies the tranquillity of the
state, is evident from the signification of "lying down," as being to be
in a state of tranquillity; for "lying down" and "sleeping" signify
nothing else. That in the internal sense this is the signification of
"lying down," may, also be seen from other passages in the word,
concerning which just below. With those who are to be regenerated, who
are here treated of in the internal representative sense, the case is
that first of all they are in a state of tranquillity, or in a state of
external peace (for external peace, or peace in externals, is called
"tranquillity"); and the same is produced from the Divine state of peace
that is inmostly within it; and it comes forth into the externals
through the removal of cupidities and falsities; for these are what
cause all unrest. Moreover at the beginning of his life, that is, during
his infancy, every man is in a state of tranquillity; but as he advances
in life, that is, grows up to manhood, he removes himself from this
state, because he gives himself up to worldly cares, and consequently to
anxieties caused by the cupidities of the love of self and of the world,
and the derivative falsities. \[2\] The case is almost the same with the
new life in the man who is being regenerated: at first he is in a state
of tranquillity; but as he passes into a new life, he also passes at the
same time into an untranquil state; for the evils and falsities with
which be had before become imbued emerge and come forth, and disturb
him, and this at last to such a degree that he is in temptations and
vexations inflicted by the diabolical crew, who are continually striving
to destroy the state of his new life. Yet inmostly the man is in a state
of peace, for unless this were with him inmostly, he would not combat,
for in his battlings he is continually looking to this state as the end,
and unless he had such an end, he would in no wise have power and
strength to combat. This moreover is the reason why he overcomes; and
because this is the end in view, he also comes into this state after the
combats or temptations. This is like the state of spring, which succeeds
the state of autumn and winter; or it is like the state of dawn, which
succeeds evening and night. (That a state of peace in spiritual things
is like spring and dawn in natural things, may be seen above, n. 1726,
2780; and that peace is from good and truth, and unrest from what is
evil and false, n. 3170.) \[3\] That in the Word "to lie down" signifies
a state of tranquillity, may be seen from the following passages. In
Moses: If ye walk in My statutes, and keep My commandments and do them,
I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall
make you afraid; and I will cause the evil wild beast to cease out of
the land, neither shall the sword pass through your land (Lev. 26:3, 6);
where "lying down" is manifestly predicated of a state of peace and
tranquillity; "evil beasts" denote the cupidities of evil (n. 45, 46,
908), which shall "cease;" the "sword" denotes, falsity fighting against
truth (n. 2799), which shall not "pass through;" all which shows that
peace and the tranquillity of peace are from good and truth, and that
the destruction thereof is from evils and falsities. \[4\] In Isaiah:
The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with
the kid; and the calf and the young lion together; and a little child
shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones
shall lie down together (Isa. 11:6-7); where the Lord is treated of, and
the state of peace in His kingdom; that they shall "lie down together"
signifies that they cannot be infested by any evil and falsity. In
Hosea: In that day will I make a covenant for them with the wild beast
of the field, and with the fowl of the heavens, and with the creeping
thing of the earth; and I will break the bow and the sword and war out
of the land, and will make them to lie down in confidence (Hos. 2:18);
where in like manner "to lie down" signifies a state of tranquillity on
the removal of falsities and evils, which occasion unrest. \[5\] In
David: I will lay me down and sleep; and I will awake, for Jehovah
sustaineth me. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of the people that
have set themselves against me round about (Ps. 3:5-6); where "to lie
down and sleep" signifies a state of tranquillity and security. Again:
In peace I will both lay me down and sleep; for Thou, Jehovah alone,
makest me to dwell in confidence (Ps. 4:8). And again: He will make me
to lie down in green pastures; He will lead me to the waters of rest; He
will restore my soul (Ps. 23:2-3). From these passages it is evident
that a state of peace and tranquillity is signified by "lying down;" and
that by "lying down in that place" is signified the tranquillity of the
state, for in the internal sense "place" signifies state (n. 3692).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3697.">3697.</span></span>

Verses 12-15. And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set on the earth, and
its head reaching to heaven; and behold the angels of God ascending and
descending on it. And behold Jehovah standing upon it; and He said, I am
Jehovah the God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac; the land
whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed; and thy
seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt break forth to
the sea, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south; and in
thee shall all the families of the ground be blessed, and in thy seed;
and behold I am with thee, and will keep thee whithersoever thou goest,
and will bring thee back to this ground; for I will not leave thee until
I have done that which I have spoken to thee. "And he dreamed,"
signifies foresight; "and behold a ladder set on the earth," signifies
the communication of the lowest truth and its derivative good; "and its
head reaching to heaven," signifies with the Divine; "and behold the
angels of God ascending and descending on it," signifies infinite and
eternal communication, and the consequent conjunction; and that from
what is lowest there is as it were an ascent, and afterwards when the
order is inverted, a descent; "and behold Jehovah standing upon it,"
signifies the Lord in the highest; "and He said, I am Jehovah the God of
Abraham thy father," signifies the Lord, that from Him that good comes;
"and the God of Isaac," signifies the Lord as to the Divine Human; "the
land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it," signifies the good in
which He was, that it was from what was His own; "and to thy seed,"
signifies that so also was the truth; "and thy seed shall be as the dust
of the earth," signifies that Divine truth natural would be as natural
good; "and thou shalt break forth to the sea, and to the east,"
signifies the infinite extension of good; "and to the north, and to the
south," signifies the infinite extension of truth; thus all states of
good and truth; "and in thee shall all the families of the ground be
blessed," signifies that all truths of the good of doctrine will be
conjoined with good; "and in thy seed," signifies and with truth; "and
behold I am with thee," signifies the Divine "and will keep thee
whithersoever thou goest," signifies the Divine Providence; "and will
bring thee back to this ground," signifies conjunction with Divine
doctrine; "for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have
spoken to thee," signifies that nothing would be wanting to prevent its
having effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3698.">3698.</span></span>

And he dreamed. That this signifies foresight, is evident from the
signification of "dreaming," as being in the internal sense to foretell
future things; for prophetic dreams, which were Divine, were predictions
of things to come, as is evident from those related in the Word (see n.
1975, 1976). Such being, in the internal sense, the signification of
"dreams" and of "to dream," therefore in the supreme sense, in which the
Lord is treated of, they signify foresight; for predictions are from the
Lord's Divine foresight. That this is the only source of predictions
concerning events which do not flow according to the common order of
nature, and cannot thence be foreseen, may be seen from the Word, as
from these words in Moses: When a prophet speaketh in the name of
Jehovah, but the word doth not come to pass, and that word doth not
happen, Jehovah hath not spoken; the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously (Deut. 18:22); and this although predictions of things
which come to pass might be from the wicked and worshipers of another
god, as is evident from this passage: If there arise in the midst of
thee a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and he give thee a sign or a
wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof he spake unto
thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and
let us serve them; thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that
prophet, or unto that dreamer of dreams; for Jehovah your God trieth you
(Deut. 13:1-3); from which it is evident that the prediction itself was
from the Divine, but the persuasion to worship other gods was from what
belonged to the prophet, to whom this was permitted for the sake of
trying them, as is said. From this also it is, and from other causes,
that very often in olden time they who worshiped the Baals and other
gods also prophesied, saw visions, and dreamed dreams, and likewise that
the things which were spoken by them came to pass, whereby many were
seduced; concerning whom we read in Jeremiah 23; besides others who were
called "diviners," "soothsayers," "jugglers," and "pythons," who were
among those who studied natural magic, whereby nothing of what was
Divine could be foretold, but only what was contrary to the Divine, that
is, contrary to the Lord, and contrary to the good of love and the truth
of faith in Him. This is magic, of whatsoever quality it may appear in
external form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3699.">3699.</span></span>

And behold a ladder set on the earth. That this signifies the
communication of the lowest truth and its derivative good, is evident
from the signification of a "ladder," as being communication, concerning
which we shall speak presently; and from the signification of the
"earth," as being what is lowest, for it is said immediately afterwards
that "its head reached unto heaven," which denotes that which is
highest; all which shows that the "ladder set between earth and heaven,"
or between the lowest and the highest, signifies communication; that it
is the communication of the lowest truth and its derivative good that is
here signified by the "ladder set on the earth," is evident from the
fact that the subject here is truth and its derivative good of that
degree which in the internal sense is here represented by Jacob. In the
original tongue the term "ladder" is derived from an expression which
signifies a "path" or "way," and that "path" or "way" is predicated of
truth, may be seen above (n. 627, 2333). Moreover, when angels are
conversing about truth, this is exhibited representatively in the world
of spirits by "ways" (n. 189, 3477); all of which shows what is
signified by a "ladder, one extremity of which is set on the earth,
while the other reaches to heaven," namely, the communication of truth
which is in the lowest place with truth which is in the highest, which
communication is treated of in what follows. (That there are lowest
truths and goods, and also highest truths and goods, and steps between
them as of a ladder, may be seen above, n. 3691.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3700.">3700.</span></span>

And its head reaching to heaven. That this signifies with the Divine,
namely, that there was communication therewith, is evident from the
signification of the "head," or summit of the ladder, as being that
which is highest; and from the signification of "heaven," as being that
which is Divine; for in the supreme sense, in which the Lord is treated
of, "heaven" signifies the Divine Itself; but in the representative
sense, which treats of the man who is being regenerated, it signifies
the inmost good and its derivative truth that is from the Lord, such as
there is in heaven, and from which is heaven itself. This is also called
"Divine," because from the Lord; for the Lord, or what is the same, the
Divine, which is from the Lord alone, is the all in all of heaven; and
whatever is not from the Divine there, is not of heaven. For this reason
it has been occasionally said above that the Lord is heaven itself, and
that all who are in heaven are in the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3701-3750](ac075)
