[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac084)  [Next](ac086.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="4201.">4201.</span></span>

See, God is witness between me and thee. That this signifies
confirmation, here from the Divine, is evident from the signification of
"witness," as being confirmation (see n. 4197).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4202.">4202.</span></span>

Verses 51-53. And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold the
pillar which I have set up between me and thee. This heap be witness,
and the pillar be witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee,
and that thou shalt not pass over this heap to me, and this pillar, for
evil. The God of Abraham and the God of Nahor judge between us, the God
of their father; and Jacob sware by the Dread of his father Isaac. "And
Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold the pillar which I
have set up between me and thee," signifies conjunction; "this heap be
witness, and the pillar be witness," signifies confirmation; "that I
will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over
this heap to me, and this pillar, for evil," signifies the limit
defining how much can flow in from good; "the God of Abraham and the God
of Nahor judge between us," signifies the Divine flowing into both; "the
God of their father," signifies from the supreme Divine; "and Jacob
sware by the dread of his father Isaac," signifies confirmation from the
Divine Human, which in this state is called "the Dread."

<span class="margnote"><span id="4203.">4203.</span></span>

And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold the pillar which I
have set up between me and thee. That this signifies conjunction, is
evident from what has been said above; for the heap and the pillar were
for a sign and for a witness that a covenant was made (that is,
friendship) thus in the internal sense the signification is conjunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4204.">4204.</span></span>

This heap be witness, and the pillar be witness. That this signifies
confirmation, is evident from the signification of "witness," as being
confirmation; namely, of good by truth which is the "pillar," and of
truth from good which is the "heap" (concerning which above, n. 4197).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4205.">4205.</span></span>

That I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not
pass over this heap to me, and this pillar, for evil. That this
signifies the limit defining how much can flow in from good, is evident
from the signification here of "passing over," as being to flow in; from
the signification of a "heap," as being good (n. 4192); and from the
signification of a "pillar," as being truth (concerning which n. 3727,
3728, 4090); and also because both the heap and the pillar were for a
sign or for a witness; but here, for a sign of the limit. As conjunction
is treated of, the connection involves that in the internal sense the
signification is the limit defining how much can flow in from good. It
has been stated above that conjunction is effected by good, and that
good flows in according to the reception. But the reception of good is
not possible in any other way than according to truths, truths being
that which good flows into; for good is the agent, and truth is the
recipient; and therefore all truths are recipient vessels (n. 4166). As
truths are that which good flows into, truths are what limit the inflow
of good; and this is what is here meant by the limit that defines how
much can flow in from good. \[2\] How the case herein is shall be
briefly stated. The truths with man, no matter what they may be, or of
whatever nature, enter into his memory by means of affection, that is,
by a certain delight which is of love. Without affection (or without the
delight which is of love) nothing can enter to man, for in these is his
life. The things which have entered are reproduced whenever a similar
delight recurs, together with many other things which have associated or
conjoined themselves with them; and in the same way when the same truth
is reproduced by one's self or by another, the affection or delight of
love which there was when it entered, is in like manner excited again;
for being conjoined they cohere. From this it is evident how the case is
with the affection of truth; for the truth which has entered together
with an affection of good, is reproduced when a similar affection
recurs; and the affection also is reproduced when a similar truth
recurs. It is also manifest from this that no truth can ever be
implanted with genuine affection, and become rooted interiorly, unless
the man is in good; for the genuine affection of truth is from the good
which is of love to the Lord and of charity toward the neighbor. The
good flows in from the Lord, but is not fixed except in truths; for in
truths good is welcomed, because they are in accord. From all this it is
also evident that the reception of good is according to the nature of
the truths. The truths that exist with those Gentiles who have lived in
mutual charity are of such a nature that the good which inflows from the
Lord can also find in them a welcome; but so long as they live in this
world, not in the same way as with those Christians who have truths from
the Word and live from them in spiritual charity (n. 2589-2604).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4206.">4206.</span></span>

The God of Abraham and the God of Nahor judge between us. That this
signifies the Divine flowing into both, namely, into the good which
those have who are within the church, and into the good which those have
who are outside the church, is evident from the signification of the
"God of Abraham," as being the Divine of the Lord regarding those who
are within the church; and from the signification of the "God of Nahor,"
as being the Divine of the Lord regarding those who are without the
church. From this it is manifest that by these words is signified the
Divine flowing into both. The reason why the "God of Abraham" denotes
the Divine of the Lord regarding those who are within the church, is
that Abraham represents the Divine of the Lord, and consequently that
which comes directly from the Lord (n. 3245, 3878). Hence they who are
within the church are specifically meant by the "sons of Abraham" (John
8:39). And the reason why the "God of Nahor" denotes the Divine of the
Lord regarding those who are out of the church, is that Nahor represents
the Church of the Gentiles, and his sons those therein who are in
brotherhood (n. 2863, 2864, 3052, 3778, 3868). For this reason also
Laban, who was Nahor's son, here represents good that is aside, such as
the Gentiles have from the Lord. That such various things of the Lord
are represented, is not because various things are in the Lord, but
because His Divine is variously received by men. This is like the life
in man, which flows in and acts upon the various sensory and motive
organs of the body, and upon the various members and viscera, and
everywhere presents variety. For the eye sees in one way, the ear hears
in another, the tongue perceives in another; so the arms and hands move
in one way, and the loins and the feet in a different way; the lungs act
in one way and the heart in another; the liver in one way and the
stomach in another, and so on; but nevertheless it is one life which
actuates them all so variously, not because the life itself acts in
different ways, but because it is differently received; for the form of
each organ is that according to which the action is determined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4207.">4207.</span></span>

The God of their father. That this signifies from the supreme Divine, is
evident from the signification of the "God of a father," as being the
supreme Divine; for wherever "father" is mentioned in the Word, it
signifies in the internal sense good (see n. 3703); and the "Father" of
the Lord, or the "Father" when named by the Lord, is the Divine good
that is in Him (n. 3704). The Divine good is the supreme Divine, but the
Divine truth is that which is from the Divine good, and is also called
the "Son." Moreover by "father" is here meant Terah, who was the father
of both Abraham and Nahor, and represents the common stock of the
churches, as may be seen above (n. 3778). Hence in the relative sense
Abraham represents the genuine church; and Nahor the Church of the
Gentiles (as said just above, n. 4206).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4208.">4208.</span></span>

And Jacob sware by the Dread of his father Isaac. That this signifies
confirmation from the Divine Human, which in this state is called "the
Dread," is evident from the signification of swearing," as being
confirmation (see n. 2842, 3375) and from the signification of the
"Dread of Isaac," as being the Lord's Divine Human (n. 4180). (That
oaths were made in the name of the Lord's Divine Human may be seen
above, n. 2842.) \[2\] The reason why it is here said, "the God of
Abraham, the God of Nahor, the God of their father" (that is, of Terah)
and "the Dread of Isaac," Jacob's father, is that the sons of Terah
acknowledged this number of gods, for they were idolaters (n. 1353,
1356, 1992, 3667). And it was a peculiarity in that house that each
family worshiped its own god. This is the reason why it is here said,
"the God of Abraham, the God of Nahor, the God of their father, and the
Dread of Isaac." Nevertheless it was enjoined upon the family of Abraham
to acknowledge Jehovah as their God; and yet they did not acknowledge
Him otherwise than as another god, by whom they might distinguish
themselves from the Gentiles, thus they acknowledged Jehovah merely as
to the name, and it was in consequence of this that they so often fell
away to other gods, as may be seen from the historic parts of the Word.
The reason of this merely nominal acknowledgment was that they were
solely in externals, and what internal things were they knew not at all,
and did not desire to know. \[3\] Insofar as they were concerned the
very rituals of their church were merely idolatrous, because they were
separated from internal things; for when separated from its internal
every ritual of the church is idolatrous. Nevertheless what is genuine
of the church could be represented by them; for representations do not
regard the person, but the thing (n. 665, 1097, 1361, 3147). Yet in
order that a representative church might come into existence, and that
there might thus be some communication of the Lord through heaven with
man, it was of especial importance that they should be kept in the
acknowledgment of Jehovah, if not in heart, still with the mouth; for
with them the representatives did not issue from internal, but from
external things; and it was in this way that they had communication with
the Lord; quite otherwise than in the genuine church, in which the
communication is effected by means of internal things. For this reason
their Divine worship did not at all affect their souls, that is, did not
make them blessed in the other life, but only prosperous in this world.
\[4\] Therefore in order that they might be kept in these external
things, there were so many miracles performed among them, which would
never have taken place if they had been in internal things; and for this
reason they were so many times driven to their worship by punishments,
captivities, and threats; whereas no one is driven by the Lord to
internal worship, but this is implanted through freedom (n. 1937, 1947,
2874-2881, 3145, 3146, 3158, 4031). Their principal external was that
they should confess Jehovah; for Jehovah was the Lord, who was
represented in all things of that church. (That Jehovah was the Lord may
be seen above, n. 1343, 1736, 2921, 3035.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4209.">4209.</span></span>

Verses 54, 55. And Jacob sacrificed a sacrifice in the mountain, and
called his brethren to eat bread; and they did eat bread, and tarried
all night in the mountain. And in the morning Laban arose early, and
kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them; and Laban departed
and returned to his place. "And Jacob sacrificed a sacrifice in the
mountain," signifies worship from the good of love; "and called his
brethren to eat bread," signifies the appropriation of good from the
Lord's Divine natural; "and they did eat bread," signifies the effect;
"and tarried all night in the mountain," signifies tranquillity; "and in
the morning Laban arose early," signifies the enlightenment of this good
from the Lord's Divine natural; "and kissed his sons and his daughters,"
signifies the acknowledgment of these truths and of the affections of
the same; "and blessed them," signifies the consequent joy; "and Laban
departed and returned to his place" signifies the end of the
representation by Laban.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4210.">4210.</span></span>

And Jacob sacrificed a sacrifice in the mountain. That this signifies
worship from the good of love, is evident from the signification of a
"sacrifice," as being worship (see n. 922, 923, 2180); and from the
signification of a "mountain," as being the good of love (n. 795, 796,
1430). "Sacrifice" signifies worship because sacrifices and
burnt-offerings were the chief things of all the worship in the later or
Hebrew representative church. They also sacrificed on mountains, as is
evident from various passages in the Word, because "mountains," from
their height, signified things which are high, such as are those which
are of heaven and are called celestial; and hence in the supreme sense
they signified the Lord, whom these people called the Most High. They
thought in this way from the appearance, for things which are more
interior appear higher, as does heaven to man. This is interiorly within
him, yet man supposes that it is on high. For this reason where what is
high is mentioned in the Word, in the internal sense there is signified
that which is interior. In the world it must be supposed that heaven is
on high, both because the visible heavens spread above us are so called,
and because man is in time and place, and therefore thinks from ideas
thence derived; and also because few know what that which is interior
is, and still fewer that there is there neither place nor time. It is
for this reason that the language of the Word is in agreement with the
ideas of man's thought; and if instead of being so it had been in
accordance with angelic ideas, the result would have been that men would
have perceived nothing at all; but everyone would have stood wondering
what it was, and whether it was anything at all, and so would have
rejected it as being destitute of anything fit for the understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4211.">4211.</span></span>

And called his brethren to eat bread. That this signifies the
appropriation of good from the Lord's Divine natural, is evident from
the signification of "brethren," as being those who were now conjoined
by a covenant, that is, by friendship; and in the internal sense those
who are in good and truth (that these are called "brethren" may be seen
above, n. 367, 2360, 3303, 3459, 3803, 3815, 4121, 4191); from the
signification of "eating," as being appropriation (see n. 3168, 3513,
3832; and that banquets and feasts with the ancients signified
appropriation and conjunction by love and charity, see above, n. 3596);
and from the signification of "bread," as being the good of love (n.
276, 680, 1798, 3478, 3735), and in the supreme sense the Lord (n. 2165,
2177, 3478, 3813). As in the supreme sense "bread" signifies the Lord,
it therefore signifies everything holy which is from Him, that is,
everything good and true; and because there is nothing else good, which
is good, except that which is of love and charity, "bread" signifies
love and charity. Nor did the sacrifices of old signify anything else,
for which reason they were called by the one word "bread" (n. 2165).
They also ate together of the flesh of the sacrifices, in order that the
heavenly feast might be represented, that is, conjunction by the good of
love and charity. This is what is now signified by the Holy Supper; for
this succeeded in the place of sacrifices, and of the feasts from the
sanctified things; and the Holy Supper is an external of the church that
contains within itself an internal, and by means of this internal it
conjoins the man who is in love and charity with heaven, and through
heaven with the Lord. For in the Holy Supper also, "eating" signifies
appropriation, the "bread" celestial love, and the "wine" spiritual
love; and this so entirely that when a man is in a holy state while
eating it, nothing else is perceived in heaven. \[2\] The reason why the
expression "the appropriation of good from the Lord's Divine natural" is
made use of, is that the subject treated of is the good of the Gentiles,
and it is this good which is now represented by Laban (n. 4189). Man's
conjunction with the Lord is not a conjunction with His Supreme Divine
Itself, but with His Divine Human; for man can have no idea whatever of
the Lord's Supreme Divine, which so transcends his idea as altogether to
perish and become nothing; but he can have an idea of His Divine Human.
For everyone is conjoined by thought and affection with one concerning
whom he has some idea, but not with one concerning whom he has no idea.
If when anyone is thinking about the Lord's Human, he has holiness in
his idea, he is thinking also of that holy which coming from the Lord
fills heaven, so that he is also thinking of heaven; for in its complex
heaven bears relation to a man, and it does this from the Lord (n. 684,
1276, 2996, 2998, 3624-3649); and this accounts for the fact that no
conjunction is possible with the Lord's Supreme Divine, but only with
His Divine Human, and through His Divine Human with His Supreme Divine.
Hence it is said in John that no one hath seen God at any time, except
the Only begotten Son (1:18); and that no one can come to the Father
except through Him; and hence also He is called the Mediator. That such
is the case may be very well known from the fact that all within the
church who say they believe in a Supreme Being, and make no account of
the Lord, are precisely those who believe nothing at all, not even that
there is a heaven, or that there is a hell, and who worship nature.
Moreover, if such persons are willing to be instructed by experience,
they will see that the evil, even the worst of them, say the same thing.
\[3\] But as regards the Lord's Human, men think in various ways, one in
one way and another in another, and one in a more holy way than another.
They who are within the church are able to think that His Human is
Divine, and also that as He says He is one with the Father, and that the
Father is in Him, and He in the Father. But they who are without the
church cannot do this, both because they know nothing about the Lord and
because they have no idea of the Divine except from the images which
they see with their eyes, and the idols which they can touch with their
hands. And yet the Lord conjoins Himself with these by means of the good
of their charity and obedience that is within their gross idea of Him.
For this reason it is here said that such have an "appropriation of good
from the Lord's Divine natural;" for the conjunction of the Lord with
man is according to the state of his thought and the derivative
affection. They who are in the most holy idea concerning the Lord, and
at the same time in the knowledges and affections of good and truth-as
those can be who are within the church-are conjoined with the Lord in
respect to His Divine rational; whereas they who are not in such
holiness, nor in such interior idea and affection, and yet are in the
good of charity, are conjoined with the Lord in respect to His Divine
natural. They who have a holiness of a still grosser kind are conjoined
with the Lord in respect to His Divine sensuous; and this conjunction is
what is represented by the brazen serpent, in that those who looked at
it recovered from the bite of the serpents (Num. 21:9). In this
conjunction are those among the Gentiles who worship idols, and yet live
in charity in accordance with their religion. From all this it is now
evident what is meant by the appropriation of good from the Lord's
Divine natural, which is signified by Jacob's calling his brethren to
eat bread.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4212.">4212.</span></span>

And they did eat bread. That this signifies the effect, namely, in the
external sense friendship, and in the supreme sense conjunction by good
and truth in the Lord's natural, is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4213.">4213.</span></span>

And tarried all night in the mountain. That this signifies tranquillity,
is evident from the signification of "tarrying all night," as being to
have peace (see n. 3170), thus tranquillity. It was also a rite that
those who entered into a covenant should tarry all night in one place,
because tarrying all night in one place signified that there was no
longer any hostility, and in the internal sense, that there was
tranquillity and peace; for they who are conjoined in respect to good
and truth are in tranquillity and in peace. It is therefore said here,
"in the mountain," because by a "mountain" is signified the good of love
and charity (see n. 4210); for the good of love and charity confers
peace. (What peace and tranquillity are, may be seen above, n. 92, 93,
1726, 2780, 3170, 3696, 3780.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4214.">4214.</span></span>

And in the morning Laban arose early. That this signifies the
enlightenment of this good from the Lord's Divine natural, is evident
from the signification of "rising early in the morning," as being
enlightenment (see n. 3458, 3723); and from the representation of Laban,
as being such good as is that of the Gentiles (n. 4189). That the
enlightenment of this good here meant is from the Lord's Divine natural,
is manifest from the series. As regards enlightenment, it is all from
the Lord, and through the good that is in the man; and such as is the
good, such is the enlightenment. \[2\] Most people believe that those
men are enlightened who are able to reason about good and truth and
about evil and falsity; and that their enlightenment is the greater in
proportion to the subtlety and acuteness with which they can speak about
these things, and at the same time confirm them by many
memory-knowledges, and likewise make what they say appear probable by
comparisons, especially those drawn from things of sense, and by other
modes of persuasion. And yet such men may be in no enlightenment, in
spite of their power of imagination and perception. This power is of two
kinds, one which comes from the light of heaven, and the other from a
fatuous light; and in the outward form these two appear alike, although
in the inward form they are quite different. That which is from the
light of heaven is in good, that is, is with those who are in good, and
who from good are able to see truth, and to know as in clear day whether
a thing is so, or is not so. But that which is from fatuous light is in
evil, that is, is with those who are in evil; and their being able to
reason about such things comes from the fact that they possess some
capacity of knowing them, but no affection of doing them; and that this
is to be in no enlightenment everyone can comprehend. \[3\] As regards
fatuous light the case in the other life is this: They who have been in
such light in this world are in the like in the other life, and there
reason about good and truth and about evil and falsity, and this much
more perfectly and excellently than when in the life of the body; for
their thoughts are not there beclogged and impeded by the cares of the
body and of the world, nor so terminated or bounded in them, as when
they were in the body and the world. But still it at once appears (not
to them, but to good spirits and angels) that their reasonings are those
of fatuous light, and that the light of heaven that inflows with them is
instantly turned into such a light; so that that which was the light of
heaven with them is either suffocated, as when the light of the sun
falls upon something opaque and becomes black; or is reflected, as with
those who are in principles of falsity; or is perverted, as when the
sun's light flows into ugly and unclean objects, and produces repulsive
colors and offensive smells. Such is the case with those who are in
fatuous light and believe themselves to be more enlightened than others
simply because they are able to reason intelligently and wisely, while
nevertheless living an evil life. \[4\] Who these are, and what is their
character, appears from everything they speak, provided they do not
counterfeit what is good for the sake of deceiving. Among them are those
who deny or despise the Lord, and within themselves ridicule those who
confess Him. Among them are those who love adulteries, and who ridicule
those who believe marriages to be holy, and by no means to be violated.
Among them are those who believe the precepts and doctrinal things of
the church to be for the sake of the common people, that they may
thereby be kept in bonds, and who in themselves make them of no account.
Among them in like manner are those who ascribe all things to nature,
and believe those to be simple-minded and of feeble judgment who ascribe
them to the Divine. Among them also are those who attribute everything
to their own prudence, and who say, and have confirmed themselves in the
opinion, that there is a Supreme Being that exercises some government in
general or in the universal, but nothing in particular or individually.
And so in other cases. \[5\] Such persons are in fatuous light even in
the other life, and among their like they also reason acutely; but when
they approach any heavenly society, this light is extinguished and
becomes darkness; and consequently their thought is obscured to such a
degree that they cannot think at all; for they are then cramped and
constricted by the light of heaven, which as before said is with them
either suffocated, reflected, or perverted; and they therefore throw
themselves down headlong, and cast themselves into hell, where such
light prevails. From all this can be seen what true enlightenment is,
namely, that it comes from the good which is from the Lord; and also
what false enlightenment is, namely, that it comes from the evil which
is from hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4215.">4215.</span></span>

And kissed his sons and his daughters. That this signifies the
acknowledgment of these truths, and of the affections of the same, is
evident from the signification of "kissing," as being conjunction from
affection (see n. 3573, 3574), consequently acknowledgment (for where
there is conjunction by means of good and truth, there is the
acknowledgment of these); from the signification of "sons," as being
truths or verities (n. 489, 491, 533, 1147, 2623, 3773); and from the
signification of "daughters," here Rachel and Leah, as being the
affections of the same, that is, of truths (n. 3758, 3782, 3793, 3819).
\[2\] It is from the correspondence that "kissing" signifies conjunction
from affection; for there is a correspondence of heaven with all the
organs and members of the body, as shown at the end of the chapters.
There is a correspondence of the internal things of man with all things
of the face, and hence the animus shines forth from the countenance, and
the interior animus or mind from the eyes. There is also a
correspondence of the thoughts and affections with the actions and
gestures of the body; as is well known in regard to those which are of a
voluntary as well as those which are of an involuntary character. For
humiliation of heart produces kneeling, which is an external gesture of
the body; humiliation still greater and more internal produces
prostration to the earth; gladness of heart and joy of mind produce
singing and joyful shouting; sadness and internal mourning produce
weeping and wailing; but conjunction from affection produces kissing.
From all this it is evident that because such external acts correspond,
they are signs of things internal; and that in them as signs there is an
internal from which they take their quality. But with those who desire
to counterfeit internal things by means of external, such externals are
also signs, but signs of simulation, hypocrisy, and deceit. Such is the
case with kissing, by which everyone wishes to signify that he loves
another from the heart; for he knows that the act of kissing comes from
such love, and is a mark of conjunction from affection, and he thereby
desires to persuade his neighbor that he loves him for the sake of the
good that is in him; when in fact it may be for his own sake, and for
his own honor and gain, and thus not for the sake of good, but of evil.
For he who regards himself as the end, and not as an intermediate end to
good, and desires to be conjoined with another as to that end, is in
evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4216.">4216.</span></span>

And blessed them. That this signifies the consequent joy, is evident
from the signification of "blessing," as being to devoutly wish success
and happiness (see n. 3185); thus to testify joy when anyone is going
away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4217.">4217.</span></span>

And Laban departed and returned to his place. That this signifies the
end of the representation by Laban, is evident from the signification of
"returning to his place," as being to return to the former state. (That
"place" is state, see above, n. 2625, 2837, 3356, 3387, 3404.)
Consequently by these words is signified the end of the representation
by Laban. From all that has been shown it may be seen that all things in
the Word both in general and particular contain interior things, and
that the interior things are of such a nature as to be adapted to the
perception of the angels who are with man. For example: when "bread" is
mentioned in the Word, the angels become aware not of material but of
spiritual bread; thus instead of bread they perceive the Lord, who is
the Bread of life, as He Himself teaches in John 6:33, 35. And because
they perceive the Lord, they perceive what is from the Lord, thus His
love toward the universal human race; and they then perceive at the same
time man's reciprocal love to the Lord; for these two things cohere in
one idea of thought and affection. \[2\] Not unlike this are the
thoughts of the man who is in a holy state when receiving the bread of
the Holy Supper; for he then thinks not of bread, but of the Lord and
His mercy, and of what is of love to Him and of charity toward the
neighbor, because he thinks of repentance and amendment of life; but
this with variety according to the holiness in which he is, not only as
to his thought, but also as to his affection. From this it is manifest
that "bread" as mentioned in the Word suggests to the angels no idea of
bread, but the idea of love, together with innumerable things that are
of love. It is the same with "wine," which when read of in the Word, and
also when received in the Holy Supper, suggests to the angels no thought
of wine, but of charity toward the neighbor. This being the case, and as
in this way there is a connection of man with heaven, and through heaven
with the Lord, the bread and wine have become symbols, and unite the man
who is in holiness of life with heaven, and through heaven with the
Lord. \[3\] The same is the case with everything in the Word, and
therefore the Word is a medium uniting man with the Lord; and unless
there were such a uniting medium, heaven could not inflow with man; for
without a medium there would be no unition, but heaven would remove
itself away from man; and if this were removed, no one could any longer
be led to good, not even to corporeal and worldly good; but all bonds
whatever, even those which are external, would be broken. For the Lord
rules the man who is in good by means of internal bonds, which are of
conscience; but one who is in evil by external bonds alone; and if these
should be broken, every such man would become insane; even as is the man
who is without fear of the law, without fear for his life, and without
fear of the loss of honor and gain, and thus of reputation-for these are
the external bonds-and so the human race would perish. From all this it
may be seen why the Word exists, and what the character of the Word is.
(That the church of the Lord where the Word is, is like the heart and
the lungs, and that the church of the Lord where the Word is not, is
like the rest of the viscera which live from the heart and the lungs,
may be seen above, n. 637, 931, 2054, 2853.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4218.">4218.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE GRAND MAN, AND CONCERNING CORRESPONDENCE. At
the end of the preceding chapters, I have related matters granted me to
see and perceive in the world of spirits and in the heavens of angels;
and in the last place the subject of the Grand Man and Correspondence
has been dealt with. In order to make fully known how the case is with
man, and that he is in connection with heaven, not only as to the
thoughts and affections, but also as to the organic forms both interior
and exterior, and that without this connection he could not subsist for
a single moment, we may in this volume continue the consideration of the
subject of correspondence with the Grand Man which was commenced at the
end of the preceding chapters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4219.">4219.</span></span>

In order that the reader may have a general knowledge of how the case is
with the Grand Man, let him bear in mind that the universal heaven is
the Grand Man, and that heaven is called the Grand Man because it
corresponds to the Divine Human of the Lord; for the Lord alone is Man,
and an angel and a spirit, and also a man on earth, are men in exact
proportion to what they have from Him. Let no one believe that man is
man from his possession of a natural human face, body, brain, and organs
and members; for all these are common to him with brute animals, and
therefore these are what die and become a carcass. But man is man from
being able to think and will as a man, and thus to receive what is
Divine, that is, what is of the Lord. By this man distinguishes himself
from beasts and wild animals; and in the other life also his quality as
a man is determined by what he has received from the Lord and made his
own in the life of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4220.">4220.</span></span>

They who in the life of the body have received the Divine things of the
Lord, that is, His love toward the universal human race; and
consequently they who have received charity toward the neighbor; and
also they who have received reciprocal love to the Lord, are in the
other life endowed with intelligence and wisdom, and with ineffable
happiness; for they become angels and thus truly men. But they who in
the life of the body have not received the Divine things of the Lord,
that is, who have not received love toward the human race, and still
less reciprocal love to the Lord, but who have loved and indeed
worshiped themselves only, and consequently have had as their end what
is of self and of the world, they, in the other life, after some brief
passages of life there, are deprived of all intelligence, and become
utterly stupid, being among the stupid infernals there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4221.">4221.</span></span>

In order that I might know that such is the case, I have been permitted
to speak with those who have lived in this manner, and likewise with one
with whom I had been acquainted in the life of the body. During this
man's life on earth, all the good he had done to the neighbor had been
done for the sake of himself, that is, for his own honor and gain. All
who could not be made subservient to these ends he had despised, and
even hated. He had indeed made an oral confession of God, but at heart
acknowledged Him not; and when I was permitted to speak to him there
exhaled from him a sphere that was as it were corporeal. His speech was
not like that of spirits, but was like that of a mortal still in the
flesh; for the speech of spirits is distinguished from that of men in
being full of ideas, or in having within it something spiritual, thus
something alive that is inexpressible; but this was not the case with
this man's speech. Such was the sphere that exhaled from him and that
was perceived in everything that he said. He appeared there among the
vile; and I was told that persons of this character successively become
so gross and stupid in respect to their thoughts and affections, that no
one in this world is more so. They have their abode under the buttocks,
where their hell is. From the same place there had previously appeared a
certain person (not as a spirit, but as a grossly corporeal man,
appears), in whom there was so little of the life of intelligence which
is properly human, that you would call it stupidity personified. From
these examples it was evident what kind of spirits those become who are
in no love toward the neighbor, nor toward the state, and still less
toward the Lord's kingdom; but who are exclusively in the love of self,
and who in everything regard themselves alone, even adoring themselves
as gods, and also desiring to be so adored by others, and having this
intent in everything they do.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4222.">4222.</span></span>

As regards the correspondence of the Grand Man with the things that
appertain to man, it is a correspondence with all things of him both in
general and in particular, that is to say, with his organs, members, and
viscera, and this so perfect that there is not a single organ or member
in the body, nor any part in an organ or member, nor even any particle
of a part, with which there is not correspondence. It is well known that
each organ and member in the body consists of parts, and of parts of
parts-as the brain, for example, which consists in general of the
cerebrum, cerebellum, medulla oblongata, and medulla spinalis, for this
last is a continuation, or kind of appendix. Again, the cerebrum
consists of many members, which are its parts, namely, of the membranes
called the dura mater and pia mater, of the corpus callosum, the corpora
striata, the ventricles and cavities, the smaller glands, the septa, in
general of the cineritious substance and the medullary substance, and
furthermore of the sinuses, blood vessels, and plexuses. The like is the
case with the bodily organs of sense and motion, and with the viscera,
as is well known from anatomical studies. All these things both in
general and in particular correspond most exactly to the Grand Man, and
to so many heavens, as it were, therein. For the heaven of the Lord is
distinguished in like manner into lesser heavens, and these into heavens
still less, and these into least, and finally into angels, each one of
whom is a little heaven corresponding to the greatest. These heavens are
most distinct from one another, each one belonging to its own general
heaven, and the general heavens to the most general, or whole, which is
the Grand Man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4223.">4223.</span></span>

But as regards this correspondence, the fact is that although the
heavens above mentioned do indeed correspond to the very organic forms
of the human body, and therefore it is said that these societies or
those angels belong to the province of the brain, to the province of the
heart, to the province of the lungs, or to the province of the eye, and
so on, they nevertheless correspond chiefly to the functions of these
viscera or organs. The case herein is as with the organs or viscera
themselves, in that their functions constitute a one with their organic
forms; for no function can be conceived of except from forms, that is,
from substances, for the substances are the subjects from which they
exist. Sight, for example, cannot be conceived of apart from the eye;
nor breathing apart from the lungs. The eye is the organic form from
which and by means of which the sight exists, and the lungs are the
organic form from which and by means of which the breathing exists; and
so with all the rest. It is the functions therefore to which the
heavenly societies chiefly correspond; and as they correspond to the
functions, they correspond also to the organic forms; for the one is
indivisible and inseparable from the other, inasmuch that whether you
speak of the function or the organic form by which and from which is the
function, it comes to the same thing. Hence there is correspondence with
the organs, members, and viscera, because there is with the functions;
and therefore when the function is brought into exercise, the organ also
is excited. The same is the case with everything that man does; when he
wills to do this or that, in this manner or that, and is thinking of it,
the organs then move in concurrence, thus in accordance with the
intention of the function or use; for it is the use that commands the
forms. \[2\] This shows that the use existed before the organic forms of
the body came forth; and that the use produced and adapted them to
itself, and not the reverse. But when the forms have been produced, and
the organs adapted, the uses proceed from them; and then it appears as
if the forms or organs were prior to the uses, when yet such is not the
case. For use flows in from the Lord, and this through heaven, according
to order, and according to the form in which heaven has been ordinated
by the Lord, thus according to correspondences. Thus does man come into
existence, and thus also does he subsist. And hence again does it appear
why it is that man corresponds to the heavens in regard to both generals
and particulars.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4224.">4224.</span></span>

Organic forms are not only those apparent to the eye, and that can be
detected by microscopes; for there are also organic forms still more
pure, which can never be discovered by any eye, whether naked or
assisted. The latter forms are interior forms such as are those of the
internal sight, and which in the last analysis are of the understanding.
These are inscrutable, but still they are forms, that is, substances;
for no sight, not even intellectual sight, is possible except from
something. This is also known in the learned world; that is to say, that
without a substance, which is the subject, there is not any mode, nor
any modification, nor any quality which manifests itself in an active
manner. These purer or interior forms which are inscrutable, are those
which form and set forth the internal senses, and also produce the
interior affections. It is to these forms that the interior things of
heaven correspond, because they correspond to the senses which they set
forth, and to the affections of these senses. But as very many things
have been disclosed to me respecting these matters and their
correspondence, they cannot be clearly presented unless each one is
treated of specifically; and therefore of the Lord's Divine mercy I may
continue below the consideration of the subject of the correspondence of
man with the Grand Man that was commenced in a preceding volume, to the
intent that man may at last know, not from any ratiocination, and still
less from any hypothesis, but from experience itself, how the case is
with him, and with his internal man which is called his soul, and in
consequence with his conjunction with heaven, and through heaven with
the Lord; and consequently whence man is man, and by what he is
distinguished from beasts; and furthermore, how man himself separates
himself from this conjunction, and conjoins himself with hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4225.">4225.</span></span>

At the outset it must be stated who are within the Grand Man, and who
are out of it. All those are within the Grand Man who are in love to the
Lord and in charity toward the neighbor, and who do good to the neighbor
from the heart according to the good that is in him, and who have a
conscience of what is just and equitable; for these are in the Lord, and
consequently in heaven. But all those are outside the Grand Man who are
in the love of self and the love of the world and the derivative
concupiscences, and who do what is good solely on account of the laws,
and for the sake of their own honor and the world's wealth and the
consequent reputation, and who thus are interiorly unmerciful and in
hatred and revenge against the neighbor for their own and the world's
sake, and are delighted with the neighbor's injury when he does not
favor them for these are in hell. These do not correspond to any organs
and members in the body, but to various corruptions and diseases induced
in them; concerning which also of the Lord's Divine mercy, I shall speak
from experience in the following pages. \[2\] They who are out of the
Grand Man (that is, out of heaven), cannot enter into it, for their
lives are contrary to it. Nay, if in any way they do enter, which is
sometimes done by such as have learned in the life of the body to
counterfeit angels of light; nevertheless on arriving there, as is
sometimes permitted in order that they may learn their own character,
they are admitted only to the first entrance, that is, to those who are
as yet simple-minded, and who have not as yet been fully instructed. And
even there those who enter as angels of light are scarcely able to tarry
a few moments, because the life there is that of love to the Lord and
love toward the neighbor; and as there is nothing there which
corresponds to their life, they are hardly able to breathe. (That
spirits and angels breathe, may be seen above, n. 3884-3893.)
Consequently they begin to be distressed, for respiration takes place in
accordance with freedom of life; and wonderful to say they are finally
scarcely able to move, but become like those who are in, anguish and
torment taking possession of their interiors, and they therefore cast
themselves down headlong, even into hell, where they recover their
respiration and power of motion. Hence it is that in the Word life is
represented by mobility. \[3\] But they who are in the Grand Man breathe
freely when they are in the good of love; but nevertheless they are
distinguished according to the quality and the amount of the good. Hence
there are so many heavens, which in the Word are called "mansions" (John
14:2). And everyone when in his own heaven is in his life, and receives
influx from the universal heaven, each person there being a center of
all the influxes, and therefore in the most perfect equilibrium; and
this according to the amazing form of heaven, which is from the Lord
alone; thus with all variety.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4226.">4226.</span></span>

Spirits recently arrived, who when they lived in the world had been
inwardly evil, but had outwardly assumed the appearance of good by means
of the works which they had done to others for the sake of themselves
and the world, have sometimes complained that they were not admitted
into heaven; for they had no other notion about heaven than that of
admission from favor. But they have sometimes received for answer that
heaven is denied to no one; and that if they desire it, they will be
admitted. Some have also been admitted into the heavenly societies
nearest the entrance; but on arriving there, they, as before said,
observed a cessation of their breathing on account of the contrariety
and resistance of their life, together with distress and torment as it
were infernal, and they cast themselves down and afterwards said that to
them heaven was hell, and that they would never have believed heaven to
be of such a character.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4227.">4227.</span></span>

There are many of both sexes who in this life have been of such a
character that whenever possible they sought by art and deceit to
subjugate to themselves the minds of others, with the end of ruling over
them, especially those who were powerful and rich, in order that they
alone might rule in their name; and who had acted in a secret manner,
and had removed other men, especially the upright, and this in various
ways-not indeed by censuring them, for uprightness defends itself; but
by other modes, such as by misrepresenting their suggestions by calling
these simple and evil; and by attributing to them any misfortunes that
might occur; together with other similar detractions. They who have been
of this character in the life of the body are the same in the other
life, for the life of everyone follows him. \[2\] I discovered this by
living experience among such spirits when they have been with me, for
they then acted in a similar manner, but still more craftily and
ingeniously; for spirits act more subtly than men, being released from
all connection with the body, and from the bonds of gross modes of
sensation. They were so subtle that sometimes I did not perceive that
their intention and end was to exercise command; and when they spoke
among themselves they took care that I should not hear and perceive it;
but I was told by others who heard them that their designs were wicked;
and that they were studying to attain their end by magic arts, and thus
by assistance from the diabolical crew. The murder of the upright they
accounted as a matter of no moment; and as for the Lord (under whom they
said that they desired to exercise command), they made Him very cheap,
regarding Him merely as another man, to whom worship is paid by ancient
custom, as among other nations which made men gods and worshiped them,
and whom they durst not speak against, because they were born in that
worship, and would thereby injure their reputation. Concerning these
spirits I am able to state that they obsess the thoughts and the will of
the men who are like them, and insinuate themselves into their affection
and intention, so that without the Lord's mercy the men cannot possibly
know that such spirits are present, and that they themselves are in a
society of such. \[3\] These spirits correspond to the corruptions of
man's purer blood, called the animal spirit, into which corruptions
enter in a disorderly manner; and wherever they diffuse themselves they
are like poisons which induce cold and torpor upon the nerves and
fibers, from which break forth the most grievous and fatal diseases.
When such act together in company, they are known by their acting-so to
speak-in a quadruped manner, <span id="fr_121"></span>[4227-1](#fn_121.md)
and they beset the back of the head under the cerebellum to the left;
for they who act under the occiput operate more clandestinely than
others, and they who act upon the back parts desire to exercise command.
\[4\] They reasoned with me about the Lord, and said that it was strange
that when they prayed He did not hear their prayers, and thus did not
aid those who made supplication. But I was permitted to reply that they
could not be heard, because they had as their end such things as are
contrary to the welfare of the human race; and because they pray for
themselves against all others; and that when they pray in this manner
heaven is closed, for they who are in heaven attend solely to the ends
of those who are praying. These things they indeed would not
acknowledge, but still they could make no answer. \[5\] I have met male
spirits of this kind who were accompanied by some of the female sex, and
who said that they can avail themselves of many of the suggestions of
women, because these are more quick-witted and deft in seeing how to
manage such matters. These men are greatly pleased with the society of
women who had been harlots. In the other life such persons for the most
part apply themselves to secret and magical arts; for a host of such
arts are there known which are quite unknown in this world; and no
sooner do persons of this character arrive in the other life than they
apply themselves to these arts, and learn to fascinate those with whom
they are, and especially those under whom they desire to reign. For
wicked deeds they have no abhorrence. Their hell, and the nature of this
their abode when not in the world of spirits, shall be spoken of
elsewhere. From all that has been said it is evident that after death
every man's life remains with him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4229.">4229.</span></span>

In volume 3 <span id="fr_122"></span>[4229-1](#fn_122.md) a commencement
was made with the explication of the Lord's predictions in the
twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew concerning the Last Judgment, the
explication being prefixed to the last chapters of that volume, and
being continued as far as the thirty-first verse of the chapter in the
Evangelist just referred to (see n. 3353-3356, 3486-3489, 3650-3655,
3897-3901, 4056-4060). The internal sense in a summary of these
predictions of the Lord plainly appears from the explications already
given, namely, that prediction is there made concerning the successive
vastation of the church, and the ultimate setting up of a New Church, in
the following order: 1. That the members of the church would begin not
to know what good and truth are, and would dispute about them. 2. That
they would hold them in contempt. 3. That at heart they would not
acknowledge them. 4. That they would profane them. 5. And because the
truth of faith and the good of charity would still remain with some, who
are called the "elect," a description is given of the state of the faith
as it then existed. 6. Next of the state of the charity. 7. And finally
the commencement of a New Church is treated of, which is meant by the
words that were last explained: He shall send forth His angels with a
trumpet and a great voice, and they shall gather together His elect from
the four winds, from the end of the heavens even to the end thereof
(Matt. 24:31), by which is meant the commencement of a New Church (see
n. 4060e).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4230.">4230.</span></span>

When the end of an old church and the beginning of a new church is at
hand, then is the Last Judgment. This is the time that is meant in the
Word by the "Last Judgment" (see n. 2117-2133, 3353, 4057), and also by
the "coming of the Son of man." It is this very Coming that is now the
subject before us, as referred to in the question addressed to the Lord
by the disciples: Tell us when shall these things be, especially what is
the sign of Thy coming, and of the consummation of the age? (Matt.
24:3). It remains therefore to unfold the things predicted by the Lord
concerning this very time of His Coming and of the Consummation of the
age which is the Last Judgment; but in the preface to this chapter only
those contained in verses 32 to 35: Now learn a parable from the
fig-tree. When her branch is now become tender, and putteth forth
leaves, ye know that the summer is nigh. So also ye, when ye see all
these things, know that it is nigh, even at the doors. Verily I say unto
you, This generation shall not pass away till all these things be
accomplished. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words shall not
pass away (Matt. 24:32-35). The internal sense of these words is as
follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4231.">4231.</span></span>

Now learn a parable from the fig-tree. When her branch is now become
tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that the summer is nigh;
signifies the first of a new church; the "fig-tree" is the good of the
natural; her "branch" is the affection of this; and the "leaves" are
truths. The "parable from which they should learn" is that these things
are signified. He who is not acquainted with the internal sense of the
Word, cannot possibly know what is involved in the comparison of the
Lord's coming to a fig-tree and its branch and leaves; but as all the
comparisons in the Word are also significative (n. 3579), it may be
known from this signification what is meant. A "fig-tree" wherever
mentioned in the Word signifies in the internal sense the good of the
natural (n. 217); that her "branch" is the affection of this, is because
affection springs forth from good as a branch from its trunk; and that
"leaves" are truths may be seen above (n. 885). From all this it is now
evident what the parable involves, namely, that when a new church is
being created by the Lord, there then appears first of all the good of
the natural, that is, good in the external form together with its
affection and truths. By the good of the natural is not meant the good
into which man is born, or which he derives from his parents, but a good
which is spiritual in respect to its origin. Into this no one is born,
but is led into it by the Lord through the knowledges of good and truth.
Therefore until a man is in this good (that is, in spiritual good), he
is not a man of the church, however much from a good that is born with
him he may appear to be so. \[2\] So also ye, when ye see all these
things, know that it is nigh, even at the doors; signifies that when
those things appear which are signified in the internal sense by the
words spoken just before (verses 29-31), and by these concerning the
fig-tree, then it is the consummation of the church, that is, the Last
Judgment, and the Coming of the Lord; consequently that the old church
is then being rejected, and a new one is being set up. It is said, "at
the doors," because the good of the natural and its truths are the first
things which are insinuated into a man when he is being regenerated and
is becoming the church. Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not
pass away, till all these things be accomplished; signifies that the
Jewish nation shall not be extirpated like other nations, for the reason
shown above (n. 3479). \[3\] Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My
words shall not pass away; signifies that the internals and the
externals of the former church would perish, but that the Word of the
Lord would abide. (That "heaven" is the internal of the church, and
"earth" its external, may be seen above, n. 82, 1411, 1733, 1850, 2117,
2118, 3355e). By the Lord's "words" are plainly meant not only these now
spoken respecting His coming and the consummation of the age, but also
all that are in the Word. These words were said immediately after what
was said about the Jewish nation, because that nation was preserved for
the sake of the Word, as may be seen from the number already cited (n.
3479). From all this it is now evident that the beginnings of a New
Church are here foretold. GENESIS 32 1. And Jacob went to his way, and
the angels of God ran to meet him. 2. And Jacob said when he saw them,
This is the camp of God; and he called the name of that place Mahanaim.
3. And Jacob sent messengers before him, to Esau his brother unto the
land of Seir, the field of Edom. 4. And he commanded them, saying, Thus
shall ye say unto my lord Esau: Thus saith thy servant Jacob, I have
sojourned with Laban, and have tarried until now. 5. And I had ox and
ass, flock and manservant and handmaid; and I send to tell my lord, to
find grace in thine eyes. 6. And the messengers returned to Jacob,
saying, We came to thy brother, to Esau, and moreover he cometh to meet
thee, and four hundred men with him. 7. And Jacob feared exceedingly,
and was distressed; and he halved the people that was with him, and the
flock, and the herd, and the camels, into two camps. 8. And he said, If
Esau come to the one camp, and smite it, then there will be a camp left
for escape. 9. And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my
father Isaac, O Jehovah, that saith unto me, Return unto thy land, and
to thy birth, and I will do well with thee; 10. I am less than all the
mercies, and all the truth, which Thou hast done with Thy servant; for
in my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am in two camps. 11.
Rescue me I pray from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for
I fear him, lest he come and smite me, the mother upon the sons. 12. And
Thou saidst, I will surely do well with thee, and I will make thy seed
as the sand of the sea, which is not numbered for multitude. 13. And he
passed the night there in that night, and he took of that which came
into his hand a present for Esau his brother: 14. Two hundred she-goats
and twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams: 15. Thirty milch
camels and their colts, forty heifers and ten bullocks, twenty she-asses
and ten foals. 16. And he gave into the hand of his servants each drove
by itself; and said unto his servants, Pass over before me, and put a
space between drove and drove. 17. And he commanded the first, saying,
When Esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose art
thou? and whither goest thou? and whose are these before thee? 18. Then
thou shalt say, Thy servant Jacob's; this is a present sent unto my lord
Esau; and behold he also is behind us. 19. And he commanded also the
second, and the third, and all that went after the droves, saying,
According to this word shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him. 20.
And ye shall also say, Behold thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he
said, I will expiate his faces in a present that goeth before me, and
afterward I will see his faces; peradventure he will lift up my faces.
21. And the present passed over before him, and he passed the night in
that night in the camp. 22. And he rose up in that night, and took his
two women, and his two handmaids, and his eleven sons, and passed over
the passage of Jabbok. 23. And he took them, and caused them to pass the
river, and caused to pass what he had. 24. And Jacob remained alone, and
there wrestled a man with him until the dawn arose. 25. And he saw that
he prevailed not over him, and he touched the hollow of his thigh, and
the hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint in his wrestling with him.
26. And he said, Let me go, for the dawn ariseth. And he said, I will
not let thee go, unless thou bless me. 27. And he said unto him, What is
thy name? And he said, Jacob. 28. And he said, Thy name shall no more be
called Jacob, but Israel; for as a prince hast thou contended with God
and with men, and hast prevailed. 29. And Jacob asked and said, Tell I
pray thy name. And he said, Wherefore is this that thou dost ask after
my name? And he blessed him there. 30. And Jacob called the name of the
place Peniel; for I have seen God faces to faces, and my soul is
delivered. 31. And the sun arose to him as he passed over Penuel, and he
halted upon his thigh. 32. Therefore the sons of Israel eat not the
nerve of that which was displaced, which is upon the hollow of the
thigh, even unto this day, because he touched in the hollow of Jacob's
thigh the nerve of that which was displaced.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4232.">4232.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. The subject here treated of in the internal sense is the
inversion of state in the natural, in order that good may be in the
first place, and truth in the second. The implantation of truth in good
is treated of (verses 1 to 23); and the wrestlings of the temptations
which are then to be sustained (verses 24 to 32). At the same time the
Jewish nation is also treated of, because although that nation could
receive nothing of the church, it nevertheless represented the things of
the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4233.">4233.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE. Verses 1, 2. And Jacob went to his way, and the
angels of God ran to meet him. And Jacob said when he saw them, This is
the camp of God; and he called the name of that place Mahanaim. "And
Jacob went to his way," signifies the successive advance of truth toward
its conjunction with spiritual and celestial good; "and the angels of
God ran to meet him," signifies enlightenment from good; "and Jacob said
when he saw them, This is the camp of God," signifies heaven; "and he
called the name of that place Mahanaim," signifies the quality of the
state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4234.">4234.</span></span>

And Jacob went to his way. That this signifies the successive advance of
truth toward its conjunction with spiritual and celestial good, is
evident from the representation of Jacob, as being here the truth of the
natural. What Jacob represented has been already stated, namely, the
Lord's natural; and as where Jacob is treated of in the historical
narrative, in the internal sense the Lord is treated of, and how He made
His natural Divine, therefore Jacob first represented the truth in that
natural, and then the truth to which was adjoined the collateral good
which was "Laban;" and after the Lord had adjoined this good, Jacob
represented it; but such good is not the good Divine in the natural, but
is a mediate good by means of which the Lord could receive good Divine;
and this mediate good was the good that Jacob represented when he
withdrew from Laban. Nevertheless in itself this good is truth which
from its mediate character possesses the capacity of conjoining itself
with the good Divine in the natural. Such then is the truth that Jacob
now represents. \[2\] But the good with which this truth was to be
conjoined is represented by Esau. (That Esau is the Divine good of the
Lord's Divine natural, may be seen above, n. 3300, 3302, 3494, 3504,
3527, 3576, 3599, 3669, 3677.) It is this very conjunction of truth
Divine with the good Divine of the Lord's Divine natural, that is now
treated of in the supreme sense. For after Jacob withdrew from Laban and
came to the Jordan, thus to the first entrance into the land of Canaan,
he advances into the representation of this conjunction; for in the
internal sense the land of Canaan signifies heaven, and in the supreme
sense the Lord's Divine Human (n. 3038, 3705). It is for this reason
that by the words, "and Jacob went to his way," is signified the
successive advance of truth toward conjunction with spiritual and
celestial good. \[3\] But these things are of such a nature as to
prevent their being fully set forth to the apprehension; the cause of
which is that the most general things of this subject are unknown in the
learned world, even among Christians. For it is scarcely known what the
natural in man is, and what the rational, and that these are altogether
distinct from each other; and scarcely even what spiritual truth is, and
what its good, and that these also are most distinct from each other.
Still less is it known that when man is being regenerated, truth is
conjoined with good, in one distinct way in the natural, and in another
distinct way in the rational, and this by innumerable means. It is not
even known that the Lord made His Human Divine according to the same
order as that in which He regenerates man. \[4\] Since therefore these
most general things are unknown, it must needs be that whatever is said
about them will appear obscure. Nevertheless they have to be stated,
because otherwise the Word cannot be unfolded as to its internal sense.
At the very least this may be the means of showing how great angelic
wisdom is, and also of what kind it is, for the internal sense of the
Word is chiefly for the angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4235.">4235.</span></span>

And the angels of God ran to meet him. That this signifies enlightenment
from good, is evident from the signification of the "angels of God," as
being something of the Lord; here, the Divine which was in the Lord; for
in the Lord was the Divine Itself which is called the "Father." The very
essence of life (which in man is called the soul) was therefrom, and was
Himself. This Divine is what is called in common speech the Divine
nature, or rather the Lord's Divine essence. (That something of the
Divine of the Lord is signified in the Word by the "angels of God," may
be seen above, n. 1925, 2319, 2821, 3039, 4085.) By "the angels of God
running to meet him" is signified in the proximate sense the influx of
the Divine into the natural, and the consequent enlightenment; for all
enlightenment is from the influx of the Divine. As the subject treated
of is the inversion of state in the Lord's natural, in order that good
might be in the first place, and truth in the second; and as the subject
treated of in this first part of the chapter is the implantation of
truth in good therein (n. 4232), and as this could not be effected
without enlightenment from the Divine, therefore the first thing treated
of is the enlightenment effected by the good into which truth was to be
implanted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4236.">4236.</span></span>

And Jacob said when he saw them, This is the camp of God. That this
signifies heaven, is because the "camp of God" signifies heaven, for the
reason that an "army" signifies truths and goods (n. 3448), and truths
and goods are marshaled by the Lord in heavenly order; hence an
"encamping" denotes a marshalling by armies; and the heavenly order
itself which is heaven, is the "camp." This "camp" or order is of such a
nature that hell cannot possibly break in upon it, although it is in the
constant endeavor to do so. Hence also this order, or heaven, is called
a "camp," and the truths and goods (that is, the angels) who are
marshaled in this order, are called "armies." This shows whence it is
that the "camp of God" signifies heaven. It is this very order, and thus
heaven itself, which was represented by the encampments of the sons of
Israel in the wilderness; and their dwelling together in the wilderness
according to their tribes was called the "camp." The tabernacle in the
midst, and around which they encamped, represented the Lord Himself.
That the sons of Israel encamped in this manner, may be seen in Numbers
1 and 33:2-56; as also that they encamped around the tabernacle by their
tribes-toward the east Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun; toward the south
Reuben, Simeon, and Gad; toward the west Ephraim, Manasseh, and
Benjamin; toward the north Dan, Asher, and Naphtali; and the Levites in
the middle near the tabernacle (2:2-34). \[2\] The tribes signified all
goods and truths in the complex (see n. 3858, 3862, 3926, 3939, 4060).
It was for this reason that when Balaam saw Israel dwelling according to
their tribes, and the spirit of God came upon him, he uttered his
enunciation, saying: How good are thy tabernacles, O Jacob, thy dwelling
places, O Israel, as the valleys are they planted, as gardens by the
river (Num. 24:5-6). That by this prophecy was not meant the people
named Jacob and Israel, but that it was the heaven of the Lord that was
represented, is very manifest. For the same reason their marshallings in
the wilderness, that is, their encampings by tribes, are called "camps"
in other passages of the Word; and by a "camp" is there signified in the
internal sense heavenly order; and by "encamping" a marshalling in
accordance with this order, namely, the order in which goods and truths
are disposed in heaven (as in Lev. 4:12; 8:17; 13:46; 14:8; 16:26, 28;
24:14, 23; Num. 2; 4:5-33; 5:2-4; 9:17 to the end; 10:1-10, 28; 11:31,
32; 12:14, 15; 31:19-24; Deut. 23:10-14). \[3\] That the "camp of God"
denotes heaven may also be seen in Joel: The earth quaked before Him,
the heavens trembled, the sun and the moon were blackened, and the stars
withdrew their brightness, and Jehovah uttered His voice before His
army, for His camp is exceeding many, for numerous is he that doeth His
word (Joel 2:10-11). In Zechariah: I will encamp at my house from the
army, on account of him who passeth by, and on account of him who goeth
away, lest the extortioner should pass over them (Zech. 9:8). In John:
Gog and Magog went up over the plain of the earth, and compassed the
camp of the saints about, and the beloved city; but fire came up from
God and consumed them (Rev. 20:9); "Gog and Magog" denote those who are
in external worship that is separated from internal and made idolatrous
(n. 1151); the "plain of the earth" denotes the truth of the church
(that a "plain" is the truth which is of doctrine may be seen above, n.
2450; and that the "earth" is the church, n. 556, 662, 1066, 1067, 1850,
2117, 2118, 3355); the "camp of the saints" denotes the heaven or
kingdom of the Lord on the earth, which is the church. \[4\] As most
things in the Word have also an opposite sense, so likewise has a
"camp," which then signifies evils and falsities, consequently hell; as
in David: Though the evil should encamp against me, my heart shall not
fear (Ps. 27:3). In the same: God hath scattered the bones of them that
encamp against me; thou hast put them to shame, because God hath
rejected them (Ps. 53:5). By the camp of Assyria, in which the angel of
Jehovah smote a hundred and eighty-five thousand (Isa. 37:36), nothing
else is meant; and the same by the camp of the Egyptians (Exod. 14:20).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4237.">4237.</span></span>

And he called the name of that place Mahanaim. That this signifies the
quality of the state, is evident from the signification of "calling a
name," as being quality (see n. 144, 145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 3421); and
from the signification of "place" as being state (n. 2625, 2837, 3356,
3387). In the original language "Mahanaim" means "two camps;" and "two
camps" signify both heavens, or both kingdoms of the Lord, the celestial
and the spiritual; and in the supreme sense the Lord's Divine celestial
and Divine spiritual. Hence it is evident that the quality of the Lord's
state when His natural was being enlightened by spiritual and celestial
good, is signified by "Mahanaim." But this quality of the state cannot
be described, because the Divine states which the Lord had when He made
the human in Himself Divine, do not fall into any human apprehension,
nor even into angelic, except by means of appearances enlightened by the
light of heaven which is from the Lord; and by means of the states of
man's regeneration; for the regeneration of man is an image of the
Lord's glorification (n. 3138, 3212, 3296, 3490).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4238.">4238.</span></span>

Verses 3-5. And Jacob sent messengers before him, to Esau his brother
unto the land of Seir, the field of Edom. And he commanded them, saying,
Thus shall ye say unto my lord Esau: Thus saith thy servant Jacob, I
have sojourned with Laban, and have tarried until now. And I had ox and
ass, flock, and manservant and handmaid; and I send to tell my lord, to
find grace in thine eyes. "And Jacob sent messengers before him, to Esau
his brother," signifies the first communication with celestial good;
"unto the land of Seir," signifies celestial natural good; "the field of
Edom," signifies the derivative truth; "and he commanded them, saying,
Thus shall ye say unto my lord Esau," signifies the first acknowledgment
of good as being in the higher place; "I have sojourned with Laban, and
have tarried until now," signifies that He had imbued Himself with the
good signified by "Laban;" "and I had ox and ass, and flock, and
manservant and handmaid," signifies acquisitions therein in their order;
"and I send to tell my lord, to find grace in thine eyes," signifies
instruction concerning His state, and also the condescension and
humiliation of truth in the presence of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4239.">4239.</span></span>

And Jacob sent messengers before him, to Esau his brother. That this
signifies the first communication with celestial good, is evident from
the signification of "sending messengers," as being to communicate; and
from the representation of Esau, as being celestial good in the natural
(see n. 3300, 3302, 3494, 3504, 3527, 3576, 3599, 3669). As before said
(n. 4234), the subject here treated of is the conjunction of the truth
Divine of the natural (which is "Jacob,") with the good Divine therein
(which is "Esau"), and therefore the enlightenment of the natural from
the Divine was first treated of (n. 4235); and here there is treated of
the first communication, which is signified by Jacob's sending
messengers to Esau his brother. (That in the Word good and truth are
called "brothers," see n. 367, 3303).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4240.">4240.</span></span>

Unto the land of Seir. That this signifies celestial natural good, is
evident from the signification of the "land of Seir," as being in the
supreme sense the Lord's celestial natural good. The reason why the
"land of Seir" has this signification, is that Mount Seir was a boundary
of the land of Canaan on one side (Josh. 11:16, 17); and all boundaries,
such as rivers, mountains, or lands, represented those things which were
ultimates (n. 1585, 1866, 4116); for they put on their representations
from the land of Canaan, which was in the midst, and represented the
Lord's heavenly kingdom, and in the supreme sense His Divine Human (see
n. 1607, 3038, 3481, 3705). The ultimates, which are boundaries, are
those things which are called natural; for it is in natural things that
spiritual and celestial things are terminated. Thus is it in the
heavens; for the inmost or third heaven is celestial, because it is in
love to the Lord; the middle or second heaven is spiritual, because it
is in love toward the neighbor; and the ultimate or first heaven is
celestial and spiritual natural, because it is in simple good, which is
the ultimate of order there. It is similar with the regenerate man, who
is a little heaven. From all this can now be seen whence it is that the
"land of Seir" signifies celestial natural good. Esau also, who dwelt
there, represents this good, as was shown above; and hence the same is
signified by the land where he dwelt; for lands take on the
representations of their inhabitants (n. 1675). \[2\] From all this it
is now evident what is signified in the Word by "Seir." As in Moses:
Jehovah came from Sinai, and arose from Seir unto them, He shone forth
from Mount Paran and He came from the ten thousands of holiness (Deut.
33:2-3). In the song of Deborah and Barak in the book of Judges: O
Jehovah, when thou wentest forth out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of
the field of Edom, the earth trembled, the heavens also dropped, the
clouds also dropped water, the mountains flowed down, this Sinai, before
Jehovah the God of Israel (Judg. 5:4-5). In the prophecy of Balaam: I
see Him, but not now; I behold Him, but not nigh; there shall arise a
star out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise up out of Israel; and Edom
shall be an inheritance; Seir also shall be an inheritance of his
enemies, and Israel maketh strength (Num. 24:17-18). Everyone can see
that in these passages "Seir" signifies something of the Lord, for it is
said that Jehovah "arose from Seir," that He "went forth out of Seir,
and marched out of the field of Edom," and that "Edom and Seir shall be
an inheritance." Yet what of the Lord it signifies, no one can know
except from the internal sense of the Word; but that it is the Lord's
Divine Human, and specifically the Divine natural as to good, may be
seen from what has been said above. To "arise," and to "go forth out of
Seir" denote that He made even His natural Divine, in order that from
this also there might be light, that is, intelligence and wisdom; and
that in this way He might become Jehovah, not only as to His Human
Rational, but also as to His Human Natural; and therefore it is said,
"Jehovah arose from Seir," and "Jehovah went forth out of Seir." (That
the Lord is Jehovah may be seen above, n. 1343, 1736, 2004, 2005, 2018,
2025, 2156, 2329, 2921, 3023, 3035.) The "prophecy concerning Dumah" in
Isaiah involves a like meaning: He calleth unto me out of Seir,
Watchman, what of the night; watchman, what of the night? The watchman
said, The morning cometh, and also the night (Isa. 21:11-12). \[3\] By
the "land of Seir" in the relative sense is properly signified the
Lord's kingdom with those who are out of the church, that is, with the
Gentiles, when the church is being set up among them, on the former or
old church falling away from charity and faith. That those who are in
darkness then have light is evident from many passages in the Word. This
is properly signified by "arising from Seir," and "going forth out of
Seir, and marching out of the field of Edom," and by "Seir being an
inheritance;" as also by the above words in Isaiah: "He calleth unto me
out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? The watchman said, The morning
cometh, and also the night;" "the morning cometh" denotes the Lord's
advent (n. 2405, 2780), and the consequent enlightenment to those who
are in night (that is, in ignorance), but enlightenment from the Lord's
Divine natural (n. 4211). As most of the things in the Word have also an
opposite sense, so likewise has "Seir;" as in Ezekiel 25:8, 9; 35:2-15,
and occasionally in the historicals of the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4241.">4241.</span></span>

The field of Edom. That this signifies the derivative truth (that is,
truth from good) is evident from the signification of the "field of
Edom," as being the Lord's Divine natural as to good, with which are
conjoined the doctrinal things of truth, or truths (see n. 3302, 3322).
The "derivative truths," or those which are from good, are distinct from
the truths from which is good. The truths from which is good are those
with which man imbues himself before regeneration; but the truths which
are from good are those with which he imbues himself after regeneration,
for after regeneration truths proceed from good, because the man then
perceives and knows from good that they are true. Such truth, thus the
truth of good, is what is signified by the "field of Edom;" as also in
the passage cited above from the book of Judges: "O Jehovah, when Thou
wentest forth out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom"
(Judg. 5:4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4242.">4242.</span></span>

And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye say unto my lord Esau. That
this signifies the first acknowledgment of good as being in the higher
place, may be seen from the signification here of "commanding the
messengers to say," as being reflection and the consequent perception
that it is so (see n. 3661, 3682), consequently acknowledgment; and from
the representation of Esau, as being good (n. 4234, 4239). That good was
in the higher place is signified by his not calling Esau his "brother,"
but his "lord," and also (as follows) by his calling himself his
"servant," and afterwards speaking in the same manner. (That while man
is being regenerated truth is apparently in the first place and good in
the second; but good in the first place and truth in the second when he
has been regenerated, may be seen above, n. 1904, 2063, 2189, 2697,
2979, 3286, 3288, 3310, 3325, 3330, 3332, 3336, 3470, 3509, 3539, 3548,
3556, 3563, 3570, 3576, 3579, 3603, 3701.) This is also what is meant by
the prophetic utterance of Isaac the father to Esau his son: By thy
sword shalt thou live, and thou shalt serve thy brother; and it shall
come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break
his yoke from off thy neck (Gen. 27:40). It is the inversion of state
foretold in these prophetic words which is treated of in the present
chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4243.">4243.</span></span>

I have sojourned with Laban, and have tarried until now. That this
signifies that He had imbued Himself with the good signified by "Laban,"
is evident from the representation of Laban, as being mediate good, that
is, good not genuine, but still serving to introduce genuine truths and
goods (see n. 3974, 3982, 3986, 4063); from the signification of
"sojourning," as being to be instructed (see n. 1463, 2025); and from
the signification of "tarrying" or "staying," as being predicated of a
life of truth with good (n. 3613); here being to imbue with. Hence it is
evident that by the words, "I have sojourned with Laban, and have
tarried until now," is signified that He had imbued Himself with the
good signified by Laban. \[2\] The case herein is this: Truth cannot be
implanted in good except by mediate things, such as have been treated of
in the preceding chapters, in which is described Jacob's sojourning and
tarrying with Laban, and his acquisition of a flock there. In the
present chapter is described the process of conjunction, and thus the
inversion of state, in the order which exists when truth is being made
subordinate to good. Truth is apparently in the first place, when a man
is learning truth from affection, but does not yet live so much in
accordance with it. But good is in the first place when he lives
according to the truth which he has learned from affection; for truth
then becomes good, inasmuch as the man then believes it to be good to do
according to the truth. They who have been regenerated are in this good;
and they also who have conscience, that is, who no longer reasoned
whether a thing is true, but do it because it is true, and thus have
imbued themselves with it in faith and in life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4244.">4244.</span></span>

And I had ox and ass, flock and manservant and handmaid. That this
signifies acquisitions therein in their order, is evident from the
signification of "ox and ass, flock and man-servant and handmaid" as
being instrumental goods and truths both exterior and interior, thus
acquisitions in their order. That an "ox" is exterior natural good, and
an "ass" exterior natural truth, may be seen above, n. 2781; and that a
"flock" is interior natural good, a "manservant" its truth, and a
"handmaid" the affection of this truth, is evident from the
signification of each, as explained several times above. These goods and
truths are the acquisitions here treated of, and that they are named in
their order, is manifest; for the exterior are the ox and the ass; and
the interior are the flock, the manservant, and the handmaid.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4245.">4245.</span></span>

And I send to tell my lord, to find grace in thine eyes. That this
signifies instruction concerning His state, and also the condescension
and humiliation of truth in the presence of good, is evident from the
signification of "sending to tell," as being to instruct concerning
one's state. That there then follow condescension and humiliation of
truth in the presence of good, is manifest; for Jacob calls him his
"lord," and says, "to find grace in thine eyes," which are words of
condescension and humiliation. There is here described the nature of the
state when the inversion is taking place, that is, when truth is being
made subordinate to good, or when they who have been in the affection of
truth are beginning to be in the affection of good. But that there is
such inversion and subordination is not apparent to any but those who
have been regenerated, and to those only of the regenerated who reflect.
There are few at this day who are being regenerated, and still fewer who
reflect; for which reason the things here said about truth and good
cannot but be obscure, and perchance of such a nature as not to be
acknowledged; especially with those who put the truths of faith in the
first place, and the good of charity in the second; and who consequently
think much about doctrinal things, but not about the goods of charity;
and think of eternal salvation as being from the former, but not from
the latter. They who think in this manner can in no wise know, still
less perceive, that the truth of faith is subordinated to the good of
charity. The things which man thinks, and from which he thinks, affect
him. If he should think from the goods of charity, he would then plainly
see that the truths of faith are in the second place and he would then
also see the truths themselves as in light; for the good of charity is
like a flame that gives light, and thus enlightens each and all things
which the man had before supposed to be true; and he would also perceive
how falsities had intermingled themselves, and had put on the appearance
of being truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4246.">4246.</span></span>

Verses 6-8. And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy
brother, to Esau, and moreover he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred
men with him. And Jacob feared exceedingly, and was distressed; and he
halved the people that was with him, and the flock, and the herd, and
the camels, into two camps. And he said, If Esau come to the one camp,
and smite it, then there will be a camp left for escape. "And the
messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother, to Esau,
and moreover he cometh to meet thee," signifies that good flows in
continually, so as to appropriate to itself; "and four hundred men with
him," signifies its state now, that it may take the prior place; "and
Jacob feared exceedingly, and was distressed," signifies the state when
it is being changed; "and he halved the people that was with him, and
the flock, and the herd, and the camels, into two camps," signifies the
preparation and disposal of the truths and goods in the natural to
receive the good represented by Esau; "and he said, If Esau come to the
one camp, and smite it, then there will be a camp left for escape,"
signifies according to every event.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4247.">4247.</span></span>

And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother, to
Esau, and moreover he cometh to meet thee. That this signifies that good
flows in continually, so as to appropriate to itself (namely, truths),
is evident from the signification of "brother," here Esau, as being
good, (namely, that of the Lord's Divine natural, of which above); and
from the signification of "coming to meet," as being to flow in
(concerning which in what follows); and as influx is signified, so is
appropriation. \[2\] From what has been said several times before on
this subject, it may be seen how the case is with good and truth, and
with the influx of good into truth, and with the appropriation of truth
by good, namely, that good is continually flowing in, and that truth
receives it, for truths are the vessels of good. The Divine good cannot
be applied to any other vessels than genuine truths, for they correspond
to each other. When a man is in the affection of truth (in which he is
in the beginning before he begins to be regenerated), even then good is
continually flowing in, but as yet has no vessels (that is, truths) into
which to apply itself (that is, to be appropriated); for in the
beginning of regeneration man is not as yet in knowledges. At that time,
however, as good is continually flowing in, it produces the affection of
truth; which is from no other source than the continual endeavor of
Divine good to flow in. From this it is evident that even at that time
good is in the first place, and acts the principal part, although it
appears as if it were truth that did this. But when a man is being
regenerated (which takes place in adult age when he is in knowledges),
good then manifests itself; for the man is not then so much in the
affection of knowing truth, as in the affection of doing it. Heretofore
truth had been in his understanding, but now it is in his will; and when
it is in the will, it is in the man; for the will constitutes the man
himself. Such is the constant circle in man that everything of knowledge
is insinuated through the sight or through the hearing into the thought,
and from this into the will, and from the will through the thought into
act. Or again from the memory, which is like an internal eye, or
internal sight, there is a similar circle-from this sight through the
thought into the will, and from the will through the thought into act;
or if anything hinders, into the endeavor to act, which, as soon as that
which hindered is removed, goes forth into act. \[3\] From this it is
evident how the case is with influx, and with the appropriation of truth
by good, namely, that first of all the truths of faith are insinuated
through the hearing or through the sight, and are then stored up in the
memory; from which they are successively elevated into knowledge, and at
last flow into the will, and when in this they proceed thence through
thought into act; and if they cannot go into act, they are in endeavor,
which is itself an internal act, and whenever there is an opportunity
this becomes an external act. Be it known, however, that while there is
this circle, nevertheless it is good which produces the circle; for the
life which is from the Lord does not flow in except into good, thus
through good, and this from the inmosts. That the life which flows in
through the inmosts produces this circle, may be seen by everyone, for
without life nothing is produced; and as the life which is from the Lord
does not flow in except into good and through good, it follows that good
is that which produces; and that it flows into truths, and appropriates
them to itself, insofar as the man is in the knowledges of truth, and is
at the same time desirous to receive them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4248.">4248.</span></span>

And four hundred men with him. That this signifies its state now, that
it may take the prior place, is evident from the signification of "four
hundred," as properly being temptations and their duration (see n. 2959,
2966). This is the state which is meant, as may be seen from what
follows, namely, that "he feared exceedingly, and was distressed," and
therefore "halved his camp into two" (verses 7-8); and also that out of
fear he made ardent supplication to Jehovah (verses 9-12); and finally
wrestled with an angel, by which wrestling is signified temptation, as
will be evident from the explication of this wrestling in what follows
in this chapter. When the state with the man who is being regenerated is
being inverted, that is, when good takes the first place, then come
temptations. Before this time the man cannot undergo them, because he is
not yet in the knowledges wherewith to defend himself, and to which he
may have recourse for comfort. For this reason also no one undergoes
temptations until he has arrived at adult age. Temptations are what
unite truths to good (see n. 2272, 3318, 3696, 3928). From this it is
manifest that by the "four hundred men with him" is signified the state,
that good may take the prior place.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4249.">4249.</span></span>

And Jacob feared exceedingly, and was distressed. That this signifies
the state when it is being changed, is evident from the fact that fear
and distress are what is first in temptations, and that when the state
is being inverted or changed these take precedence. The arcana which lie
hidden more at large in what is here said that Esau went to meet Jacob
with four hundred men, and that Jacob therefore feared and was
distressed-cannot easily be set forth to the apprehension, for they are
too interior. This only may be presented: that when good is taking the
prior place and is subordinating truths to itself, which takes place
when the man is undergoing spiritual temptations, the good that then
flows in from within is attended with very many truths which have been
stored up in his interior man. These cannot come to his mental view and
apprehension until good acts the first part, for then the natural begins
to be enlightened by good, whence it becomes apparent what things in it
are in accord, and what are discordant, from which come the fear and
distress that precede spiritual temptation. For spiritual temptation
acts upon the conscience, which is of the interior man; and therefore
when he enters into this temptation the man does not know whence come
such fear and distress, although the angels with him know this well; for
the temptation comes from the angels holding the man in goods and truths
while evil spirits are holding him in evils and falsities. \[2\] For the
things that come forth with the spirits and angels who are with a man
are perceived by the man exactly as if they were in him; for while a man
is living in the body, and does not believe that all things flow in, he
supposes that the things which come forth interiorly are not produced by
causes outside of him, but that all the causes are within him, and are
his very own; yet such is not the case. For whatever a man thinks and
whatever he wills (that is, his every thought and his every affection)
are either from hell or from heaven. When he thinks and wills evils, and
is delighted with the consequent falsities, he may know that his
thoughts and affections are from hell; and while he is thinking and
willing goods, and is delighted with the derivative truths, he may know
that they are from heaven, that is, through heaven from the Lord. But
the thoughts and affections that appertain to a man appear for the most
part under another aspect; as for example, the combat of evil spirits
with angels that arises from the things which appertain to a man who is
to be regenerated, appears under the aspect of fear and distress, and of
temptation. \[3\] These statements cannot but appear to man as
paradoxes, because almost every man of the church at this day believes
that all the truth which he thinks, and the good which he wills and
does, are from himself, although he says otherwise when he speaks from
the doctrine of faith. Nay, of such a nature is man that if anyone
should say to him that there are evil spirits from hell who are flowing
into his thought and will when he thinks and wills evils, and angels
from heaven when he thinks and wills goods, he would stand amazed that
anyone should maintain such a thing; for he would say that he feels life
in himself, and thinks from himself and wills from himself. From this
feeling in himself he forms his belief, and not from his doctrine; when
yet the doctrine is true, but the feeling fallacious. It has been given
me to know this from an almost continual experience of many years, and
so to know it that no doubt whatever remains.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4250.">4250.</span></span>

And he halved the people that was with him, and the flock, and the herd,
and the camels, into two camps. That this signifies the preparation and
disposal of the truths and goods in the natural to receive the good
represented by Esau, is evident from the signification of "people," as
being truths, and also falsities (see n. 1259, 1260, 3581); from the
signification of "flock," as being interior goods, and also things not
good; from the signification of "herd," as being exterior goods, and
also things not good (n. 2566, 4244); from the signification of
"camels," as being exterior or general truths, and also things not true
(n. 3048, 3071, 3143, 3145); and from the signification of "camps," as
being order in a good sense genuine order, and in the opposite sense
order not genuine (see n. 4236). That by "to halve" is here meant to
divide into two, and thus to dispose one's self to receive, is manifest.
How these things are circumstanced is evident from what was said just
above, namely, that when good flows in, as is the case when the order is
being inverted and good is taking the prior place, the natural is then
enlightened, and it is seen what is genuine truth and good therein, and
what not genuine; and the one kind is also discerned from the other, and
thus some are retained, while others are removed; and hence the order
becomes altogether different from what it had been before. For when good
rules it is attended with this effect, because truths are then nothing
but ministers and servants, and are disposed more and more nearly in
accordance with heavenly order, according to the reception of good by
truths, and also according to the quality of the good; for good takes
its quality from truths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[4227-1](ac085.htm#fr_121.md) That is, with "a
quadruplicate step, so that the sound is like a quadruped" (Spiritual
Experiences 1031, 1127). The reason why the speech and action of such
spirits is attended with this bestial sound is doubtless on account of
the abnormal development within them of what is merely natural. A
quadruped has no hands, but only feet, and the feet correspond to that
which is lowest and most external in man. \[Reviser.\] 4228. The subject
of the grand man and correspondence will be continued at the end of the
following chapter, where correspondence with the senses in general will
be treated of.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[4229-1](ac085.htm#fr_122.md) That is, of the
original Latin work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4251-4300](ac086.md)
