[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac094)  [Next](ac096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="4701.">4701.</span></span>

Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down
ourselves to thee to the earth? That this signifies will the church
adore, is evident from the signification of "coming to bow down," as
being to be about to adore (see n. 4689, 4698); and from the
signification of "father" (who here is "I"), and "mother" and
"brethren," as being the church, here the Jewish Church, as just shown.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4702.">4702.</span></span>

And his brethren envied him. That this signifies their <span
id="fr_128"></span>[4702-1](#fn_128.md) aversion is evident from the
signification of "envying," as also being aversion, like "to hate," and
"not to speak to him for peace," as above (n. 4681); for in the original
the word "envying" signifies also being jealous and quarreling; and as
jealousy and quarreling are the effects of hatred, aversion also is
signified by the same word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4703.">4703.</span></span>

But his father kept the word. That this signifies that truth remained in
their religiosity, is evident from the signification here of "father" as
being the Jewish religion derived from the ancient (of which above, n.
4700); and from the signification of "keeping," as being to preserve
inwardly, thus to remain; and from the signification of "word," as being
truth (of which above, n. 4692). What is further meant by truth
remaining in their religiosity may be seen above (n. 4700).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4704.">4704.</span></span>

Verses 12-17. And his brethren went to feed the flock of their father in
Shechem. And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock
in Shechem? Come, and I will send thee unto them. And he said to him,
Behold me! And he said to him, Go I pray see the peace of thy brethren,
and the peace of the flock, and bring me word again. And he sent him out
of the valley of Hebron, and he came to Shechem. And a man found him,
and behold he was wandering in the field; and the man asked him, saying,
What seekest thou? And he said, I seek my brethren, tell me I pray where
they are feeding the flock. And the man said, They are departed hence,
for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his
brethren, and found them in Dothan. "And his brethren went to feed the
flock," signifies those who teach from faith; "of their father,"
signifies of the Ancient and of the Primitive Church; "in Shechem,"
signifies the first rudiments; "and Israel said unto Joseph," signifies
perception from the Divine spiritual; "Do not thy brethren feed the
flock in Shechem?" signifies that they are teaching; "come, and I will
send thee unto them" signifies that it should teach Divine spiritual
goods; "and he said to him, Behold me," signifies affirmation; "and he
said to him, Go I pray see the peace of thy brethren," signifies every
coming of the Lord, and perception how it was with those who taught;
"and the peace of the flock," signifies how it was with those who were
learning, or the church; "and bring me word again," signifies knowledge;
"and he sent him out of the valley of Hebron," signifies from the
natural and sensuous Divine; "and he came to Shechem," signifies the
knowledge of general doctrinals; "and a man found him, and behold he was
wandering in the field," signifies that they were fallen away from the
general truth of the church; "and the man asked him, saying, What
seekest thou?" signifies foresight; "and he said, I seek my brethren,
tell me I pray where they are feeding the flock," signifies the
knowledge of how the case was, and in what state they were; "and the man
said, They are departed hence, for I heard them say, Let us go to
Dothan," signifies that they betook themselves from generals to special
things of doctrine; "and Joseph went after his brethren, and found them
in Dothan," signifies that they were in the special things of false
principles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4705.">4705.</span></span>

And his brethren went to feed the flock. That this signifies those who
teach from faith, is evident from the signification of Joseph's
"brethren," as being those in the church who are of faith (of whom
above, n. 4665, 4671, 4679, 4690); and from the signification of
"feeding the flock," as being to teach (n. 343, 3767, 3768, 3772, 3783).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4706.">4706.</span></span>

Of their father. That this signifies of the Ancient and of the Primitive
Church, is evident from the signification here of "father," or Jacob, as
being the Ancient Church (of which above, n. 4680); that the Primitive
Christian Church is likewise signified; may also be seen above (n.
4690). By the Primitive Church is meant the Christian Church in its
beginning. In general four churches distinct from one another are
treated of in the Word. There is the church which existed before the
flood and was named Man; this is called the Most Ancient Church. Next is
the one that existed after the flood, which is called the Ancient
Church. Then followed that with the posterity of Jacob, which was not a
church, but the representative of a church; which representative is also
called a religiosity. And there is the one that was set up after the
Lord's coming, which is called the Christian Church. It is this in its
beginning that is called the Primitive Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4707.">4707.</span></span>

In Shechem. That this signifies the first rudiments, is evident from the
signification of "Shechem," as being truth derived from the ancient
Divine stock (n. 4399, 4454), and as being doctrine (n. 4472, 4473),
here the first rudiments of doctrine concerning faith; for the
predication of a name is according to the subject in its series. The
first rudiments are also the generals of doctrinals; the generals being
what are received first, and the specific things then following.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4708.">4708.</span></span>

And Israel said unto Joseph. That this signifies perception from the
Divine spiritual, is evident from the signification of "saying" in the
historicals of the Word as being perception (n. 1791, 1815, 1819, 1822,
1898, 1919, 2080, 2619, 2862, 3395, 3509); and from the representation
of Joseph as being the Divine spiritual (n. 4669).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4709.">4709.</span></span>

Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem? That this signifies that
they are teaching, is evident from the signification of "feeding the
flock" as being to teach (of which just above, n. 4705); and from the
signification of "Shechem" as being the first rudiments of doctrine
concerning faith (n. 4707).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4710.">4710.</span></span>

Come, and I will send thee unto them. That this signifies that it should
teach Divine spiritual goods, is evident from the representation of
Joseph as being the Lord's Divine spiritual (n. 4669, 4708). When this
is said to be "sent," it denotes to teach Divine spiritual goods; for in
the internal sense "to be sent" is to go forth and to proceed (n. 2397),
and also at the same time to teach; here therefore it is to teach the
Divine spiritual goods which proceed from the Lord's Divine spiritual.
Divine spiritual goods are those which are of love and charity; but
Divine spiritual truths are those which are of the faith thence. One who
teaches the former, teaches also the latter; for the latter are from the
former and concerning them. That in the internal sense "to be sent" is
to proceed and to teach, is evident from many passages in the Word, as
where it is often said of the Lord that He was "sent" by the Father,
whereby is signified that He proceeded from Him, that is, from the
Divine good; and also that the Lord "sends" the Comforter, or the Spirit
of Truth, whereby is signified that holy truth proceeds from Him. The
prophets also were "sent," by which is signified that they taught what
proceeds from the Lord. Everyone may confirm these things from the Word,
where they often occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4711.">4711.</span></span>

And he said to him, Behold me! That this signifies affirmation, is
evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4712.">4712.</span></span>

And he said to him, Go I pray see the peace of thy brethren. That this
signifies every coming of the Lord, and perception how it was with those
who taught, is evident from the signification of "saying," as being
perception (of which just above, n. 4708); and from the signification of
"peace," as being safety (n. 4681), thus how it was with them; and from
the representation of brethren, as here being those who teach from faith
(n. 4705). From this it is plain that by these words is signified
perception how it was with those who taught. That every coming of the
Lord is also signified, is because by Joseph is represented the Lord as
to the Divine spiritual (n. 4669, 4708, 4710); and therefore when it is
said that Joseph should go and see the peace of his brethren, the coming
of the Lord is signified. By every coming is meant whenever truth from
the Word flows into the thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4713.">4713.</span></span>

And the peace of the flock. That this signifies how it was with those
who were learning, or the church, is evident from the signification of
"peace" as being how it was with them (of which just above, n. 4712);
and from the signification of a "flock" as being those who are learning.
For a "shepherd," or one who feeds the flock, denotes one who teaches
the good of charity and leads to it; and the "flock" denotes one who
learns and is led (n. 343); thus also the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4714.">4714.</span></span>

And bring me word again. That this signifies knowledge, is evident from
the signification of "bringing word again," as being to report how
matters were, thus knowledge.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4715.">4715.</span></span>

And he sent him out of the valley of Hebron. That this signifies from
the natural and sensuous Divine, is evident from the signification of
"to be sent," as being to proceed and to teach (see n. 4710); and from
the signification of a "valley" as being those things which are below
(n. 1723, 3417); and from the signification of "Hebron" as being the
Lord's church as to good (n. 2909). Thus by these words is signified
that it taught the lower things of the church, and this because they did
not comprehend higher things. For he who teaches faith, and not charity,
is unable to notice the higher or interior things of the church; because
he has nothing to guide him, and to dictate whether this or that is of
faith, or is true. But if he teaches charity, he then has good, and this
is to him a dictate and guides him; for all truth is from good and
treats of good, or what is the same, everything of faith is from charity
and treats of charity. Everyone, from mere natural light, can know that
everything of doctrine has regard to life. \[2\] That by these words is
signified from the natural and sensuous Divine, is the higher sense; for
the lower things of the church are said to be from the Lord's natural
and sensuous Divine; not that in the Lord these things are lower,
because in the Lord and in His Divine Human all is infinite, inasmuch as
He is Jehovah as to each essence (n. 2156, 2329, 2921, 3023), but
because it is so in man. For those who are sensuous men apprehend
sensuously the things which are in the Lord and from Him, and those who
are natural apprehend them naturally. It is so said because of the
quality of those who receive. But those who are celestial men, and
thence truly rational, perceive interior things, and it is said of them
that they are taught from the Lord's rational Divine. This as before
said is the higher sense signified by the words. \[3\] That a "valley"
is the lower things of the church, is evident from other passages in the
Word, as in Isaiah: The prophecy of the valley of vision. What hast thou
here, that thou art wholly gone up to the housetops? It is a day of
tumult, and of treading down, and of perplexity, to the Lord Jehovih
Zebaoth, in the valley of vision (Isa. 22:1, 5); the "valley of vision"
denotes phantasies concerning spiritual things from sensuous, thus from
lower things. Again: The choice of thy valleys were full of chariots,
and the horsemen placing placed themselves at the gate (Isa. 22:7); the
"choice of the valleys" denotes good and true things in the natural or
external man. Again: The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare
ye the way of Jehovah, make level in the solitude a pathway for our God;
every valley shall be exalted (Isa. 40:3-4); a "valley" denotes low
things. \[4\] In Jeremiah: How sayest thou, I am not defiled, I have not
gone after the Baalim? See thy way in the valley, acknowledge what thou
hast done (Jer. 2:23); where "valley" denotes things of the memory and
of the senses, which are lower things by which they perverted truths.
Again: I am against thee O inhabitress of the valley, and rock of the
plain, saith Jehovah; who say, Who will come down against us? (Jer.
21:13); the "inhabitress of the valley and rock of the plain" denote
faith in which there is no charity. Again: The waster shall come upon
every city, and no city shall escape; but the valley shall perish, and
the plain shall be destroyed (Jer. 48:8); with a similar meaning. Again:
Thou shalt not glory in the valleys; thy valley hath flowed away, O
perverse daughter (Jer. 49:4); "valley" denotes external things in
worship, which are also the lowest. \[5\] In Ezekiel: I will give to Gog
a place for burial in Israel, the valley of them that pass through, and
there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude; whence they shall call
it, The valley of the multitude of Gog (Ezek. 39:11, 15); "Gog" denotes
those who are in external worship without internal (n. 1151), whence his
burial place is called "the valley of them that pass through," and "the
valley of the multitude of Gog." In David: Yea, when I walk through the
valley of shadow I will fear no evil (Ps. 23:4); where the "valley of
shadow" denotes lower things, which are relatively in shade. \[6\] As
valleys were between mountains and hills, and below them, therefore by
"valleys" are signified the lower or exterior things of the church,
because by hills and mountains are signified its higher or interior
things, by "hills" things which are of charity, and by "mountains" those
which are of love to the Lord (n. 795, 1430, 2722, 4210); and as by the
land of Canaan is signified the Lord's kingdom and His church, therefore
it is called "a land of mountains and valleys, that drinketh water of
the rain of heaven" (Deut. 11:11). That Joseph is here said to have been
sent out of the valley of Hebron is because the mission was to those who
taught concerning faith (see n. 4705); for those who are in faith, and
not in charity, are in lower things; because with them faith is only in
the memory and thence in the mouth, but not in the heart and thence in
the work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4716.">4716.</span></span>

And he came to Shechem. That this signifies knowledge of general
doctrinals, is evident from the signification of "Shechem," as being the
first rudiments, or what is the same thing, the generals of doctrinals
(n. 4707).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4717.">4717.</span></span>

And a man found him, and behold he was wandering in the field. That this
signifies that they were fallen away from the general truth of the
church, is evident from the signification of "wandering in the field,"
as being to fall away from the general truth of the church; for a
"field" is the church as to good (n. 2971, 3196, 3766), and a "man of
the field" is the good of life from doctrinals (n. 3310). It is said a
"man," because by a "man" \[vir\] is signified the truth of the church
(n. 3134). Those are said to fall away from the general truth of the
church who acknowledge the Lord, but not His Human as Divine; and also
those who acknowledge faith as essential, but not charity. Each is a
general truth of the church, and when a man recedes from it he falls
away from general truth; and whoever does this, soon falls away from
specific truths (of which in what follows); just as when anyone starts
with a false principle and from it deduces consequences, these also
become false, because the principle rules in the consequents, and by
these the false principle is also strengthened.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4718.">4718.</span></span>

And the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou? That this signifies
foresight, may be seen from the series, for the series involves
foresight.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4719.">4719.</span></span>

And he said, I seek my brethren; tell me I pray where they are feeding
the flock? That this signifies knowledge of how the case was, and what
state they were in; proximately, according to the words, how it was with
those who taught from faith, and to learn their state, is evident; for
by the "brethren" are signified those who teach from faith (see n.
4712); how it was with them is signified by "seeking them," or "seeing
their peace" (n. 4712, 4713); by "where" is signified state, for in the
internal sense everything relating to place denotes state (n. 2625,
2837, 3356, 3387, 4321); and by "those who feed" are signified those who
teach (n. 343, 3767, 3768, 3772, 3783).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4720.">4720.</span></span>

And the man said, They are departed hence, for I heard them say, Let us
go to Dothan. That this signifies that they betook themselves from
generals to special things of doctrine, is evident from the
signification of "departing," as being to betake themselves; and from
the signification of "from Shechem," which is the place they departed
from, as being from the generals of doctrine (n. 4707, 4716); and from
the signification of "Dothan," as being the special things of doctrine.
That "Dothan" is the special things of doctrine cannot so well be
confirmed from other passages in the Word, because it is mentioned in
the second book of Kings only (2 Kings 6:13), where it is related that
the king of Syria sent chariots and horsemen and a great army to Dothan
to take Elisha, and that they were smitten with blindness and led by
Elisha to Samaria. \[2\] As all the historicals of the Word are
representative of the celestial and spiritual things of the Lord's
kingdom, so also is this, and by the king of Syria are represented those
who are in the knowledges of truth (n. 1232, 1234, 3249, 3664, 3680,
4112); here in the opposite sense those who are in the knowledges of
what is not true; by Elisha is represented the Word of the Lord (n.
2762); by Dothan, doctrinals from the Word; by the chariots and horsemen
and the great army which the king of Syria sent, are signified falsities
of doctrine; by the mountain full of horses and chariots of fire round
about Elisha, which his young man saw, are signified the good and true
things of doctrine from the Word (n. 2762); by the blindness with which
those were smitten who were sent thither by the king of Syria, are
signified the falsities themselves (n. 2383); and by their being led by
Elisha to Samaria, where their eyes were opened, is signified
instruction by means of the Word. Such things are involved in this
history, in which by Dothan, where Elisha was, are signified doctrinal
things of good and truth from the Word. Its signification in the present
verse is similar, the special things of doctrine being nothing else; but
here the special things of false principles are signified, because the
subject treated of is the church that begins from faith, which it thus
separates from charity from the very beginning. All the doctrinals which
are then formed savor of the general principle, thus of faith without
charity; whence come the falsities which are the special things of the
false principles. \[3\] Every church in its beginning knows only the
generals of doctrine, for it is then in its simplicity, and as it were
in its childhood; but in the course of time it adds particulars, which
in part are confirmations of the generals, and in part additions (which,
however, are not contrary to the generals), and also explanations to
reconcile plain contradictions and to avoid violence to the dictates of
common sense. All these things are nevertheless the special things of
false principles; for all things of every doctrine which recognize the
general principle as father, have relation to one another as in a kind
of fellowship, and are conjoined as if by relationships of blood and of
marriage. It is plain from this that when the general principle is
false, all things savor of falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4721.">4721.</span></span>

And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan. That this
signifies that they were in the special things of false principles, is
evident from the representation of Joseph, as being the Lord as to
Divine truth (see n. 4669); from the representation of his brethren, as
being the church that turns away from charity to faith, and at last to
faith separate (n. 4665, 4671, 4679, 4680, 4690); and from the
signification of "Dothan," as being the special things of false
principles (of which just above, n. 4720). From this it is plain that by
these words is signified that it found them in the special things of
false principles. \[2\] That it may be known what is meant by the
special things of false principles, let us take for illustration some of
the doctrinals of a church which acknowledges faith alone as a
principle, as that man is justified by faith alone, that then all sins
are wiped away from him, that he may be saved by faith alone even in the
last hour of his life, that salvation is merely admission into heaven
through grace, that children also are saved by faith, that the Gentiles
because they have no faith are not saved; besides many others. These and
the like are the special things belonging to the principle of faith
alone. But if the church would acknowledge as its principle the life of
faith, it would acknowledge charity toward the neighbor and love to the
Lord, consequently the works of charity and of love, and then all these
special things would fall to pieces; and instead of justification it
would acknowledge regeneration, in regard to which the Lord says in
John, "Except a man be born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God"
(John 3:3); and it would acknowledge that regeneration is effected by a
life of faith, but not by faith separate. Neither would it profess that
all sins are then wiped away from man, but that it is of the Lord's
mercy that he is withheld from them, and kept in good and thence in
truth; thus that all good is from the Lord, and all evil from himself.
Nor would the church profess that man may be saved by faith in the last
hour of his life, but by the life of faith which abides with him.
Neither would it profess that salvation is mere admission into heaven
through grace, for heaven is denied by the Lord to no one; but it would
acknowledge that if one's life is not such that he can be with angels,
he flees from heaven of his own will (n. 4674). Nor would it profess
that children are saved by faith, but that in the other life they are
instructed in the goods of charity and the truths of faith by the Lord,
and so are received into heaven (n. 2289-2308). Nor would it profess
that because the Gentiles have no faith they are not saved; but that
their life remains with them as with others, and that those who have
lived in mutual charity are instructed in the goods of faith, and are
alike received into heaven, as is both wished and believed by those who
are in the good of life (n. 2589-2604); and so in many other
particulars. \[3\] The church which acknowledges faith alone as a
principle cannot know what charity is, nor even what the neighbor is,
thus not what heaven is; and it will wonder that anyone should ever say
that the happiness of the life after death and the joy in heaven is the
Divine which flows into willing well and doing well to others, and that
the happiness and the blessedness therefrom transcend all perception,
and that the reception of this influx can never be given to anyone who
has not lived a life of faith, that is, who has not been in the good of
charity. That a life of faith saves, the Lord teaches plainly in Matthew
25, verses 31 to the end, and in many other places; and hence also the
creed which is called the creed of Athanasius teaches at the end,
"Everyone shall render an account of his works; he who has done well
shall enter into life eternal, but he who has done ill into eternal
fire."

<span class="margnote"><span id="4722.">4722.</span></span>

Verses 18-22. And they saw him afar off, and before he came near unto
them, they conspired against him to cause him to die. And they said a
man to his brother, Behold this lord of dreams cometh. Come now
therefore and let us slay him, and cast him into one of the pits, and we
will say, An evil wild beast hath devoured him; and we shall see what
his dreams will be. And Reuben heard, and rescued him out of their hand,
and said, Let us not smite him, the soul. And Reuben said unto them,
Shed no blood; cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, but lay
no hand upon him; that he might rescue him out of their hand, to bring
him back to his father. "And they saw him afar off," signifies
perception of the Lord's Divine Human remotely; "and before he came near
unto them, they conspired against him to cause him to die," signifies
that they wished to extinguish the Divine spiritual which is from the
Lord's Divine Human; "and they said a man to his brother," signifies
their mutual thoughts; "behold, this lord of dreams cometh," signifies
that those things were empty; "come now therefore and let us slay him,"
signifies the extinction of the essential of doctrine concerning the
Lord's Divine Human; "and cast him into one of the pits," signifies
among falsities; "and we will say an evil wild beast hath devoured him,"
signifies a lie from a life of cupidities; "and we shall see what will
become of his dreams," signifies that the preachings concerning it would
thus be false and would appear so; "and Reuben heard," signifies
confession of the faith of the church in general; "and rescued him out
of their hand," signifies liberation; "and said let us not smite him,
the soul," signifies that it must not be extinguished, because it is the
life of religion; "and Reuben said unto them," signifies exhortation;
"shed no blood," signifies that they should not do violence to what is
holy; "cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness," signifies that
they should conceal it meanwhile among their falsities; "but lay no hand
upon him," signifies that they should not do violence to it; "that he
might rescue him out of their hand, to bring him back to his father,"
signifies that it might claim it for the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4723.">4723.</span></span>

And they saw him afar off. That this signifies perception of the Lord's
Divine Human remotely, is evident from the signification of "seeing," as
being perception (see n. 2150, 3764); from the signification of "afar
off," as being remotely; and from the representation of Joseph, who it
was that they saw afar off, as being the Lord as to Divine truth (n.
4669). That it is the Lord's Divine Human which is here meant by
"Joseph," is because this is the supreme of Divine truth. There are two
essentials which constitute the church, and hence two principal things
of doctrine - one, that the Lord's Human is Divine; the other, that love
to the Lord and charity toward the neighbor make the church, and not
faith separate from love and charity. Because these are the primary
things of Divine truth, these also are represented by Joseph; for the
same person that represents Divine truth in general, represents also the
specific things of Divine truth; but what is specifically represented,
is evident from the series.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4724.">4724.</span></span>

And before he came near into them, they conspired against him to cause
him to die. That this signifies that they wished to extinguish the
Divine spiritual which is from the Lord's Divine Human, is evident from
the signification of "conspiring," as being to will from a depraved
mind, since whatever men will from a depraved mind, they conspire to
accomplish; and from the signification of "slaying," as being to
extinguish; and from the representation of Joseph, as being the Divine
spiritual or Divine truth, as repeatedly shown above. Because Divine
truth proceeds from the Lord's Divine Human, it is therefore said,. the
Divine spiritual which is from the Lord's Divine Human. \[2\] The case
herein is this: All the Divine truth in the whole heaven proceeds from
no other source than the Lord's Divine Human. That which is from the
Divine Itself cannot flow in immediately with any angel, because it is
infinite; but only mediately through the Lord's Divine Human, as is also
meant by these words of the Lord, "No man hath seen God at any time; the
only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath set Him
forth" (John 1:18). For this reason also the Lord as to the Divine Human
is called Mediator. \[3\] This also was from eternity, for the Divine
being, without flowing through heaven and becoming thence the Divine
coming-forth, could not be communicated to any angel, still less to any
spirit, and less still to any man. That the Lord as to the Divine Itself
is the Divine being, and as to the Divine Human is the Divine
coming-forth, may be seen above (n. 4687). Neither could the Lord's
Human itself have received any influx from the Divine being, unless in
Him the Human had been made Divine; for that which receives the Divine
being must also be Divine. From these few things it may be seen that
Divine truth does not proceed immediately from the Divine Itself, but
from the Lord's Divine Human. \[4\] This also do they extinguish in
themselves who battle for faith alone and do not live a life of faith;
for they believe that the Lord's Human is purely human, not unlike the
human of another man; and hence many of them deny the Divine of the
Lord, however they may profess Him with the lips. But those who live a
life of faith, on bended knees and with humble hearts adore the Lord as
God the Savior, and do not then at all think from doctrine of the
distinction between the Divine and the human nature; and they do the
same in the Holy Supper. Hence it is plain that with them the Lord's
Divine Human is in their hearts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4725.">4725.</span></span>

And they said a man to his brother. That this signifies their mutual
thoughts, is evident from the signification of "saying," as being to
perceive and to think (n. 3395); and from the signification of "a man to
his brother," as being mutually. It was a customary form of speech with
the ancients to say "a man to his brother" when what is mutual was
signified; for the reason that a "man" signified truth (n. 3134, 3459),
and a "brother" good (n. 4121), between which there intervenes a most
intimate mutual relation; for the conjunction of truth with good and of
good with truth takes place mutually and reciprocally (n. 2731).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4726.">4726.</span></span>

Behold this lord of dreams cometh. That this signifies that those things
were empty, is evident from the signification of "dreams," as being
preachings (n. 4682), here preachings of Divine truth, because it is
said of Joseph. But because Divine truth as to its essentials is
rejected by those who are in faith alone (as was shown in regard to the
Lord's Divine Human and charity), therefore by "dreams" are here
signified empty things; for to such persons falsities appear as truths,
and truths as falsities, or if not as falsities, yet as empty things;
and the "lord of dreams" is the preacher of these. That Divine truths
appear to such persons as empty, is evident from many things-as for
example, it is a Divine truth that the Word is holy and Divinely
inspired as to every jot, and that its holiness and Divine inspiration
are in consequence of everything in it being representative and
significative of heavenly and spiritual things of the Lord's kingdom.
But when the Word is open to the internal sense, and it is taught what
its particulars represent and signify, then such as are in faith alone
reject these things as empty, saying that they are of no use; although
these heavenly and spiritual things are what would affect the internal
man with greater delight than worldly things affect the external man;
and so in many other instances.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4727.">4727.</span></span>

Come now therefore and let us slay him. That this signifies the
extinction of the essential of doctrine concerning the Lord's Divine
Human, is evident from the signification of "slaying," as being to
extinguish; and from the representation of Joseph, whom they wished to
kill, as being the Divine truth of the Lord, and specifically the
doctrine concerning His Divine Human, which has been shown above to be
an essential of doctrine (n. 4723). That the church in acknowledging
faith alone has extinguished this essential truth, is known; for which
of them believes the Lord's Human to be Divine? Do they not turn away at
the very proposition? When yet in the ancient churches it was believed
that the Lord who was to come into the world was a Divine Man, and also
when seen by them He was called Jehovah, as is plain from many passages
in the Word, but for the present only this from Isaiah will be adduced:
The voice of one crying the wilderness, Prepare ye the Way of Jehovah,
make level in the solitude a pathway for our God (Isa. 40:3). That these
words were spoken of the Lord, and that by John the Baptist the way was
prepared and a pathway made level for Him, is very evident from the
evangelists (Matt. 3:3; Mark 1:3; Luke 3:4; John 1:23); and further from
the Lord's own words, that He was one with the Father, and that the
Father was in Him, and He in the Father; also that to Him was given all
power in heaven and on earth, and that judgment belonged to Him. One who
knows even a little about power in heaven and on earth, and about
judgment, can know that they would be nothing unless He were Divine as
to the Human also. \[2\] Those who are in faith alone cannot know what
makes man new or sanctifies him, still less what made the Lord's Human
Divine; for they know nothing of love and charity, and it is love to the
Lord and charity toward the neighbor that make man new and sanctify him,
while the Divine love itself made the Lord Divine. For love is the very
being of man, and hence is his living; and it forms man according to an
image of itself, just as the soul of man, which is his interior essence,
as it were creates or fashions the body into an image, of itself; and
indeed in such a way that by means of the body it acts and has sensation
just as it wills and thinks. Thus the body is as the effect, and the
soul as the cause in which is the end; consequently the soul is the all
in the body, as the cause of the end is the all in the effect. The Human
of Him whose soul was Jehovah Himself (as was the case with the Lord,
for He was conceived of Jehovah) could not when glorified be other than
Divine. From this it is plain how greatly those err who make the Lord's
Human, after it was glorified, to be like the human of a man, when yet
it is Divine. From His Divine Human proceeds all the wisdom, all the
intelligence, and also all the light, in heaven. Whatever proceeds from
Him is holy; and the holy that is not from the Divine is not holy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4728.">4728.</span></span>

And cast him into one of the pits. That this signifies among falsities,
is evident from the signification of "pits," as being falsities. That
"pits" are falsities, is because men who have been in principles of
falsity are after death kept awhile under the lower earth, until
falsities have been removed from them, and as it were rejected to the
sides. These places are called "pits," and those who go into them are
such as must be in vastation (n. 1106-1113, 2699, 2701, 2704). It is for
this reason that by "pits" in the abstract sense, are signified
falsities. The lower earth is next under the feet and the region round
about for a short distance. Here are most persons after death, before
they are taken up into heaven. This earth is also frequently mentioned
in the Word. Beneath it are the places of vastation, which are called
"pits," and below them and round about for a considerable extent, are
hells. \[2\] From this it is in some measure plain what is meant by
"hell," what by the "lower earth," and what by a "pit," when mentioned
in the Word, as in Isaiah: Thou hast been brought down to hell, to the
sides of the pit. Thou hast been cast forth out of thy grave like an
abominable shoot, the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through
with the sword, that go down to the stones of the pit (Isa. 14:15, 19);
speaking of the king of Babylon, by whom is represented the profanation
of truth; for a "king" is truth (n. 1672, 2015, 2069, 3009, 4581), and
"Babylon" profanation (n. 1182, 1326). "Hell" is where the damned are,
and their damnation is compared to an abominable shoot, and to the
raiment of those that are slain and thrust through with the sword, that
go down to the stones of the pit. The "raiment of those that are slain"
is truth profaned; "those thrust through with the sword" are they in
whom truth has been extinguished; the "pit" is falsity which must be
vastated; "stones" are the borders, whence also they are called the
"sides," for round about the pits are hells. (That "raiment" is truth,
see above, n. 2576; that the "raiment of those that are slain" is truth
profaned, for the "blood" by which it is stained is what is profane, n.
1003; and that "those thrust through with a sword" are they in whom
truth has been extinguished, n. 4503). From this it is also plain that
without the internal sense it could not possibly be known what is here
meant. \[3\] So too in Ezekiel: When I shall bring thee down with them
that descend into the pit, to the people of an age, and shall make thee
to dwell in the earth of the lower regions, in desolations from an age,
that thou dwell not with them that go down into the pit; then will I set
adornment in the land of the living (Ezek. 26:20); "they that descend
into the pit" denote those who are sent into vastation; "not to dwell
with them that go down into the pit" means to be delivered from
falsities. \[4\] Again: That none of all the trees of the waters exalt
themselves for their stature, neither send their branch among the
tangled boughs, nor stand over them for their height, all that drink
water; they shall all be delivered unto death, to the lower earth in the
midst of the sons of men, to them that go down into the pit. I will make
the nations to shake at the sound of his ruin, when I make him go down
into hell with them that go down into the pit; and all the trees of
Eden, the choice and chief of Lebanon, all that drink waters, shall be
comforted in the lower earth (Ezek. 31:14, 16); this is said of Egypt,
by which is signified the knowledge that of itself enters into the
mysteries of faith, that is, those who so enter (n. 1164, 1165, 1186).
From what has been said above it is clear what is signified by "hell,"
by the "pit," and by the "lower earth," which are here mentioned by the
prophet; nor does it appear except from the internal sense what is
signified by the "trees of the waters," the "trees of Eden," the "branch
sent among the tangled boughs," the "choice and chief of Lebanon," and
"all that drink waters." \[5\] Again: Son of man, wail for the multitude
of Egypt, and cause her to go down, even her, and the daughters of the
august nations, unto the earth of the lower regions, with them that go
down into the pit. Asshur is there, whose graves are set in the sides of
the pit, all slain by the sword (Ezek. 32:18, 22-23); the signification
of which may be seen from what has been explained above. In David: O
Jehovah, Thou hast brought up my soul from hell; Thou hast kept me
alive, from among them that go down into the pit (Ps. 30:3). Again: I am
accounted with them that go down into the pit; I am accounted as a man
that hath no strength. Thou hast set me in a pit of the lower regions,
in darkness, in the depths (Ps. 88:4, 6). In Jonah: I went down to the
cuttings off of the mountains; the bars of the earth were upon me
forever; yet hast Thou brought up my life from the pit (Jonah 2:6);
where the subject treated of is the Lord's temptations, and deliverance
from them. The "cuttings off of the mountains" are where the most damned
are, the dark clouds which appear about them being the "mountains."
\[6\] That a "pit" is the vastation of falsity, and in the abstract
sense falsity, is still more evident in Isaiah: They shall be gathered
with a gathering as the bound to the pit, and shall be shut up in the
prison; yet after a multitude of days shall they be visited (Isa.
24:22). Again: Where is the anger of him that causeth straitness? He
that leadeth forth shall hasten to open; and he shall not die at the
pit, neither shall bread fail (Isa. 51:13-14). In Ezekiel: Behold I
bring strangers upon thee, the violent of the nations, who shall draw
their swords upon the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall profane thy
brightness. They shall bring thee down into the pit, and thou shalt die
the deaths of them that are pierced in the heart of the seas (Ezek.
28:7-8); speaking of the prince of Tyre, by whom are signified those who
are in principles of falsity. \[7\] In Zechariah: Exult greatly, O
daughter of Zion; sound, O daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy King cometh
unto thee; He is just, wretched, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt
the foal of she-asses. By the blood of thy covenant I will send forth
thy bound out of the pit wherein is no water (Zech. 9:9, 11); where the
"pit wherein is no water" denotes falsity in which there is nothing
true; as also in what follows it is said that they cast Joseph into the
pit, and the pit was empty, there was no water in it (Gen. 37:24). In
David: Unto thee O Jehovah will I cry, my Rock be not Thou silent unto
me, lest if Thou be silent unto me I seem like them that go down into
the pit (Ps. 28:1). Again: Jehovah brought me up also out of a pit of
vastation, out of the miry clay; and He set my feet upon a rock (Ps.
40:2). Let not the billow of waters overwhelm me, neither let the deep
swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me (Ps. 69:15).
\[8\] Again: He sent His word, and healed them, and rescued them from
their pits (Ps. 107:20); "from their pits" denoting from falsities.
Again: Make haste, answer me, O Jehovah; my spirit is consumed, hide not
Thy faces from me, lest I become like them that go down into the pit
(Ps. 143:7). As a "pit" signifies falsity, and the "blind" signify those
who are in falsities (n. 2383), the Lord therefore says, Let them alone;
they are blind leaders of the blind, for if the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into a pit (Matt. 15:14; Luke 6:39). Something similar
to what was represented by Joseph was also represented by Jeremiah the
prophet, concerning which he says: They took Jeremiah, and cast him into
the pit that was in the court of the guard; and they let down Jeremiah
with cords, into the pit where was no water (Jer. 38:6); that is, they
rejected Divine truths among falsities in which was nothing of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4729.">4729.</span></span>

And we will say, An evil wild beast hath devoured him. That this
signifies a lie from a life of cupidities, is evident from the
signification of a "wild beast," as being affection and cupidity (n. 45,
46); for a "wild beast" in the genuine sense denotes what is living (n.
774, 841, 908); hence by an "evil wild beast" is here signified a life
of cupidities; that it is a lie is plain. This has reference to what
goes before-that their rejecting that Divine truth among falsities, was
a lie from a life of cupidities. For there are three sources of falsity,
one the doctrine of the church, another the fallacy of the senses, and
the third a life of cupidities. That which is from the doctrine of the
church takes hold of man's intellectual part only; for he is persuaded
from infancy that it is so, and confirmatory things afterwards
strengthen it. But that which is from the fallacy of the senses does not
so much affect the intellectual part; for those who are in falsity from
the fallacy of the senses have but little insight from the
understanding, because they think from lower and sensuous things. But
the falsity which is from a life of cupidities springs from the will
itself, or what is the same, from the heart; for what man wills from the
heart, he desires. This falsity is the worst of all, because it inheres,
and is not eradicated except by new life from the Lord. \[2\] There are,
as is known, two interior faculties in man, the understanding and the
will. What the understanding absorbs and becomes imbued with, does not
for this reason pass into the will; but what the will absorbs does pass
into the understanding. For whatever a man wills, he thinks; and
therefore when he wills evil from cupidity, he thinks it and confirms
it. The confirmations of evil by the thought are what are called
falsities from a life of cupidities. These falsities appear to him as
truths; and when he has confirmed them in himself, truths appear to him
as falsities; for he has then shut out the influx of light through
heaven from the Lord. But if he has not confirmed these falsities in
himself, then the truths with which his understanding had previously
been imbued, resist and do not permit them to be confirmed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4730.">4730.</span></span>

And we shall see what his dreams will be. That this signifies that the
preachings concerning it would thus be false and would appear so, is
evident from the signification of "dreams," as being preachings (n.
4682); and as in their eyes these appeared as falsities (n. 4726, 4729),
therefore by "dreams" here are signified preachings concerning Divine
truth, especially that the Lord's Human is Divine, which preachings in
their opinion were false. That they also appeared to them as falsities,
is signified by their saying, "We shall see what his dreams will be."
That the preachings concerning the Lord's Divine Human appeared and
still appear as falsities to those who are in faith alone, may be seen
from what was said just above (n. 4729e); for what is confirmed from a
life of cupidities has no other appearance. \[2\] That falsities are
confirmed from a life of cupidities is also from this cause, that they
do not know what heaven is, nor hell, neither what love toward the
neighbor is, nor the love of self and the world. If they knew these
things, and even if they were but willing to know them, they would think
very differently. Who at this day knows otherwise than that love toward
the neighbor is to give what one has to the poor, and to assist every
man with one's wealth, and to benefit him in every way, without
distinction as to whether he is good or evil? And because by these means
one would be stripped of his wealth, and would himself become poor and
wretched, he therefore rejects the doctrine of charity, and embraces
that of faith; and then he confirms himself against charity by many
things, as by thinking that he was born in sins and hence can do no good
of himself, and that if he does the works of charity or piety, he cannot
but place merit in them. And when he thinks thus on the one hand, and
from a life of cupidities on the other, he betakes himself to the side
of those who say that faith alone saves. And when he is there, he
confirms himself still more, until he believes that the works of charity
are not necessary to salvation; and when these are excluded, he falls
into this new notion-that because such is the nature of man, a means of
salvation has been provided by the Lord, which is called faith; and at
last into this, that he may be saved if even at the very hour of death
he says with confidence or trust that God has mercy upon him through
looking to the Son as having suffered for him, making nothing of what
the Lord has said in John (1:12, 13), and many other places. It is for
this reason that faith alone has been acknowledged in the churches as
the essential; but that it has not been everywhere acknowledged in this
manner, is because the parsons cannot gain anything by preaching faith
alone, but only by the preaching of works. \[3\] But had these men known
what charity toward the neighbor is, they would never have fallen into
this falsity of doctrine. The fundamental of charity is to act rightly
and justly in everything which belongs to one's duty or employment-as
for example, if one who is a judge punishes an evil doer according to
the laws, and does so from zeal, he is then in charity toward the
neighbor; for he desires his amendment, thus his good, and also wills
well to society and his country, that it receive no further injury from
the evildoer; thus he can love him if he amends, as a father the son
whom he chastises; and thus he loves societies and his country, which
are to him the neighbor in general. It is similar in all other
instances. But of the Lord's Divine Mercy this will be shown more fully
elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4731.">4731.</span></span>

And Reuben heard. That this signifies the confession of the faith of the
church in general, is evident from the representation of Reuben, as
being faith in the understanding or doctrine, which is the first thing
of regeneration-the complex the truth of doctrine by which the good of
life can be attained (n. 3861, 3866); and here therefore the confession
of the faith of the church in general. That Reuben here interposes is
because the church which begins from faith would cease to be a church
unless this Divine truth remained in it - that the Lord's Human is
Divine, for this is the supreme or inmost truth of the church. For this
reason Reuben wished to rescue Joseph, by whom this truth is here
represented, out of the hand of his brethren, to restore him to his
father-by which is signified that it wished to claim this truth for the
church. Moreover, when Reuben returned to the pit and saw that Joseph
was not there, he rent his clothes and said to his brethren, "The child
is not, and I, whither do I come?" (verses 29, 30) by which is signified
that there was no longer any faith in the Lord, and thus no church.
\[2\] This supreme or inmost truth, that the Lord's Human is Divine, is
denied by those in the church who are in faith alone; and yet because
they know from the Word that in the Lord there is the Divine, and do not
apprehend how the Human can be Divine, they therefore attribute both to
the Lord, making a distinction between His Divine nature and His Human
nature. Those however who are in a life of faith, or in charity, adore
the Lord as their God and Savior; and when in adoration, they think of
the Lord's Divine without separating it from the Human, and thus at
heart acknowledge all in the Lord to be Divine. But when they think from
doctrine, because they likewise cannot comprehend how the Human can be
Divine, they speak according to their doctrine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4732.">4732.</span></span>

And rescued him out of their hand. That this signifies liberation, is
evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4733.">4733.</span></span>

And said, Let us not smite him, the soul. That this signifies that it
must not be extinguished, because it is the life of religion, is evident
from the signification of "smiting," as being to extinguish; and from
the signification of "soul" as being life (n. 1000, 1005, 1436, 1742),
here the life of religion. That acknowledgment and adoration of the
Lord's Divine Human is the life of religion, is plain from what was said
just above (n. 4731); and also from the fact that men are of such a
nature as to desire to worship that of which they can have some
perception and thought, and sensuous men even that which they can
perceive by some sense, nor are they willing to worship unless the
Divine is therein. This is common to the human race. For this reason
Gentiles worship idols in which they believe there is the Divine, and
others worship men after their death whom they believe to be either gods
or saints. For nothing can be called forth in man unless there is
something to affect his senses. \[2\] Those who say that they
acknowledge a Supreme Being, of whom they have no idea of perception,
for the most part acknowledge no God, but nature instead, because they
comprehend this. Very many of the learned among Christians are such, and
this also because they do not believe the Human of the Lord to be
Divine. Lest therefore men who have removed themselves so far from the
Divine, and have become so far corporeal, should worship wood and
stones; and lest they should worship some man after his death, and thus
under him some devil, and not God Himself, because they could not in any
way perceive Him, and thus everything of the church should perish, and
with the church the human race, the Divine Itself willed to assume the
Human and to make it Divine. Let the learned take heed therefore, lest
they think of the Lord's Human and do not at the same time believe it to
be Divine, for in so doing they make for themselves a stumbling block,
and at last believe nothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4734.">4734.</span></span>

And Reuben said unto them. This signifies exhortation, in the proximate
sense confession of the faith of the church in general (which is
"Reuben," n. 4731) exhorting or dictating that they should not do
violence, as in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4735.">4735.</span></span>

Shed no blood. That this signifies that they should not do violence to
what is holy is evident from the signification of "blood" as being what
is holy-of which in what follows; hence "to shed blood" is to do
violence to what is holy. All the holy in heaven proceeds from the
Lord's Divine Human, and therefore all the holy in the church; wherefore
that violence might not be done to it, the Holy Supper was instituted by
the Lord, in which it is expressly said that the bread is His flesh, and
the wine His blood, thus that it is his Divine Human from which the holy
then comes. With the ancients, flesh and blood signified the human own,
because the human consists of flesh and blood; thus the Lord said to
Simon, "Blessed art thou, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto
thee, but My Father who is in the heavens" (Matt. 16:17). The flesh and
the blood, therefore, signified by the bread and the wine in the Holy
Supper, denote the Lord's Human Own. The Lord's Own Itself, which He
acquired to Himself by His own power, is Divine. His Own from conception
was what He had from Jehovah His Father, and was Jehovah Himself. Hence
the Own which He acquired to Himself in the Human was Divine. This
Divine Own in the Human is what is called His flesh and blood; "flesh"
is His Divine good (n. 3813), and "blood" is the Divine truth of Divine
good. \[2\] The Lord's Human, after it was glorified or made Divine,
cannot be thought of as human, but as the Divine love in human form; and
this so much the more than the angels, who, when they appear (as seen by
me), appear as forms of love and charity under the human shape, and this
from the Lord; for the Lord from Divine love made His Human Divine; just
as man through heavenly love becomes an angel after death, so that he
appears, as just said, as a form of love and charity under the human
shape. It is plain from this that by the Lord's Divine Human, in the
celestial sense is signified the Divine love itself, which is love
toward the whole human race, in that it wills to save them and to make
them blessed and happy to eternity, and to make its Divine their own so
far as they can receive it. This love and the reciprocal love of man to
the Lord, and also love toward the neighbor, are what are signified and
represented in the Holy Supper-the Divine celestial love by the flesh or
bread, and the Divine spiritual love by the blood or wine. \[3\] From
these things it is now evident what is meant in John by eating the
Lord's flesh and drinking His blood: I am the living bread which came
down from heaven. If anyone eat of this bread he shall live forever; and
the bread that I will give is My flesh. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink His blood, ye have
no life in you. Whoso eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood, hath
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For My flesh is
meat indeed, and My blood is drink indeed. He that eateth My flesh and
drinketh My blood abideth in Me, and I in him. This is the bread which
came down from heaven (John 6:51-58). As "flesh and blood" signify as
before said the Divine celestial and the Divine spiritual which are from
the Lord's Divine Human, or what is the same, the Divine good and the
Divine truth of his love, by "eating and drinking" is signified making
them one's own; and this is effected by a life of love and charity,
which is also a life of faith. (That "eating" is making good one's own,
and "drinking" making truth one's own, may be seen above, n. 2187, 3069,
3168, 3513, 3596, 3734, 3832, 4017, 4018.) \[4\] As "blood" in the
celestial sense signifies the Divine spiritual or the Divine truth
proceeding from the Lord's Divine Human, it therefore signifies the holy
proceeding; for the Divine truth proceeding from the Lord's Divine Human
is the holy itself. \[5\] Holiness is nothing else, nor from any other
source. That "blood" signifies this holy is evident from many passages
in the Word, of which we may adduce the following: Son of man, thus
saith the Lord Jehovih, Say to every bird of the heaven, to every wild
beast of the field, Assemble yourselves and come; gather yourselves from
every side upon My sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great
sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh and drink
blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the
princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, \[of bullocks,\]
all of them fatlings of Bashan. And ye shall eat fat till ye be full,
and drink blood till ye be drunken, of My sacrifice which I will
sacrifice for you. And ye shall be sated at My table with horse and
chariot, with the strong, and with every man of war. And I will set My
glory among the nations (Ezek. 39:17-21). The subject here treated of is
the calling together of all to the Lord's kingdom, and specifically the
setting up again of the church among the Gentiles; and by their "eating
flesh and drinking blood" is signified making Divine good and Divine
truth their own, thus the holy which proceeds from the Lord's Divine
Human. Who cannot see that by "flesh" is not meant flesh, nor by "blood"
blood, where it is said that they should eat the flesh of the mighty and
drink the blood of the princes of the earth, and that they should be
sated with horse and chariot, with the strong, and with every man of
war? \[6\] So likewise in Revelation: I saw an angel standing in the sun
and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly in
mid-heaven, Come and gather yourselves unto the supper of the great God;
that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the
flesh of the strong, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit
thereon, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and
great (Rev. 19:17-18); who would ever understand these words unless he
knew what is signified in the internal sense by "flesh," and what by
"kings," "captains," "the strong" "horses," "those that sit thereon,"
and "free and bond?" \[7\] Further in Zechariah: He shall speak peace to
the nations; and His dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from
the river even to the ends of the earth. As for thee also, through the
blood of Thy covenant I will send forth thy bound out of the pit (Zech.
9:10, 11); where the Lord is spoken of; the "blood of Thy covenant" is
the Divine truth proceeding from his Divine Human, and is the holy
itself which, after He was glorified, went forth from Him. This holy is
also what is called the Holy Spirit, as is evident in John: Jesus said,
If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink. Whosoever believeth
in Me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water. But this spoke He of the Spirit, which they that believe
on Him should receive for the Holy Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was
not yet glorified (John 7:37-39). That the holy proceeding from the Lord
is the "spirit," may be seen in John 6:63. \[8\] Moreover, that "blood"
is the holy proceeding from the Lord's Divine Human, in David: Bring
back their soul from deceit and violence; and precious shall their blood
be in His eyes (Ps. 72:14); "precious blood" denotes the holy which they
would receive. In Revelation: These are they who come out of great
affliction, and they washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb (Rev. 7:14). And again: They overcame the dragon by
the blood of the lamb, and by the Word of their testimony; and they
loved not their soul even unto death (Rev. 12:11). \[9\] The church at
this day does not know otherwise than that the "blood of the lamb" here
signifies the Lord's passion, because it is believed that they are saved
solely by the Lord having suffered, and that it was for this that He was
sent into the world; but let this view of it be for the simple, who
cannot comprehend interior arcana. The Lord's passion was the last of
His temptation, by which He fully glorified His Human (Luke 24:26; John
12:23, 27, 28; 13:31, 32; 17:1, 4, 5); but the "blood of the lamb" is
the same as the Divine truth, or the holy proceeding from the Lord's
Divine Human; thus the same as the "blood of the covenant" spoken of
just above, and of which it is also written in Moses: \[10\] Moses took
the book of the covenant, and read in the ears of the people; and they
said, All that Jehovah hath spoken will we do, and hear. Then Moses took
the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of
the covenant which Jehovah hath made with you upon all these words
(Exod. 24:7-8); the "book of the covenant" was the Divine truth which
they then had, which was confirmed by the blood testifying that it was
from His Divine Human. \[11\] In the rituals of the Jewish Church blood
had no other signification than the holy proceeding from the Lord's
Divine Human, wherefore when they were sanctified, it was done by
blood-as when Aaron and his sons were sanctified, blood was sprinkled
upon the horns of the altar, the remainder at the bottom of the altar,
also upon the tip of the right ear, the thumb of the right hand, and the
great toe of the right foot, and upon his garments (Exod. 29:12, 16, 20;
Lev. 8:15, 19, 23, 30). And when Aaron entered within the veil to the
mercy-seat, blood was also to be sprinkled with the finger upon the
mercy-seat eastward seven times (Lev. 16:12-15). So also in the rest of
the sanctifications, and also in the expiations and cleansings (in
regard to which see the following passages, Exod. 12:7, 13, 22; 30:10;
Lev. 1:5, 11, 15; 3:2, 8, 13; 4:6, 7, 17, 18, 25, 30, 34; 5:9; 6:27, 28;
14:14-19, 25-30; 16:12-15, 18, 19; Deut. 12:27). \[12\] As by "blood" in
the genuine sense is signified the holy, so in the opposite sense by
"blood" and "bloods" are signified those things which offer violence to
it, because by shedding innocent blood is signified doing violence to
what is holy. For this reason wicked things of life and profane things
of worship were called "blood." That "blood" and "bloods" have such a
signification, is evident from the following passages. In Isaiah: When
the Lord shall have washed the excrement of the daughters of Zion, and
shall have washed away the bloods of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by
the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of expurgation (Isa. 4:4). The
waters of Dimon are full of blood (Isa. 15:9). Again: Your hands are
defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity. Their feet run to
evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are
thoughts of iniquity (Isa. 59:3, 7). In Jeremiah: Also in thy skirts is
found the blood of the souls of the innocent poor (Jer. 2:34). \[13\]
Again: It is because of the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of
her priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of
Jerusalem. They have wandered blind in the streets, they are polluted
with blood; those which they cannot \[pollute\] they touch with their
garments (Lam. 4:13-14). In Ezekiel: I have passed by thee, and saw thee
trodden down in thy bloods, and I said unto thee, Live in thy bloods,
and I said unto thee, Live in thy bloods. I washed thee with waters, and
washed away thy bloods from upon thee, and I anointed thee with oil
(Ezek. 16:6, 9). Again: Thou son of man, Wilt thou debate with a city of
bloods? Make known to her all her abominations. Thou art become guilty
through thy blood that thou hast shed, and art defiled through thine
idols which thou hast made. Behold the princes of Israel, everyone
according to his arm, have been in thee and have shed blood; men of
slander have been in thee to shed blood; and in thee they have eaten at
the mountains (Ezek. 22:2-4, 6, 9). In Moses: If anyone shall sacrifice
elsewhere than upon the altar at the tent, it shall be blood; and as if
he had shed blood (Lev. 17:1-9). \[14\] Falsified and profaned truth is
signified by the following passages concerning blood. In Joel: I will
set wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and
pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon
into blood, before the great and terrible day come (Joel 2:30-31). In
Revelation: The sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the whole
moon became as blood (Rev. 6:12). Again The second angel sounded, and as
it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea; and
the third part of the sea became blood (Rev. 8:8). Again: The second
angel poured out his vial into the sea; and it became blood as of a dead
man, and every living soul died in the sea. And the third angel poured
out his vial into the rivers, and into the fountains of waters, and
there became blood (Rev. 16:3-4). \[15\] Similar is what is said in
Exodus (7:15-22), about the rivers, ponds, and pools of water in Egypt
being turned into blood; for by "Egypt" is signified the
memory-knowledge which from itself enters into heavenly mysteries, and
hence perverts, denies, and profanes Divine truths (n. 1164, 1165,
1186). All the miracles in Egypt, being Divine, involved such things.
The "rivers which were turned into blood" are the truths of intelligence
and wisdom (n. 108, 109, 3051); "waters" have a similar signification
(n. 680, 2702, 3058), and also "fountains" (n. 2702, 3096, 3424); "seas"
are truths in the complex which are a matter of memory-knowledge (n.
28); the "moon" of which it is also said that it should be "turned into
blood," is Divine truth (n. 1529-1531, 2495, 4060). It is evident from
this, that by the moon, the sea, fountains, waters, and rivers, being
turned into blood, is signified truth falsified and profaned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4736.">4736.</span></span>

Cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness. That this signifies
that they should conceal it meanwhile among their falsities, that is,
that they should regard it as false, but still retain it because it was
of importance to the church, is evident from the signification of a
"pit," as being falsities (see n. 4728); and from the signification of a
"wilderness," as being where there is no truth. For the word
"wilderness" has a wide signification, it means where the land is
uninhabited, and thus not cultivated; and when predicated of the church,
it denotes where there is no good, and consequently no truth (n. 2708,
3900). Thus by a "pit in the wilderness" are here meant falsities in
which there is no truth, because no good. It is said in which there is
no truth because no good; for when anyone believes that faith saves
without works, truth may indeed exist, but still it is not truth in him,
because it does not look to good, nor is it from good. This truth is not
alive, because it has in it a principle of falsity, consequently with
anyone who has such truth, the truth is but falsity from the principle
which rules in it. The principle is like the soul, from which the rest
have their life. On the other hand there are falsities which are
accepted as truths, when there is good in them, especially if it is the
good of innocence, as with the Gentiles and also with many within the
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4737.">4737.</span></span>

But lay no hand upon him. That this signifies that they should not do
violence to it, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4738.">4738.</span></span>

That he might rescue him out of their hand, to bring him back to his
father. That this signifies that it might claim it for the church, is
evident from the signification of "rescuing out of their hand," as being
to set free-as above (n. 4732) and from the signification of "bringing
back to his father" as being to claim for the church; for by Jacob, who
is here the "father," is represented the Jewish religion derived from
the Ancient Church, as above (n. 4700, 4701). It was the Divine truth
concerning the Lord's Divine Human that it would claim for the church,
for by Joseph, as before said, this truth is specifically signified.
\[2\] As further regards this truth, be it known that the Ancient Church
acknowledged it, and also the primitive Christian Church; but after the
papal sway had grown even to domination over all human souls, and had
exalted itself-as is said of the King of Babylon in Isaiah, "Thou saidst
in thy heart, I will ascend into the heavens, I will exalt my throne
above the stars of heaven, and I will sit in the mount of congregation,
I will ascend above the heights of the cloud, I will become like the
Most High" (Isa. 14:13-14)-then the Divine was taken away from the
Lord's Human, that is, a distinction was then made between His Divine
and His Human. \[3\] How this was decreed in a certain council has also
been revealed to me. There appeared to me certain spirits in front to
the left on the plane of the sole of the foot, at some distance from me,
who were talking together, but about what I did not hear. I was then
told that they were some of those who composed the council in which the
decree was made regarding the Lord's two natures, the Divine and the
human. Presently it was granted me to converse with them. They said that
those who had the greatest influence in the council, and who were
superior to the rest in rank and authority, came together in a dark room
and there concluded that both a Divine and a human nature should be
attributed to the Lord; chiefly for the reason that otherwise the papal
sway could not be maintained. For if they had acknowledged the Lord to
be one with the Father, as He Himself says, no one could have been
acknowledged as His vicar on earth; for schisms were arising at that
time by which the papal power might have fallen and been dissipated
unless they had made this distinction; and for the strengthening of this
invention they sought out confirmations from the Word, and persuaded the
rest. \[4\] The spirits added that by this means they were able to rule
in heaven and on earth, because they had it from the Word that to the
Lord was given all power in heaven and on earth, which power could not
have been attributed to any vicar if His Human also were acknowledged to
be Divine; for they knew that no one was allowed to make himself equal
to God, and that the Divine had this power of Itself, but not the Human,
unless it had been given it, as it was afterwards to Peter. They
continued, that the schismatics of that day were men of acute
discernment, whom in this way they were able to quiet, and by this means
the papal power was also confirmed. From all this it is evident that
this distinction was invented merely for the sake of dominion; and that
for this reason they were not willing to know that the power given to
the Lord's Human in heaven and on earth shows that it also is Divine.
That Peter, to whom the Lord gave the keys of heaven, does not mean
Peter, but the faith of charity, which, because it is from the Lord
alone, is the power of the Lord alone, can be seen in the preface to the
twenty-second chapter of Genesis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4739.">4739.</span></span>

Verses 23-30. And it came to pass when Joseph was come unto his
brethren, that they stripped Joseph of his tunic, the tunic of various
colors that was on him, and they took him, and cast him into the pit;
and the pit was empty, there was no water in it. And they sat down to
eat bread, and they lifted up their eyes and saw, and behold a company
of Ishmaelites came from Gilead, with their camels bearing spices and
balsam and stacte, going to carry them down to Egypt. And Judah said
unto his brethren, What gain is it if we slay our brother, and cover up
his blood? Come and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our
hand be upon him, for he is our brother, our flesh. And his brethren
hearkened unto him. And there passed by men, Midianites, merchantmen;
and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to
the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver. And they brought Joseph
into Egypt. And Reuben returned unto the pit, and behold Joseph was not
in the pit, and he rent his garments. And he returned unto his brethren,
and said, The child is not; and I, whither do I come? "And it came to
pass when Joseph was come unto his brethren," signifies when it was
preached about; "that they stripped Joseph of his tunic," signifies that
they dispelled and annihilated the appearances of truth; "the tunic of
various colors that was on him," signifies the quality of the
appearances as to truths from good; "and they took him and cast him into
the pit," signifies among falsities; "and the pit was empty, there was
no water in it," signifies that there was then nothing true; "and they
sat down to eat bread," signifies appropriation of evil from falsity;
"and they lifted up their eyes and saw," signifies further thought; "and
behold a company of Ishmaelites came from Gilead," signifies those who
are in simple good, such as the Gentiles are in; "with their camels
bearing spices and balsam and stacte," signifies interior natural
truths; "going to carry them down to Egypt," signifies instruction from
memory-knowledges; "and Judah said unto his brethren," signifies the
depraved in the church who are against whatever is good; "What gain is
it if we slay our brother and cover up his blood?" signifies that there
would be nothing of profit or of eminence, if this should be wholly
extinguished; "come and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites," signifies
that they acknowledge it who are in simple good; "and let not our hand
be upon him," signifies that they may be without blame; "for he is our
brother, our flesh," signifies because what is from them is accepted;
"and his brethren hearkened unto him," signifies compliance; "and there
passed by men, Midianites, merchantmen," signifies those who are in the
truth of this good; "and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit,"
signifies aid from them that it might not be among falsities; "and sold
Joseph to the Ishmaelites," signifies reception by those who are in
simple good, and alienation on the part of those who are in faith
separate; "for twenty pieces of silver," signifies estimation; "and they
brought Joseph into Egypt," signifies consultation from
memory-knowledges; "and Reuben returned unto the pit," signifies the
faith of the church in general; "and behold Joseph was not in the pit,"
signifies that there was no longer any faith; "and he rent his
garments," signifies mourning; "and he returned unto his brethren,"
signifies those who teach; "and said, The child is not," signifies that
there was no faith in it; "and I, whither do I come?" signifies where
now is the church?

<span class="margnote"><span id="4740.">4740.</span></span>

And it came to pass when Joseph was come unto his brethren. That this
signifies when it was preached about, is evident from the representation
of Joseph, as being truth Divine, especially concerning the Lord's
Divine Human. When this is said to "come unto them," it means that it is
preached to them; for his brethren represent the church which is in
faith separate, to whom this is preached.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4741.">4741.</span></span>

That they stripped Joseph of his tunic. That this signifies that they
dispelled and annihilated the appearances of truth, is evident from the
signification of "stripping," when predicated of Divine truth, which
here is "Joseph," as being to dispel and also to annihilate; and from
the signification of the "tunic," because it was of various colors, as
being appearances of truth (n. 4677). The dispelling and annihilating of
the appearances of truth takes place after truth itself has been
rejected; for truth itself shines forth of itself in the mind, and
however it may be extinguished, still appears, especially in those who
are in good. This is also clearly seen by those who have annihilated
truth in themselves, wherefore also they endeavor to dispel and to
annihilate these appearances. \[2\] Take as an example for the sake of
illustration - who does not see that to will well and do well is the
veriest Christian life? And if anyone is told that this is charity, he
cannot but affirm it; and those who affirm it will even say that they
know what this is, because this is of the life. But as regards thinking
this or that to be true, even from confidence (as they are willing to do
who are in faith separate), they will say that they do not know what it
is, for they have no other perception of it than as of smoke which
vanishes. As faith alone and the confidence from it appear of this
character to everyone who thinks seriously about it, especially to the
good, therefore such persons labor to dispel and annihilate even these
appearances, by thus paring off whatever touches them more nearly, and
whatever is round about this Divine truth. This is signified by
stripping Joseph of the tunic that was on him. \[3\] The same persons
also believe that those are wiser than all others, who having once
accepted a dogma, whatever it may be, can confirm it by various things,
and by various reasonings make it appear like truth. But nothing could
be less the part of a wise man; it is what everyone can do who possesses
any ingenuity, and the evil more skillfully than the upright. For to do
this is not the part of a rational man, inasmuch as a rational man can
see, as from above, whether that which is confirmed is true or false;
and because he sees this, he regards confirmations of falsity as of no
account, and they appear to him as simply ludicrous and empty, no matter
how much anyone else believes them to have been taken from the school of
wisdom itself. In a word, nothing is less the part of a wise man, nay,
nothing is less rational, than to be able to confirm falsities; for it
is the part of a wise man and it is rational, first to see that a thing
is true, and then to confirm it. In fact to see what is true is to see
from the light of heaven, which is from the Lord; but to see what is
false as true is to see from a fatuous light, which is from hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4742.">4742.</span></span>

The tunic of various colors that was on him. That this signifies the
quality of the appearances as to truths from good, is evident from the
signification of a "tunic of various colors," as being the appearances
of truth by which the spiritual of the natural is known and
distinguished (n. 4677), here therefore the quality of the appearances;
for which reason also a tunic is twice mentioned - "they stripped Joseph
of his tunic, the tunic of various colors." That the quality of
appearances is according to the truths from good, may be seen from the
appearances of truth when presented to view in the light of heaven, that
is, in the other life, where there is no other light than that which
comes through heaven from the Lord, and which comes forth from His
Divine truth; for this before the eyes of angels appears as light (n.
2776, 3190, 3195, 3222, 3339, 3340, 3636, 3643, 3993, 4302, 4413, 4415).
This light is varied with everyone according to the reception. All the
thought of the angels is effected through the variegation of this light,
as also is the thought of man, although he is not aware of it; because
with man this light falls into material images or ideas, which, being in
his natural or external man, are from the light of the world. Thus the
light of heaven is obscured in him to such a degree that he scarcely
knows that his intellectual light and sight are from it. But in the
other life, when the sight of the eye is no longer in the light of the
world, but in the light of heaven, it becomes manifest that his thought
is from this source. \[2\] When this light passes from heaven into the
world of spirits, it is there presented under the appearance of various
colors, which in beauty, variety, and loveliness immeasurably surpass
the colors which are from the light of the world. (See what was said
above in regard to colors, from experience, n. 1053, 1624, 3993, 4530,
4677.) As the colors in the other life are from this source, they are in
their origin nothing else than appearances of truth from good. For truth
does not shine from itself, because there is nothing flaming in it
alone; but it shines from good, for good is like a flame which gives
forth light. Such therefore as the good is, such does the truth from it
appear; and such as the truth is, in such a manner does it shine from
good. From this it is evident what is signified in the internal sense by
the tunic of various colors, namely, the quality of appearances as to
truths from good; for by Joseph, to whom the tunic belonged, is
represented Divine truth, as before shown.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4743.">4743.</span></span>

And they took him, and cast him into the pit. That this signifies among
falsities, is evident from what has been said above (n. 4728, 4736),
where similar words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4744.">4744.</span></span>

And the pit was empty, there was no water in it. That this signifies
that there was then nothing true, is evident from the signification of a
"pit," as being falsities (see n. 4728); from the signification of
"being empty, "as being where there is nothing true because nothing good
(of which hereafter); and from the signification of "water," as being
truth (n. 680, 739, 2702, 3058, 3424). That "being empty" denotes where
there is nothing true because nothing good, is evident from other
passages in the Word, as in Jeremiah: Their great ones have sent their
little ones for waters; they came unto the pits, and found no waters;
they returned with their vessels empty; they were affected with shame
and ignominy, and covered their head (Jer. 14:3); where "empty vessels"
denote truths in which there is no truth from good. Again:
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath troubled
me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up (Jer.
51:34); where an "empty vessel" denotes where there is no truth; and
"Babylon," those who vastate, that is, deprive others of truths (n.
1327e). Again: I beheld the earth, and lo it was void and empty; and the
heavens, and they had no light (Jer. 4:23). In Isaiah: The cormorant and
the bittern shall possess it; and the owl and the raven shall dwell
therein; and they shall stretch over it the line of a void, and the
plummet of emptiness (Isa. 34:11). \[2\] Again: The city of emptiness
shall be broken; every house shall be shut up, that no one may come in.
There is a cry in the streets upon the one, the joy of the land shall be
exiled, what is left in the city shall be a waste (Isa. 24:10-12); here
"emptiness" is expressed by another word in the original tongue, which,
however, involves a similar meaning. That "emptiness" is where there is
no truth because no good, is evident in the internal sense from the
particulars mentioned, as from the signification of a "city," of a
"house," of a "cry," of "wine," and of "streets." In Ezekiel: Hath said
the Lord Jehovih, Woe to the city of bloods! I will also make the hearth
great, setting the pot empty upon the coals that it may be hot, and the
brass thereof may be heated, and that the uncleanness thereof may melt
therein, the scum thereof be consumed (Ezek. 24:9, 11); it is evident
here what "being empty" signifies; an "empty pot" is that in which there
is uncleanness and scum, that is, evil and falsity. \[3\] So in Matthew:
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry
places, seeking rest, but findeth none. Then he saith, I will return
into my house whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth it
empty, swept, and prepared for him. Then goeth he, and joineth to
himself seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in
and dwell there (Matt. 12:43-45); the "unclean spirit" denotes
uncleanness of life in man, and also the unclean spirits with him, for
unclean spirits dwell in the uncleanness of man's life; "dry places," or
where there is no water, denote where there are no truths; the "empty
house" denotes the interiors of man again filled with uncleanness, that
is, with falsities from evil. In Luke: God hath filled the hungry with
good things, and the rich He hath sent empty away (Luke 1:63); "the
rich" denote those who know many things; for "riches" in the spiritual
sense are memory-knowledges, doctrinal things, and the knowledges of
good and truth. They are called the "empty rich" who know these things,
and do not do them; for truths to them are not truths, because without
good (see n. 4736).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4745.">4745.</span></span>

And they sat down to eat bread. That this signifies the appropriation of
evil from falsity, is evident from the signification of "eating," as
being appropriation (n. 3168, 3513, 3596, 3832); and from the
signification of "bread," as being the good of love (n. 276, 680, 2165,
2177, 3464, 3478, 3735, 3813, 4211, 4217, 4735), and also in general all
food (see n. 2165). Here however "bread" signifies the contrary, namely,
evil; for it is known that they who eat the bread in the Holy Supper
unworthily, do not appropriate good to themselves, but evil; whence it
is evident that in the contrary sense by "eating bread" is signified the
appropriation of evil. It was a custom among the ancients to eat
together when they had made an important decision which was confirmed by
the rest, by which they signified their approbation, and thus that they
made it their own; as in Ezekiel: Behold, the princes of Israel,
everyone according to his arm, have been in thee and have shed blood;
men of calumny have been in thee to shed blood; and in thee they have
eaten at the mountains (Luke 22:6, 9). Be it known further that there
are in general two origins of evil, one from life, and the other from
doctrine. The evil which is from the doctrine of falsity is called evil
from falsity, and it is this evil which is here meant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4746.">4746.</span></span>

And they lifted up their eyes and saw. That this signifies further
thought, is evident from the signification of "lifting up the eyes and
seeing," as being intentness and thought, or intense thought (n. 2789,
2829, 3198, 3202, 4339). That here further thought is signified, is
evident from the series.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4747.">4747.</span></span>

And behold a company of Ishmaelites came from Gilead. That this
signifies those who are in simple good, such as the Gentiles are in, is
evident from the representation of the Ishmaelites, as being those who
are in simple good as to life, and thence in natural truth as to
doctrine (n. 3263); and from the signification of "Gilead," as being
exterior good, by which man is first initiated when he is being
regenerated (n. 4117, 4124). From this it is evident that by a "company
of Ishmaelites from Gilead" is signified such good as is with the
Gentiles, that is, those who are in such simple good. \[2\] How these
things are circumstanced may be seen from what has been already said,
and also from what follows. This only need now be said in advance: they
who are within the church and have confirmed themselves against Divine
truths, especially against these - that the Lord's Human is Divine, and
that the works of charity contribute to salvation - if they have
confirmed themselves against them, not only by doctrine but also by
life, they have reduced themselves to such a state as to their interiors
that afterwards they cannot possibly be brought to receive them, for
what is once confirmed by doctrine, and at the same time by life,
remains to eternity. Those who do not know the interior state of man may
suppose that anyone, no matter how he has confirmed himself against
these truths, can yet easily accept them afterwards, provided he is
convinced. But that this is impossible has been granted me to know by
much experience in regard to such persons in the other life. For
whatever is confirmed by doctrine is absorbed by the intellectual part,
and what is confirmed by life is absorbed by the will part; and that
which is inrooted in both man's lives, the life of his understanding and
the life of his will, cannot be rooted out. The very soul of man which
lives after death is formed thereby, and is of such a nature that it
never recedes therefrom. This is also the reason why the lot of those
within the church with whom this is the case, is worse than the lot of
those who are out of the church; for those who are out of the church,
who are called Gentiles, have not confirmed themselves against these
truths, because they have not known them; and therefore such of them as
have lived in mutual charity, easily receive Divine truths, if not in
the world, yet in the other life. (See what was adduced from experience
in regard to the state and lot of the Gentiles and other peoples in the
other life, n. 2589-2604.) \[3\] For this reason when any new church is
being set up by the Lord, it is not set up with those who are within the
church, but with those who are without, that is, with the Gentiles.
These things are often treated of in the Word. This much is premised in
order that it may be known what is involved in Joseph's being cast into
the pit by his brethren, and in his being drawn out thence by the
Midianites, and sold to the Ishmaelites. For by Joseph's brethren are
represented those within the church who have confirmed themselves
against Divine truth, especially against the two truths, that the Lord's
Human is Divine, and that works of charity contribute to salvation, and
this not only by doctrine, but also by life; while by the Ishmaelites
are represented those who are in simple good, and by the Midianites
those who are in the truth of this good. It is related of the latter
that they drew Joseph out of the pit; and of the former that they bought
him. But what is signified by their bringing him into Egypt, and their
selling him to Potiphar, Pharaoh's chamberlain, will be shown in what
follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4748.">4748.</span></span>

With their camels bearing spices and balsam and stacte. That this
signifies interior natural truths, is evident from the signification of
"camels," as being in general those things of the natural man that serve
the spiritual, and specifically general memory-knowledges in the natural
man (n. 3048, 3071, 3114, 3143, 3145, 4156); and from the signification
of "spices, balsam, and stacte," as being interior natural truths
conjoined with good in the natural man (of which in what follows). In
the holy worship of the ancients use was made of sweet smelling and
fragrant things, among which were their frankincense and incenses; and
the like things were also mixed with the oils with which they were
anointed. But the origin of this practice is at this day unknown,
because it is entirely unknown that the things which were used in the
worship of the ancients originated in spiritual and celestial things
which are in the heavens, and corresponded to them. Man has so far
removed himself from the things of heaven, and plunged into natural,
worldly, and bodily things, that he is in obscurity, and many are in the
negative, as to the existence of anything spiritual or celestial. \[2\]
The reason why frankincense and incenses were used in sacred rites among
the ancients, is that odor corresponds to perception, and a fragrant
odor, such as that of spices of various kinds, to a grateful and
pleasing perception, such as is that of truth from good, or of faith
from charity. Indeed the correspondence is such that in the other life,
whenever it is the good pleasure of the Lord, perceptions themselves are
changed into odors (as may be seen in what has been said above from
experience, n. 925, 1514, 1517-1519, 3577, 4624-4634). What is here
signified in detail by "spices, balsam, and stacte," may be seen from
other passages in which they are mentioned. In general they signify
interior truths in the natural, but such as are from good therein; for
truths by themselves do not make the natural, but good by truths. Hence
its varieties are according to the quality of the truth conjoined with
good, consequently according to the quality of the good; for good has
its quality from truths. \[3\] As by "Gilead" is signified exterior good
such as is of the senses and is called pleasure (n. 4117, 4124), and as
by "Egypt" in a good sense are signified memory-knowledges which are the
external truths of the natural man corresponding to this good, or
agreeing with it (n. 1462), therefore by Ishmaelites from Gilead
carrying on camels those spices down to Egypt is signified that they
carried their interior truths from their own memory-knowledges, to the
memory-knowledges signified by Egypt (of which hereafter). Interior
truths are conclusions from exterior truths, or from memory-knowledges;
for the memory-knowledges of the natural man serve as a means for
drawing conclusions about, and thus viewing, interior things; in like
manner as anyone views the mind of another in his countenance, in the
vibration of the light in his eyes, and in the life of the tone of his
voice, and in that of his gesture and action. \[4\] As it is by such
truths that man's natural is perfected and also amended, healing is
therefore ascribed to spices of this kind-as to balsam in Jeremiah: Is
there no balsamic gum in Gilead? Is there no physician there? Why then
doth not the health of my people go up? (Jer. 8:22). Go up into Gilead,
and take balsam, O virgin daughter of Egypt; in vain hast thou
multiplied medicines; there is no healing for thee (Jer. 46:11). Babylon
is suddenly fallen and shattered, howl upon her, take balsam for her
pain, if so be she may be healed (Jer. 51:8). \[5\] That such things
have a spiritual signification is very evident in Revelation: The
merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over Babylon; for no man
buyeth their merchandise any more; merchandise of gold, and silver, and
precious stone, and pearl, and fine linen, and crimson, and silk, and
scarlet; and all thyine wood, and every vessel of ivory, and every
vessel made of most precious wood, and brass, and iron, and marble; and
cinnamon, and incense, and ointment, and frankincense, and wine, and
oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and cattle, and sheep, and horses, and
chariots, and bodies and souls of men (Rev. 18:11-13); these things
would never have been so specifically enumerated unless each one of them
signified such things as are in the Lord's kingdom and in His church,
for otherwise they would have been words without meaning. It is known
that by "Babylon" are signified those who have turned aside all worship
of the Lord to the worship of self, and who are thus in a profane
internal while they are in a holy external, wherefore by their
"merchandise" are signified the things which they have studiously and
artfully invented for the sake of self-worship, and also doctrinal
things and knowledges of good and truth from the Word which they have
perverted in their own favor. Thus by the particulars here mentioned
such things are specifically signified, and by "cinnamon," "incense,"
"ointment," and "frankincense" truths from good; but in relation to them
truths perverted and falsities from evil. \[6\] The same is true of what
is related in Ezekiel of the merchandise of Tyre: Judah and the land of
Israel were thy traders; in wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, in honey and
oil, and balsam, they furnished thy trading (Ezek. 27:17); here also by
"balsam" is signified truth from good. To one who does not believe in
the internal sense of the Word, all the foregoing expressions must be
bare words, thus vessels containing nothing within; and yet Divine,
celestial, and spiritual things are in them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4749.">4749.</span></span>

Going to carry them down to Egypt. That this signifies instruction in
memory-knowledges is evident from the signification of "Egypt" as being
memory-knowledges (n. 1164, 1165, 1462); and as by "spices, balsam, and
stacte" are signified interior truths from the memory-knowledges of
those who are in simple good, such as the Gentiles are in, therefore by
"going to carry them down thither," is signified to be instructed. In
regard to these things the case is this: the memory-knowledges which are
signified by "Egypt" are those which conduce to spiritual life, and
which correspond to spiritual truths; for formerly the Ancient Church
was in Egypt also; but after it had been there turned into magic, the
memory-knowledges which pervert spiritual things were signified by
"Egypt." Thence it is that memory-knowledges in a good, and also in the
opposite, sense, are signified in the Word by "Egypt" (n. 1164, 1165,
1462); and here in a good sense. The memory-knowledges from which are
the interior truths signified by the Ishmaelites' carrying on camels
spices, balsam, and stacte, are not such as are of the church, but such
as are with the Gentiles. The truths from these memory-knowledges cannot
be corrected and made sound by any other means than by the
memory-knowledges of the genuine church, thus by instruction in these.
This is what is here signified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4750.">4750.</span></span>

And Judah said unto his brethren. That this signifies the depraved in
the church who are against whatever is good, is evident from the
representation of Judah, as being in a good sense the good of celestial
love (n. 3654, 3881), but in the opposite sense to be against all good
whatever (of which hereafter); and from the signification of his
"brethren," as being those in the church who are in faith separate. That
by Judah are here represented those who are against all good whatever,
is because in a good sense they who are in the good of celestial love
are represented in the Word by him. Celestial love is love to the Lord
and the derivative love toward the neighbor. They who are in this love
are most closely conjoined with the Lord, and are therefore in the
inmost heaven, where they are in a state of innocence, from which they
appear to the rest as little children, and wholly as loves in form.
Others are not able to go near them, and therefore when they are sent to
others, they are encompassed by other angels, by whom the sphere of
their love is tempered, which would otherwise throw into a swoon those
to whom they are sent; for the sphere of their love penetrates even to
the marrows. \[2\] As this love or this good of love which is called
celestial is represented by Judah in a good sense, so in the opposite
sense is represented by him that which is contrary to celestial good,
and thus contrary to all good whatever. Most things in the Word have a
twofold sense, namely, a good sense and its opposite. From the good
sense the quality of the opposite one is known; for whatever is
contained in the opposite sense is diametrically opposed to what is
contained in the good sense. \[3\] The goods of love are in general two
- the good of celestial love, and the good of spiritual love.
Diametrically opposed to the good of celestial love, is the evil of the
love of self; and diametrically opposed to the good of spiritual love,
is the evil of the love of the world. They who are in the evil of the
love of self are against all good whatever; but not so much so they who
are in the evil of the love of the world. In the Word, by Judah in the
opposite sense are represented those who are in the love of self; and by
Israel they who are in the love of the world. The reason of this is that
by Judah was represented the Lord's celestial kingdom, and by Israel His
spiritual kingdom. \[4\] The hells also are distinct according to these
two loves. They who are in the love of self, being against all good
whatever, are in the deepest and therefore the most grievous hell; but
they who are in the love of the world, being not so much against all
good whatever, are in hells not so deep, and therefore less grievous.
\[5\] The evil of the love of self is not, as is generally thought, that
external elation which is called pride; but it is hatred against the
neighbor, and thence a burning desire for revenge, and delight in
cruelty. These are the interiors of the love of self. Its exteriors are
contempt for others in comparison with self, and an aversion to those
who are in spiritual good, and this sometimes with manifest elation or
pride, and sometimes without it; for one who holds the neighbor in such
hatred, interiorly loves no one but himself and those whom he regards as
making one with himself; thus he loves them in himself, and himself in
them, for the sole end of self. \[6\] Such is the quality of those who
are represented by Judah in the opposite sense. The Jewish nation had
been in such love even from the first, for they had looked upon all in
the whole world as the vilest slaves, and as worthless in comparison
with themselves, and had also held them in hatred; and what is more,
when the love of self and of the world had not mutually conjoined them,
they persecuted even their associates and brothers with similar hatred.
This disposition still remains with that nation; but because they now
dwell in foreign lands on sufferance, they keep it concealed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_128"></span>[4702-1](ac095.htm#fr_128.md) The Latin here has
ejus, but illorum in n. 4678.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4751-4800](ac096.md)
