[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac096)  [Next](ac098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="4801.">4801.</span></span>

A certain one conversed with me who at the time that he lived in the
world had more than others known the exterior truths of faith, but still
had not led a life in conformity with the precepts of faith; for he had
loved himself only, and had despised others in comparison with himself,
and had believed that he would be among the first in heaven; but because
he was of such a quality he could not have any other opinion of heaven
than as of a worldly kingdom. When in the other life he found that
heaven was entirely different from what he had conceived it to be, and
that those were chief who had not set themselves above others,
especially those who had believed that they were unworthy of mercy, and
thus that according to their merits they were the last, he was very
indignant, and rejected the things that in the life of the body had been
of his faith. He was continually endeavoring to do violence to those who
were in the province of the tongue. It was granted me clearly to
perceive his effort for several weeks, and hence also to know who and of
what quality are those who correspond to the tongue, and who they are
that are opposed to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4802.">4802.</span></span>

There are also spirits who though evil still in some measure admit the
light of heaven and receive the truths of faith, so that they have some
perception of truth. They also eagerly receive truths, yet not for the
purpose of living according to them, but that they may glory in seeming
more intelligent and sharpsighted than others; for the intellect of man
is such that it can receive truths, and yet truths are not appropriated
to any but those who live according to them. Unless man's intellect were
such he could not be reformed. \[2\] They who in the world have been of
such a quality, that is, have understood truths and yet have lived a
life of evil, are in the other life also of this quality, but there
abuse their capacity to understand truths in order to acquire dominion;
for they know there that by means of truths they have communication with
some societies of heaven, and consequently that they can be with the
evil and have power; for in the other life truths have power in them;
but because their life is evil they are in hell. \[3\] I have spoken
with two persons who had been such in the life of the body, and they
wondered at their being in hell, when yet they had had a persuasive
belief in the truths of faith. But they were told that the light with
them by which they understood truths was a light like that of winter in
the world, in which objects appear in their beauty and colors equally as
in the light of summer; but that nevertheless in this winter light all
things are torpid, and nothing pleasant and gladsome is produced; and
that as their end of understanding truths had been glorying, and
consequently self, therefore when the sphere of their ends exalts itself
toward the interior heavens to the angels there, by whom ends only are
perceived, it cannot be endured, but is rejected; and that for this
reason they are in hell. \[4\] It was added that formerly such persons
were pre-eminently called serpents of the tree of knowledge, because
when they reason from the life they speak against truths; and moreover
that they were like a woman with a lovely face, and a noisome odor, and
who wherever she goes is therefore rejected from societies. Moreover,
when in the other life such persons come to angelic societies they
actually have a foul smell, and this even they themselves perceive as
soon as they approach those societies. From this also it is evident what
faith is without a life of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4803.">4803.</span></span>

It is worthy of mention, being wholly unknown in the world, that the
states of good spirits and of angels are continually changing and
perfecting, and that they are thus raised into the interiors of the
province in which they are, and so into nobler functions; for in heaven
there is a continual purification, and so to speak new creation; but
still the case is such that no angel can possibly attain absolute
perfection even to eternity. The Lord alone is perfect; in Him and from
Him is all perfection. They who correspond to the mouth are continually
desiring to speak, for in speaking they find their greatest pleasure.
When they are being perfected they are reduced to this - that they do
not speak anything but what is of service to their companions, to the
common good, to heaven, and to the Lord. The delight of so speaking is
enhanced with them in the degree of the loss of the desire to regard
themselves in their speech, and to seek wisdom from their own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4804.">4804.</span></span>

There are very many societies in the other life that are called
societies of friendship. They are composed of those who in the life of
the body preferred to every other delight that of conversation, and who
loved those with whom they conversed, not caring whether they were good
or evil, provided they were entertaining; and thus who were not friends
to good or to truth. They who have been such in the life of the body are
such also in the other life, in which they associate solely from the
delight of conversation. Many such societies have been with me, but at a
distance, being seen chiefly a little to the right above the head. That
they were present it was given me to note by a torpor and dullness, and
by a privation of the delight in which I was, the presence of such
societies inducing these effects. For wherever they come they take
delight away from others, and wonderful to say, they make it their own;
for they turn away the spirits who are with others, and turn them to
themselves, whereby they transfer another's delight to themselves; and
as they are on this account troublesome and injurious to those who are
in good, they are therefore kept away by the Lord, lest they should come
near to the heavenly societies. From this it was given me to know how
much injury friendship occasions man as to his spiritual life if the
person and not good is regarded; everyone may indeed be friendly to
another, but still he should be most friendly to what is good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4805.">4805.</span></span>

There are also societies of interior friendship which do not take away
another's external delight and divert it to themselves, but take away
his internal delight or blessedness, arising from the affection of
spiritual things. These societies are in front to the right close above
the lower earth, and some of them a little higher. I have several times
conversed with those who were below; and then those who were above
inflowed in general. In the life of the body their nature was such that
they loved from the heart those who were within their common fellowship,
and also embraced one another with brotherly affection. They had
believed that they only were living and in the light, and that those who
were outside of their society were comparatively not living and not in
the light; and because they were of such a quality they also thought
that the Lord's heaven consists solely of those few. \[2\] But it was
given to tell them that the Lord's heaven is immense, and that it
consists of every people and tongue, and that all are there who have
been in the good of love and of faith; and it was shown that there are
those in heaven who relate to all the provinces of the body both as to
its exteriors and as to its interiors; but that if they aspired beyond
the things which correspond to their life, especially if they condemned
others who were outside of their society, they could not have heaven;
and that in this case their society is a society of interior friendship,
which as before said is of such a nature that when they approach others
they deprive them of the blessedness of spiritual affection; for they
regard them as not being the elect, and as not living; and when this
thought is communicated, it induces sadness, which however according to
the law of order in the other life returns to themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4806.">4806.</span></span>

A continuation concerning Correspondence with the Grand Man will be
found at the end of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4807.">4807.</span></span>

Genesis 38 THE LAST JUDGMENT Before the preceding chapter (n. 4661-4664)
a beginning was made of unfolding what the Lord says in Matthew (chap.
25 from verse 31 to the end) concerning the Judgment upon the good and
the evil, who are there called sheep and goats. What the internal sense
of these words is, has not yet been unfolded, but is now to be unfolded
before this and some following chapters. And it will then be evident
that by the Last Judgment is not there meant the last time of the world,
and that the dead will then for the first time rise again and be
gathered together before the Lord and judged; but that there is meant
the last time of everyone who passes out of the world into the other
life; for then is his Judgment, and this is the Judgment which is meant.
Yet that this is so does not appear from the sense of the letter, but
from the internal sense. The reason why the Lord so spoke, is that He
spoke here, as everywhere else in the Word of the Old and the New
Testament, by representatives and significatives; for to speak by
representatives and significatives is to speak at the same time to the
world and to heaven, or to men and to angels. Such speech is Divine,
because universal, and hence is proper to the Word. Wherefore they who
are in the world and care for worldly things only, do not apprehend
anything else from what the Lord says here concerning the Last Judgment
than that all are to rise again at one and the same time, and even that
the Lord will then sit upon a throne of glory, and will speak to those
gathered together according to these words. But they who care for
heavenly things know that the time of everyone's resurrection is when he
dies, and that the Lord's words here involve that everyone will be
judged according to his life, thus that everyone carries his judgment
with him, because he carries his life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4808.">4808.</span></span>

That this is involved in the internal sense of the words in question
will appear from the explication of the particulars according to this
sense; but here only those things will be unfolded which are contained
in verses 31 to 33: When the Son of man shall come in His glory, and all
the holy angels with Him, then shall He sit upon the throne of His
glory; and before Him shall be gathered all nations, and He shall
separate them one from another as the shepherd separateth the sheep from
the goats; and He shall set the sheep on His right hand, but the goats
on the left. (Matt. 25:31-33).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4809.">4809.</span></span>

When the Son of man shall come in His glory; signifies when the Divine
truth shall appear in its light, which takes place with every man when
he dies, for he then comes into the light of heaven, in which he can
perceive what is true and good, and hence what is his quality. The "Son
of man," in the internal sense of the Word, is the Lord as to Divine
truth, thus is the Divine truth which is from the Lord. "Glory" is the
intelligence and wisdom thence derived, which appear as light, and
before the angels as the resplendence of light. This resplendence of
light, in which are wisdom and intelligence derived from the Divine
truth which is from the Lord, is what in the Word is called "glory."
(That the "Son of man" in the internal sense is the Divine truth, may be
seen n. 2159, 2803, 2813, 3704.) \[2\] And all the holy angels with Him;
signifies the angelic heaven. The "holy angels" are the truths which are
from the Lord's Divine good; for by "angels" in the Word are not meant
angels, but those things which are from the Lord (see n. 1925, 4085);
for the angels are recipients of the life of truth proceeding from the
Lord's Divine good, and insofar as they receive, so far they are angels.
From this it is plain that "angels" are these truths. As the subject
here treated of is the state of everyone after death, and the judgment
of everyone according to his life, it is said that all the holy angels
will be with Him; and by this is signified that the judgment will be
effected by means of heaven; for all influx of Divine truth takes place
through heaven, and immediate influx can be received by no one. \[3\]
Then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory; signifies the Judgment,
for a "throne" is predicated of the Lord's royalty, and the Lord's
royalty is the Divine truth (n. 1728, 2015, 3009, 3670), and the Divine
truth is that from which and according to which is the Judgment. \[4\]
And before Him shall be gathered all nations; signifies that the goods
and evils of all will be made manifest; for by "nations" in the internal
sense of the Word are signified goods, and in the opposite sense evils
(n. 1259, 1260, 1416, 2588, 4574); thus that goods and evils will appear
in Divine light, that is, in light from the Divine truth, is signified
by all nations being gathered before Him. \[5\] And He shall separate
them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the sheep from the
goats; signifies the separation of good from evil; for the "sheep" are
they who are in good, and the "goats" they who are in evil. They are
properly called "sheep" who are in charity and thence in faith, and they
"goats" who are in faith and not in charity-both being here treated of.
That "sheep" are they who are in charity and thence in faith, may be
seen above (n. 2088, 4169), and "goats" they who are in faith and not in
charity (n. 4769). \[6\] And He shall set the sheep on His right hand,
but the goats on the left; signifies separation according to truths from
good, and according to falsities from evil. In the other life they who
are in truths from good actually appear to the right, and they who are
in falsities from evil to the left. Hence to be set on the right hand
and on the left, is to be set in order according to the life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4810.">4810.</span></span>

From all this it is evident what these words of the Lord involve, and
that they are not to be understood according to the letter (namely, that
the Lord at some last time will come in glory, and all the holy angels
with Him, and will sit upon a throne of glory, and judge all nations
gathered before Him), but that everyone will be judged according to his
life, when he passes out of life in the world into life eternal. GENESIS
38 1. And it came to pass in this time and Judah went down from his
brethren, and turned aside even to a man, an Adullamite, and his name
was Hirah. 2. And Judah saw there a daughter of a man, a Canaanite, and
her name was Shua; and he took her, and came to her. 3. And she
conceived and bare a son, and he called his name Er. 4. And she
conceived again and bare a son, and she called his name Onan. 5. And she
added again and bare a son, and she called his name Shelah; and he was
in Chezib when she bare him. 6. And Judah took a woman for Er his
firstborn, and her name was Tamar. 7. And Er, Judah's firstborn, was
evil in the eyes of Jehovah; and Jehovah caused him to die. 8. And Judah
said unto Onan, Come to thy brother's wife, and perform the duty of a
husband's brother unto her, and raise up seed to thy brother. 9. And
Onan knew that the seed would not be his; and it came to pass when he
came to his brother's wife, and he destroyed it to the earth, that he
might not give seed to his brother. 10. And the thing which he did was
evil in the eyes of Jehovah; and He caused him also to die. 11. And
Judah said to Tamar his daughter-in-law, Remain a widow in thy father's
house, till Shelah my son be grown up; for he said, Lest he also die,
like his brethren. And Tamar went and abode in her father's house. 12.
And the days were multiplied, and Shua's daughter died, the wife of
Judah; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto the shearers of his
flock, he and his companion Hirah the Adullamite, to Timnah. 13. And it
was told Tamar, saying, Behold, thy father-in-law goeth up to Timnah to
shear his flock. 14. And she put off from upon her the garments of her
widowhood, and covered herself in a veil, and wrapped herself, and sat
in the gate of the fountains which is upon the way to Timnah; for she
saw that Shelah was grown up, and she was not given unto him for a
woman. 15. And Judah saw her, and thought her to be a harlot, because
she had covered her face. 16. And he turned aside unto her to the way,
and said, Grant I pray that I may come to thee; for he knew not that she
was his daughter-in-law. And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou
mayest come to me? 17. And he said, I will send thee a kid of the goats
from the flock. And she said, If thou wilt give a pledge, till thou send
it? 18. And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy
signet, and thy kerchief, and thy staff that is in thy hand. And he gave
them to her, and came to her; and she conceived to him. 19. And she
arose, and went, and put off her veil from upon her, and put on the
garments of her widowhood. 20. And Judah sent the kid of the goats by
the hand of his companion the Adullamite, to receive the pledge from the
woman's hand; and he found her not. 21. And he asked the men of that
place, saying, Where is the harlot that was at the fountains upon the
way? And they said, There was no harlot there. 22. And he returned to
Judah and said, I have not found her; and also the men of the place
said, There was no harlot there. 23. And Judah said, Let her take it to
her, haply we shall be put to shame; behold I sent this kid, and thou
hast not found her. 24. And it came to pass about three months after,
and it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter-in-law hath played the
harlot; and moreover, behold she is with child to whoredoms. And Judah
said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt. 25. She was brought forth,
and she sent to her father-in-law, saying, By the man whose these are am
I with child; and she said, Acknowledge I pray thee whose are these, the
signet and the kerchief and the staff. 26. And Judah acknowledged them,
and said, She is more just than I; forasmuch as I gave her not to Shelah
my son. And he added no further to know her. 27. And it came to pass in
the time of her travail, and behold twins were in her womb. 28. And it
came to pass when she travailed, that one put out a hand; and the
midwife took and bound double-dyed upon his hand, saying, This came out
first. 29. And it came to pass as he drew back his hand, that behold his
brother came out; and she said, Wherefore hast thou broken upon thee a
breach? And he called his name Perez. 30. And afterward came out his
brother, that had the double-dyed upon his hand; and he called his name
Zerah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4811.">4811.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. The subject treated of in this chapter, in the internal
sense is the Jewish Church and the genuine church; the Jewish Church is
described by Judah, and the genuine church by Tamar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4812.">4812.</span></span>

The sons by Tamar signify the two essentials of the church, namely,
faith and love-Perez faith, and Zerah love. Their birth represents that
love is actually the firstborn of the church, and faith only apparently
so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4813.">4813.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE. Verses 1-5. And it came to pass in this time and
Judah went down from his brethren, and turned aside even to a man, an
Adullamite, and his name was Hirah. And Judah saw there a daughter of a
man, a Canaanite, and her name was Shua; and he took her, and came to
her. And she conceived and bare a son, and he called his name Er. And
she conceived again and bare a son, and she called his name Onan. And
she added again and bare a son, and she called his name Shelah; and he
was in Chezib when she bare him. "And it came to pass in this time,"
signifies the state of the things that follow; "and Judah went down from
his brethren," signifies the posterity of Jacob, specifically the tribe
of Judah, which was separated from the rest; "and turned aside even to a
man, an Adullamite," signifies to falsity; "and his name was Hirah,"
signifies its quality; "and Judah saw there a daughter of a man, a
Canaanite," signifies the affection of evil from the falsity of evil;
"and her name was Shua," signifies its quality; "and he took her, and
came to her," signifies that the tribe of Judah conjoined itself with
these things; "and she conceived and bare a son," signifies that the
falsity of the church was thence derived; "and he called his name Er,"
signifies its quality; "and she conceived again and bare a son,"
signifies evil; "and she called his name Onan," signifies its quality;
"and she added again and bare a son," signifies what is idolatrous; "and
called his name Shelah," signifies its quality; "and he was in Chezib
when she bare him," signifies the state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4814.">4814.</span></span>

And it came to pass in this time. That this signifies the state of the
things that follow, is evident from the signification of "time," as
being state (see n. 2625, 2788, 2837, 3254, 3356, 3404, 3938). That it
is the state of the things that follow, is signified by its being said
"it came to pass in this time," for what came to pass is related in what
follows. Moreover, the things which follow in a series flow from those
which precede, for in the preceding chapter it is said of the sons of
Jacob that they sold Joseph, and that Judah persuaded them to do it; of
whom it is said in that chapter, "And Judah said unto his brethren, What
gain is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood? Come and let
us sell him to the Ishmaelites" (verses 26, 27), whereby was signified
that the Divine truth was alienated by them, especially by Judah, by
whom is there signified in the proximate sense the tribe of Judah, and
in general the depraved in the church who are against all good whatever
(n. 4750, 4751). This is referred to by its being said "in this time,"
for the subject now treated of is Judah, and his sons by the Canaanite
woman, and afterward by Tamar his daughter-in-law; and by these things
in the internal sense is described the tribe of Judah in respect to the
things of the church instituted with that tribe. \[2\] That by "time" is
signified state, and hence by its "coming to pass in this time," the
state of the things that follow, cannot but appear strange; for the
reason that it cannot be comprehended how the notion of time can be
changed into the notion of state, or that when "time" occurs in the
Word, something relating to state is to be understood. But be it known
that the thoughts of angels do not derive anything from time or from
space, because they are in heaven; for when they left the world, they
left also the notion of time and space, and put on notions of state,
that is, of the state of good and truth. Wherefore when man reads the
Word and then thinks of time and of the things belonging to time, the
angels with him do not perceive anything of time, but perceive instead
the things that are of state, which also correspond thereto. Neither
does man in his interior thought perceive time, but only in his
exterior, as may appear from the state of man when his exterior thought
is lulled to rest, that is, when he is sleeping; and also from various
other experiences. \[3\] But be it known that there are in general two
states, a state of good and a state of truth. The state of good is
called a state of being, but the state of truth a state of coming into
existence; for being is of good, and the derivative coming into
existence is of truth. Space corresponds to the state of being, and time
to the state of coming into existence. Hence it may be seen that when
man reads "and it came to pass in this time," the angels with him can by
no means perceive these words as man does. So likewise in other
instances. For whatever is written in the Word is of such a nature that
with angels it is turned into a corresponding sense, which does not at
all appear in the sense of the letter; because what is worldly of the
sense of the letter is turned into what is spiritual of the internal
sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4815.">4815.</span></span>

And Judah went down from his brethren. That this signifies the posterity
of Jacob, and specifically the tribe of Judah, which was separated from
the rest, is evident from the representation of Judah, as being in the
universal sense the posterity of Jacob, and in the specific sense the
tribe called the tribe of Judah; and from the signification of "going
down from his brethren," as being to be separated from the rest of the
tribes, here to go into worse evil than they; for "going down" involves
to be cast down to evil, as "going up" involves elevation to good (n.
3084, 4539). The reason of this as before said is that the land of
Canaan represented the Lord's kingdom, and Jerusalem and Zion the inmost
of it; but the regions outside the boundaries of that land represented
those things which are outside the Lord's kingdom, namely, falsity and
evil. Therefore going from Zion and Jerusalem toward the boundaries was
called "going down;" but going from the boundaries to Jerusalem and Zion
was called "going up." Hence "going up" involves elevation to what is
true and good, and "going down," to be cast down to what is false and
evil. As the falsity and evil to which the tribe of Judah cast itself
down are here treated of, it is said that Judah "went down," and then
that he "turned aside to a man, an Adullamite;" and by "turning aside"
is signified turning to falsity, and afterward to evil. \[2\] It is
known that the tribe of Judah was separated from the rest of the tribes,
and the reason was that this tribe might represent the Lord's celestial
kingdom, but the rest of the tribes His spiritual kingdom. For this
reason also Judah in the representative sense is the celestial man, and
in the universal sense the Lord's celestial kingdom (n. 3654, 3881); and
the rest of the tribes were called by the one name, "Israelites," for
Israel in the representative sense is the spiritual man, and in the
universal sense the Lord's spiritual kingdom (n. 3654, 4286). \[3\] That
the tribe of Judah went into worse evil than the rest is specifically
signified by these words: "Judah went down from his brethren, and turned
aside." That the tribe of Judah went into worse evil than the rest is
evident from many passages in the Word, especially in the prophets; as
in Jeremiah: Her treacherous sister Judah saw when for all the ways
whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away and
given her a bill of divorcement; yet treacherous Judah her sister feared
not, but she also went and committed whoredom, so that by the voice of
her whoredom the land was profaned, she committed adultery with stone
and wood; yet for all these things treacherous Judah hath not returned
unto Me; backsliding Israel hath justified her soul more than
treacherous Judah (Jer. 3:7-11). And in Ezekiel: Her sister indeed saw,
yet she corrupted her love more than she, and her whoredoms above the
whoredoms of her sister (Ezek. 23:11 to end); speaking of Jerusalem and
Samaria, or of the tribes of Judah and the tribes of Israel. So in many
other places. \[4\] In the internal sense that tribe is described as to
how it lapsed into falsity, and thence into evil, and at last into mere
idolatry. This is indeed described in the internal sense before that
tribe was separated from the rest, and before it so came to pass; but
what is in the internal sense is Divine, and to the Divine future things
are present. (See what is foretold of this nation in Deut. 31:16-22;
32:15-44.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4816.">4816.</span></span>

And turned aside to a man, an Adullamite. That this signifies to
falsity, is evident from the signification of "turning aside," as being
to go away into what is perverse, for "turning aside," like "going
down," is predicated of far removal from good to evil, and from truth to
falsity; and from the signification of a "man" \[vir\] as being one who
is intelligent, and in the abstract sense truth, because the genuine
intellectual is from truths (n. 265, 749, 1007, 3134, 3309); but in the
opposite sense it is one who is not intelligent, and consequently
falsity. This falsity is represented by an Adullamite, for Adullam was
on the boundary of the inheritance of Judah (Josh. 15:35), and hence
signified the truth which is from good; as also in Micah: Yet will I
bring an heir to thee O inhabitress of Mareshah, even to Adullam shall
come the glory of Israel (Micah 1:15); but as most things in the Word
have also an opposite sense, so too has Adullam, and it then signifies
the falsity which is from evil. That most things have also an opposite
sense is because before the land of Canaan was made an inheritance for
the sons of Jacob, it was possessed by nations by whom were signified
falsities and evils; and also afterwards when the sons of Jacob went
into what is contrary; for lands take on the representation of the
nations and peoples who inhabit them, according to their quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4817.">4817.</span></span>

And his name was Hirah. That this signifies its quality, is evident from
the signification of "name," and of "calling a name," as being the
quality (see n. 144, 145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 2724, 3006, 3421). The
quality of the falsity spoken of just above is what is signified; for by
the names both of places and of persons in the Word are signified states
and things (n. 1224, 1264, 1876, 1888, 1946, 2643, 3422, 4298, 4442).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4818.">4818.</span></span>

And Judah saw there a daughter of a man, a Canaanite. That this
signifies the affection of evil from the falsity of evil, is evident
from the signification of a "daughter," as being the affection of good
(n. 2362), and in the opposite sense the affection of evil (n. 3024);
and from the signification of a "man," as being one who is intelligent,
and in the abstract sense truth, but in the opposite sense one who is
not intelligent, and falsity, as just above (n. 4816); and from the
signification of a "Canaanite," as being evil (n. 1573, 1574). From this
it is evident that by a "daughter of a man a Canaanite" is signified
evil which is from the falsity of evil. What evil from the falsity of
evil is, will be shown below. \[2\] Here something must first be said
about the origins of the tribe of Judah, for they are described in this
chapter. There are three origins of this tribe, or of the Jewish
nation-one from Shelah, the son of Judah, by his Canaanite wife; another
from Perez, and the third from Zerah, the sons of Judah by Tamar his
daughter-in-law. That the whole Jewish nation was from these three sons
of Judah is evident from the enumeration of the sons and grandsons of
Jacob who came with him into Egypt (Gen. 46:12); and also from their
classification according to families, in Moses: The sons of Judah
according to their families were: of Shelah, the family of the
Shelanites; of Perez, the family of the Perezites; of Zerah, the family
of the Zerahites (Num. 26:20; 1 Chron. 4:21); this shows what the origin
of that nation was, namely, that one third of them was from the
Canaanite mother, and that two thirds of them were from the
daughter-in-law; consequently that all were from an illegitimate
connection, for marriages with the daughters of the Canaanites were
strictly forbidden (as is evident from Gen. 24:3; Exod. 34:16; Deut.
7:3; 1 Kings 11:2; Ezra 9 and 10), and to lie with one's daughter-in-law
was a capital offense, as is evident in Moses: If a man lie with his
daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death; they have
wrought confusion; their bloods shall be upon them (Lev. 20:12). Judah's
referring this deed with his daughter-in-law to the levirate law in
which an ordinance is made regarding the brother, but by no means
regarding the father (as appears from verse 26 of this chapter), implies
that his sons by Tamar should be acknowledged as the sons of Er his
firstborn, who was born of the Canaanite mother, and who was evil in the
eyes of Jehovah, and was therefore caused to die (verse 7); for those
who were born first to the husband's brother were not his by whom they
were conceived, but his whose seed they raised up, as is evident from
Deuteronomy 25:5, 6, and also from verses 8 and 9 of this chapter.
Moreover, those who were born of Tamar were born of fornication; for
Judah thought when he went unto her that she was a harlot (verses 15,
16, 21). This shows whence and of what quality was the origin of the
Jewish nation, and that they spoke falsely when they said, "We were not
born of fornication" (John 8:41). \[3\] What this origin involves and
represents is plain from what follows, namely, that their interiors were
of such a quality, or had such an origin. Judah's marrying a Canaanite
involves an origin from the evil which is from the falsity of evil, for
this is signified in the internal sense by "a daughter of a man, a
Canaanite;" his lying with his daughter-in-law involves and represents
damnation from falsified truth from evil, for everywhere in the Word
whoredom signifies the falsification of truth (n. 3708). Evil from the
falsity of evil is evil of life from false doctrine which has been
hatched by the evil of the love of self (that is, by those who are in
this evil), and confirmed by the sense of the letter of the Word. Such
is the origin of evil with the Jewish nation, and such is its origin
with some in the Christian world, especially with those who in the Word
are meant by Babylon. This evil is of such a nature that it closes every
way to the internal man, insomuch that nothing of conscience can be
formed therein; for the evil which a person does from false doctrine, he
believes to be good, because he believes it to be true; and therefore he
does it freely and with delight, as allowable. Thus heaven is so closed
to him that it cannot be opened. \[4\] The quality of this evil may be
shown by an example. With those who from the evil of the love of self
believe that Jehovah has chosen a single nation only, and that all the
rest of mankind are relatively slaves, and so vile that they may be
killed at pleasure or be cruelly treated - as the Jewish nation
believed, and at this day the Babylonish nation also believes - and
confirm this belief from the sense of the letter of the Word, then
whatever evil they do from this false doctrine and others built upon
this as a foundation, is evil from the falsity of evil, and destroys the
internal man, preventing any conscience from ever being formed therein.
These are they spoken of in the Word who are said to be "in bloods," for
they are in cruel rage against the whole human race which does not adore
their articles of faith, and thus themselves, and does not offer its
gifts upon their altars. \[5\] Take another example: with those who from
the evil of the love of self and of the world believe that there must be
someone as the Lord's vicar on earth, who has the power of opening and
shutting heaven, and thus of ruling over the minds and consciences of
all, and who confirm this falsity from the sense of the letter of the
Word, whatever of evil they do from this belief is evil from the falsity
of evil, which in like manner destroys the internal man with those who
from this evil claim for themselves this power, and in this way rule;
and this evil is destructive to such a degree that they no longer know
what the internal man is, nor that anyone has conscience, consequently
they no longer believe that there is any life after death, nor that
there is a heaven or a hell, no matter how they may speak of these
things. \[6\] This evil, as regards its quality, cannot be distinguished
by men in the world from other evils, but in the other life it is known
by the angels as in clear day; for evils and falsities are manifest in
that life as to their distinctions of quality and origin, which are
innumerable; and according to the genera and species of these also are
the distinctions of the hells. Concerning these innumerable differences
man knows scarcely anything; he merely believes that evil exists, but
what its quality is he does not know, and this for the sole reason that
he does not know what good is, and this because he does not know what
charity is; for if he had known the good of charity he would have known
also the opposites or evils, with their distinctions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4819.">4819.</span></span>

And her name was Shua. That this signifies its quality, is evident from
the signification of "name," as being quality (of which above, n. 4817),
here the quality of evil from the falsity of evil (of which also above,
n. 4818).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4820.">4820.</span></span>

And he took her, and came to her. That this signifies that the tribe of
Judah conjoined itself with these things, namely, with evils from the
falsities of evil, is evident from the signification of "taking
her"-that is to say, for a woman-and "coming" or "entering to her," as
being to be conjoined, as explained several times above. For in the
internal sense marriages represent the conjunction of good and truth,
because this is their source (n. 2727-2759), but in the opposite sense
the conjunction of evil and falsity, here the conjunction of the tribe
of Judah with evil and falsity; for this is said of Judah, by whom is
signified the tribe named after him, as may be seen above (n. 4815). It
is not said here that he took her for a wife, but only that he took her
and came to her, for the reason that the connection was unlawful (n.
4818); and also because it was thus tacitly indicated that it was not a
marriage, but a whoredom, thus that the sons born of her were born of
whoredom. The conjunction of evil with falsity is nothing else. Her
being afterwards called his wife; in these words-"and the days were
multiplied, and Shua's daughter died, the wife of Judah" (verse 12)-will
be spoken of below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4821.">4821.</span></span>

And she conceived, and bare a son. That this signifies that the falsity
of the church was thence derived, is evident from the signification of
"conceiving and bearing," as being to acknowledge in faith and act (n.
3905, 3915, 3919); and from the signification of a "son," as being the
truth of the church, but in the opposite sense falsity (n. 489, 491,
533, 1147, 2623, 3373, 4257). Hence by her "conceiving and bearing a
son" is here signified that the church with the tribe of Judah
acknowledges falsity in faith and act. That by this son is signified the
falsity of the church, is because he was the firstborn, and in the
ancient churches by the firstborn was signified the truth of faith (n.
352, 3325), and in the opposite sense falsity-as was also signified by
the firstborn of men and of beasts in Egypt (n. 3325). That not truth
but falsity is signified, is plain from what shortly follows; for it is
said, "Er, Judah's firstborn, was evil in the eyes of Jehovah; and
Jehovah caused him to die" (verse 7). The name of his son Er also
involves this quality, as likewise the name of the second son Onan
involves his quality, namely, what is wrong or evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4822.">4822.</span></span>

And he called his name Er. That this signifies its quality, is evident
from the signification of "calling a name," as being quality (n. 144,
145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 2724, 3006, 3421), namely, the quality of the
falsity of the church, of which just above (n. 4821). It is said "the
quality of the falsity," because falsities differ one from another, just
as truths do, and to such a degree that their different kinds can
scarcely be enumerated; and each kind of falsity has its own quality by
which it is distinguished from another. There are general falsities
which reign with the depraved in every church, and the falsity is varied
with everyone in the church according to his life. The falsity which was
in the Jewish Church, and which is here treated of, was falsity from the
evil of the love of self, and of the derivative love of the world (see
n. 4818).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4823.">4823.</span></span>

And she conceived again, and bare a son. That this signifies evil, is
evident from the signification of a "son," as being truth, and also good
(n. 264); thus in the opposite sense falsity and also evil, but the evil
which is from falsity. This evil in its essence is falsity, because it
is from it; for one who from a false doctrine does what is evil, does
also what is false; but because it is done in act, it is called evil.
That by the firstborn son is signified falsity, and by this one evil, is
evident from its being related of this son that he did evil in act,
namely, that "he destroyed the seed to the earth, that he might not give
seed to his brother. And the thing which he did was evil in the eyes of
Jehovah; and He caused him also to die" (verses 9 and 10). Here also it
is evident that this evil was from falsity. Moreover, in the ancient
churches by the second son was signified the truth of faith in act; and
therefore by this son falsity in act, that is, evil. That evil is what
is signified by him, may be seen also from the fact that Er the
firstborn was named by his father, or Judah; while this son, or Onan,
was named by his mother, the daughter of Shua, as may be seen in the
original tongue. For in the Word by a "man" is signified falsity, and by
a "woman" the evil thereof (see n. 915, 2517, 4510). That by the
daughter of Shua is signified evil, may be seen above (n. 4818, 4819).
Wherefore Er, because he was named by his father, signifies falsity, and
Onan, because he was named by his mother, signifies evil; for the former
was thus as it were the father's son, but the latter as it were the
mother's. \[2\] In the Word "man and wife," and also "husband and wife,"
are often mentioned; and when "man and wife" are mentioned, by "man" is
signified truth, and by "wife" good, and in the opposite sense by "man"
is signified falsity, and by "wife" evil; but when "husband and wife"
are mentioned, good is signified by "husband," and truth by "wife," and
in the opposite sense evil is signified by "husband," and falsity by
"wife." The reason of this mystery is this: in the celestial church the
husband was in good, and the wife in the truth of this good; but in the
spiritual church the man is in truth, and the wife in the good of this
truth; such were they in fact then, and such are they now, for the
interiors of man have undergone this change. Hence where celestial good
and celestial truth from it are treated of in the Word, it is said
"husband and wife;" but where spiritual good and spiritual truth from it
are treated of, it is said "man and wife," or rather "man and woman."
From this, as also from the expressions themselves, it is known what
good and what truth are treated of in the Word, in its internal sense.
\[3\] This too is the reason of its having been occasionally stated that
marriages represent the conjunction of good and truth, and of truth and
good. Moreover, conjugial love has its origin from this conjunction of
good with truth; and conjugial love with the spiritual from the
conjunction of truth with good. Marriages also actually correspond to
these conjunctions. From all this it is evident what is involved in the
father's naming the first son, and the mother's naming the second, and
also the third-as appears from the original tongue-namely, that the
father named the first son, because by him was signified falsity, and
that the mother named the second, because by him was signified evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4824.">4824.</span></span>

And she called his name Onan. That this signifies its quality, namely,
the quality of the evil spoken of just above (n. 4823), is evident from
the signification of "calling a name," as being the quality (n. 4822).
"Onan" signifies and involves the quality of this evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4825.">4825.</span></span>

And she added again and bare a son. That this signifies what is
idolatrous, is evident from the signification of a "son" here, as being
what is idolatrous, for those who were born before signified falsity and
evil (n. 4821, 4823). From this it follows that the third son means what
is idolatrous, for both falsity and evil produce this, and are in it. Of
the three sons who were born to Judah of the Canaanite woman, this son
was the only one that survived, from whom came a third part of the
Jewish nation; and that this nation took its rise from what is
idolatrous, is here meant in the internal sense. That this nation was
very prone to idolatry is evident from the historic and prophetic parts
of the Word according to the sense of the letter; and that it was
continually idolatrous is plain from the internal sense. For idolatry
consists not only in worshiping idols, graven images, and other gods,
but also in worshiping external things without their internals. In this
that nation was continually idolatrous, adoring external things only,
and entirely removing internal things, not being willing even to know
about them. They had indeed holy things with them-as the tent of
meeting, with the ark, the mercy-seat on it, the tables on which were
the loaves, the lampstand, incenses, and the altar outside the tent, on
which were offered burnt-offerings and sacrifices - all which things
were called holy; and the inmost of the tent was called the holy of
holies, and also the sanctuary. They also had with them the garments
that belonged to Aaron and to their high priests, and were called the
garments of holiness; for there was the ephod with the breast-plate in
which was the Urim and Thummim, besides other things. Yet these things
were not holy in themselves, but were holy from representing holy
things, namely, the Divine celestial and spiritual things of the Lord's
kingdom, and also the Lord Himself. Still less were they holy from the
people with whom they were, for that people were not at all affected by
the internal things which were represented, but only by the external;
and to be affected by external things only is idolatrous, for it is to
worship wood and stone, and also the gold and silver with which they are
covered, from a phantasy that they are holy in themselves. Such was that
nation, and such also it is at this day. \[2\] But still there might be
with them a representative of a church, because the representative does
not regard the person, but the thing (see n. 665, 1097e, 3670, 4208,
4281, 4288). Thus their worship did not make them blessed and happy in
the other life, but only prosperous in the world so long as they
continued in the representatives, and did not turn aside to the idols of
the Gentiles, and thus become openly idolaters; for then not anything of
the church could any longer be represented with that nation. These are
the things which are meant by what is idolatrous that is signified by
the third son of Judah by the Canaanite woman. This idolatry with that
nation had its origin from their internal idolatry, for they above other
nations were in the love of self and the world (n. 4459e, 4750); and
those who are in the love of self and of the world are in internal
idolatry, for they worship themselves and the world, and perform holy
ceremonies for the sake of self-adoration and gain, that is, for self as
an end-not for the Lord's church and kingdom as an end, thus not for the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4826.">4826.</span></span>

And she called his name Shelah. That this signifies its quality, is
evident from the signification of "calling a name," as being quality, of
which above, where the two former sons of Judah, Er and Onan, are
treated of (n. 4822, 4824). The quality of the idolatry is what is
signified by Shelah, for there are many idolatries-there is external
idolatry and there is internal, both being in general the worship of
falsity and evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4827.">4827.</span></span>

And he was in Chezib when she bare him. That this signifies the state,
is evident from the signification of "Chezib," as being the state,
namely, the state of the idolatry signified by Shelah, in which the
Jewish nation was; and from the signification of "bearing," as being to
be conjoined in act (see n. 3905, 3915, 3919); and because the
conjunction was with the evil that is in idolatry it is said that "she"
called his name Shelah, as appears from the original language; for by
"her," namely, the daughter of Shua, is signified evil from the falsity
of evil (n. 4818, 4819).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4828.">4828.</span></span>

Verses 6-10. And Judah took a woman for Er his firstborn, and her name
was Tamar. And Er, Judah's firstborn, was evil in the eyes of Jehovah;
and Jehovah caused him to die. And Judah said unto Onan, Come to thy
brother's wife, and perform the duty of a husband's brother unto her,
and raise up seed to thy brother. And Onan knew that the seed would not
be his; and it came to pass when he came to his brother's wife, and he
destroyed it to the earth, that he might not give seed to his brother.
And that which he did was evil in the eyes of Jehovah, and He caused him
also to die. "And Judah took a woman," signifies the church which was
for his posterity; "for Er his firstborn," signifies falsity of faith;
"and her name was Tamar," signifies the quality of the church, that it
was a church representative of spiritual and celestial things; "and Er,
Judah's firstborn, was evil in the eyes of Jehovah," signifies that it
was in the falsity of evil; "and Jehovah caused him to die," signifies
that there was no representative of the church; "and Judah said unto
Onan," signifies to preserve a representative of the church; "Come to
thy brother's wife, and perform the duty of a husband's brother unto
her," signifies that it should be continued; "and raise up seed to thy
brother," signifies lest the church should perish; "and Onan knew that
the seed would not be his," signifies aversion and hatred; "and it came
to pass when he came to his brother's wife, and he destroyed it to the
earth," signifies what is contrary to conjugial love; "that he might not
give seed to his brother," signifies that thus there was no
continuation; "and that which he did was evil in the eyes of Jehovah,"
signifies that it was contrary to the Divine order; "and He caused him
also to die," signifies that there was also no representative of the
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4829.">4829.</span></span>

And Judah took a woman. That this signifies the church which was for his
posterity, is evident from the representation of Tamar, who is the
"woman" here, as being the church, of which in what follows. That it was
for the posterity of Judah, is signified by his taking her for Er his
first-born, that he might have descendants thence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4830.">4830.</span></span>

For Er his firstborn. That this signifies falsity of faith, is evident
from the representation of Er, as being falsity (n. 4821, 4822); and
from the signification of the "firstborn," as being faith (n. 352, 3325,
4821).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4831.">4831.</span></span>

And her name was Tamar. That this signifies the quality of the church,
that it was a church representative of spiritual and celestial things,
is evident from the signification of "name," as being the quality (n.
144, 145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 2724, 3006, 3421), here the quality of the
church, because in this chapter by Tamar is represented the church, and
indeed a church representative of spiritual and celestial things which
was to be instituted among the posterity of Judah. That this church is
represented by Tamar, is evident from what follows. This entire chapter
in the internal sense treats of the Jewish Church, that it should become
representative of the spiritual and celestial things of the Lord's
kingdom, as had been the Ancient Church; and this not only in external,
but also in internal form. For the church is not a church from
externals, that is, from rituals, but from internals, which are
essential, while externals are only formal. The posterity of Jacob were
such as not to be willing to receive internal things; therefore with
them the Ancient Church could not be renewed, but only a representative
of that Church (n. 4307, 4444, 4500). The internal of the church here is
Tamar, and its external is Judah with his three sons by the Canaanite
woman.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4832.">4832.</span></span>

And Er, Judah's firstborn, was evil in the eyes of Jehovah. That this
signifies that he was in the falsity of evil, is evident from the
representation of Er and the signification of the "firstborn," as being
falsity of faith, of which just above (n. 4830). That this falsity was
the falsity of evil, is evident from what was said above (n. 4818); but
the falsity of evil in this son was of such a nature that not even a
representative of a church could be instituted among any posterity from
him; wherefore it is said that he was "evil in the eyes of Jehovah and
Jehovah caused him to die." With that whole nation from its first
origin, especially from Judah, there was falsity of evil, that is, false
doctrine from evil of life, but different in one son of Judah from what
it was in another. It was foreseen what might be serviceable, and that
it was not that which was in Er the firstborn, nor that which was in
Onan the second son, but only that which was in Shelah. Therefore the
first two were destroyed, and the last was preserved. That falsity of
evil was with that whole nation from its first origin is plainly
described in Moses in these words: They have corrupted themselves, they
are not His sons, it is their blemish; they are a perverse and crooked
generation. And Jehovah saw and reprobated because of indignation His
sons and His daughters. And He said, I will hide My faces from them, I
will see what their posterity shall be; for they are a generation of
perversities, sons in whom is no faithfulness; I will add evils upon
them, I will spend Mine arrows upon them. They shall be exhausted with
hunger, and consumed with burning coals, and bitter overthrow. They are
a nation void of counsels, and there is no intelligence in them. Their
vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their
grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are of bitternesses; their
wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel gall of asps. Is not this
laid up in store with Me, sealed in My treasuries? The day of their
destruction is at hand, and the things that are to come upon them make
haste (Deut. 32:5, 19-24, 28, 32-35); by these words in the internal
sense is described the falsity of evil in which that nation was, and
which was rooted in them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4833.">4833.</span></span>

And Jehovah caused him to die. That this signifies that there was no
representative of the church, is evident from the signification of
"dying," as being to cease to be such (see n. 494), and also the end of
representation (n. 3253, 3259, 3276), here therefore is signified that
there could be no representative of the church among any posterity from
him, according to what was said just above (n. 4832).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4834.">4834.</span></span>

And Judah said unto Onan. That this signifies to preserve a
representative of the church, is evident from the things which follow,
to which they have reference; for he said to him that he should perform
to his brother the duty of a husband's brother, by which was represented
the preservation and continuation of the church, now to be spoken of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4835.">4835.</span></span>

Come to thy brother's wife, and perform the duty of a husband's brother
unto her. That this signifies that he should continue it, namely, the
representative of the church, is evident from the signification of "to
come" or "enter to a brother's wife, and perform the duty of a husband's
brother unto her," as being to preserve and continue that which is of
the church. The commandment in the Mosaic law that if any man died
childless, his brother should take the widow to wife and raise up seed
to his brother, and that the firstborn should be called by the name of
the deceased brother, but the rest of the sons should be his own, was
called "the duty of the husband's brother." That this statute was not a
new thing originating in the Jewish Church, but had been in use before,
is evident from this history, and the same is true of many other
statutes that were commanded the Israelites by Moses-as that they should
not take wives of the daughters of the Canaanites, and that they should
marry within their families (Gen. 24:3-4; 28:1-2). From these and many
other instances it is evident that there had been a church before, in
which such things had been instituted as were afterwards promulgated and
enjoined upon the sons of Jacob. That altars and sacrifices had been in
use from ancient times is plain from Genesis 8:20-21; 22:3, 7-8, 13.
From this it is clear that the Jewish Church was not a new church, but
that it was a resuscitation of the Ancient Church which had perished.
\[2\] What the law in regard to the husband's brother had been is
evident in Moses: If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and
have no son, the wife of the deceased shall not marry without, to a
strange man; her husband's brother shall enter to her, and take her to
him to wife, and thus perform the duty of a husband's brother unto her.
Then it shall be that the first-born whom she beareth shall stand upon
the name of his deceased brother, that his name be not blotted out of
Israel. But if the man will not marry his brother's wife, his brother's
wife shall go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My husband's
brother refuses to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel; he will
not perform the duty of a husband's brother unto me. Then the elders of
his city shall call him, and speak unto him; and if he stand and say, I
desire not to take her; then shall his brother's wife come near unto him
in the sight of the elders, and shall draw his shoe from off his foot,
and spit in his face; and she shall answer and say, So shall it be done
unto the man that doth not build up his brother's house; whence his name
shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hath his shoe taken off
(Deut. 25:5-10). \[3\] One who does not know what the duty of a
husband's brother represents, can have no other belief than that it was
merely for the sake of preserving the name, and hence the inheritance;
but the preservation of a name and of an inheritance was not of so much
importance that for the sake of it a brother should enter into marriage
with his brother's wife; but this was enjoined that thereby might be
represented the preservation and continuation of the church. For
marriage represented the marriage of good and truth, that is, the
heavenly marriage, and consequently the church also, for the church is a
church from the marriage of good and truth; and when the church is in
this marriage it makes one with heaven, which is the heavenly marriage
itself. As marriage has this representation, therefore sons and
daughters represented and also signified truths and goods; wherefore to
be childless signified a deprivation of good and truth, thus that there
was no longer any representative of the church in that house,
consequently that it was out of communion. Moreover, the brother
represented kindred good, with which might be conjoined the truth which
was represented by the widowed wife; for in order that truth may be the
truth which has life and produces fruit, and so continue that which is
of the church, it cannot be conjoined with any other than its own and
kindred good. This is what is perceived in heaven by the duty prescribed
to the husband's brother. \[4\] That if the man would not perform the
duty of a husband's brother, his brother's wife should take his shoe
from off his foot and spit in his face, signified that, as one who was
devoid of external and internal good and truth, he would destroy the
things of the church; for a "shoe" is what is external (n. 1748), and
the "face" is what is internal (n. 1999, 2434, 3527, 4066, 4796). From
this it is evident that by the duty of the husband's brother was
represented the preservation and continuation of the church. But when
the representatives of internal things ceased by the coming of the Lord,
then this law was abolished. This is circumstanced as are the soul or
spirit of man and his body. The soul or spirit of man is his internal,
and the body is his external; or what is the same, the soul or spirit is
the very form of man, but the body is his representative image; and when
a man rises again, his representative image, or his external, which is
the body, is put off; for he is then in his internal, or in his form
itself. It is circumstanced also as is one who is in darkness, and from
it sees the things which are of the light; or what is the same as is one
who is in the light of the world, and from this sees the things which
are of the light of heaven; for the light of the world in comparison
with the light of heaven is as darkness. In darkness, or in the light of
the world, the things which are of the light of heaven do not appear
such as they are in themselves, but as in a representative image, as the
mind of man appears in his face; and therefore when the light of heaven
appears in its clearness, the darkness or representative image is
dissipated. This was effected by the coming of the Lord. 4835a. And
raise up seed to thy brother. That this signifies lest the church should
perish, is evident from the signification of "seed," as being truth from
good, or the faith of charity (n. 1025, 1447, 1610, 1940, 2848, 3310,
3373, 3671). The like is also signified by the "firstborn who was to
stand upon the name of the deceased brother" (n. 352, 367, 2435, 3325,
3494). To "raise up the seed to a brother" is to continue that which is
of the church, according to what was said just above (see n. 4834), thus
lest the church should perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4836.">4836.</span></span>

And Onan knew that the seed would not be his. That this signifies
aversion and hatred, is evident from the representation of Onan, as
being evil (n. 4823, 4824); and because not to give seed to one's
brother, or not to perform the duty of a husband's brother, is not to
will the good and truth of the church, and its continuation (n. 4834),
therefore by these words is signified aversion and hatred; for evil is
nothing else than aversion and hatred toward the good and truth of the
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4837.">4837.</span></span>

And it came to pass, when he came to his brother's wife, and he
destroyed it to the earth. That this signifies what is contrary to
conjugial love, is evident from what now follows. By Er, Judah's
firstborn, is described the falsity of evil in which the Jewish nation
was at first; by Onan the second son is described the evil which is from
the falsity of evil, in which that nation was afterwards; and by Shelah
the third son is described the idolatry thence derived, in which they
were thereafter continually (n. 4826). Evil from the falsity of evil is
described by what Onan did, that he was not willing to give seed to his
brother, but that he destroyed it to the earth. That by this is
signified what is contrary to conjugial love, is because in the internal
sense by the conjugial is meant what is of the church; for the church is
the marriage of good and truth, and to this marriage, evil from the
falsity of evil is altogether contrary, that is, those who are in such
evil are contrary to this marriage. \[2\] That this nation had not
anything conjugial, whether understood in a spiritual or in a natural
sense, is very evident from the fact that they were permitted to have
more wives than one; for where there is the conjugial as understood in a
spiritual sense, that is, where the good and truth of the church are,
consequently where the church is, this is by no means permitted, for the
genuine conjugial is never possible except among those with whom the
church or kingdom of the Lord is, and not with these except between two
(n. 1907, 2740, 3246). Marriage between two persons who are in genuine
conjugial love corresponds to the heavenly marriage, that is, to the
conjunction of good and truth, the husband corresponding to good, and
the wife to the truth of this good; moreover, when they are in genuine
conjugial love, they are in this heavenly marriage. Therefore wherever
the church is, it is never permitted to have more wives than one; but
because there was no church among the posterity of Jacob, but only a
representative of a church, or the external of a church without its
internal (n. 4311, 4500), it was therefore permitted among them.
Further, the marriage of one husband with several wives would present in
heaven an idea or image as if one good were conjoined with several
truths which do not agree together, and thus as if there was no good;
for a good from truths which do not agree together becomes none at all,
since good has its quality from truths and their agreement. \[3\] It
would also present an image as if the church were not one, but several,
and these distinct from one another according to the truths of faith, or
according to doctrinals; when yet it is one when good is the essential
in it and this is qualified and as it were modified by truths. The
church is an image of heaven; for it is the kingdom of the Lord on
earth. Heaven is distinguished into many general societies, and into
lesser ones subordinate to these; but still they are one through good;
for the truths of faith there are in agreement according to good; for
they have regard to good, and are from it. If heaven were distinguished
according to the truths of faith, and not according to good, there would
be no heaven, for there would be no unanimity; for the angels could not
have from the Lord a oneness of life, or one soul. This is possible only
in good, that is in love to the Lord, and in love toward the neighbor.
For love conjoins all; and when everyone has love for good and truth,
they have a common life, which is from the Lord, and thus have the Lord,
who conjoins all. The love of good and truth is what is called love
toward the neighbor; for the neighbor is he who is in good and thence in
truth, and in the abstract sense is good itself and its truth. From
these things it may be seen why within the church marriage must be
between one husband and one wife; and why it was permitted the
descendants of Jacob to take a number of wives; and that the reason for
this was that there was no church among them, and consequently a
representative of a church could not be instituted among them by
marriages, because they were in what is contrary to conjugial love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4838.">4838.</span></span>

That he might not give seed to his brother. That this signifies that
thus there was no continuation, is evident from the signification of
"giving seed to one's brother," or performing the duty of a husband's
brother, as being to continue that which is of the church, of which
above (n. 4834); and therefore by "not giving seed to his brother," is
signified that the there was no continuation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4839.">4839.</span></span>

And that which he did was evil in the eyes of Jehovah. That this
signifies that it was contrary to the Divine order, is evident from the
signification of "evil in the eyes of Jehovah," or evil against Him, as
being what is contrary to the order which is from Him. This appears also
from the deed, and likewise from the statute in regard to the husband's
brother, namely, that his brother's wife should take his shoe from off
his foot, and spit in his face, and that his name should be called in
Israel, The house of him that hath his shoe taken off (Deut. 25:8-10),
whereby was signified that he was without good external or internal; and
they who are without good, and are in evil, are against Divine order.
All that evil which springs or flows forth from interior evil (that is,
from the intention or end of evil, such as was this of Onan's), is
contrary to Divine order; but that which does not spring or flow forth
from interior evil, that is, from an intention or end of evil, though it
sometimes appears like evil, yet is not so, provided the end is not
evil, for the end qualifies every deed. For man's life is in his end,
because what he loves and thence thinks, he has for his end; the life of
his soul being nothing else. \[2\] Everyone is able to know that evil is
contrary to Divine order, and good according to it; for Divine order is
the Lord Himself in heaven, because the Divine good and truth which are
from Him constitute order, insomuch that they are order, Divine good its
essential, and Divine truth its formal. When Divine order is represented
in form it appears as a man; for the Lord, from whom it is, is the only
Man (n. 49, 288, 477, 565, 1871, 1894, 3638, 3639); and insofar as
angels, spirits, and men receive from Him, that is, insofar as they are
in good and thence in truth, thus insofar as they are in His Divine
order, so far they are men. From this it is that the universal heaven
represents one man, which is called the Grand Man, and that the whole
and every part of man corresponds thereto, as has been shown at the end
of the chapters. From this also it is that the angels in heaven all
appear in the human form; and that, on the other hand, the evil spirits
who are in hell, though from fantasy they appear to one another like
men, in the light of heaven appear as monsters, more dire and horrible
according to the evil in which they are (n. 4533); and this because evil
itself is contrary to order, and thus contrary to the human form; for as
before said the Divine order when represented in form appears as a man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4840.">4840.</span></span>

And He caused him also to die. That this signifies that there was also
no representative of the church, is evident from what was shown above
(n. 4833), where similar words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4841.">4841.</span></span>

Verse 11. And Judah said to Tamar his daughter-in-law, Remain a widow in
thy father's house, till Shelah my son be grown up; for he said, Lest he
also die, like his brethren. And Tamar went and abode in her father's
house. "And Judah said," signifies in general the posterity of Jacob,
specifically that from Judah; "to Tamar his daughter-in-law" signifies a
church representative of spiritual and celestial things, which is called
"daughter-in-law" from truth; "Remain a widow in thy father's house,"
signifies alienation from itself; "till Shelah my son be grown up,"
signifies until the time; "for he said," signifies thought; "Lest he
also die, like his brethren," signifies fear lest it should perish; "and
Tamar went and abode in her father's house," signifies alienation from
itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4842.">4842.</span></span>

And Judah said. That this signifies in general the posterity of Jacob,
specifically that from Judah, is evident from the signification of
"Judah" in the proximate sense, as being the nation which was from
Jacob, and specifically that which was from Jacob by Judah, as also
above (n. 4815). In the Word a distinction is indeed made between Judah
and Israel, and in the historic sense by "Judah" is meant the tribe of
Judah, and by "Israel" the ten tribes which were separated from that
tribe. But in the internal or spiritual sense by Judah is represented
the celestial or good of the church, and by Israel the spiritual or
truth of the church; while in the opposite sense by Judah is represented
the evil of the church, and by Israel the falsity of the church,
wherever these existed, whether with the Jews or with the Israelites.
For the internal or spiritual sense of the Word is universal, and does
not distinguish the tribes, as does the external or historic sense.
Hence it is that by "Judah" in the proximate sense is signified the
whole nation which was from Jacob, and specifically that which was from
Jacob by Judah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4843.">4843.</span></span>

To Tamar his daughter-in-law. That this signifies a church
representative of spiritual and celestial things, which is called
"daughter-in-law" from truth, is evident from the representation of
Tamar, as being a church representative of spiritual and celestial
things, of which above (n. 4831); and from the signification of a
"daughter-in-law" as being the spiritual or truth of the church. That a
"daughter-in-law" has this meaning in the internal sense is because all
things belonging to marriage, and all who were born from marriage,
represented such things as are of the heavenly marriage (see n. 4837),
and consequently which are of good and truth; for these are of the
heavenly marriage. From this it is that in the Word a husband signifies
good, and a wife truth; and also that sons and daughters signify the
truths and goods that are from them. Hence a daughter-in-law, being the
wife of a son now become a husband, signifies the truth of the church
conjoined with good and so on. But in regard to those who are of the
celestial church these significations are different from what they are
in regard to those who are of the spiritual church; for in the spiritual
church the husband is called "man," and signifies truth; and the wife is
called "woman," and signifies good (see n. 4823). \[2\] That by a
"daughter-in-law" in the internal sense of the Word is signified the
truth of the church adjoined to its good, consequently in the opposite
sense the falsity of the church adjoined to its evil, is also evident
from the passages in the Word in which "daughter-in-law" is mentioned-as
in Hosea: They sacrifice upon the heads of the mountains, and burn
incense upon the hills, under the oak, and the poplar, and the
terebinth, because the shadow thereof is good; therefore your daughters
commit whoredom, and your daughters-in-law commit adultery. Shall not I
visit upon your daughters because they commit whoredom, and upon your
daughters-in-law because they commit adultery? (Hos. 4:13-14); where the
subject treated of is the worship of evil and falsity, the worship of
evil being signified by "sacrificing upon the heads of the mountains,"
and the worship of falsity by "burning incense upon the hills." A life
of evil is signified by the "daughters committing whoredom," and the
doctrine of falsity from which is a life of evil is signified by the
"daughters-in-law committing adultery." That in the Word adulteries and
whoredoms signify adulterations of good and falsifications of truth may
be seen above (n. 2466, 2729, 3399); and therefore "daughters-in-law"
here denote affections of falsity. \[3\] In Micah: The great one
speaketh the perversity of his soul; and he wresteth it. Their good one
is as a thorn; the upright, as a bramble. The son lightly esteemeth the
father, the daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law; a man's foes are they of his household (Micah
7:3-4, 6); where the subject treated of is the falsity from evil in
which the church is in the last time, when vastated, and in the
proximate sense that in which the Jewish Church was. The "daughter
rising up against her mother," signifies that the affection of evil is
opposed to truth; and the "daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law,"
that the affection of falsity is opposed to good. \[4\] As the case is
similar with the man who is in temptations-for in these there is a
combat of evil against truth and of falsity against good, spiritual
temptations being nothing else than vastations of the falsity and evil
in a man-therefore temptations or spiritual combats are described by the
Lord in almost the same words, in Matthew: Jesus said, Think not that I
am come to send peace on the earth; I am not come to send peace, but a
sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and
the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law; and a man's foes shall be they of his household (Matt.
10:34-36); the like words quoted just above from the prophet signified
the vastation of the church, but here they signify the temptations of
those who are of the church, because as already said temptations are
nothing else than vastations, or removals, of falsity and evil; and for
this reason both temptations and vastations are also signified and
described by inundations of water and by floods (n. 705, 739, 756, 907).
Here also therefore the "daughter being at variance against her mother"
denotes the affection of evil opposed to truth, and the "daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law," the affection of falsity opposed to good;
and because in the man who is in temptation evils and falsities are
within or are his, they are said to be of his household-"a man's foes
shall be they of his household." That temptations are what are thus
described is plain from the Lord's saying that He came not to send peace
upon the earth, but a sword, for by a "sword" is signified truth
combating, and in the opposite sense falsity combating (n. 2799, 4499),
when yet He came to give peace (John 14:27; 16:33). That it is
temptations which are so described is evident from what follows in that
chapter: "He that taketh not up his cross, and followeth after Me, is
not worthy of Me." \[5\] So also in Luke: Suppose ye that I am come to
give peace in the earth? I tell you, Nay; but division; for from
henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against two,
and two against three. The father shall be divided against the son, and
the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the
daughter against the mother; the mother-in-law against her
daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law (Luke
12:51-53); from these sayings also it is plain that by "father,"
"mother," "son," "daughter," "daughter-in-law," and "mother-in-law" are
signified those things which are from the heavenly marriage, namely,
goods and truths in their order, and also their opposites; as likewise
in Mark: Jesus said, There is no man that has left house or brethren or
sisters or father or mother or wife or children or fields, for My sake
and the gospel's, but he shall receive a hundred-fold in this time,
houses and brethren and sisters and mothers and children and fields,
with persecutions; and in the age to come eternal life (Mark 10:29-30);
one unacquainted with the internal sense of the Word will suppose that
nothing more than house, brethren, sisters, father, mother, wife,
children, and fields are signified by these words here; but it is such
things as appertain to man, his own, which he must forsake; and the
spiritual and celestial things that are of the Lord which he must
receive in their place, and this by means of temptations, which are
meant by "persecutions." Everyone can see that if he forsake a mother he
will not receive mothers; in like manner neither brethren, sisters, etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4844.">4844.</span></span>

Remain a widow in thy father's house. That this signifies alienation
from itself, is evident from the fact that thereby he wanted her to go
away and return no more to him. He indeed told her to remain there until
Shelah his son was grown up; but still he thought that she would not be
given to Shelah his son, for he said in himself, "Lest he also die, like
his brethren." This is proved also by his action in the matter, as
appears from verse 14: "Tamar saw that Shelah was grown up, and she was
not given unto him to wife." From this it follows that by his words is
signified that he alienated her away from himself; that is, in the
internal sense, that the church representative of spiritual and
celestial things, which is represented by Tamar (n. 4811, 4831), was
alienated from the Jewish Church, which is represented by Judah. For
they could not agree together, because Judaism was only a representative
of a church, and not a representative church (n. 4307, 4500); because it
acknowledged what is external, but not what is internal. \[2\] A "widow"
also signifies the truth of the church without its good, because a
"wife" in the representative sense signifies truth, and a "husband" good
(see n. 4823, 4843); wherefore a wife without a husband is the truth of
the church without its good. And when it is said of her that she should
"remain in her father's house," it signifies that the truth of the
church would be alienated, and also that it would not be received in his
house; neither could the Jewish nation receive it, because it was not in
good, but in evil. \[3\] A "widow" is often mentioned in the Word, and
one unacquainted with the internal sense cannot but believe that by a
"widow" is signified a widow. But a "widow" in the internal sense
signifies the truth of the church without good, that is, those who are
in truth without good and still desire to be in good, consequently who
love to be led by good; and a "husband" is the good which should lead.
In the Ancient Church such persons were understood in the good sense by
widows, whether they were women or men. For the Ancient Church
distinguished the neighbor toward whom they were to exercise charity
into a number of classes, some of which they called poor, some miserable
and afflicted, some bound and in prison, some blind and lame, and others
strangers, orphans, and widows; and they dispensed works of charity to
them according to their qualities. Their doctrinals taught them these
things; and that church knew no other doctrinals. Wherefore they who
lived at that time both taught and wrote according to their doctrinals,
and consequently when they spoke of widows they had in mind no other
than such as were in truth without good and yet desired to be led by
good. \[4\] From this it is also plain that the doctrinals of the
Ancient Church taught those things which related to charity and the
neighbor, and that their knowledges consisted in knowing what external
things signified. For the church was representative of spiritual and
celestial things, and therefore the spiritual and celestial things which
were represented and signified were what they learned by means of
doctrinals and knowledges. But these doctrinals and knowledges are at
this day entirely obliterated, and indeed to such a degree that it is
not known that they ever existed; for the doctrinals of faith succeeded
in their place, which if widowed and separated from those of charity,
teach almost nothing. For the doctrinals of charity teach what good is,
but the doctrinals of faith what truth is, and to teach truth without
good is to walk as one who is blind, because good is what teaches and
leads, and truth is what is taught and led. There is as great a
difference between these two doctrinals as between light and darkness;
and unless the darkness be illumined by the light, that is, unless truth
be illumined by good, or faith by charity, there is nothing but
darkness. Hence it is that no one knows by looking at it, and
consequently neither from perception, whether truth is truth, but only
from doctrine imbibed in childhood and confirmed in adult age. Hence
also it is that churches differ so widely that what one calls truth,
another calls falsity, and they are never in agreement. \[5\] That by
"widows" in a good sense are signified those who are in truth without
good, but still desire to be led by good, is evident from the passages
in the Word in which "widows" are mentioned, as in David: Jehovah, who
executeth judgment for the oppressed, who giveth food to the hungry;
Jehovah, who looseth the bound; Jehovah, who openeth \[the eyes of\] the
blind; Jehovah, who raiseth up them that are bowed down; Jehovah, who
loveth the just; Jehovah, who preserveth the sojourners; He upholdeth
the orphan and the widow (Ps. 146:7-9); here in the internal sense those
are meant who are instructed in truths and led to good by the Lord; but
some of these are called the "oppressed," some the "hungry," others the
"bound," the "blind," those who are "bowed down," the "sojourners," the
"orphan," and the "widow," and this according to their quality; but what
this is, no one can know except from the internal sense. The doctrinals
of the Ancient Church taught this. In this passage, as in several
others, the sojourner, orphan, and widow are named jointly, because by
the "sojourner" are signified those who wish to be instructed in the
truths of faith (n. 1463, 4444), by the "orphan," those who are in good
without truth and desire to be led to good by means of truth, and by the
"widow," those who are in truth without good, and desire to be led to
truth by means of good. These three are named jointly here and elsewhere
in the Word for the reason that in the internal sense they constitute
one class, inasmuch as by them, taken together, are signified those who
wish to be instructed and to be led to good and truth. \[6\] Again: A
father of the orphans, and a judge of the widows, is God in the
habitation of His holiness (Ps. 68:5); the "orphans" denote those who,
like little children, are in the good of innocence, but not yet in
truth, whose father is said to be the Lord, because He leads them as a
father, and this through truth into good, that is, into the good of life
or of wisdom. "Widows" denote those who as adults are in truth, but not
yet in good, whose judge is said to be the Lord, because He leads them,
and this through good into truth, that is, into the truth of
intelligence; for by a "judge" is signified one who leads. Good without
truth, which is the "orphan," becomes the good of wisdom through the
doctrine of truth; and truth without good, which is the "widow," becomes
the truth of intelligence through a life of good. \[7\] In Isaiah: Woe
unto them that decree statutes of iniquity to turn aside the poor from
judgment, and to take away into judgment the miserable of My people,
that widows may be their spoil, and that they may plunder the orphans
(Isa. 10:1-2); here by the "miserable," the "poor," the "widows," and
the "orphans," are signified not those who are naturally, but those who
are spiritually such; and because in the Jewish church, as in the
Ancient, all things were representative, it was also representative to
do good to the orphans and the widows; for thus charity toward those who
in the spiritual sense were such was represented in heaven. \[8\] In
Jeremiah: Do ye judgment and justice, and rescue the spoiled out of the
hand of the oppressor; and defraud not the sojourner, the orphan, or the
widow, neither do violence, neither shed innocent blood in this place
(Jer. 22:3); here also by the "sojourner, the orphan, and the widow" are
signified those who are spiritually such; for in the spiritual world or
heaven it is not known who the sojourner, the orphan, and the widow are,
those who have been in this condition in the world not being so there;
and therefore when these words are read by man, they are perceived by
angels according to their spiritual or internal sense. \[9\] Likewise in
Ezekiel: Behold, the princes of Israel, everyone according to his arm,
have been in thee to shed blood. In thee have they set light by father
and mother; in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the
sojourner; in thee have they defrauded the orphan and the widow (Ezek.
22:6-7). Also in Malachi: I will come near to you to judgment; and I
will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against false
swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the
widow, and the orphan, and that turn aside the sojourner, and fear not
Me (Mal. 3:5). And in Moses: A sojourner shalt thou not wrong, neither
shalt thou oppress him. Ye shall not afflict any widow or orphan. If
thou shalt afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto Me, I will
surely hear their cry; and My anger shall wax hot, and I will kill you
with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your sons orphans
(Exod. 22:21-24). \[10\] This, like all the rest of the precepts,
judgments, and statutes in the Jewish Church, was representative; and in
that church they were kept so to do in externals, and by such things to
represent the internal things of charity, although they had nothing of
charity, nor did them from internal affection. The internal was from
affection to instruct in truths and to lead by truths to good those who
were in ignorance, and to lead by good to truths those who had
knowledge; whereby they would have done good in the spiritual sense to
the sojourner, the orphan, and the widow. Yet that the external might
remain for the sake of representation, it was among the curses
pronounced on Mount Ebal, to turn aside the judgment of the sojourner,
the orphan, and the widow (Deut. 27:19). To "turn aside their judgment"
means to do what is contrary, that is, by instruction and life to lead
to what is false and evil. And because depriving others of goods and
truths, and appropriating them to self for the sake of self-honor and
gain was among those curses, the Lord said: Woe unto you, scribes and
Pharisees! For ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long
prayers; therefore ye shall receive more abundant judgment (Matt. 23:14;
Luke 20:47); "devouring widows' houses" means taking away truths from
those who desire them, and teaching falsities. \[11\] In like manner it
was representative that what was left in the fields, oliveyards, and
vineyards, should be for the sojourner, the orphan, and the widow (Deut.
24:19-22); and also that when they had made an end of tithing the tithes
of their increase in the third year, they should give it to the
sojourner, the orphan, and the widow, that they might eat within their
gates, and be filled (Deut. 26:12). Because it is the Lord alone who
instructs, and leads to good and truth, it is said in Jeremiah: Leave
thy orphans, I will make them alive; and the widows shall confide upon
Me (Jer. 49:11); and in Moses: Jehovah doth execute the judgment of the
orphan and widow, and loveth the sojourner, in giving him bread and
raiment (Deut. 10:18); "bread" denotes the good of love (n. 2165, 2177,
3478, 3735, 3813, 4211, 4217, 4735); "raiment," the truth of faith (n.
4545, 4763). \[12\] What is related of Elijah, that when there was a
famine for want of rain in the land he was sent to Zarephath to a widow,
and that he asked of her a little cake, which she was first to make and
to give to him, and was afterwards to make for herself and her son, and
that then the barrel of meal with her was not consumed, and the cruse of
oil did not fail (1 Kings 17:1-16), was representative, like all the
other things related of Elijah, and in general all that are in the Word.
The famine that was in the land because there was no rain, represented
the vastation of truth in the church (see n. 1460, 3364); the widow in
Zarephath represented those outside of the church who desire truth; the
cake which she was to make for him first, represented the good of love
to the Lord (n. 2177), whom, out of the little she had, she was to love
above herself and her son; the barrel of meal signifies truth from good
(n. 2177), and the cruse of oil charity and love (n. 886, 3728, 4582);
Elijah represents the Word, by means of which such things are done (see
n. 2762). \[13\] This is meant also, in the internal sense, by the
Lord's words in Luke: No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I
tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah,
when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when there was a
great famine over all the land; but unto none of them was Elijah sent,
except to Zarephath of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow (Luke
4:24-26); that is, to those without the church who desire truth. But the
widows within the vastated church, to whom Elijah was not sent, are they
who are not in truth, because not in good, for wherever there is no good
there is also no truth, however much truth may appear with them in outer
form like truth, and yet be as a shell without a kernel. \[14\] They who
are in such truth, and also they who are in falsity, are signified by
"widows" in the opposite sense-as in Isaiah: Jehovah will cut off from
Israel head and tail, branch and rush, in one day. The elder and the
honored in faces is the head, and the prophet the teacher of a lie is
the tail. Therefore the Lord will not be glad over their young men,
neither will He have compassion on their orphans and widows (Isa.
9:14-15, 17). In Jeremiah: I will fan them with a winnowing fan in the
gates of the land; I will bereave them of children, I will destroy My
people; they have not turned from their ways. Their widows are increased
to Me above the sand of the seas; I will bring to them, upon the mother
a young man, a waster at noonday. She that hath borne seven languisheth;
she hath breathed out her soul, her sun is gone down while it is yet day
(Jer. 15:7-9). Again: Our inheritance is turned unto strangers, our
houses unto aliens. We have become fatherless orphans, our mothers are
as widows (Lam. 5:2-3). \[15\] As by "widows" were signified those who
are not in truth because not in good, it was reproachful for churches,
even such as were in falsities from evil, to be called widows-as in
Revelation: She hath said in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow,
and I shall not see mourning. Therefore in one day shall her plagues
come, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be burned with fire
(Rev. 18:7-8); speaking of Babylon. In like manner of the same in
Isaiah: Hear this, thou delicate one, that sitteth securely, that sayest
in thy heart, I am, and there is none else like me; I shall not sit a
widow, neither shall I know the loss of children. But these two evils
shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and
widowhood (Isa. 47:8-9). \[16\] From all this it is now evident what is
meant by a "widow" in the internal sense of the Word; and as a widow
represented and thence signified the truth of the church without its
good-because a wife signifies truth and a husband good-therefore, in the
ancient churches, where all things in general and particular were
representative, it was forbidden the priests to marry a widow who was
not the widow of a priest, as is written in Moses: The high priest shall
take a wife in her virginity. A widow, or one divorced, or a polluted
woman, or a harlot, these shall he not take; but a virgin of his own
people shall he take to wife (Lev. 21:13-14); and concerning the new
temple and the new priesthood in Ezekiel: The priests, the Levites,
shall not take for their wives a widow, nor one divorced; but they shall
take virgins of the seed of the house of Israel; yet a widow that is the
widow of a priest they may take (Ezek. 44:22). For the virgins whom they
were to marry represented and thence signified the affection of truth,
and the widow of a priest the affection of truth from good; for a
"priest" in the representative sense is the good of the church. For this
reason it was also allowed the widows who were daughters of a priest,
who were childless, to eat of the offerings or holy things (Lev. 22:12,
13). \[17\] That this is the signification of a "widow," was known from
their doctrinals to those who were of the Ancient Church; for their
doctrinals were doctrinals of love and charity, which contained
innumerable things that at this day are wholly obliterated. From these
doctrinals they knew what charity to exercise, or what duty they owed
the neighbor, thus who were called widows, who orphans, who sojourners,
and so on. Their knowledges of truth and memory-knowledges were to know
what the rituals of their church represented and signified; and those
who were learned among them knew what the things on the earth and in the
world represented; for they knew that universal nature was a theater
representative of the heavenly kingdom (n. 2758, 2989, 2999, 3483). Such
things elevated their minds to heavenly things, and their doctrinals led
to life. But after the church turned aside from charity to faith, and
still more after it separated faith from charity, and made faith saving
without charity and its works, men's minds could no longer be elevated
by knowledges to heavenly things, nor by doctrinals be led to life; and
this to such a degree that at last scarcely anyone believes that there
is any life after death, and scarcely anyone knows what the heavenly is.
That there is any spiritual sense in the Word which does not appear in
the letter, cannot be believed. In this way men's minds have been
closed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4845.">4845.</span></span>

Till Shelah my son be grown up. That this signifies until the time, is
evident from the signification of "growing up," as being to be of this
age, thus until the time; and from the representation of Shelah, the
son, as being what is idolatrous, of which above (n. 4825, 4826), thus
the Jewish religion, which with them was idolatrous (n. 4825) Hence by
the words, "till Shelah my son be grown up," is signified until the time
that the Jewish religion can receive internal things, or the spiritual
and celestial things of the representative church, which is Tamar (n.
4829, 4831, 4843).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4846.">4846.</span></span>

For he said. That this signifies thought, is evident from the
signification of "saying" in the historic parts of the Word, as being to
perceive and also to think (see n. 1791, 1815, 1819, 1822, 1898, 1919,
2080, 3395). Here therefore by "he said" is signified that he said in
himself, or thought, that Tamar would not be given to Shelah his son for
a wife-in the internal sense that the internal things of the
representative church would be alienated (n. 4844).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4847.">4847.</span></span>

Lest he also die, like his brethren. That this signifies fear lest it
should perish, namely, the representative of a church that was with the
posterity descended from Jacob, and specifically that descended from
Jacob through Judah, is evident from the signification of "lest he also
die," as being fear lest it should perish. In regard to this-that the
representative of a church which was with the posterity of Jacob would
perish if the internal things of a genuine representative church were
adjoined to it, the case is as follows. A representative church, such as
had existed among the ancients, was to have been instituted with the
posterity of Jacob; but that nation was of such a quality that they
wished to worship and to adore external things only, and did not wish to
know anything at all about internal things; for they were immersed in
the cupidities of the love of self and of the world, and thence in
falsities. That nation, more than the Gentiles, believed that there were
many gods, but that Jehovah was greater than they because He could do
greater miracles; and therefore as soon as the miracles ceased, and also
when they had become little esteemed because of being frequent and
familiar, they straightway turned to other gods, as is very evident from
the historic and prophetic parts of the Word. \[2\] Because that nation
was of such a quality, a representative church such as had existed among
the ancients could not be instituted with them, but only the
representative of a church; and it was provided by the Lord that some
communication with heaven might thereby be effected; for what is
representative is possible with the evil, because it regards not the
person, but the thing. From this it is plain that insofar as they were
concerned their worship was merely idolatrous (n. 4825), although the
representatives contained within them holy Divine things. With such
idolatrous worship, what is internal could not be conjoined, for if what
is internal had been conjoined, that is, if they had acknowledged
internal things, they would have profaned holy things; for if a holy
internal is conjoined with an idolatrous external it becomes profane. It
is for this reason that internal things were not disclosed to that
nation, and that if they had been disclosed it would have perished.
\[3\] That that nation could not receive and acknowledge internal
things, however much they might have been revealed to them, is very
plain from what they are at this day; for they now know internal things,
because they live among Christians; but still they reject and also scoff
at them. Even the most of those who have been converted do the same at
heart. Thus it is evident that a church representative of spiritual and
celestial things was not with that nation, but only the representative
of a church, that is, the external without the internal, which in itself
is idolatrous. From these things it may also be seen how erroneously
those Christians think who believe that at the end of the church the
Jewish nation will be converted, and be chosen in preference to
Christians; and still more those who believe that the Messiah, or the
Lord, will then appear to them and by a great prophet and great miracles
bring them back into the land of Canaan. But into these errors those
fall who by "Judah," "Israel," and the "land of Canaan," in the
prophetic parts of the Word, understand simply Judah, Israel, and the
land of Canaan; and who thus believe only the literal sense, and care
not for any internal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4848.">4848.</span></span>

\[And Tamar went\] and abode in her father's house. That this signifies
alienation from itself, is evident from the signification of abiding a
widow in the house of a father, as being alienation, of which above (n.
4844).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4849.">4849.</span></span>

Verses 12-14. And the days were multiplied, and Shua's daughter died,
the wife of Judah; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto the
shearers of his flock, he and his companion Hirah the Adullamite, to
Timnah. And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father-in-law goeth up
to Timnah to shear his flock. And she put off from upon her the garments
of her widowhood, and covered herself in a veil, and wrapped herself,
and sat in the gate of the fountains which is upon the way to Timnah;
for she saw that Shelah was grown up, and she was not given to him for a
woman. "And the days were multiplied," signifies a change of state; "and
Shua's daughter died," signifies as to evil from falsity; "the wife of
Judah," signifies the religiosity with the nation descended from Jacob,
specifically that from Judah; "and Judah was comforted," signifies rest;
"and went up unto the shearers of his flock," signifies some elevation
to take counsel for the church; "he and his companion Hirah the
Adullamite," signifies that it was still in falsity; "to Timnah,"
signifies the state; "and it was told Tamar, saying," signifies some
communication with a church representative of spiritual and celestial
things; "Behold thy father-in-law goeth up to Timnah to shear his
flock," signifies that the Jewish Church wished to take counsel for
itself; "and she put off from upon her the garments of her widowhood,"
signifies a simulation of the truth that is from good; "and covered
herself in a veil," signifies truth obscured; "and wrapped herself,"
signifies thus not acknowledged; "and sat in the gate of the fountains
which is upon the way to Timnah," signifies what is intermediate to the
truths of the church and to falsities; "for she saw that Shelah was
grown up, and she was not given to him for a woman," signifies
discernment that it could not otherwise be conjoined with the
religiosity in which was the posterity of Jacob, specifically that from
Judah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4850.">4850.</span></span>

And the days were multiplied. That this signifies a change of state, is
evident from the signification of "days being multiplied," as being the
changing of the states; for "day" or "time" in the internal sense is
state (see n. 23, 487, 488, 893, 2788, 3462, 3785), and "being
multiplied," when predicated of days or times, is being changed. That it
is a change of state which is signified, is evident also from what
follows. It is said "were multiplied," because a change of state is
involved as to truths, for "multiplying" is predicated of truths (see n.
43, 55, 913, 983, 2846, 2847). As state and change of state are so often
mentioned, and as few know what is meant, it will be well to explain.
Time and the succession of time, or space and the extension of space,
cannot be predicated of man's interiors, that is, of his affections and
the thoughts therefrom; because these interiors are not in time nor in
place-although to the senses in the world it appears as if they were-but
are in interior things which correspond to time and place. These
interior things which correspond we have to call states, because there
is no other word by which these corresponding things can be expressed.
The state of the interiors is said to be changed when the mind or heart
is changed as to affections and consequent thoughts-as from sadness to
joy, or from joy to sadness again; from impiety to piety or devotion;
and so on. These changes are called changes of state, and are predicated
of the affections, and of the thoughts also insofar as they are governed
by the affections; but changes of state of the thoughts are in those of
the affections like particulars in generals, and are relatively
variations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4851-4900](ac098)
