[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac092)  [Next](ac094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="4601.">4601.</span></span>

That Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubine. That this
signifies the profanation of good by means of faith separate, and that
and Israel heard signifies that this faith was rejected, is evident from
the representation of Reuben as being faith in doctrine and in
understanding, which is the first thing of the church (see n. 3861,
3866), here this faith separate from charity (of which in what follows);
and from the signification of "lying with Bilhah his father's
concubine," as being the profanation of good, for "to commit adultery"
signifies to pervert or adulterate goods (n. 2466, 2729, 3399), but "to
lie with a father's concubine" is to profane them; and from the
signification of "Israel heard," as being that this faith was rejected.
In the proper sense by Israel's hearing is signified that the spiritual
church knew this and assented to it; for by "hearing" is signified
hearkening to, and by "Israel" the spiritual church; but that the true
church does not assent, will appear from what will be said about Reuben.
But in the internal sense is signified that this faith was rejected, for
it is not said what Jacob felt and thought about this nefarious deed;
nevertheless that he utterly abominated and abhorred it, is manifest
from his prophecy respecting Reuben: Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my
strength, and the beginning of my might; excellent in honor, and
excellent in power. Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel, who wentest
up thy father's bed, then profanedst thou it, he went up my couch (Gen.
49:3, 4); and from Reuben's being on this account deprived of his
birthright (1 Chron. 5:1). Hence it is evident that by "Israel heard" is
signified that this faith was rejected. (That "birthright" is the faith
of the church may be seen above, n. 352, 2435, 3325.) \[2\] The
profanation of good is effected by faith separate when the truth of the
church and its good are acknowledged and believed, and yet the man lives
contrary to them. For with those who separate the things of faith from
those of charity in the understanding and thence in life, evil is
conjoined with truth and falsity with good; and this conjunction itself
is what is called profanation. It is otherwise with those, who, although
they know what the truth and good of faith are, still do not at heart
believe. (See what has been said and shown before on profanation, n.
301-303, 571, 582, 593, 1001, 1003, 1008, 1010, 1059, 1327, 1328, 2051,
2426, 3398, 3399, 3402, 3489, 3898, 4050, 4289; also that the
profanation of good by faith separate was represented by Cain's killing
Abel; by Ham's being cursed by his father; and by the Egyptians being
swallowed up by the Red Sea, n. 3325; and here also by Reuben, n. 3325,
3870). \[3\] In order that those who are of the spiritual church could
be saved, the Lord miraculously separated their intellectual part from
their will part, and bestowed upon the intellectual the power of
receiving a new will (n. 863, 875, 895, 927, 928, 1023, 1043, 1044,
2256, 4328, 4493). When therefore the intellectual apprehends and
perceives the good which is of faith, and appropriates it to itself, and
yet man's will (that is, his willing evil) still reigns and commands,
there is effected the conjunction of truth and evil, and of good and
falsity. This conjunction is profanation, and is meant by eating and
drinking unworthily in the Holy Supper, said of those from whom the good
which is there signified by the "body," and the truth which is there
signified by the "blood," cannot be separated, because things which have
been conjoined in this manner can never be separated to all eternity,
and therefore the deepest hell awaits them. But they who know what the
truth and good of faith are, and yet do not at heart believe them (as is
the case with most people at the present day), cannot profane them,
because the intellectual does not receive them and imbue itself with
them. \[4\] It is the rejection of this separated faith that is here
treated of, because in what presently follows truths and goods are
treated of in their genuine order, and directly afterwards their
conjunction with the rational or intellectual. The sons of Jacob
presently named are truths and goods in genuine order, and Isaac is the
rational or intellectual. The coming of Jacob and his sons to Isaac, is
in the internal sense this conjunction with the intellectual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4602.">4602.</span></span>

Verses 22-26. And the sons of Jacob were twelve. The sons of Leah,
Reuben Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar,
and Zebulun. The sons of Rachel, Joseph and Benjamin. And the sons of
Bilhah Rachel's handmaid, Dan and Naphtali. And the sons of Zilpah,
Leah's handmaid, Gad and Asher. These are the sons of Jacob, who were
born to him in Paddan-aram. "And the sons of Jacob were twelve,"
signifies the state of all things now in the Divine natural; "the sons
of Leah," signifies external Divine goods and truths in their order;
"Reuben Jacob's firstborn," signifies the good of faith; "and Simeon,
and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun," signifies the essential
things of these; "the sons of Rachel, Joseph and Benjamin," signifies
interior goods and truths; "and the sons of Bilhah Rachel's handmaid,
Dan and Naphtali," signifies subsequent things that are of service to
interior goods and truths; "and the sons of Zilpah Leah's handmaid, Gad
and Asher" signifies those which are of service to exterior goods and
truths; "these are the sons of Jacob, who were born to him in
Paddan-aram," signifies their origin and their present state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4603.">4603.</span></span>

And the sons of Jacob were twelve. That this signifies the state of all
things now in the Divine natural, is evident from the representation of
Jacob, as being the Divine natural (of which often above); and from the
signification of "twelve" as being all, and when predicated of the sons
of Jacob or of the tribes named from them, as being all things of truth
and good (see n. 2089, 2129, 2130, 3272, 3858, 3913, 3939). As regards
the Lord's natural it has been shown how He made it Divine in Himself,
for this was represented by Jacob. But the subject here treated of is
the conjunction of the Divine natural with the Divine rational, which
conjunction is represented by Jacob's coming to Isaac, for Isaac
represents the Lord's Divine rational. It is for this reason that all
Jacob's sons are enumerated anew, for all things of truth and good must
be in the natural before this could be fully conjoined with the
rational, because the natural serves the rational as a receptacle, and
therefore these are enumerated. Be it known, however, that the sons of
Jacob are now named in an order different from that in which they were
named before; for the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, namely, Dan, Naphtali,
Gad, and Asher, are in the last place, who nevertheless were born before
Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, and Benjamin. The reason of this is that the
order of the truths and goods in the natural when this has been made
Divine, is here treated of; for the order in which these are mentioned
is in accordance with the state of the subject that is being treated of
(n. 3862, 3926, 3939).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4604.">4604.</span></span>

The sons of Leah. That this signifies external Divine goods and truths
in their order, is evident from the representation of Leah, as being the
affection of external truth (see n. 3793, 3819). Hence her "sons" are
the goods and truths represented by Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah,
Issachar, and Zebulun, of which in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4605.">4605.</span></span>

Reuben Jacob's firstborn. That this signifies the good of faith, is
evident from the signification of the "firstborn," as being faith (see
n. 352, 367, 2435, 3325); and from the representation of Jacob as being
the good of natural truth (see n. 4538); and from that of Reuben, as
being the quality of faith. For "Reuben" in the genuine sense signifies
the truth of faith (n. 3861, 3866); but after the truth of faith has
been made good, he signifies the good of faith. Moreover, regarded in
itself faith is charity, and thus regarded in itself the truth of faith
is the good of faith, because faith is impossible except from charity,
that is, truth is impossible except from good; and therefore when a man
has been regenerated, good is in the first place, or is the firstborn
(n. 3325, 3494). Hence it is that by "Reuben Jacob's firstborn" is here
signified the good of faith. The like is signified also in Moses: Let
Reuben live and not die, and it shall be that his numbers are mortal
(Deut. 33:6); the reason why in this passage "Reuben" denotes the good
of faith, is that he is put in the first place, and Judah in the second,
thus in a different order in this prophecy of Moses respecting the sons
of Israel from that in the prophecy of Jacob (Gen. 49), for as before
said (n. 4603), the order in which they are named is determined in
accordance with the state of the subject that is being treated of. \[2\]
In like manner in John: I heard the number of the sealed, a hundred and
forty-four thousand sealed out of every tribe. Of the tribe of Judah
were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve
thousand, of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand (Rev. 7:4, 5);
here Judah is named in the first place, Reuben in the second, and Gad in
the third. These three here constitute the first class, and as the
Lord's kingdom is the subject treated of, "Judah" signifies celestial
good such as is in the inmost or third heaven, "Reuben" spiritual good
which is the same as the good of faith such as is in the second or
middle heaven, and "Gad" the good of the natural such as is in the first
heaven. But it is otherwise in the prophecy of Deborah and Barak: The
princes in Issachar were with Deborah, and as was Issachar so was Barak;
into the valley he was sent at his feet, in the classes of Reuben were
great decrees of heart; why dwellest thou between two burdens to hear
the hissings of the droves? To the classes of Reuben were great
searchings of heart (Judg. 5:15-16); It is impossible to know the
meaning of these words unless it is known what Issachar, Deborah, Barak,
and Reuben represent; and what the "princes," the "valley," the
"classes," the "decrees of heart," the "two burdens," and the "hissings
of the droves," signify; but it is evident that "Reuben" here denotes
faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4606.">4606.</span></span>

And Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun. That these
signify the essential things of these, that is, of the external Divine
goods and truths, is evident from the representation of each one;
namely, of Simeon, as being in the supreme sense Providence, in the
internal sense faith in the will, and in the external sense obedience
(see n. 3869-3872); of Levi as being in the supreme sense Love and
Mercy, in the internal sense charity or spiritual love, and in the
external sense conjunction (n. 3875, 3877); of Judah, as being in the
supreme sense the Divine of the Lord's love, in the internal sense the
Lord's celestial kingdom, and in the exterior sense that doctrine from
the Word which is of the celestial church (n. 3881); of Issachar, as
being in the supreme sense the Divine good of truth and truth of good,
in the internal sense celestial conjugial love, and in the external
sense mutual love (n. 3956, 3957); and from the representation of
Zebulun, as being in the supreme sense the Lord's Divine Itself and His
Divine Human, in the internal sense the heavenly marriage, and in the
external sense conjugial love (n. 3960, 3961). These are the essential
things which are in the external Divine goods and truths of the Lord,
but no one can unfold how each of these is within them unless he is in
heavenly light, for therein these things appear like the answers given
in the Urim and Thummim by means of flashings out of light and flame,
and a consequent perception from the Lord. For in the Urim and Thummim
there were twelve precious stones according to the twelve tribes of
Israel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4607.">4607.</span></span>

The sons of Rachel, Joseph and Benjamin. That these signify interior
goods and truths, is evident from the representation of Rachel, as being
the affection of interior truth (see n. 3758, 3782, 3793, 3819), hence
the "sons of Rachel" are interior goods and truths. The essential things
of these are represented by Joseph and Benjamin; by Joseph in the
supreme sense the Divine spiritual, in the internal sense the spiritual
kingdom, and in the external sense its good (see n. 3969); and by
Benjamin the Divine spiritual of the celestial (n. 3969, 4592). These
essential things are within interior goods and truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4608.">4608.</span></span>

And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid, Dan and Naphtali. That these
signify subsequent things that are of service to interior goods and
truths, is evident from the representation of Bilhah Rachel's handmaid
as being the subsequent affection that is of service as a means to the
affection of interior truth (see n. 3849). Moreover, a "handmaid"
denotes a means that serves for conjunction (n. 3913, 3917, 3931), and
her "sons" denote such means. By subsequent goods and truths are meant
those goods and truths that do not enter in immediately, but which are
derived from such as do, and are adjoined to them as handmaids, and
which also mediate and promote. Their essential things are represented
by Dan and Naphtali; by Dan in the supreme sense the Lord's
righteousness and mercy, in the internal sense the holy of faith, and in
the external sense the good of life (n. 3921, 3923); and by Naphtali, in
the supreme sense His own power, in the internal sense temptation in
which there is victory, and in the external sense resistance from the
natural man (n. 3927, 3928). These are the essential things of the means
that are of service to interior goods and truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4609.">4609.</span></span>

And the sons of Zilpah Leah's handmaid, Gad and Asher. That this
signifies those which are of service to exterior goods and truths, is
evident from the representation of Zilpah Leah's handmaid, as being the
subsequent affection that is of service as a means to the affection of
exterior truth (see n. 3835). A "handmaid" denotes a means that is of
service for conjunction (as just above, n. 4608), and her "sons" denote
such means, the essential things of which are represented by Gad and
Asher; by Gad in the supreme sense omnipotence and omniscience, in the
internal sense the good of faith, and in the external sense works (n.
3934); by Asher in the supreme sense eternity, in the internal sense the
happiness of eternal life, and in the external sense the delight of the
affection (n. 3938, 3939). These are the things which the enumeration of
the sons of Jacob at this time involves; but how they cohere together
and one follows another, and one is contained within another, cannot be
seen in the light of the world unless it is enlightened by the light of
heaven. Yet the things which then appear are still such as not to fall
into words, for human words are from ideas formed from the things which
are in the light of the world. The ideas which are from the light of
heaven transcend these to such a degree that they cannot be expressed,
but only to some extent thought of by those to whom it has been given to
withdraw their mind from things of sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4610.">4610.</span></span>

These are the sons of Jacob, who were born to him in Paddan-aram. That
this signifies their origin and their present state, is evident from
what has already been said of the sons of Jacob both in general and
specifically, namely, that by them are signified all things in the
Lord's Divine natural in general (n. 4603), insomuch that all these
things taken together are now "Jacob." Their origin is signified by
their being born in Paddan-aram, or from the knowledges of truth and
good, for these are signified by "Paddan-aram" (n. 3664, 3680). As all
of these taken together are now "Jacob," it is therefore said in the
original language, "who was born to him," in the singular. In what now
follows the subject treated of is the conjunction of the Divine natural
with the Divine rational. This conjunction is represented by Jacob's
coming to Isaac his father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4611.">4611.</span></span>

Verses 27-29. And Jacob came unto Isaac his father to Mamre
Kiriath-arba, this is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned. And the
days of Isaac were a hundred years and eighty years. And Isaac expired
and died and was gathered unto his peoples, old and sated of days; and
Esau and Jacob his sons buried him. "And Jacob came unto Isaac his
father," signifies now the Divine rational with which it was conjoined;
"to Mamre Kiriath-arba" signifies its state; "this is Hebron," signifies
the state when they were conjoined; "where Abraham and Isaac sojourned,"
signifies Divine life together; "and the days of Isaac were," signifies
the state of the Divine rational at this time; "a hundred years and
eighty years," signifies the quality of the state; "and Isaac expired,
and died," signifies resuscitation in the Divine natural; "and was
gathered unto his peoples," signifies that it was now among the things
which are of the Divine natural; "old and sated of days," signifies
newness of life; "and Esau and Jacob his sons buried him," signifies
that it rose again in the good and the good of truth of the natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4612.">4612.</span></span>

And Jacob came unto Isaac his father. That this signifies now the Divine
rational with which it was conjoined, is evident from the representation
of Jacob, as being the Divine natural in the state treated of just above
(see n. 4604-4610); and from the representation of Isaac, as being the
Divine rational (see n. 1893, 2066, 2072, 2083, 2630, 3012, 3194, 3210).
Conjunction is signified by his coming to him. In what follows, down to
the end of the chapter, the subject treated of is the conjunction of the
natural with the rational; and therefore in what immediately precedes,
the quality of the natural has been described, in that it contained
within it all things of good and truth, and this quality of the natural
is signified by the twelve sons of Jacob, for as we have seen, each one
of them represents some general of truth and good. \[2\] As regards the
conjunction of the natural and the rational treated of in the following
verses, be it known that the rational receives truths and goods sooner
and more easily than the natural (n. 3286, 3288, 3321, 3368, 3498,
3513). For the rational is purer and more perfect than the natural,
because it is interior or higher, and viewed in itself it is in the
light of heaven, to which it is adapted. This is the reason why the
rational receives the things of this light (namely, truths and goods, or
what is the same, the things of intelligence and wisdom), sooner and
more easily than the natural. But the natural is grosser and more
imperfect, because it is exterior or lower, and viewed in itself it is
in the light of the world; which light has nothing of intelligence and
wisdom within it except insofar as it receives it through the rational
from the light of heaven. The influx of which the learned of the present
day speak, is nothing else. \[3\] But with the natural the case is this:
From the earliest infancy and childhood the natural receives its quality
from the things which flow in from the world through the external
senses, and by and from these the man acquires an intellectual. But as
he is then in the delights of the love of self and of the world, and
consequently in cupidities, both from inheritance and from actual life,
the intellectual which he then acquires is filled with such things, and
whatever favors his delights he then regards as goods and truths, and
the result is that the order of the goods and truths in the natural is
inverted, or is opposite to heavenly order. When the man is in this
state, the light of heaven does indeed flow in through the rational, for
it is from this that he has the ability to think, to reason, to speak,
and to act becomingly and as a good citizen in the outward form; but
still the things which are of light, and that conduce to his eternal
happiness, are not in the natural, because the delights which rule there
are repugnant to them, for the delights of the love of self and of the
world are in themselves diametrically opposite to the delights of the
love of the neighbor, and consequently to those of love to the Lord. The
man may indeed know the things of light or of heaven, but he cannot be
affected with them, except insofar as they conduce to his winning honors
and gaining wealth, and thus except insofar as they favor the delights
of the love of self and of the world. \[4\] From this it may appear that
the order in the natural is wholly inverted, or opposite to heavenly
order, and therefore when the light of heaven flows in through the
rational into the natural, it must needs be either reflected back, or
suffocated, or perverted. Hence then it is that the natural must be
regenerated before it can be conjoined with the rational. For when the
natural has been regenerated, the things which flow in from the Lord
through heaven, thus through the rational into the natural, are
received, because they agree. For the natural is nothing else than a
receptacle of good and truth from the rational, or through the rational
from the Lord. By the natural is meant the external man, which is also
called the natural man, and by the rational is meant the internal man.
These things have been premised in order that it may be known how the
case is with what follows, in which the subject treated of is the
conjunction of the natural with the rational.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4613.">4613.</span></span>

To Mamre Kiriath-arba. That this signifies its state, is evident from
the signification of "Mamre," as being the quality and quantity of that
to which it is adjoined (see n. 2970); and from the signification of
"Kiriath-arba" as being the church as to truth (n. 2909), thus truth.
Hence by "Mamre Kiriath-arba" is signified the state of the natural as
to truth, and by "Hebron" its state as to good, of which below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4614.">4614.</span></span>

This is Hebron. That this signifies the state when they were conjoined,
is evident from the signification of "Hebron," as being the good of the
church (see n. 2909), here the Divine good of the Lord's Divine natural;
for those things which in the internal sense signify something of the
church, in the supreme sense signify something of the Lord's Divine, for
the reason that all that which makes the church is from the Lord. That
"Hebron" signifies the state when they were conjoined (namely, the
rational and the natural), is because Isaac was there, by whom is
represented the Lord's Divine rational; and Jacob came thither, by whom
is represented His Divine natural, and by his coming thither is
signified conjunction (n. 4612). It is said, "Mamre Kiriath-arba, this
is Hebron," because the Divine natural is conjoined with the good of the
rational by means of good, for Isaac represents the Lord's Divine
rational as to good (n. 3012, 3194, 3210), whereas Rebekah represents it
as to truth (see n. 3012, 3013, 3077), and Rebekah is not here
mentioned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4615.">4615.</span></span>

Where Abraham and Isaac sojourned. That this signifies Divine life
together, is evident from the signification of "sojourning," as being
life (see n. 1463, 2025); and from the representation of Abraham, as
being the Lord's Divine Itself (n. 1989, 2011, 3245, 3251, 3439, 3703,
4206, 4207); and from the representation of Isaac, as being His Divine
rational (n. 1893, 2066, 2072, 2083, 2630, 2774, 3012, 3194, 3210,
4180). As the conjunction of the Divine natural with the Divine rational
is the subject here treated of, Abraham and Isaac are named, and it is
said that they "sojourned" there, in order that Divine life together may
be signified, that is, together with the Divine natural, which is
"Jacob." And because the Divine Itself, the Divine rational, and the
Divine natural are one in the Lord, it is therefore said, "where also
Abraham and Isaac sojourned" \[peregrinatus\] in the singular, and not
\[peregrinati\] in the plural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4616.">4616.</span></span>

And the days of Isaac were. That this signifies the state of the Divine
rational at this time, is evident from the signification of "days," as
being states (see n. 23, 487, 488, 493, 893, 2788, 3462, 3785); and from
the representation of Isaac as being the Divine rational (see just
above, n. 4615).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4617.">4617.</span></span>

A hundred years and eighty years. That this signifies the quality of the
state, may be seen from the fact that all numbers in the Word signify
things (see n. 482, 487, 575, 647, 648, 755, 813, 1963, 1988, 2075,
2252, 3252, 4264, 4495); thus a "hundred years and eighty years" signify
the quality of the thing, or the quality of the state which is treated
of. That a "hundred" denotes a full state may be seen above (n. 2636),
and "eighty," temptation (see n. 1963), here, by means of temptations;
besides other things which cannot be known. For numbers have their
signification from the more simple numbers from which they arise by
multiplication, as this number from twelve and fifteen, and also from
others still more simple.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4618.">4618.</span></span>

And Isaac expired and died. That this signifies resuscitation in the
Divine natural, is evident from the signification of "expiring and
dying," as being resuscitation (see n. 3326, 3498, 3505) For when it is
related in the Word that anyone "died," the signification in the
internal sense is the last of him and something new in another, thus
continuation, as when it is related of the kings of Judah and Israel
that they "died," or of the high priests that they "died," in the
internal sense this denotes the end of the representation by them, and
the continuation of it in another, thus resuscitation. Moreover they who
are in the other life, and are with man when these things are being
read, do not receive any idea of death, because there they do not know
anything about dying. Hence instead of this they perceive continuance in
another. Moreover, when man dies, he dies only as to his bodily part,
which had served him for uses on earth, and continues his life as to his
spirit in a world where bodily things are no longer of any use. \[2\]
The reason why by Isaac's expiring and dying is signified resuscitation
in the Divine natural, is that the rational has no life unless the
natural corresponds to it (n. 3493, 3620, 3623). It is the same as with
the sight of the eye-unless this has objects outside of itself which it
sees, it perishes; and it is the same with the other senses. The case is
also the same if the objects are altogether contrary, for these induce
death; and it is the same as with the vein of a spring whose waters have
no outflow, causing the spring to be choked. And it is the same also
with the rational-unless there is reception of its light in the natural,
its sight perishes, for the knowledges in the natural are the objects of
sight to the rational; and if these objects are contrary to the light,
that is, to the intelligence of truth and the wisdom of good, the sight
of the rational also perishes, for it cannot flow into things contrary
to itself. Hence it is that with those who are in evils and falsities
the rational is closed, so that no communication with heaven is open
through it except only as it were through chinks, in order that there
may be the capacity of thinking, of reasoning, and of speaking.
Consequently, in order that the natural may be conjoined with the
rational, it must be prepared for the reception of it, which is effected
by the Lord by means of regeneration; and then, when it is conjoined,
the rational lives in the natural; for as before said the rational sees
its objects in the natural, just as does the sight of the eye in the
objects of the world. \[3\] The rational has indeed a life in itself
that is distinct from the life of the natural; but still the rational is
in the natural like a man in his house, or like the soul in its body.
The case is also the same with the heavens. The inmost or third heaven
does indeed live distinct from the heavens which are below it, and yet
unless there were a reception in the second or middle heaven, its wisdom
would be dissipated. In like manner unless there were reception of the
light and intelligence of this heaven in the lowest or first heaven, and
of this finally in man's natural, the intelligence of these heavens also
would be dissipated, unless it were provided by the Lord that there
should be reception elsewhere. Therefore the heavens have been so formed
by the Lord that the one serves the other for reception; and finally man
as to his natural and sensuous serves for the lowest reception, for
herein the Divine is in the ultimate of order, and passes into the
world. If therefore the ultimate agrees or corresponds with the things
that are prior, the prior things are then together in the ultimate; for
the things which are ultimate are receptacles of those which are prior
to themselves, and therein all the successives are together. Hence it is
evident what is meant by resuscitation in the Divine natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4619.">4619.</span></span>

And was gathered unto his peoples. That this signifies that it was now
among the things which are of the Divine natural, is evident from the
signification of "being gathered unto his peoples," as being, in regard
to representatives, that this one is treated of no longer (see n. 3255,
3276); thus here that it is among the things which are of the Divine
natural (as follows from what has been said just above, n. 4618). When
anyone died the ancients said that "he was gathered to his peoples," and
thereby meant in the proximate sense that he was among his own in the
other life. For during his bodily life every man is as to his spirit in
company with spirits and angels, and also comes among the same after
death (n. 1277, 2379). This is what was meant by the "peoples" to whom
he is gathered. But in the internal sense of the Word, where the goods
and truths of the church or of the Lord's kingdom are treated of, by
"being gathered to one's people" is signified to be among the truths and
goods which agree or correspond. All the heavenly societies are in
truths and goods, but as the truths and goods there are related as by
the relationships and connections of earth, with every shade of
difference (n. 685, 917, 3815, 4121), therefore their "peoples" are the
truths in which are the concordant societies, or the societies which are
in these truths. (That "peoples" denote truths, see n. 1259, 1260, 2928,
3295, 3581.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4620.">4620.</span></span>

Old and sated of days. That this signifies newness of life, is evident
from the signification of "old," as being the putting off of a former
state and the putting on of a new one (see n. 2198, 3016, 3254, 3492),
here therefore newness of life; and from the signification of "sated of
days," as being a full state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4621.">4621.</span></span>

And Esau and Jacob his sons buried him. That this signifies that it rose
again in the good and good of truth of the natural, is evident from the
signification of "being buried," as being resurrection (see n. 2916,
2917), and as being a state of representation resuscitated in another
(n. 3256); from the representation of Esau, as being the Lord's Divine
natural as to good (n. 3302, 3576, 4241); and from the representation of
Jacob, as being the Lord's Divine natural as to the good of truth (n.
4273, 4337, 4538). From all this and from what was said above (n. 4618)
it is manifest that by Esau and Jacob his sons burying him is signified
that it rose again in the good and good of truth of the natural. That
"being buried" is in the internal sense rising again, is because when
the body has died the soul rises again. Hence when "burial" is mentioned
in the Word the angels do not think of the body which is cast off, but
of the soul which rises again; for they are in spiritual ideas, thus in
the things that belong to life; and therefore all things that belong to
death in the natural world, signify such things as belong to life in the
spiritual world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4622.">4622.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE GRAND MAN, HERE
CONCERNING THE CORRESPONDENCE OF ODOR AND OF THE NOSTRILS THEREWITH. The
dwellings of the blessed in the other life are of many kinds, and are
constructed with such art as to be as it were embodiments of the very
art of architecture, or to come straight from the art itself. (On this
subject see what has already been related from experience, n. 1116,
1626-1630.) These dwellings appear not only to the sight, but also to
the touch, for all things there are adapted to the sensations of spirits
and angels, and hence are such as do not come to bodily sense like that
of man, but to that possessed by those who are there. I know that this
is incredible to many, but this is because nothing is believed which
cannot be seen by the bodily eyes and felt with the hands of flesh. For
this reason the man of this day, whose interiors are closed, knows
nothing of the things which exist in the spiritual world or in heaven.
He does indeed say from the Word and from doctrine that there is a
heaven, and that the angels who are there are in joy and in glory, but
he knows no more about the matter. How the case is there he would indeed
like to know, but when told he still believes nothing, because at heart
he denies the existence of such things, and his desire to know about
them is prompted solely by his curiosity from doctrine, and not by any
delight grounded in faith. They who are not in faith also deny at heart;
but they who believe get ideas from various sources about heaven and its
joy and glory, each person from such things as are of his own knowledge
and intelligence, and the simple from the things of bodily sensation.
\[2\] Nevertheless most people do not apprehend that spirits and angels
enjoy sensations much more exquisite than those of men in this world,
namely, sight, hearing, smell, something analogous to taste, and touch;
and especially the delights of the affections. If men would only believe
that their interior essence is the spirit, and that the body and its
sensations and members are adapted to uses in this world merely, and
that the spirit and its sensations and organs are adapted to uses in the
other life, then from themselves and almost of their own accord they
would come into ideas about the state of their spirit after death; for
they would reflect that the spirit must be the man himself who thinks,
and who desires, longs for things, and is affected with them; and
further that all the power of sensation which appears in the body
belongs properly to the spirit, and to the body merely by influx; and
they would afterwards confirm themselves in this idea by many
considerations, and in this way would at last take more delight in the
things of their spirit than in those of their body. \[3\] It is also a
real fact that it is not man's body which sees, hears, smells, and
feels, but his spirit; and therefore when the spirit is divested of the
body, it is in its own sensations, the same as when it was in the body,
only now far more exquisite; for the things of the body, being
comparatively gross, had rendered the sensations obtuse, and this the
more because the man had immersed them in earthly and worldly things.
This I can aver-that a spirit has much more exquisite sight than a man
in the body, and also much more exquisite hearing, and, astonishing to
say, the sense of smell, and especially the sense of touch; for spirits
see one another, hear one another, and touch one another. Moreover,
anyone who believes in the life after death might infer that this is the
case from the fact that no life is possible without sensation, and that
the quality of the life is according to the quality of the sensation,
nay, that the intellectual faculty is nothing but an exquisite sense of
interior things, and the higher intellectual of spiritual things; and it
is from this that the things of the intellectual and its perceptions are
called internal senses. \[4\] As regards man's power of sensation
immediately after death the case is this: As soon as a man dies and all
things of his body grow cold, he is raised up into life, and at the same
time into a state of all sensations; insomuch that at first he scarcely
knows but that he is still in the body, for the sensations he then
enjoys lead him so to believe. But when he observes that he has more
exquisite sensations, and especially when he begins to speak with other
spirits, it dawns upon him that he is in the other life, and that the
death of his body has been the continuation of the life of his spirit. I
have spoken with two of my acquaintances on the day of their burial, and
with one who through my eyes saw his coffin and his bier; and as this
man enjoyed all the sensation he had in this world, he spoke to me about
the burial rites while I was following in his funeral procession, and
also about his body, saying that they should throw that away because he
himself was alive. \[5\] Be it known, however, that they who are in the
other life can see nothing whatever in this world through the eyes of
any man; but that their being able to do so through mine was because I
am in the spirit with them and at the same time in the body with those
who are in the world (see also n. 1880). And be it further known that I
did not see with my bodily eyes those with whom I have spoken in the
other life, but with the eyes of my spirit; and yet I saw them as
clearly, and sometimes more clearly, than with the eyes of the body; for
of the Lord's Divine mercy the senses of my spirit have been opened.
\[6\] But I am aware that what I have so far said will not be believed
by those who are immersed in bodily, earthly, and worldly things (that
is, by those of them who have such things as their end), for such people
apprehend no other things than those which are dissipated by death. I am
also well aware that those will not believe who have thought much and
investigated much about the soul, and who have not at the same time
comprehended that the soul of man is his spirit, and that his spirit is
the man himself who is living in the body; for such persons could have
no other notion about the soul than as of a thinking principle, whether
of flame or of ether, that acts solely into the organic forms of the
body, and not into those purer forms which are of the spirit in the
body; thus that the soul is such a thing as must be dissipated together
with the body. And this is especially the case with those who have
confirmed themselves in such things by views that are inflated with a
persuasion of their own preeminent wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4623.">4623.</span></span>

But be it known that the life of sense with spirits is twofold, namely,
real and not real. The one is distinguished from the other by the fact
that everything is real which appears to those who are in heaven,
whereas everything is unreal which appears to those who are in hell. For
whatever comes from the Divine (that is, from the Lord) is real, because
it comes from the very being of things, and from life in itself, but
whatever comes from a spirit's own is not real, because it does not come
from the being of things, nor from life in itself. They who are in the
affection of good and truth are in the Lord's life, thus in real life,
for the Lord is present in good and truth through the affection; but
they who are in evil and falsity through the affection, are in the life
of what is their own, thus in a life not real, for the Lord is not
present in evil and falsity. The real is distinguished from the not real
in this-that the real is actually such as it appears, and that the not
real is actually not such as it appears. \[2\] They who are in hell have
sensations equally with others, and are not aware but that everything is
really or actually just as it appears to their senses; and yet when they
are looked at by the angels, the same things appear as phantasms, and
disappear, and they themselves do not appear as men, but as monsters. It
has also been given me to speak with them on this subject, and some of
them said that they believe things to be real because they see and touch
them, adding that sense cannot deceive. But it was given me to reply
that no matter how real these things may appear to them, they
nevertheless are not real, and this because they themselves are in
things contrary or opposite to the Divine, namely, in evils and
falsities, and moreover are themselves nothing but phantasies insofar as
their thoughts are concerned, to the extent that they are in cupidities
of evil and persuasions of falsity; and to see anything from phantasies
is to see things that are real as not real, and things that are not real
as real; and that unless it were given them of the Lord's Divine mercy
to have their senses affected in this manner, they would have no
sensitive life, consequently no life at all, because that which is
sensitive constitutes the whole of life. To adduce all my experience on
these subjects would be to fill many pages. \[3\] Therefore when you
enter the other life beware of being deceived, for evil spirits know how
to conjure up illusions of many kinds before those who come fresh from
the world, and if they cannot deceive them, they nevertheless thereby
endeavor to persuade them that nothing is real, but that all things are
ideal, even those which are in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4624.">4624.</span></span>

But with regard to the correspondence with the Grand Man of the sense of
smell and consequently of the nostrils, those persons belong to this
province who are in general perception, so that they may be called
"perceptions." To these correspond the sense of smell and its organ.
Hence also it is that to smell, to scent, to be quick-scented, and also
the nose, are in common speech predicated of those who make a close
conjecture, and also of those who perceive; for the interiors of the
words of man's speech derive many things from correspondence with the
Grand Man, because in respect to his spirit man is in society with
spirits, while in respect to his body he is in society with men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4625.">4625.</span></span>

But the societies of which the whole heaven (that is, the Grand Man)
consists, are very numerous, and are more or less universal. The more
universal are those to which an entire member, organ, or viscus,
corresponds; and the less universal are those to which their parts, or
parts of parts, correspond. Every society is an image of the whole, for
that which is unanimous is composed of so many images of itself. As the
more universal societies are images of the Grand Man, they have within
them particular societies which correspond in a similar manner. I have
sometimes spoken with those who in the society into which I was sent,
belonged to the province of the lungs, of the heart, the face, the
tongue, the ear, the eye, and also with those who belonged to the
province of the nostrils, from which last it was also given me to know
their character, namely, that they are perceptions, for they had a
general perception of whatever happened in the society, but not so much
in particular as have those who are in the province of the eye, for the
latter discriminate and view those things which are matters of
perception. It was further given me to observe that the perceptive power
of the former varies in accordance with the general changes of state in
the society in which they are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4626.">4626.</span></span>

When any spirit is approaching, even when he is far away and hidden from
view, his presence (when the Lord gives permission) is perceived from a
certain spiritual sphere; and from this is known the quality of his
life, of his affection, and of his faith. Angelic spirits, who are in a
more exquisite perception, thereby know innumerable things respecting
the state of his life and faith, as I have often witnessed. When it
pleases the Lord these spheres are turned into odors, and the very odor
is plainly smelt. The reason why these spheres are turned into odors is
that odor corresponds to perception, and because perception is as it
were spiritual odor, from which also odor descends. (But see what has
already been adduced from experience on these subjects; concerning
spheres, n. 1048, 1053, 1316, 1504-1519, 1695, 2401, 2489, 4464,
concerning perception, n. 483, 495, 503, 521, 536, 1383, 1384, 1388,
1391, 1397, 1398, 1504, 1640, and concerning the consequent odors, n.
1514, 1517-1519, 1631, 3577.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4627.">4627.</span></span>

Those, however, who relate to the interiors of the nostrils are in a
more perfect state of perception than those (just treated of) who relate
to their exteriors. Concerning the former I may give the following
account. I saw as it were a bath, with long seats or benches, and from
it heat exhaled. A woman appeared there who soon vanished into a
blackish cloud and I heard little children saying that they did not
desire to be there. Soon afterwards I observed some angelic choirs, who
were sent to me for the purpose of averting the endeavors of certain
evil spirits; and then suddenly above the forehead there appeared little
apertures, greater or less, through which a beautiful yellow light was
shining; and in this light within the apertures I saw some women in a
snowy radiance. There afterwards again appeared little apertures in a
different arrangement, through which the women within were looking out;
and again other little apertures through which the light did not so
freely pass. \[2\] Finally I observed a bright white light, and was told
that here were the abodes of those women who constitute the province of
the internal nostrils (for they were of the female sex); and that the
clearsightedness of perception of those who are there, is represented in
the world of spirits by such apertures. For the spiritual things in
heaven are represented in the world of Spirits by natural things, or
rather by such things as are similar to those which are natural. It was
afterwards given me to speak with them, and they said that through these
representative apertures they can see with exactness what is being done
below, and that the apertures appear turned to those societies which
they are occupied in observing. And as they were then turned to me, they
said that they could observe all the ideas of my thought, and also those
of the people around me. They said moreover that they did not merely
observe the ideas, but also saw them represented in many ways, as for
instance those of the affection of good by correspondent little flames,
and those of the affection of truth by variations of light. They added
that they saw certain angelic societies with me, and their thoughts
represented by objects of many colors, by crimson dyes such as we see on
painted curtains, and also by the colors of the rainbow on a darker
ground, and they said that they thus perceived those angelic societies
to be of the province of the eye. \[3\] Afterwards other spirits were
seen who were cast down from thence and scattered about hither and
thither, of whom they said that they were such as had insinuated
themselves among them for the purpose of observing something, and of
seeing what was going on below, but with an insidious purpose. This
casting down was observed whenever angelic choirs approached and entered
into conversation with me. As regards those who were cast down, they
said that they relate to the mucus of the nostrils, and that they are
dull and stupid, and also devoid of conscience, thus altogether devoid
of interior perception. The woman who was seen (as mentioned above)
signified such female ensnarers. With these also it was given me to
speak, and they expressed their surprise at anyone's having conscience,
being quite ignorant of what conscience is; and when I said that it is
an interior perception of what is good and true, and that to act
contrary to it causes anxiety, this they did not understand. Such are
those who correspond to the mucus which infests the nostrils and is
therefore ejected. \[4\] There was afterwards shown me the kind of light
in which those live who relate to the interiors of the nostrils. It was
a light beautifully varied with veins of golden flame and silver light,
the affections of good being represented therein by the veins of golden
flame, and the affections of truth by the veins of silver light. I was
also shown that they have apertures opening at the side, through which
they see as it were a sky with stars in the blue, and I was told that in
their chambers there is a light so great as to immeasurably surpass the
noonday light of this world. I was further told that the heat there is
like that of early summer on earth, and also that these angels of the
female sex are accompanied by little children of some years who are
unwilling to stay when the female ensnarers (or mucuses) arrive.
Numberless such representatives appear in the world of spirits; but
these were representative of the perceptions in which are those female
angels who correspond to the sense of smell in the interiors of the
nostrils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4628.">4628.</span></span>

With regard further to the odors into which the spheres of perceptions
are turned, they are smelt as plainly as are odors on earth, but do not
reach the sense of the man whose interiors are closed; for they flow in
by an internal, and not by an external, way. These odors are from a
twofold origin-the perception of good and the perception of evil; those
from the perception of good are as intensely sweet as though they
exhaled from the fragrant flowers of a garden and other fragrant things,
and are inexpressibly pleasant and various, and the angels of heaven are
in the spheres of such odors; whereas the odors which are from the
perception of evil are as intensely repulsive as are the stenches and
putrid smells from stinking waters, excrements, and carcasses, or the
filthy smell from mice and bedbugs. In the spheres of such stenches are
they who are in hell, and wonderful to say they who are in them do not
perceive their offensiveness, nay the stenches are delightful to them,
and when they are in them, they are in the sphere of their delights. But
when hell is opened, and the exhalation from it reaches good spirits,
these are seized with horror and distress, like those in the world who
encounter the sphere of such stenches.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4629.">4629.</span></span>

To adduce all my experience in connection with the spheres of
perceptions being turned into odors, would be to fill a volume. See what
has been related of them above, n. 1514, 1517-1519, 1631, 3577, to which
I may just add that I once perceived the general thought of many spirits
concerning the Lord's being born a man, and I observed that it consisted
of mere objections; for what spirits think, both in general and in
particular, is plainly perceived by others. The odor of that sphere was
perceived as like that of stinking water, and of water defiled with
filth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4630.">4630.</span></span>

A certain person was present unseen over my head. I knew he was there by
the stench, which was like that of rotten teeth, and I afterwards
noticed a smell like that from burning horn or bone. Then there came a
great crowd of such persons that rose up like a cloud from below not far
from the back, and as these also were unseen, I conjectured that they
were subtle, and yet evil; but I was told that these were invisible
where there is a spiritual sphere, but visible where there is a natural
sphere. For those who are so natural as not to think at all about
spiritual things, nor to believe in the existence of hell or of heaven,
and yet are subtle in their transactions, are such as these, and are
called "the invisible natural," being sometimes made manifest to others
by their stench, as described above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4631.">4631.</span></span>

Two or three times also a cadaverous odor breathed upon me; and when I
inquired from whom it came, I was informed that it came from a hell
where are foul robbers and assassins and those who perpetrate crimes
with gross deceit. Sometimes also I have noticed an excrementitious
odor, and when I inquired whence it came, I was told that it was from a
hell where there are adulterers. And when an excrementitious odor was
mingled with a cadaverous one, I was told that it was from a hell where
there are adulterers who are also cruel; and so on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4632.">4632.</span></span>

Once when I was thinking about the rule of the soul in the body, and
about the influx of the will into the actions, I noticed that those who
are in an excrementitious hell that was then a little open, thought of
nothing but the control of the soul over the anus, and of the influx of
the will into the protrusion of the excrements, which showed in what
kind of a sphere of perception and thence of stench they were. A similar
thing took place when I was thinking about conjugial love, in that those
who are in the hell of adulterers then thought of nothing but filthy
practices and infamous acts such as are connected with adultery. And
when I thought about sincerity, I noticed that the deceitful thought of
nothing but deceitful crimes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4633.">4633.</span></span>

From what has now been said on the subject of perceptions and odors, it
is manifest that in the other life everyone's life, and consequently
everyone's affection, is in plain view; and therefore anyone who
believes that his previous character, and the consequent quality of his
life, is unknown there, or that he can there hide his disposition as in
this world, is much mistaken. Moreover, not only are those things seen
there which a man has known about himself, but also those which he has
not known, namely, such things as by frequent practice he has at last
immersed in the delights of life, so as to cause them to disappear from
his sight and reflection. The very ends of his thought, of his speech,
and of his actions, which from a like cause have become hidden from him,
are most plainly perceived in heaven, for heaven is in the sphere and
perception of ends.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4634.">4634.</span></span>

A continuation concerning Correspondence with the Grand Man will be
found at the end of the following chapter, and there concerning the
correspondence therewith of the hearing and of the ears.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4635.">4635.</span></span>

Genesis 36 THE LAST JUDGMENT As in prefatory remarks to preceding
chapters of Genesis there have been unfolded the Lord's predictions in
Matthew 24 concerning the last time of the church, and as the same
predictions are continued in Matthew 25, I may unfold these also in
respect to the internal sense. These predictions as given in their order
in the letter are as follows: Then shall the kingdom of the heavens be
likened unto ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went forth to meet
the bridegroom. And five of them were prudent, but five were foolish.
They that were foolish, when they took their lamps, took no oil with
them; but the prudent took oil in their vessels with their lamps. And
while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. But at
midnight a cry was made, Behold the bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet
him. Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. But the
foolish said unto the prudent, Give us of your oil, for our lamps are
gone out. But the prudent answered, saying, Perchance there will not be
enough for us and you; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for
yourselves. And while they went away to buy, the bridegroom came; and
they that were ready went in with him to the wedding, and the door was
shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, lord, open to
us. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.
Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour wherein the Son of
man cometh (Matt. 25:1-13).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4636.">4636.</span></span>

That by this parable the Lord described His own coming, is evident from
the particulars, and from the end, where He says, "Watch therefore, for
ye know not the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh," as He
also says in the foregoing chapter \[Matt. 24\], where He is speaking
expressly of His coming: "Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour
your Lord cometh" (Matt. 24:42). That His "coming" is the consummation
of the age, or the last time of the church, has been shown before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4637.">4637.</span></span>

It is very evident that each and all things the Lord spoke in parables
are representative and significative of the spiritual and celestial
things of His kingdom, and in the highest sense, of the Divine things
with Him; and therefore the man who does not know this must suppose that
the Lord's parables have no more in them than ordinary comparisons. Such
must be the case with the parable of the ten virgins unless it is known
what is signified in the internal sense by the virgins, and also by ten
and five, and by the lamps, the vessels, and the oil, and by them that
sell, the wedding, and all the rest; and the same with all the other
parables. The things which the Lord spoke in these parables appear in
the outward form like ordinary comparisons; but in their inward form
they are of such a nature as to fill the universal heaven. For there is
an internal sense in every particular, which is of such a nature that
its spiritual and celestial diffuses itself through the heavens in every
direction like light and flame. This sense is quite uplifted above the
sense of the letter, and flows from the several expressions, and from
the several words, nay, from every jot. But what this parable involves
in the internal sense will appear from what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4638.">4638.</span></span>

Then shall the kingdom of the heavens be likened unto ten virgins. This
signifies the last period of the old church and the first of the new.
The church is the Lord's kingdom on earth. The "ten virgins" are all who
are in the church, namely, both those who are in good and truth, and
those who are in evil and falsity. "Ten" in the internal sense denotes
remains, and also fullness, thus all; and "virgins" denote those who are
in the church, as also elsewhere in the Word. \[2\] Who took their
lamps; signifies spiritual things in which is the celestial, or truths
in which there is good, or what is the same, faith in which there is
charity toward the neighbor, and charity in which there is love to the
Lord; for "oil" is the good of love, as shown hereafter. But lamps in
which there is no oil denote the same in which there is no good. \[3\]
And went forth to meet the bridegroom; signifies their reception. And
five of them were prudent, but five were foolish; signifies a part of
them in truths in which there is good, and a part of them in truths in
which is no good. The former are the "prudent," and the latter the
"foolish." In the internal sense "five" denotes some, here therefore a
part of them. They that were foolish, when they took their lamps, took
no oil with them; signifies not having the good of charity in their
truths; for in the internal sense "oil" denotes the good of charity and
of love. But the prudent took oil in their vessels with their lamps;
signifies that they had the good of charity and of love in their truths;
their "vessels" are the doctrinal things of faith. \[4\] And while the
bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept; signifies delay, and
hence doubt. To "slumber" in the internal sense is to grow sluggish from
the delay in the things of the church, and to "sleep" is to cherish
doubt - the prudent, a doubt in which there is affirmation; the foolish,
a doubt in which there is negation. But at midnight a cry was made;
signifies the time which is the last of the old church and the first of
the new. This time is what is called "night" in the Word, when the state
of the church is treated of. The "cry" denotes a change. Behold the
bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him; signifies the same as the
judgment, namely, acceptance and rejection. \[5\] Then all those virgins
arose, and trimmed their lamps; signifies preparation of all; for those
who are in truths in which there is no good are equally in the belief of
being accepted as are those who are in truths in which there is good,
for they suppose that faith alone saves, not knowing that there is no
faith where there is no charity. But the foolish said unto the prudent,
Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out; signifies that they
desire good to be communicated by others to their empty truths, or to
their destitute faith. For in the other life all spiritual and celestial
things are mutually communicated, but only through good. \[6\] But the
prudent answered, saying, Perchance there will not be enough for us and
you; signifies that it cannot be communicated, because the little of
truth that they had would be taken away from them. For as to the
communication of good in the other life to those who are in truths
without good, these as it were take away good from those who have it,
and appropriate it to themselves, and do not communicate it to others,
but defile it; for which reason no communication of good to them is
possible. These spirits will be described from experience at the end of
the next chapter \[Gen. 37\]. \[7\] But go ye rather to them that sell,
and buy for yourselves; signifies the good of merit. They who boast of
this are "they that sell." Moreover, in the other life they who are in
truth in which there is no good, above all others make a merit of all
they have done which appeared good in the outward form, although in the
inward form it was evil, according to what the Lord says in Matthew:
"Many will say to Me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied by
Thy name, and by Thy name have cast out demons, and in Thy name done
many mighty works? But then will I confess unto them, I know you not;
depart from Me, ye workers of iniquity" (Matt. 7:22, 23). And in Luke:
"When the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door,
then shall ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying,
Lord, lord, open to us. But he shall answer and say to you, I know you
not whence ye are; then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk
in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets; but he shall say,
I tell you I know you not whence ye are, depart from me all ye workers
of iniquity" (Luke 13:26, 27). Such are those who are here meant by the
foolish virgins, and the like is therefore said of them in these words:
"they also came, saying, Lord, lord, open to us; but he answered and
said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not." \[8\] And while they went
away to buy, the bridegroom came. This signifies their too late
application. And they that were ready went in with him to the wedding;
signifies that they who were in good and thence in truth were received
into heaven. Heaven is likened to a wedding from the heavenly marriage,
which is the marriage of good and truth; and the Lord is likened to the
bridegroom, because they are then conjoined with Him; and hence the
church is called the bride. And the door was shut; signifies that others
cannot enter. \[9\] Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord,
lord, open to us; signifies that they desire to enter from faith alone
without charity, and from works in which there is not the Lord's life,
but the life of self. But be answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I
know you not; signifies rejection. His not knowing them means in the
internal sense that they were not in any charity toward the neighbor and
thereby in conjunction with the Lord. They who are not in conjunction
are said not to be known. \[10\] Watch therefore, for ye know not the
day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh; signifies an assiduous
application of life in accordance with the precepts of faith, which is
"to watch." The time of acceptance, which is unknown to man, and the
state, are signified by their not knowing the day nor the hour in which
the Son of man is to come. Elsewhere also in Matthew he who is in good,
that is, he who acts according to the precepts, is called "prudent;" and
he who is in knowledges of truth and does them not is called "foolish:"
Everyone that heareth My words and doeth them, I will liken him unto a
prudent man; and everyone that heareth My words and doeth them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish man (Matt. 7:24, 26). GENESIS 36 1. And
these are the births of Esau; he is Edom. 2. Esau took his women of the
daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and
Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite; 3.
And Basemath the daughter of Ishmael, the sister of Nebaioth. 4. And
Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Basemath bare Reuel; 5. And Oholibamah
bare Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah: these are the sons of Esau that were
born unto him in the land of Canaan. 6. And Esau took his women, and his
sons, and his daughters, and all the souls of his house, and his
acquisition, and all his beast, and all his purchase, which he had
acquired in the land of Canaan, and went into a land from before Jacob
his brother. 7. For their substance was too great for them to dwell
together; and the land of their sojournings could not bear them because
of their acquisitions. 8. And Esau dwelt in Mount Seir; Esau he is Edom.
9. And these are the births of Esau the father of Edom in Mount Seir:
10. These are the names of the sons of Esau; Eliphaz the son of Adah the
wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Basemath the wife of Esau. 11. And the
sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz. 12. And
Timna was concubine to Eliphaz the son of Esau; and she bare to Eliphaz
Amalek: these are the sons of Adah Esau's wife. 13. And these are the
sons of Reuel; Nahath and Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah: these were the sons
of Basemath Esau's wife. 14. And these were the sons of Oholibamah the
daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bare to
Esau Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah. 15. These are the chiefs of the sons
of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau; chief Teman, chief
Omar, chief Zepho, chief Kenaz, 16. Chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief
Amalek. These are the chiefs of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these are
the sons of Adah. 17. And these are the sons of Reuel Esau's son; chief
Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah; these are the chiefs
of Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Basemath Esau's
wife. 18. And these are the sons of Oholibamah Esau's wife; chief Jeush,
chief Jalam, chief Korah: these are the chiefs of Oholibamah the
daughter of Anah, Esau's wife. 19. These are the sons of Esau, and these
are their chiefs: he himself is Edom. 20. These are the sons of Seir the
Horite, the inhabitants of the land; Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and
Anah, 21. And Dishon and Ezer and Dishan; these are the chiefs of the
Horite, the sons of Seir in the land of Edom. 22. And the sons of Lotan
were Hori and Hemam; and the sister of Lotan was Timna. 23. And these
are the sons of Shobal; Alvan and Manahath and Ebal, Shepho and Onam.
24. And these are the sons of Zibeon, both Aiah and Anah: this is the
Anah who found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses for
Zibeon his father. 25. And these are the children of Anah; Dishon, and
Oholibamah the daughter of Anah. 26. And these are the sons of Dishon;
Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and Cheran. 27. These are the sons of Ezer;
Bilhan and Zaavan and Akan. 28. These are the sons of Dishan, Uz and
Aran. 29. These are the chiefs of the Horite; chief Lotan, chief Shobal,
chief Zibeon, chief Anah, 30. Chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief Dishan.
These are the chiefs of the Horite, according to their chiefs in the
land of Seir. 31. And these are the kings that reigned in the land of
Edom, before there reigned a king over the sons of Israel. 32. And Bela
the son of Beor reigned in Edom; and the name of his city was Dinhabah.
33. And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his
stead. 34. And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites
reigned in his stead. 35. And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad,
who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead; and the
name of his city was Avith. 36. And Hadad died, and Samlah of Mazrekah
reigned in his stead. 37. And Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth of the
river reigned in his stead. 38. And Shaul died, and Baal-hanan the son
of Achbor reigned in his stead. 39. And Baal-hanan the son of Achbor
died, and Hadar reigned in his stead; and the name of his city was Pau;
and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter
of Me-zahab. 40. And these are the names of the chiefs of Esau,
according to their families, according to their places, in their names;
chief Timnah, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth; 41. Chief Oholibamah, chief
Elah, chief Pinon; 42. Chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar; 43. Chief
Magdiel, chief Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom, according to their
habitations in the land of their possession. Esau himself is the father
of Edom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4639.">4639.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. In the internal sense the subject here treated of is the
Lord's Divine good natural, and the whole order of this good is
described by the names. The Lord's Divine good natural is "Esau."

<span class="margnote"><span id="4640.">4640.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE. Verse 1. And these are the births of Esau; he is
Edom. "And these are the births of Esau," signifies derivations in the
Lord's Divine good natural; "he is Edom," signifies the Lord's Divine
Human in respect to the natural and the corporeal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4641.">4641.</span></span>

And these are the births of Esau. That this signifies derivations in the
Lord's Divine good natural, is evident from the signification of
"births," as being derivations of good and truth (see n. 1330, 3263,
3279, 3860, 3868, 4070); and from the representation of Esau, as being
the Lord's Divine good natural (n. 3302, 3322, 3494, 3504, 3576, 3599).
This good is the subject now treated of in this chapter; but as it is of
such a nature as not to fall into the understanding of any man, and
scarcely of any angel, this good is therefore described by mere names.
For the Lord's Divine good natural, which is represented by Esau, is
what He had Divine from birth, since He was conceived of Jehovah, and
hence from birth he had the Divine being, which He had as His soul, and
consequently as the inmost of His life. \[2\] This was clothed outwardly
by what He took on from the mother; and as this was not good, but in
itself evil, He therefore expelled it by His own power, especially by
the combat of temptations; and this human, which He made new in Himself,
He then conjoined with the Divine good which He had from birth. Jacob
represented the good which He procured to Himself by His own power, and
which has been treated of in the preceding chapters. This is the good
which He conjoined with the Divine good, and He thus made the human in
Himself all Divine. The good which Esau represents flowed in by an
internal way, and through rational good into natural immediately; but
the good which Jacob and Israel represent, flowed in by an external way,
and the Divine went to meet it through rational good, but mediately
through the truth of the rational into the natural. Isaac represents
this rational good, and Rebekah this rational truth. (See what has
already been said of these n. 3314, 3573, 4563.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4642.">4642.</span></span>

He is Edom. That this signifies the Lord's Divine Human in respect to
the natural and the corporeal, is evident from the representations of
Edom as being the Lord's Divine Human in respect to natural good, to
which are adjoined the doctrinal things of truth (see n. 3302, 3322,
4241), thus in respect to the natural and the corporeal. For doctrinal
things are like a body to truth, or in a spiritual sense are the bodily
things of natural truth. Hence it is that by Edom is represented the
Lord's Divine Human in respect to the natural and the corporeal.
Doctrine is as it were the embodiment of truth, because doctrine is not
in itself truth, but truth is in doctrine as the soul in its body. \[2\]
In what now follows the Lord's Divine good natural is treated of, but
its derivations are described by names for the reason stated above-that
the derivations of this good transcend the understanding of everyone,
even that of an angel. For the angels are finite, and what is finite
does not comprehend what is infinite. Nevertheless when this chapter is
read, the derivations contained in the names are represented to angels
in a general way by the influx of Divine love from the Lord, and the
influx by a celestial flame which affects them with Divine good. \[3\]
He who believes that the Word is not inspired as to its smallest jot,
and he who believes that it is inspired in any other way than that each
single series represents Divine things, and thence heavenly and
spiritual things, and that each single word signifies these, must needs
suppose that these names involve nothing more than the genealogies from
Esau. But what are genealogies to the Word? And what is there Divine in
them? (But that the names in the Word all signify real things may be
seen above, n. 1224, 1264, 1876, 1888, 4442, and in every place where
their signification is unfolded.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4643.">4643.</span></span>

Verses 2-5. Esau took his women of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the
daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the
daughter of Zibeon the Hivite; and Basemath the daughter of Ishmael, the
sister of Nebaioth. And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Basemath bare
Reuel; and Oholibamah bare Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah: these are the
sons of Esau which were born unto him in the land of Canaan. "Esau took
his women of the daughters of Canaan" signifies the first conjunction of
natural good with the affection of apparent truth; "Adah the daughter of
Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of
Zibeon the Hivite," signifies the quality which was from the Ancient
Church; "and Basemath the daughter of Ishmael, the sister of Nebaioth,"
signifies a second conjunction with the affection of truth from a Divine
stock; "and Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz, and Basemath bare Reuel,"
signifies the first derivations therefrom; "and Oholibamah bare Jeush,
and Jalam, and Korah," signifies a second derivation; "these are the
sons of Esau which were born unto him in the land of Canaan," signifies
from the good of the Lord's kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4644.">4644.</span></span>

As the subject here treated of is the good which was Divine in the Lord
from His birth, and the conjunction of this good with the truth and good
which He acquired to Himself as a Man born, and also the derivations
therefrom; and because as before said these things are of such a nature
as not to fall into the understanding, not even the angelic, they
therefore cannot be explained in detail. Moreover they are mere names,
by which this Divine good with its derivations is described; and to
unfold the meaning of mere names, without any historic sense preceding
and following to give a confirming light, would be to bring the subject
into doubt, because no matter how clearly it may be shown them, there
are few who can believe that real things are signified by the names in
the Word. For these reasons I will merely transcribe the contents of
this chapter, and add somewhat of a general explication by means of such
things as may be adapted to the apprehension, and which are only
outlines. For the things which are in the Divine never appear to anyone,
but the things which are from the Divine appear in a very general manner
according to the understanding into which they fall, and yet only as
faint outlines. Be it known moreover that no man is born into any good,
but everyone into evil: into interior evil from his father, and into
exterior evil from his mother; for everyone's heredity is evil. But
insofar as regards the Father the Lord alone was born into good, and
into the Divine good itself; and it is this Divine good into which the
Lord was born that is here treated of. Its derivations are what came
forth in the Lord's Human when He made it Divine, and by means of which
He glorified it. Hence it is that something of a general explication can
be added.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4645.">4645.</span></span>

Verses 6-8. And Esau took his women, and his sons, and his daughters,
and all the souls of his house, and his acquisition, and all his beast,
and all his purchase, which he had acquired in the land of Canaan, and
went into a land from before Jacob his brother, For their substance
\[conquisitio\] was too great for them to dwell together; and the land
of their sojournings could not bear them because of their acquisitions.
And Esau dwelt in Mount Seir; Esau he is Edom. "And Esau took his women,
and his sons, and his daughters, and all the souls of his house, and his
acquisition, and all his beast, and all his purchase, which he had
acquired in the land of Canaan, and went into a land from before Jacob
his brother," signifies all things of Divine good and the derivative
truth which He nevertheless had, with which there was correspondence in
heaven, and from which is heaven (withdrawing from Jacob for the sake of
the representation); "for their substance was too great," signifies on
account of infinity; "for them to dwell together," signifies the
representatives; "and the land of their sojournings could not bear them
because of their acquisitions," signifies that all things cannot be
described; "and Esau dwelt in Mount Seir," signifies the truth of
natural good; "Esau he is Edom" signifies the Lord's Divine Human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4646.">4646.</span></span>

Verses 9-14. And these are the births of Esau the father of Edom in
Mount Seir: these are the names of the sons of Esau; Eliphaz the son of
Adah the wife of Esau; Reuel the son of Basemath the wife of Esau. And
the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz. And
Timna was concubine to Eliphaz the son of Esau; and she bare to Eliphaz
Amalek; these are the sons of Adah Esau's wife. And these are the sons
of Reuel; Nahath and Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah: these were the sons of
Basemath Esau's wife. And these were the sons of Oholibamah the daughter
of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife; and she bare to Esau
Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah. "And these are the births of Esau the
father of Edom," signifies the derivations in Divine good natural ("the
father of Edom" is the Divine good from which the others are derived);
"in Mount Seir," signifies as to the truths of good; "these are the
names of the sons of Esau," signifies the quality of the derivations;
"Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Basemath the
wife of Esau," signifies the states of these derivations from the
marriage of good and truth; "and the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar,
Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz," signifies the first derivation of good;
"and Timna was concubine to Eliphaz the son of Esau," signifies things
that serve them; "and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek," signifies what is
sensuous; "these are the sons of Adah Esau's wife," signifies a second
derivation; "and these are the sons of Reuel; Nahath and Zerah, Shammah
and Mizzah; these were the sons of Basemath Esau's wife," signifies a
third derivation; "and these were the sons of Oholibamah the daughter of
Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife; and she bare to Esau Jeush,
and Jalam, and Korah," signifies a subsequent derivation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4647.">4647.</span></span>

Verses 15-19. These are the chiefs of the sons of Esau; the sons of
Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau; chief Teman, chief Omar, chief Zepho,
chief Kenaz, chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek. These are the
chiefs of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Adah. And
these are the sons of Reuel Esau's son; chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief
Shammah, chief Mizzah; these are the chiefs of Reul in the land of Edom;
these are the sons of Basemath Esau's wife. And these are the sons of
Oholibamah Esau's wife; chief Jeush, chief Jalam, chief Korah: these are
the chiefs of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife. These are
the sons of Esau, and these are their chiefs: he himself is Edom. "These
are the chiefs of the sons of Esau," signifies the principal truths of
good; "the sons of Eliphaz, the firstborn of Esau; chief Teman, chief
Omar, chief Zepho, chief Kenaz, chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek,"
signifies the first classification, and their quality, and of what
quality they are also in the Lord's kingdom; "these are the chiefs of
Eliphaz in the land of Edom, these are the sons of Adah," signifies the
principal truths of the first class; "and these are the sons of Reuel
Esau's son; chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah,"
signifies a second class, and their quality, as in heaven; "these are
the chiefs of Reuel in the land of Edom," signifies a second
classification; "these are the sons of Basemath Esau's wife," signifies
from the marriage of good and truth; "and these are the sons of
Oholibamah Esau's wife," signifies the principal truths of a third
classification; "chief Jeush, chief Jalam, chief Horah," signifies their
quality, and hence what is their quality in the Lord's kingdom; "these
are the chiefs of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife"
signifies the principal truths arising from the conjunction of good and
truth; these twelve chiefs are as the twelve tribes, according to their
disposal by good; "these are the sons of Esau, and these are their
chiefs," signifies that these are the principal of the truths of good;
"he himself is Edom," signifies in the Lord's Divine Human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4648.">4648.</span></span>

Verses 20-28. These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants of
the land; Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah, and Dishon and Ezer and
Dishan; these are the chiefs of the Horite, the sons of Seir in the land
of Edom. And the sons of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and the sister of
Lotan was Timna. And these are the sons of Shobal; Alvan and Manahath
and Ebal, Shepho and Onam. And these are the sons of Zibeon, both Aiah
and Anah; this is the Anah who found the mules in the wilderness, as he
fed the asses for Zibeon his father. And these are the children of Anah;
Dishon, and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah. And these are the sons of
Dishon; Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and Cheran. These are the sons of
Ezer; Bilhan and Zaavan and Akan. These are the sons of Dishan; Uz and
Aran. \[2\] "These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants of
the land," signifies truths therefrom in their order; "Lotan and Shobal
and Zibeon and Anah, and Dishon and Ezer and Dishan," signifies their
quality; "these are the chiefs of the Horite, the sons of Seir,"
signifies the chief truths of good from the former; "in the land of
Edom," signifies in the Lord's Divine Human; "and the sons of Lotan were
Hori and Hemam, and the sister of Lotan was Timna," signifies a second
class of truths; "and these are the sons of Shobal; Alvan and Manahath
and Ebal, Shepho and Onam," signifies a third class and their quality.
\[3\] "And these are the sons of Zibeon, both Aiah and Anah," signifies
a third class and their quality; "this is the Anah who found the mules
in the wilderness," signifies truths from memory-knowledges; "as he fed
the asses for Zibeon his father," signifies when he was in
memory-knowledges; "and these are the children of Anah; Dishon, and
Oholibamah the daughter of Anah," signifies a third class and their
quality; "and these are the sons of Dishon; Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran
and Cheran," signifies a fourth class and their quality; "these are the
sons of Ezer; Bilhan and Zaavan and Akan," signifies a fourth class and
their quality; "these are the sons of Dishan; Uz and Aran," signifies a
fifth class and their quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4649.">4649.</span></span>

Verses 29, 30. These are the chiefs of the Horite; chief Lotan, chief
Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah, chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief
Dishan. These are the chiefs of the Horite, according to their chiefs in
the land of Seir. "These are the chiefs of the Horite," signifies the
chief truths from those which follow; "chief Lotan, chief Shobal, chief
Zibeon, chief Anah, chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief Dishan," signifies
their quality; "these are the chiefs of the Horite, according to their
chiefs in the land of Seir," signifies the chief truths in the
successives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4650.">4650.</span></span>

Verses 31-39. And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom,
before there reigned a king over the sons of Israel. And Bela the son of
Beor reigned in Edom; and the name of his city was Dinhabah. And Bela
died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead. And
Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his
stead. And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in
the field of Moab, reigned in his stead; and the name of his city was
Avith. And Hadad died, and Samlah of Mazrekah reigned in his stead. And
Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth of the river reigned in his stead.
And Shaul died, and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
And Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead;
and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the
daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab. "And these are the kings
that reigned in the land of Edom," signifies the principal truths in the
Lord's Divine Human; "before there reigned a king over the sons of
Israel," signifies when interior spiritual natural truth had not yet
risen; "and Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom," signifies the first
truth; "and the name of his city was Dinhabah," signifies doctrine
therefrom; "and Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned
in his stead," signifies what is therefrom as from its essential, and
its quality; "and Jobab died, and Husham reigned in his stead,"
signifies what was therefrom; "of the land of the Temanites," signifies
whence it was; "and Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad reigned in
his stead," signifies what was therefrom; "who smote Midian in the field
of Moab," signifies purification from falsity; "and the name of his city
was Avith," signifies doctrinal things therefrom; "and Hadad died, and
Samlah of Mazrekah reigned in his stead," signifies what was thence
derived and its quality; "and Samlah died, and Shaul reigned in his
stead," signifies what was therefrom; "of Rehoboth of the river,"
signifies its quality; "and Shaul died, and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor
reigned in his stead," signifies what was therefrom, and its quality;
"and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead,"
signifies what was therefrom; "and the name of his city was Pau,"
signifies doctrine; "and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of
Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab" signifies its good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4651-4700](ac094)
