[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac101)  [Next](ac103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="5051.">5051.</span></span>

In a quiet dream I saw some trees planted in a wooden receptacle, one of
which was tall, another lower, and two were small. The lower tree
delighted me very greatly, and all the while a very pleasant rest, such
as I cannot express, affected my mind. On awaking from sleep I conversed
with those who induced the dream. They were angelic spirits (see n.
1977, 1979), and they told me what was signified by what I had seen-that
it was conjugial love, the tall tree signifying the husband, the lower
tree the wife, and the two small ones the children. They told me further
that the very pleasant rest which affected my mind indicated what
pleasantness of peace those have in the other life who have lived in
genuine conjugial love. They added that such are those who belong to the
province of the thighs next above the knees, and that those who are in a
still more pleasant state belong to the province of the loins. It was
also shown that this province communicates through the feet with the
soles and the heels. That this is so, is plain from that great nerve in
the thigh which sends forth its branches not only through the loins to
the members of generation (which are the organs of conjugial love), but
also through the feet to the soles and the heels. It was also then
discovered what is meant in the Word by the hollow and the nerve of the
thigh which was put out of joint in Jacob, when he wrestled with the
angel (Gen. 32:25, 31, 32; see n. 4280, 4281, 4314-4317). \[2\] I
afterward saw a great dog, such as that called Cerberus by ancient
writers, with a frightful open mouth; and I was told that such a dog
signifies a guard to prevent man's passing over from heavenly conjugial
love to the love of adultery, which is infernal; for heavenly conjugial
love exists when a man together with his wife, whom he loves most
tenderly, and with his children, lives content in the Lord. From this he
has in this world an inward pleasantness, and in the other life heavenly
joy; but when he passes from this love into the opposite, and finds in
this a delight that seems to him heavenly, although it is infernal, then
such a dog is presented as a guard lest there should be a communication
between these opposite delights.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5052.">5052.</span></span>

The Lord instills conjugial love through the inmost heaven, the angels
of which are in peace beyond all others. Peace in the heavens is
comparatively like springtime in the world, which renders all things
joyous, for in its origin peace is the celestial itself. The angels who
are in the inmost heaven are the wisest of all, and from their innocence
they appear to others as infants, for they love infants much more than
do their fathers and mothers. They are present with infants in the womb,
and through them the Lord cares for the feeding and full development of
the infants therein; thus they have charge over those who are with
child.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5053.">5053.</span></span>

There are heavenly societies to which correspond all and each of the
members and organs allotted to generation in both sexes. These societies
are distinct from others, just as this province in man is quite distinct
and separate from the rest. The reason why these societies are
celestial, is that conjugial love is the fundamental love of all loves
(n. 686, 2733, 2737, 2738). It also excels the rest in use, and
consequently in delight; for marriages are the nurseries of the whole
human race, and are also the nurseries of the Lord's heavenly kingdom;
for heaven is from the human race.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5054.">5054.</span></span>

They who have loved infants most tenderly, as for instance such mothers,
are in the province of the womb and the organs round about, namely, in
the province of the neck of the womb and of the ovaries; and they who
are there are in a life most sweet and soft, and are in heavenly joy
beyond others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5055.">5055.</span></span>

But what and of what quality those heavenly societies are which belong
to the several organs of generation, it has not been given me to know;
for they are too interior to be comprehended by anyone who is in a lower
sphere. They bear relation to the uses of these organs, which uses are
hidden, and are far from ken, for the reason (which also is of
Providence) that such things, in themselves most heavenly, may not
suffer injury by filthy thoughts of lasciviousness, of whoredom, and of
adultery, which are excited in very many persons at the bare mention of
these organs. For this reason I may relate some of the more remote
things that I have seen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5056.">5056.</span></span>

A certain spirit from another earth was with me (of which spirits from
other earths of the Lord's Divine mercy I shall speak elsewhere), and he
anxiously begged me to intercede for him, that he might come into
heaven. He said that he was not aware of having done what is evil,
except that he had rebuked the inhabitants of that earth (for there are
spirits who chide and chastise those who do not live rightly, who also
will be described when I speak of the inhabitants of other earths). He
added that after chiding he instructed them. He then talked with as it
were a broken voice, and he could move one to pity. But I could only
reply that I could give him no help, and that admission into heaven is
of the Lord alone, but that if worthy he might hope. He was then sent
back among upright spirits from his own earth; but these said that he
could not be in their company, because he was not such as they were. Yet
because with intense longing he importuned to be let into heaven, he was
sent into a society of upright spirits of this earth; but these also
said that he could not remain with them. In the light of heaven he was
of a black color; but he himself said that he was not of a black, but of
a murrhine color. \[2\] I was told that they are such in the beginning
who are afterward received among those who constitute the province of
the seminal vesicles; for in these vesicles is collected the semen with
its proper serum with which it is combined and thereby rendered fit,
after it has been emitted, to be resolved in the neck of the womb, and
thus to be serviceable for conception; and there is in such a substance
an endeavor and as it were a longing to perform a use, thus to put off
the serum with which it is clothed. Something similar showed itself in
this spirit. He came again to me, but in vile clothing, and said that he
was burning to come into heaven, and that he now perceived that he was
fit for it. I was given to tell him that perhaps this was an indication
that he would soon be received. He was then told by angels to cast off
his garment; and in his longing he cast it off so quickly that scarcely
anything could be quicker. By this was represented the nature of the
ardent desires of those who are in the province to which the seminal
vesicles correspond.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5057.">5057.</span></span>

A large mortar was seen, and standing by it a man with an iron
instrument, who from phantasy seemed to himself to pound men in that
vessel, torturing them in direful ways. This he did with great delight,
which was communicated to me, that I might know the quality and
intensity of it in those who are of this nature. It was an infernal
delight. I was told by angels that such was the ruling delight with the
posterity of Jacob; and that they perceived nothing more delightful than
to treat the nations with cruelty, to expose them when slain to be
devoured by wild beasts and birds, to cut them alive with saws and axes,
to make them pass through the brick-kiln (2 Sam. 12:31), and to dash
their little children together and throw them away. Such things were
never commanded, nor were they ever permitted except to those the nerve
of whose thigh was out of joint (n. 5051). Such spirits dwell under the
right heel, where are adulterers who are also cruel. \[2\] It is
therefore surprising that anyone should ever have believed that that
nation was chosen more than others; and from this also many confirm
themselves in the idea that the life effects nothing, but that election,
and hence reception into heaven, is of mere mercy, whatever the life may
have been; when yet everyone from sound reason may see that to think in
this way is contrary to the Divine, for the Divine is mercy itself, and
therefore if heaven were of mere mercy without regard to the life,
everybody would be received. To thrust down anyone into hell to be
tormented there, when it would be possible to receive him into heaven,
would be unmercifulness and not mercy; and to elect one in preference to
another would be injustice, and not justice. \[3\] Wherefore they who
have believed and have confirmed themselves in the idea that some are
elected, and the rest not, and that admission into heaven is of mere
mercy, without regard to the life, are told (as I have several times
heard and seen) that heaven is never denied by the Lord to anyone, and
that if they desire they may know this from experience. For this purpose
they are taken up into some society of heaven where are those who have
lived in the affection of good, or in charity; but being evil, as soon
as they come there they begin to be tormented and to be inwardly
tortured, because their life is contrary; and when the heavenly light
appears, they appear in it like devils, almost devoid of human form,
some with the face sunken, some like grates of teeth, and some monstrous
in other ways. Thus they abhor themselves, and cast themselves down
headlong into hell, and for them the deeper the better.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5058.">5058.</span></span>

There was also a certain person who in the world had been a man of
position, and who was then known to me, although not as to his inner
quality; but in the other life, after some revolvings of the state of
his life, it became evident that he was deceitful. When he had been for
some time among the deceitful in the other life, and had suffered hard
things there, he desired to be separated from them. I heard him then
saying that he desired to come into heaven; and he too had believed that
reception is of mere mercy. But he was told that if he got there he
could not stay there, and that he would be tormented like those who in
the world are in the death agony. Nevertheless he insisted, and was
therefore admitted into a society consisting of the simple good who are
in front above the head; but as soon as he arrived he began to act
craftily and deceitfully, according to his life. The result was that
within an hour the good in that society, who were simple, began to
lament, saying that he took away from them their perception of good and
of truth, and consequently their delight, thus destroying their state.
Then some light from the interior heaven was admitted, in which he
appeared as a devil, with the upper part of his nose loathsomely
furrowed with a foul wound. He also began to be inwardly tortured; and
when he felt this, he cast himself down into hell. From this it is plain
that it is not election and reception from mercy, but the life, that
makes heaven; nevertheless all things of the life of good and of the
faith of truth are from mercy given to those who receive mercy in the
world; and with these there is reception from mercy, and they are those
who are called the "elect" (see n. 3755e, 3900).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5059.">5059.</span></span>

When those have approached me who have lived in what is contrary to
conjugial love-that is, in adulteries-they always injected pain in the
loins, more or less severe according to the life of adulteries which
they had lived; from which influx also it has been evident that the
loins correspond to conjugial love. The hell of these is under the
hinder part of the loins, beneath the buttocks, where they dwell in
filth and excrements; and these things are delightful to them because in
the spiritual world they are in correspondence with these pleasures. But
more will be said about these spirits, when of the Lord's Divine mercy I
come to speak of the hells in general and in particular.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5060.">5060.</span></span>

Who they are that correspond to the testicles, was in like manner
evident to me from those who are in what is contrary to conjugial love,
and who inflict pain on the testicles; for when societies operate they
act upon those parts and those members of the body to which they
correspond-heavenly societies by a gentle, sweet, delightful influx; and
infernal ones, who are in what is contrary, by a severe and painful
influx. But their influx is perceived by those only whose interiors have
been opened, and who thereby have received perceptible communication
with the spiritual world. They who are in what is contrary to conjugial
love and who inflict pain on the testicles, are those who ensnare by
love, friendship, and kind offices. When such spirits approached me they
desired to speak with me in private, being exceedingly fearful lest
anyone should be present, for this had been their character in the life
of the body; and being such then, they are such in the other life also,
because everyone's life remains with him. \[2\] There arose from the
region about Gehenna somewhat aerial and inconspicuous. It was a company
of such spirits, but though there were many in it, it afterward appeared
to me as only one spirit hampered with bandages, which however he seemed
to himself to remove, whereby was signified that they desired to remove
obstacles; for in such a manner do the thoughts and efforts of the mind
appear representatively in the world of spirits, and when they appear,
it is instantly perceived what they signify. Afterward it seemed as if
there came forth from his body a little snow-white spirit, who drew near
to me, by which was represented their thought and intention-that they
desired to assume a state of innocence, so that no one might suspect
their real character. When he came to me, he let himself down toward the
loins, and seemed to wind himself as it were about both of them, whereby
was represented that they desired to exhibit themselves in chaste
conjugial love; afterward he seemed to wind himself about the feet in
spiral coils, whereby was represented that they desired to insinuate
themselves by such things as are delightful in nature. At last that
little spirit became almost invisible, by which was represented that
they desire to lie wholly concealed. \[3\] I was told by angels that
such instilling belongs to those who seek to ensnare in conjugial love,
that is to say, those who in the world have instilled themselves with
the end to commit adultery with wives, by speaking chastely and sanely
about conjugial love, by caressing the children, by praising the husband
in every possible way, so as to be believed to be friendly, chaste, and
innocent, when yet they are deceitful adulterers. Their quality was also
shown me, for after these things had been done, that little snow-white
spirit became visible, and appeared dusky and very black, and also very
deformed; and he was cast out into his hell, which was deep under the
middle part of the loins. There they dwell in the foulest excrements;
and they are also among the robbers there who bear relation to the
general involuntary sense (n. 4327). I afterward conversed with such
spirits, and they were surprised that anyone should make adultery a
matter of conscience, that is, that from conscience he would not lie
with another's wife when allowed; and when I talked with them about
conscience, they denied that anyone has conscience. I was told that such
spirits are for the most part from Christendom, and seldom from other
parts of the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5061.">5061.</span></span>

By way of corollary I may add this memorable circumstance. There were
some spirits who had long lain concealed, shut up in a peculiar hell,
from which they could not break out. I sometimes wondered who they were.
One evening they were let out, and then was heard from them a very
tumultuous noise of murmurs, which continued a long time; and when
opportunity was given, I heard from them scoffings against me, and
perceived that they desired and were endeavoring to come up and destroy
me. I asked the angels the reason of this; and they said that during
their lifetime these persons had hated me, although I had never harmed
them; and I was instructed that when such spirits merely perceive the
sphere of the person whom they have hated, they breathe his destruction;
but they were sent back into their own hell. From this it is evident
that those who have hated each other in the world meet in the other
life, and attempt many evils against each other, as has often been
granted me to know by other examples. For hatred is opposite to love and
charity, and is an aversion, and as it were a spiritual antipathy; and
therefore the moment that such spirits perceive in the other life the
sphere of the person against whom they have borne hatred, they come as
it were into a fury. It is plain from this what is involved in the
Lord's words in Matthew 5:22-26.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5062.">5062.</span></span>

A continuation concerning correspondence with the Grand Man will be
found at the end of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5063.">5063.</span></span>

CHAPTER THE FORTIETH. In the preface to the preceding chapter an
explication was given of what the Lord said concerning the Judgment upon
the good and the evil, in Matthew 25, verses 34 to 36. Then follow these
words: Then shall the righteous answer Him, saying, Lord, when saw we
Thee hungry and fed Thee? or thirsty and gave Thee drink? When saw we
Thee a stranger and gathered Thee? or naked and clothed Thee? When saw
we Thee sick, or in prison, and came unto Thee? But the King shall say
to them, Verily I say to you, Insofar as ye did it to one of the least
of these My brethren, ye did it to Me. Then shall He say also unto them
on the left hand, Depart from Me ye cursed into the eternal fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels; for I was hungry and ye gave Me
not to eat, I was thirsty and ye gave Me not to drink, I was a stranger
and ye gathered Me not, naked and ye clothed Me not, sick, and in
prison, and ye visited Me not. Then shall they also answer Him, saying,
Lord, when saw we Thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or
sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto Thee? Then shall He answer
them, saying, Verily I say to you, Insofar as ye did it not to one of
these least, ye did it not to Me. And these shall go away into eternal
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal (Matt. 25:37-46).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5064.">5064.</span></span>

In the prefatory remarks to the preceding chapter (n. 4954-4959), it was
explained what is signified in the internal sense by "giving meat to the
hungry and drink to the thirsty," by "gathering the stranger, clothing
the naked, and visiting the sick and him that is in prison"-that it is
the essence of charity which is involved and is thus described. By the
"hungry," the "thirsty," and the "stranger," is signified the affection
of good and truth; and by the "naked," the "sick," and "those who are in
prison," self-acknowledgment (see n. 4956, 4958).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5065.">5065.</span></span>

As the same things are thrice repeated in what has already been quoted
and explained, it is unnecessary to show in detail, or word by word,
what these expressions signify in the internal sense. In this place I
will merely state what is signified by the answer made both by those on
the right hand, and by those on the left-that they had not seen Him
hungry, thirsty, a stranger, naked, sick, and in prison; and afterward
what is signified by the "King," and also by the "righteous and eternal
life," and by the "cursed and eternal fire."

<span class="margnote"><span id="5066.">5066.</span></span>

The answer made by those on the right hand: Lord, when saw we Thee
hungry and fed Thee? or thirsty and gave Thee drink? When saw we Thee a
stranger and gathered Thee? or naked and clothed Thee? When saw we Thee
sick, or in prison, and came unto Thee? signifies that if they had seen
the Lord Himself, everyone of them would have performed these offices;
yet not from love toward Him, but from fear because He was to be the
judge of the universe; thus not for His sake, but for the sake of
themselves; thus not from within or from the heart, but from without and
in act only. This is as when one sees a king whose favor he desires to
gain in order that he may become great or rich, and therefore bears
himself submissively toward him. It is similar with those who are in
holy external worship, in which they as it were see the Lord, and submit
themselves to Him, believing that in this way they will receive eternal
life; and yet they have no charity, and do no good to anyone except for
their own sake, thus only to themselves. They are like persons who in
outward form pay court to their king with much respect, and yet deride
his commands because at heart they disregard him. These and similar
things are what are signified by those on the right hand so answering;
and as the evil also do the like things in outward form, therefore they
who were on the left made nearly the same answer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5067.">5067.</span></span>

As therefore the Lord cares not for external but for internal things,
and as man testifies to his internal things, not by worship only, but by
charity and its acts, the Lord answered: Verily I say to you, Insofar as
ye did it to one of the least of these My brethren, ye did it to Me;
those are called "brethren" who are in the good of charity and of life;
for the Lord is with them, because they are in good itself; and it is
they who are properly meant by the neighbor. In these also the Lord does
not manifest Himself, for in respect to Him they are vile; but the man
manifests himself before the Lord, in that he worships Him from within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5068.">5068.</span></span>

That the Lord calls Himself "King"-in these words: When the Son of man
shall come in His glory, then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory,
then shall the King say unto them; is because the Lord's royalty is the
Divine truth, from which and according to which judgment is effected.
But from and according to it the good are judged in one way, and the
evil in another. The good, because they have received Divine truth, are
judged from good, and thus from mercy; the evil, because they have not
received Divine truth, are judged from truth, and thus not from mercy;
for this they have rejected, and hence they continue to reject it in the
other life. To receive Divine truth is not only to have faith, but also
to practice it, that is, to cause that which is of doctrine to become of
the life. It is from this that the Lord calls Himself "King." (That the
Lord's royalty is the Divine truth has been shown above, n. 1728, 2015,
3009, 3670, 4581, 4966.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5069.">5069.</span></span>

That they on the right hand are called "the righteous:"- Then shall the
righteous answer Him, saying, etc., and, The righteous shall go into
eternal life; signifies that they are in the Lord's righteousness. All
who are in the good of charity are called the "righteous"-not that they
are righteous from themselves, but from the Lord, whose righteousness is
appropriated to them. They who believe themselves righteous from
themselves, or made so righteous that there is no longer anything of
evil in them, are not among the righteous, but among the unrighteous;
for they attribute good to themselves, and also feel self-merit on
account of it, and such can never adore the Lord from true humiliation;
so that those who in the Word are called the "righteous," and the
"saints," are those who know and acknowledge that all good is from the
Lord, and that all evil is from themselves, that is, is theirs from
hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5070.">5070.</span></span>

The "eternal life" which is given to the righteous, is life from good.
Good has life in itself, because it is from the Lord, who is life
itself. In the life which is from the Lord there are wisdom and
intelligence; for to receive good from the Lord and thence to will good,
is wisdom; and to receive truth from the Lord and thence to believe
truth, is intelligence; and they who have this wisdom and intelligence
have life; and as happiness is joined to such life, eternal happiness
also is signified by "life." The contrary is the case with those who are
in evil. These do indeed appear-especially to themselves-as if they had
life, but it is such life as in the Word is called "death," and also is
spiritual death; for they are not wise in any good, nor intelligent in
any truth. This may be seen by everyone who takes the matter into
consideration, for as there is life in good and in its truth, there
cannot be life in evil and in its falsity, because these are opposite
and extinguish life. Therefore the persons in question have no other
life than such as belongs to the insane.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5071.">5071.</span></span>

That they on the left hand are called "cursed," and their punishment
"eternal fire," as where it is said: Then shall He say also unto them on
the left hand, Depart from Me ye cursed into the eternal fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels; and, These shall go away into eternal
punishment; is because they have averted themselves from good and truth,
and have turned to evil and falsity. A "curse," in the internal sense of
the Word, signifies a turning away (n. 245, 379, 1423, 3530, 3584). The
"eternal fire" into which they must depart is not natural fire, nor is
it torment of conscience, but is concupiscence of evil; for the
concupiscences in man are spiritual fires which consume him in the life
of the body, and torment him in the other life. By these fires the
infernals torture one another in direful ways. \[2\] That "eternal fire"
is not natural fire, is evident. That it is not torment of conscience,
is because all who are in evil have no conscience, and they who have had
none in the life of the body cannot have any in the other life. But that
it is concupiscence is because all vital fire is from the loves in
man-heavenly fire from the love of good and truth, and infernal fire
from the love of evil and falsity-or what is the same, heavenly fire is
from love to the Lord and love toward the neighbor, and infernal fire is
from the love of self and the love of the world. That all the fire or
heat within man is from this source, anyone may know if he pays
attention to the matter. It is for this reason also that love is called
spiritual heat, and that by "fire" and "heat" in the Word nothing else
is signified (n. 934e, 1297, 1527, 1528, 1861, 2446, 4906). The vital
fire in the evil is such that when they are in the vehemence of their
concupiscences, they are also in a kind of fire, from which they are in
the ardor and fury of tormenting others; but the vital fire in the good
is such that when in a high degree of affection, they also are in a kind
of fire, but from it they are in the love and zeal of benefiting others.
GENESIS 40 1. And it came to pass after these words that they sinned,
the butler of the king of Egypt and the baker, to their lord the king of
Egypt. 2. And Pharaoh was wroth over his two court ministers, over the
prince of the butlers, and over the prince of the bakers. 3. And he put
them into the custody of the house of the prince of the guards, unto the
prison house, the place where Joseph was bound. 4. And the prince of the
guards set Joseph over them, and he ministered to them; and they were
for days in custody. 5. And they dreamed a dream both of them, each his
dream in one night, each according to the interpretation of his dream,
the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were bound in the
prison house. 6. And Joseph came unto them in the morning, and saw them,
and behold they were troubled. 7. And he asked Pharaoh's court ministers
that were with him in the custody of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore
are your faces evil today? 8. And they said unto him, We have dreamed a
dream and there is no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do
not interpretations belong to God? Tell it me, I pray. 9. And the prince
of the butlers told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream
behold a vine was before me. 10. And in the vine were three shoots, and
it was as though it budded, its blossom went up, and the clusters
thereof ripened grapes. 11. And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand, and I took
the grapes and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup upon
the palm of Pharaoh. 12. And Joseph said to him, This is the
interpretation of it; the three shoots three days are these. 13. In yet
three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head, and shall bring thee back
upon thy station, and thou shalt give Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after
the former manner when thou wast his butler. 14. But remember me with
thee when it is well with thee, and do mercy I pray with me, and make
mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house. 15. For
being carried off by theft I was carried away out of the land of the
Hebrews; and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into
the pit. 16. And the prince of the bakers saw that he had interpreted
good, and he said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream, and behold three
baskets with holes in them upon my head. 17. And in the uppermost basket
there was of all food for Pharaoh, the work of the baker; and the birds
did eat them out of the basket from upon my head. 18. And Joseph
answered and said, This is the interpretation thereof. The three baskets
three days are these. 19. In yet three days shall Pharaoh lift off thy
head from upon thee, and shall hang thee upon wood; and the birds shall
eat thy flesh from upon thee. 20. And it came to pass on the third day,
on Pharaoh's birthday, and he made a feast unto all his servants; and he
lifted up the head of the prince of the butlers and the head of the
prince of the bakers in the midst of his servants. 21. And he brought
back the prince of the butlers upon his butlership; and he gave the cup
upon Pharaoh's palm. 22. And he hanged the prince of the bakers; as
Joseph interpreted to them. 23. And the prince of the butlers did not
remember Joseph, and he forgot him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5072.">5072.</span></span>

The Contents. In the internal sense of this chapter the subject is
continued of a state of temptations, by which even bodily things might
be brought into correspondence. Bodily things properly so called are
sensuous things <span id="fr_131"></span>[5072-1](#fn_131) which are of
two kinds, some being subordinate to the intellectual part, and some to
the will part. Those which are subordinate to the intellectual part are
represented by the butler of the king of Egypt, and those which are
subordinate to the will part are represented by his baker; that the
former are for a time retained, but the latter cast out, is represented
by the butler returning to his place, and the baker being hanged. The
rest will be plain from the series in the internal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5073.">5073.</span></span>

The Internal Sense. Verses 1-4. And it came to pass after these words
that they sinned, the butler of the king of Egypt and the baker, to
their lord the king of Egypt. And Pharaoh was wroth over his two court
ministers, over the prince of the butlers, and over the prince of the
bakers. And he put them into the custody of the house of the prince of
the guards, unto the prison house, the place where Joseph was bound. And
the prince of the guards set Joseph over them, and he ministered to
them; and they were for days in custody. "And it came to pass,"
signifies a new state, and the things which follow; "after these words,"
signifies after the things which precede; "that they sinned," signifies
inverted order; "the butler of the king of Egypt," signifies in those
things in the body which are subject to the intellectual part; "and the
baker," signifies in those things in the body which are subject to the
will part; "to their lord the king of Egypt," signifies that they were
contrary to the new state of the natural man; "and Pharaoh was wroth,"
signifies that the new natural man averted itself; "over his two court
ministers" signifies from the sensuous things of the body of both kinds;
"over the prince of the butlers, and over the prince of the bakers,"
signifies in general from the sensuous things subordinate to the
intellectual part and to the will part; "and he put them into the
custody," signifies rejection; "of the house of the prince of the
guards," signifies by those things which are primary for interpretation;
"unto the prison house," signifies among falsities; "the place where
Joseph was bound," signifies the state of the celestial of the natural
now as to these things; "and the prince of the guards set Joseph over
them," signifies that the celestial of the natural taught them from
things primary for interpretation; "and he ministered to them,"
signifies that he instructed them; "and they were for days in custody,"
signifies that they were long in a state of rejection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5074.">5074.</span></span>

And it came to pass. That this signifies a new state and the things
which follow, is evident from the fact that the expression "it came to
pass," or "it was," in the Word, involves a new state (see n. 4979,
4999); and that in the original language it serves as a mark of
distinction between the series of things which precede and those which
follow (see n. 4987); hence it also signifies the things which follow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5075.">5075.</span></span>

After these words. That this signifies after the things which precede,
is evident from the signification of "words," in the original language,
as being things; here therefore "after these words" means after these
things, thus after the things which precede. That "words," in the
original language signify things also, is because "words," in the
internal sense signify truths of doctrine; and therefore all Divine
truth in general is called the "Word," and the Lord Himself, from whom
comes all Divine truth, is in the supreme sense the "Word" (n. 1288).
And because nothing that exists in the universe is anything, that is, is
a real thing, unless it is from Divine good by Divine truth, therefore
"words" in the Hebrew language mean things also. That nothing in the
universe is anything, that is, a real thing, unless it is from Divine
good by Divine truth, that is, by the "Word," is plain in John: In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word.
All things were made by Him; and without Him was not anything made that
was made (John 1:1, 3). \[2\] The interior significations of expressions
for the most part originate in the interior man, which is among spirits
and angels; for every man as to his spirit, or as to that very man which
lives after the decease of the body, is in company with angels and
spirits, although the external man is not aware of this; and because he
is in company with them, he is also with them in the universal language,
and thus in the origins of words. Hence there are imparted to words many
significations which in the external form appear out of agreement,
although in the internal form they are entirely in agreement-as here,
that "words" signify things. It is the same in a host of cases, as that
the understanding is called the inward "sight," light being attributed
to it; that attention and obedience are called "hearing" and
"hearkening;" that the perception of a thing is called "smelling;" and
so forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5076.">5076.</span></span>

That they sinned. That this signifies inverted order, is evident from
the signification of "sinning," as being to act contrary to Divine
order: whatever is contrary to this is "sin." Divine order itself is
Divine truth from Divine good. All are in this order who are in truth
from good, that is, who are in faith from charity, for truth is of
faith, and good is of charity; and they are contrary to this order who
are not in truth from good, consequently who are in truth from evil, or
in falsity from evil; nothing else is signified by "sin." Here by their
"sinning"-the butler and the baker-is signified that external sensuous
things were in inverted order relatively to interior things, so that
they did not accord or did not correspond.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5077.">5077.</span></span>

The butler of the king of Egypt. That this signifies in those things in
the body which are subject to the intellectual part, is evident from the
signification of a "butler," as being that external sensuous, or
sensuous of the body, which is subordinate or subject to the
intellectual part of the internal man (of which hereafter); and from the
signification of the "king of Egypt," as being the natural man (of which
below, n. 5079). As the butler and the baker are treated of in the
following verses, and as they signify the external sensuous things which
are of the body, something must first be said about these sensuous
things. It is known that the external or bodily senses are five, namely,
sight, hearing, smelling, taste, and touch, and that these constitute
all the life of the body; for without these senses the body does not
live at all, and therefore when deprived of them it dies and becomes a
corpse; so that the very bodily part of man is nothing else than a
receptacle of sensations, and consequently of the life from them. The
sensitive is the principal, and the bodily is the instrumental. The
instrumental without its principal to which it is adapted cannot even be
called that bodily with which man is invested during his life in the
world; but only the instrumental together with the principal, when they
act as one. This therefore is the bodily part. \[2\] All the external
sensuous things of man bear relation to his internal sensuous things,
for they are given to man and placed in his body in order that they may
serve the internal man while it is in the world, and be subject to its
sensuous things; and therefore when a man's external sensuous things
begin to rule over his internal sensuous things, the man is lost; for
then the internal sensuous things are considered to be mere servants, to
serve for confirming those things which the external sensuous things
command with authority. When the external sensuous things are in this
state, they are in the inverted order spoken of just above (n. 5076).
\[3\] As before said, the external sensuous things of man bear relation
to his internal sensuous things; in general, to his intellectual part
and to his will part; there are therefore external sensuous things which
are subject or subordinate to his intellectual part, and there are those
which are subject to his will part. That sensuous which is especially
subject to the intellectual part is the sight; that which is subject to
the intellectual part and secondarily to the will part is the hearing;
that which is subject to both together is the sense of smell, and still
more the taste; but that which is subject to the will part is the touch.
That the external sensuous things are subject to these parts, and in
what manner, might be abundantly shown; but to enter upon the
investigation of this now would lead us too far afield; yet the facts
may in some measure be known from what has been shown concerning the
correspondence of these senses, at the end of the preceding chapters.
\[4\] And be it known further that all the truths which are said to be
of faith pertain to the intellectual part; and that all the goods which
are of love and charity are of the will part. Consequently it belongs to
the intellectual part to believe, to acknowledge, to know, and to see
truth and also good, but to the will part to be affected with and to
love these; and that which man is affected with and loves, is good. But
how the intellect flows into the will, when truth passes into good; and
how the will flows into the intellect, when it acts upon it, are matters
of still deeper investigation, concerning which, of the Lord's Divine
mercy more will be said below as occasion offers. \[5\] The reason why a
"butler" signifies that sensuous which is subject or subordinate to the
intellectual part of the internal man, is that everything which serves
for drinking, or which is drunk-as wine, milk, water-bears relation to
truth, which is of the intellectual part, thus bears relation to the
intellectual part; and because it is an external sensuous, or sensuous
of the body, that subserves, therefore by a "butler" is signified this
sensuous, or this part of the sensuous things. (That "to give to drink"
and "to drink" are in general predicated of the truths which are of the
intellectual part, may be seen above, n. 3069, 3071, 3168, 3772, 4017,
4018; and that specifically they are predicated of the truth which is
from good, or of the faith which is from charity, n. 1071, 1798; and
that "water" is truth, n. 680, 2702, 3058, 3424, 4976.) From all this it
may now be seen what is signified by a "butler."

<span class="margnote"><span id="5078.">5078.</span></span>

And the baker. That this signifies in those things in the body which are
subject to the will part, is evident from the signification of a
"baker," as being that external sensuous, or sensuous of the body, which
is subordinate or subject to the will part of the internal man. A
"baker" has this signification because everything that serves for food,
or that is eaten, such as bread, food in general, and all the work of
the baker, is predicated of good, and therefore bears relation to the
will part; for all good is of this part, just as all truth is of the
intellectual part (as was said just above, n. 5077). (That "bread" is
the celestial, or good, may be seen above, n. 1798, 2165, 2177, 3478,
3735, 3813, 4211, 4217, 4735, 4976.) \[2\] The reason why here and in
the following verses of this chapter the external sensuous things of
both kinds are treated of in the internal sense is that in the previous
chapter the subject treated of was the Lord, and how He glorified or
made Divine the interiors of His natural; here therefore the subject
treated of is the Lord, and how He glorified or made Divine the
exteriors of His natural. The exteriors of the natural are what are
properly called the bodily things, or the sensuous things of both kinds
together with their recipient organs, for these together constitute what
is called the body (as shown above, n. 5077). The Lord made the very
bodily in Himself Divine, both its sensuous things and their recipient
organs; and He therefore rose again from the sepulcher with His body,
and likewise after His resurrection said to the disciples: Behold My
hands and My feet, that it is I Myself; feel Me and see; for a spirit
hath not flesh and bones, as ye see Me have (Luke 24:39). \[3\] Most of
those who are of the church at this day believe that everyone is to rise
again at the last day, and with his body; which opinion is so universal
that from doctrine scarcely anyone believes otherwise. But this opinion
has prevailed because the natural man supposes that it is only the body
that lives; and therefore unless he believed that the body would receive
life again, he would deny the resurrection altogether. But the truth of
the matter is this. Man rises again immediately after death, and he then
appears to himself in a body just as in this world, with a similar face,
members, arms, hands, feet, breast, belly, and loins; so that when he
sees and touches himself, he says that he is a man as in the world.
Nevertheless what he sees and touches is not his external which he
carried about in the world, but it is the internal which constitutes
that very human which is alive, and which had an external about it, or
outside of every part of it, by which it could be in the world and be
adapted for acting and performing its functions there. \[4\] The earthly
bodily part is no longer of any use to him, he being in another world
where are other functions, and other powers and abilities, to which the
nature of his body there is adapted. This body he sees with his eyes,
not those which he had in the world, but those which he has there, which
are the eyes of his internal man and by which through the eyes of the
body he had before seen worldly and earthly things. This body he also
feels with the touch, not with the hands or the sense of touch which he
enjoyed in the world, but with the hands and the sense of touch which he
enjoys there, which is that from which his sense of touch in the world
came forth. Moreover, every sense is more exquisite and more perfect
there, because it is the sense of the internal of man freed from the
external; for the internal is in a more perfect state, because it gives
to the external the power of sensation; but when it acts into the
external, as is the case in the world, sensation is dulled and obscured.
Moreover, it is the internal which is sensible of the internal, and the
external which is sensible of the external. Thus it is that men after
death see one another, and are in company together according to their
interiors. In order that I might be certain in regard to this matter, it
has been given me to touch the spirits themselves, and often to converse
with them about it (see n. 322, 1630, 4622). \[5\] Men after death, who
are then called spirits, and if they have lived in good, angels, marvel
exceedingly that the man of the church believes that he is not to see
eternal life until the last day when the world shall perish, and that he
is then to be clothed again with the cast-off dust; when yet the man of
the church knows that he rises again after death; for when a man dies,
who does not then say that his soul or spirit is in heaven or else in
hell? And who does not say of his children who have died that they are
in heaven? And who does not comfort a sick person, or one appointed to
die, by the assurance that he will shortly come into the other life? And
he who is in the agony of death and is prepared, believes no otherwise;
nay, from this belief many also claim for themselves the power of
delivering others from places of damnation, and of admitting them into
heaven, while saying masses on their behalf. Who does not know what the
Lord said to the thief, "Today shalt thou be with Me in paradise" (Luke
23:43), and what He said of the rich man and Lazarus, that the former
was carried into hell, but the latter borne by the angels into heaven
(Luke 16:22-23)? And who does not know what the Lord taught concerning
the resurrection, that "He is not the God of the dead, but of the
living" (Luke 20:38)? \[6\] A man knows these things, and so thinks and
speaks when he thinks and speaks from his spirit; but when he thinks and
speaks from his doctrine, he says very differently-that he is not to
rise again till the last day; when yet the last day to everyone is when
he dies, and then also is his judgment, as indeed many say. What is
meant by "being encompassed with skin, and from the flesh seeing God"
(Job 19:25, 26), may be seen above (n. 3540e). These things are said in
order that it may be known that no man rises again in the body with
which he was clothed in the world; but that the Lord alone so rose, and
this because He glorified His body, or made it Divine, while He was in
the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5079.">5079.</span></span>

Against their lord the king of Egypt. That this signifies that
they-namely, the external sensuous things, or those of the body,
signified by "the butler and the baker"-were contrary to the new state
of the natural man, is evident from the signification of the "king of
Egypt" as being memory-knowledge in general (see n. 1164, 1165, 1186,
1462, 4749, 4964, 4966). For the same is signified by the "king of
Egypt" as by "Egypt," the king being the head of the nation; and it is
the same in other passages also where mention is made of the "king" of
any nation (n. 4789). As memory-knowledge in general is signified by the
"king of Egypt," the natural man is also signified thereby, because all
memory-knowledge is the truth of the natural man (4967): the good itself
of the natural man is signified by "lord" (n. 4973). That a new state of
the natural man is here signified, is because in the preceding chapter
there was described the making new of the interiors of the natural, and
in the supreme sense, which relates to the Lord, that they were
glorified; but the subject here treated of is the exteriors of the
natural, which were to be reduced to harmony or correspondence with the
interiors. Those interiors of the natural which were new, or what is the
same thing, the new state of the natural man, is what is signified by
"their lord the king of Egypt;" and the exteriors which were not reduced
into order, and hence were contrary to order, are what are signified by
"the butler and the baker." \[2\] There are interiors and there are
exteriors of the natural, the interiors of the natural being
memory-knowledges and the affections of them, while its exteriors are
the sensuous things of both kinds, spoken of above (n. 5077). When a man
dies he leaves behind him these exteriors of the natural, but carries
with him into the other life the interiors of the natural, where they
serve as a plane for things spiritual and celestial. For when a man dies
he loses nothing except his bones and flesh; he has with him the memory
of all that he had done, spoken, or thought, and he has with him all his
natural affections and desires, thus all the interiors of the natural.
Of its exteriors he has no need; for he does not see, nor hear, nor
smell, nor taste, nor touch, what is in this world, but only such things
as are in the other life, which indeed look for the most part like those
which are in this world; but still are not like them, for they have in
them what is living, which those things which properly belong to the
natural world have not. For all and each of the things in the other life
come forth and subsist from the sun there, which is the Lord, whence
they have in them what is living; whereas all and each of the things in
the natural world come forth and subsist from its sun, which is
elementary fire, and hence have not in them what is living. What appears
living in them is from no other source than the spiritual world, that
is, through the spiritual world from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5080.">5080.</span></span>

And Pharaoh was wroth. That this signifies that the new natural man
averted itself, is evident from the representation of Pharaoh, or the
king of Egypt, as being the new natural man, or the new state of the
natural man (spoken of just above, n. 5079); and from the signification
of "being wroth or angry," as being to avert itself (n. 5034); here
therefore it signifies that the interior natural, which was made new,
averted itself from the exterior natural or bodily sensuous part,
because this did not correspond with it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5081.">5081.</span></span>

Against his two courtministers. That this signifies that it averted
itself from the sensuous things of the body, of both kinds, is evident
from the signification of "courtministers," who here are the butler and
the baker, as being the sensuous things of both kinds (of which above,
n. 5077, 5078). The sensuous things of the body, namely, the sight,
hearing, smell, taste, and touch, are as it were ministers of the court
relatively to the interior man, who is their lord the king; for they
minister to him, so that from the things in the visible world and in
human society he may come into the teachings of experience, and may in
this way acquire intelligence and wisdom. For man is not born into any
knowledge, still less into any intelligence or wisdom, but only into the
capability of receiving and becoming imbued with them. This is effected
in two ways, namely, by an internal way, and by an external way. By the
internal way flows in what is Divine, by the external way flows in what
is of the world. These meet within man, and then insofar as he suffers
himself to be enlightened by what is Divine, he comes into wisdom. The
things which flow in by the external way, flow in through the sensuous
things of the body; although they never flow in of themselves, but are
called forth by the internal man to serve as a plane for the celestial
and spiritual things which flow in by the internal way from the Divine.
From this it is evident that the sensuous things of the body are like
the ministers of a court. In general, all exterior things are ministers
relatively to interior things. Relatively to the spiritual man the whole
natural man is nothing else. \[2\] In the original language the term
here used means a minister, courtier, chamberlain, or eunuch; in the
internal sense it signifies, as here, the natural man as to good and
truth, but specifically the natural man as to good; as in Isaiah: Let
not the son of the stranger, that cleaveth to Jehovah, speak, saying,
Jehovah will surely separate me from His people; neither let the eunuch
say, Behold I am dry wood. For thus hath said Jehovah to the eunuchs
that keep My sabbaths, and choose that wherewith I am delighted, and are
holding My covenant; I will give them in My house and within My walls a
place and a name, a good better than sons and daughters; I will give
them a name of eternity that shall not be cut off (Isa. 56:3-5); here a
"eunuch" denotes the natural man as to good, and the "son of the
stranger" the natural man as to truth; for the church of the Lord is
external and internal, and they who are of the external church are
natural, while they who are of the internal church are spiritual. They
who are natural, and yet are in good, are "eunuchs," and they who are in
truth are the "sons of the stranger;" and as the truly spiritual or
internal are to be found only within the church, therefore also by the
"sons of the stranger" are signified those who are outside the church,
or the Gentiles, and yet are in truth according to their religiosity (n.
2049, 2593, 2599, 2600, 2602, 2603, 2861, 2863, 3263); and by "eunuchs,"
those who are in good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5082.">5082.</span></span>

Over the prince of the butlers, and over the prince of the bakers. That
this signifies in general from the sensuous things subordinate to the
intellectual part and to the will part, is evident from the
signification of a "butler," as being the sensuous subordinate and
subject to the intellectual part (of which above, n. 5077); and from the
signification of a "baker," as being the sensuous subordinate and
subject to the will part (of which also above, n. 5078); and from the
signification of a "prince," as being what is primary (see n. 1482,
2089, 5044), here in general or in common; for what is primary is also
common, because it rules in the rest; for particulars bear relation to
primaries as to generals, in order that they may make a one and that no
contradiction should appear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5083.">5083.</span></span>

And he put them into the custody. That this signifies rejection, is
evident from the signification of "putting into custody," as being
rejection; for he who is put into custody is rejected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5084.">5084.</span></span>

Of the house of the prince of the guards. That this signifies by those
things which are primary for interpretation, is evident from the
signification of the "prince of the guards," as being what is primary
for interpretation (n. 4790, 4966). Here therefore the signification is
that the sensuous things of both kinds were rejected by the things
primary for interpretation, namely those which are of the Word as to the
internal sense; and these sensuous things are said to be rejected when
they have no faith in such things; for sensuous things and those which
by their means enter immediately into the thought, are fallacious, and
all the fallacies which prevail in man are from this source. It is from
these that few believe the truths of faith, and that the natural man is
opposed to the spiritual, that is, the external man to the internal; and
therefore if the natural or external man begins to rule over the
spiritual or internal man, the things of faith are no longer believed;
for fallacies overshadow and cupidities suffocate them. \[2\] As few
know what the fallacies of the senses are, and few believe that they
induce so great a shade on rational things, and most of all on the
spiritual things of faith, even so as to extinguish them, especially
when the man is at the same time in the delight of the cupidities from
the love of self and the love of the world, the subject may be
illustrated by examples, showing first what are the fallacies of the
senses which are merely natural, or in those things which are in nature,
and then what are the fallacies of the senses in spiritual things. (1)
It is a fallacy of merely natural sense, or that which is in nature, to
believe that the sun revolves once each day around this earth, and also
the sky with all the stars; and although it is said that it is
incredible-because impossible-that so great an ocean of fire as is the
sun, and not only the sun but also innumerable stars, should revolve
around the earth once every day without any change of place relatively
to one another, and although it is added that it may be seen from the
planets that the earth performs a daily and annual motion by rotation
and revolution, the planets also being earths, some of them with moons
revolving around them, and making - as is known by observation - daily
and annual motions like our earth; nevertheless with very many persons
the fallacy of sense prevails, that it is as it appears to the eye.
\[3\] (2) It is a fallacy of merely natural sense, or that which is in
nature, that there is only a single atmosphere, and that this is merely
successively purer from one portion to another, and that where it ceases
there is a vacuum. When only the external sensuous of man is consulted,
it apprehends no otherwise. (3) It is a fallacy of merely natural sense,
that from the first creation there has been impressed on seeds a
property of growing up into trees and flowers, and of reproducing
themselves, and that from this is the coming into existence and
subsistence of all things. And if it is urged that it is not possible
for anything to subsist unless it perpetually comes into existence,
according to the law that subsistence is a perpetual coming into
existence, and also that everything not connected with something prior
to itself falls into nothing, still the sensuous of the body and the
thought from this sensuous does not apprehend it, nor that each and all
things subsist in the same way that they came into existence, by influx
from the spiritual world, that is to say through the spiritual world
from the Divine. \[4\] (4) Hence it is a fallacy of merely natural sense
that there are simple substances, which are monads and atoms; for
whatever is within the range of the external sensuous, the natural man
believes to be a simple substance, or else nothing. (5) It is a fallacy
of merely natural sense that all things are of nature and from nature,
and that there indeed is something in purer or interior nature which is
not apprehended; but if it is said that within or above nature there is
what is spiritual and celestial, this is rejected; and it is believed
that if it is not natural, it is nothing. (6) It is a fallacy of sense
that only the body lives, and that its life perishes when it dies. The
sensuous does not at all apprehend that the internal man is in every
particular of the external man, and that the internal man is within
nature, and in the spiritual world; hence it does not believe, because
it does not apprehend, that the internal man will live after death
unless it is again clothed with the body (n. 5078, 5079). \[5\] (7)
Hence it is a fallacy of sense that man cannot live after death any more
than the beasts, because these also have a life similar in many respects
to that of man, man being only a more perfect animal. The sensuous, that
is, the man who thinks and draws conclusions therefrom, does not
apprehend that man is above the beasts and has a higher life, because he
can think not only about the causes of things, but also about the
Divine, and can by faith and love be conjoined with the Divine, and also
receive influx therefrom and make it his own, thus that as there is
reciprocity in man there is also reception, as is by no means the case
with beasts. \[6\] (8) It is a fallacy thence derived that the very
living part of man, which is called the soul, is merely something
ethereal, or flamy, which is dissipated when the man dies; and that it
resides in the heart, or in the brain, or in some part of this, and from
thence rules the body as if this were a machine. That the internal man
is in every part of the external man, and that the eye does not see from
itself, nor the ear hear from itself, but from the internal man, the
sensuous man does not apprehend. (9) It is a fallacy of sense that
light, and also heat, can come from no other source than the sun or
elementary fire. That there is light in which is intelligence, and heat
in which is heavenly love, and that all the angels are in this light and
heat, the sensuous does not apprehend. (10) It is a fallacy of sense
that man believes that he lives of himself, or that life has been
imparted to him; for so it appears to the sensuous mind. That it is the
Divine alone which has life of itself, and thus that there is only one
life, and that the lives in the world are only recipient forms, the
sensuous mind does not at all apprehend (see n. 1954, 2706, 2886-2889,
2893, 3001, 3318, 3337, 3338, 3484, 3742, 3743, 4151, 4249, 4318-4320,
4417, 4523, 4524, 4882). \[7\] (11) The sensuous man believes from
fallacy that adulteries are allowable; for from the sensuous he
concludes that marriages are instituted merely in behalf of order for
the sake of the education of the offspring; and that so long as this
order is not destroyed, it is immaterial from whom the offspring comes;
and also that what is of marriage differs from lasciviousness merely in
its being allowed; thus also that it would not be contrary to order to
marry more than one wife, if it were not forbidden by the Christian
world from Holy Scripture. If they are told that there is a
correspondence between the heavenly marriage and marriages on earth, and
that no one can have in himself anything of marriage unless he is in
spiritual truth and good, also that genuine marriage cannot possibly
exist between a husband and several wives, and hence that marriages are
in themselves holy, these things are rejected by the sensuous man as of
no account. (12) It is a fallacy of sense that the Lord's kingdom, or
heaven, resembles an earthly kingdom in respect that the joy and
happiness there consist in one being greater than another, and hence
having more glory than another; for the sensuous does not at all
comprehend what is meant by the least being greatest, or the last first.
If they are told that joy in heaven or to the angels consists in serving
others by benefiting them, without any thought of merit or recompense,
this strikes them as something sad. (13) It is a fallacy of sense that
good works merit reward, and that to benefit anyone for the sake of self
is a good work. (14) It is also a fallacy of sense that man is saved by
faith alone, and that faith can exist in one who has no charity, and
also that it is the faith, and not the life, that remains after death.
In like manner in very many other instances. When therefore what is
sensuous rules in man, the rational enlightened from the Divine sees
nothing and is in thick darkness, and it is then believed that
everything is rational which is concluded from what is sensuous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5085.">5085.</span></span>

Unto the prison house. That this signifies among falsities, is evident
from the signification of a "prison house," as being the vastation of
falsity, and hence falsity (n. 4958, 5037, 5038).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5086.">5086.</span></span>

The place where Joseph was bound. That this signifies the state of the
celestial of the natural now as to these things, is evident from the
signification of "place," as being state (see n. 2625, 2837, 3356, 3387,
4321, 4882); from the representation of Joseph, as being the celestial
of the spiritual from the rational (n. 4286, 4585, 4592, 4594, 4963),
here the celestial of the natural, because now in the natural from which
are temptations (n. 5035, 5039); and from the signification of "being
bound," as being a state of temptations (see n. 5037). In the foregoing
chapter the subject treated of is the state of temptations of the
celestial of the spiritual in the natural as to those things which were
of the interior natural, and here as to those things which are of the
exterior natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5087.">5087.</span></span>

And the prince of the guards set Joseph over them. That this signifies
that the celestial of the natural taught them from things primary for
interpretation, is evident from the signification of the "prince of the
guards," as being things primary for interpretation (n. 4790, 4966,
5084); from the representation of Joseph, as being the celestial of the
natural (of which just above, n. 5086); and from the signification of
"to be set over," as here being to teach; for he who for the purpose of
exploration or amendment is set over those things which are being
rejected, performs the office of a teacher.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5088.">5088.</span></span>

And he ministered to them. That this signifies that he instructed them,
is evident from the signification of "ministering," as being to
instruct. That "ministering" does not here mean ministering as a
servant, is evident from the fact that Joseph was set over them, and
therefore "to minister" here denotes to furnish the things which would
be of benefit to them; and because the subject here treated of is the
new natural or external sensuous, by "being set over" is signified to
teach, and by "ministering" is signified to instruct. "To be set over"
is predicated of the good which is of life; and to "minister" of the
truth which is of doctrine (n. 4976).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5089.">5089.</span></span>

And they were for days in custody. That this signifies that they were
long in a state of rejection, is evident from the signification of
"days," as being states (see n. 23, 487, 488, 493, 893, 2788, 3462,
3785, 4850); here therefore "for days" means that they were long in the
state of rejection which is signified by "custody" (n. 5083). The
particulars which are contained in the internal sense cannot be here set
forth more fully, because they are of such a nature that no idea can be
formed of them from the things in this world; as for instance of the
celestial of the spiritual man, and of its state in the natural when the
interior natural is being made new, and afterward, when it has been made
new and the exterior natural is rejected. But of these and similar
things an idea may be formed from the things in heaven, which idea is
such that it does not fall into any idea formed from the things in this
world, except with those who while in thought can be withdrawn from
sensuous things. \[2\] Unless man's thought can be elevated above
sensuous things, so that these are seen as below him, he cannot
understand any interior thing in the Word, still less such things as are
of heaven abstracted from those which are of the world; for sensuous
things absorb and suffocate them. It is for this reason that those who
are sensuous and have zealously devoted themselves to getting
knowledges, rarely apprehend anything of the things of heaven; for they
have immersed their thoughts in such things as are of the world, that
is, in terms and distinctions drawn from these, thus in sensuous things,
from which they can no longer be elevated and thus kept in a point of
view above them; thus neither can their thought be any longer freely
extended over the whole field of the things of the memory, so as to
select what agrees and reject what is in opposition, and apply whatever
is in connection; for as already said their thought is kept closed and
immersed in terms, and thus in sensuous things, so that it cannot look
around. This is the reason why the learned believe less than the simple,
and are even less wise in heavenly things; for the simple can look at a
thing above terms and above mere knowledges, thus above sensuous things;
whereas the learned cannot do so, but look at everything from terms and
knowledges, their mind being fixed in these things, and thus bound as in
jail or in prison.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5090.">5090.</span></span>

Verses 5-8. And they dreamed a dream both of them, each his dream in one
night, each according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and
the baker of the king of Egypt, who were bound in the prison house. And
Joseph came unto them in the morning, and saw them, and behold they were
troubled. And he asked Pharaoh's courtministers that were with him in
the custody of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore are your faces evil
today? And they said unto him, we have dreamed a dream, and there is no
interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations
belong to God? Tell it me, I pray. "And they dreamed a dream both of
them," signifies foresight concerning them; "each his dream in one
night," signifies concerning the event which to them was in obscurity;
"each according to the interpretation of his dream," signifies which
they had in themselves; "the butler and the baker," signifies concerning
the sensuous things of both kinds; "of the king of Egypt," signifies
which were subordinate to the interior natural; "who were bound in the
prison house," signifies which were among falsities; "and Joseph came
unto them in the morning," signifies revealed and clear to the celestial
of the natural; "and saw them," signifies perception; "and behold they
were troubled," signifies that they were in a sad state; "and he asked
Pharaoh's court ministers" signifies the sensuous things in question;
"that were with him in the custody of his lord's house," signifies which
were rejected; "saying, Wherefore are your faces evil today?" signifies
from what affection was this sadness; "and they said unto him,"
signifies perception concerning these things; "We have dreamed a dream,"
signifies prediction; "and there is no interpreter of it," signifies
that no one knows what is in them; "and Joseph said unto them,"
signifies the celestial of the natural; "Do not interpretations belong
to God?" signifies that the Divine is in these things; "tell it me, I
pray," signifies that it should be known.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5091.">5091.</span></span>

And they dreamed a dream both of them. That this signifies foresight
concerning them, is evident from the signification of a "dream," as
being foresight (n. 3698); "both of them," denotes the sensuous things
of both kinds signified by "the butler and the baker." That the dreams
were concerning these things is plain from the following verses. That a
"dream" in the supreme sense denotes foresight, is because dreams which
flow in immediately through heaven from the Lord foretell things to
come. Such were the dreams of Joseph, the dreams of the butler and the
baker, the dream of Pharaoh, the dream of Nebuchadnezzar, and prophetic
dreams in general. The things to come which are foretold by such dreams
are from no other source than the Lord's Divine foresight. Hence also it
may be known that all things both in general and in particular are
foreseen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5092.">5092.</span></span>

Each his dream in one night. That this signifies concerning the event
which to them was in obscurity, is evident from the signification of a
"dream," as being foresight, and hence prediction, and because it
signifies prediction, it also signifies the event, for prediction is
concerning the event; and from the signification of "night," as being
obscurity. "Night" in the spiritual sense signifies a state of shade
brought on by falsity from evil (n. 1712, 2353), thus also obscurity,
namely, of the mind. The obscurity of night in the world is natural
obscurity; but the obscurity of night in the other life is spiritual
obscurity. The former arises from the absence of the sun of this world
and the deprivation of light therefrom, but the latter from the absence
of the sun of heaven which is the Lord, and the deprivation of light
(that is, of intelligence) therefrom. This deprivation does not arise
from the sun of heaven setting, like the sun of the world, but from a
man or spirit being in falsity from evil, and removing himself, and thus
bringing obscurity upon himself. From the mere idea of night and its
obscurity in both senses, it is evident how the spiritual sense stands
relatively to the natural sense of this same thing. Moreover, spiritual
obscurity is threefold, one kind being from the falsity of evil, the
second from ignorance of truth, and the third is that of exterior things
relatively to interior things, thus of the sensuous things of the
external man relatively to the rational things of the internal man. All
these kinds of obscurity however, arise from the fact that the light of
heaven (or intelligence and wisdom from the Lord) is not received; for
this light is continually flowing in, but it is rejected, suffocated, or
perverted by the falsity of evil; is but little received by ignorance of
truth; and is dulled by being made general by the sensuous things of the
external man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5093.">5093.</span></span>

Each according to the interpretation of his dream. That this signifies
which they had in themselves (namely, the event), is evident from the
signification of the "interpretation of a dream," as being the unfolding
of it, and hence the knowledge of the event, thus the event which they
had in themselves. That a "dream" denotes the event may be seen just
above (n. 5092).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5094.">5094.</span></span>

The butler and the baker. That this signifies concerning the sensuous
things of both kinds, is evident from the signification of a "butler,"
as being the sensuous subordinate to the intellectual part (see n.
5077); and from the signification of a "baker," as being the sensuous
subordinate to the will part (n. 5078). That these were rejected by the
interior natural has been said above (n. 5083, 5089). Be it known,
however, that it was not the sensuous things themselves-namely, those of
the sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch-that were rejected, for from
these the body lives; but it was the views or thoughts, and also the
affections and desires, from them. Objects from the world enter into the
external or natural memory of man through these sensuous things on the
one hand, and objects through rational things on the other. These
objects separate themselves in his memory. Those which have entered
through rational things take a more interior place, but those which have
entered through the sensuous things have a more exterior place; hence as
before said the natural becomes twofold, interior and exterior. \[2\]
The interior natural is what is represented by Pharaoh the king of
Egypt, but the exterior natural by the butler and the baker. What the
difference is may be seen from their respective views of things, or
thoughts, and the conclusions thence derived. One who thinks and
concludes from the interior natural is so far rational as he imbibes
what enters through the rational; but one who thinks and concludes from
the exterior natural, is so far sensuous as he imbibes what enters from
sensuous things. Such a man is also called a sensuous man, but the other
a rational man. When a man dies he takes with him all the natural; and
such as it has been formed with him in the world, such it remains;
insofar as he has become imbued with what is from the rational, insofar
he is rational; and insofar as he has become imbued with what is from
the sensuous, so far he is sensuous. The difference is that insofar as
the natural has drawn and appropriated to itself what is from the
rational, so far it looks at as beneath itself the sensuous things of
the exterior natural, and insofar it has dominion over them, deeming
worthless and rejecting the fallacies thence derived, whereas insofar as
the natural has drawn and appropriated to itself anything from the
sensuous things of the body, so far it looks at rational things as
beneath itself, deeming them worthless and rejecting them. \[3\] For
example, the rational natural man can comprehend that man does not live
from himself, but by an influx of life through heaven from the Lord; but
the sensuous man cannot comprehend this, for he says that he plainly
feels and perceives that life is in himself, and that it is idle to
speak contrary to the evidence of the senses. As another example: the
rational natural man comprehends that there is a heaven and a hell,
whereas the sensuous man denies this, because he does not apprehend that
there is any purer world than that which he sees with his eyes. The
rational natural man comprehends that there are spirits and angels who
are unseen; but the sensuous man does not comprehend this, supposing
that to be nothing which he does not see and touch. \[4\] As still
another example: the rational natural man comprehends that it is the
part of an intelligent man to look at ends, and to foresee and to
dispose the means to some ultimate end. When he looks at nature from the
order of things, he sees that nature is a complex of means, and he then
perceives that a Supreme Being of intelligence has disposed them; but to
what ultimate end he does not see unless he becomes spiritual. On the
other hand the sensuous man does not comprehend that there can be
anything distinct from nature, thus neither that there can be any Entity
which is above nature. What it is to understand, to be wise, to look at
ends, and to dispose means, he does not apprehend unless it is called
natural; and when it is called natural, he has an idea of these
operations like that which an artificer has of an automaton. From these
few instances it may be seen what is meant by the interior natural and
the exterior natural, and also what by sensuous things being rejected;
namely, not the rejection of the things of sight, hearing, smell, taste,
and touch, in the body, but of the conclusions therefrom concerning
interior things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5095.">5095.</span></span>

Of the king of Egypt. That this signifies which were subordinate to the
interior natural, is evident from the representation of Pharaoh or the
king of Egypt in this chapter, as being a new state of the natural (n.
5079, 5080), consequently the interior natural, for this was made new.
What the interior natural is, and what the exterior, may be seen just
above (n. 5094). What is the nature of the internal sense in the
historic and prophetic portions of the Word, must be briefly told. Where
several persons are mentioned in the historic sense-as here Joseph,
Pharaoh, the prince of the guards, the butler and the baker-in the
internal sense they indeed signify various things; but only in one
person. The reason is that names signify things, as for instance Joseph
here represents the Lord as to the celestial spiritual from the rational
and also in the natural, Pharaoh represents Him as to the new state of
the natural or as to the interior natural, the butler and the baker
represent Him as to those things which are of the exterior natural. Such
is the internal sense; and it is the same in other places, as where
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are mentioned. In the sense of the letter
these are three persons, but in the supreme sense all three represent
the Lord-Abraham the Divine Itself, Isaac the Divine intellectual, and
Jacob His Divine natural. It is the same in the prophets, where
sometimes the narration consists of mere names, such as those of
persons, kingdoms, or cities, and yet in the internal sense these names
together present and describe one thing. One who is not aware of this
may easily be led away by the sense of the letter into thinking of a
variety of things, and thus the idea of one thing is dissipated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5096.">5096.</span></span>

Who were bound in the prison house. That this signifies which were among
falsities, is evident from the signification of "being bound in a prison
house," as being to be among falsities (see n. 4958, 5037, 5038, 5085).
They who are in falsities, and still more they who are in evils, are
said to be "bound," and in "prison"-not that they are in any bond, but
for the reason that they are not in freedom, for those who are not in
freedom are interiorly bound. For they who have confirmed themselves in
falsity are no longer in any freedom to choose and receive truth; and
they who have much confirmed themselves therein are not even in freedom
to see truth, still less to acknowledge and believe it; for they are in
the persuasion that falsity is truth, and truth falsity. This persuasion
is such that it takes away all freedom to think anything else, and
consequently holds the very thought in bonds and as it were in prison.
This has become evident to me from much experience with those in the
other life who have been in persuasion of falsity through confirmations
in themselves. \[2\] They are such as not at all to admit truths, but to
reflect or strike them back again, and this with hardness according to
the degree of the persuasion, especially when the falsity is from evil,
or when evil has persuaded them. These are they who are meant in the
Lord's parable in Matthew: Some seeds fell upon the hard way, and the
birds came and devoured them (Matt. 13:4); the "seeds" are Divine
truths; the "hard rock" is persuasion; the "birds" are principles of
falsity. They who are such do not even know that they are in bonds or in
prison, for they are affected with their own falsity, and love it for
the sake of the evil from which it springs; hence they suppose that they
are in freedom, for whatever is of the affection or love appears free.
But they who are not in confirmed falsity-that is, in the persuasion of
falsity-easily admit truths, and see and choose them, and are affected
with them, and afterward see falsities as it were beneath themselves,
and also see how they who are in the persuasion of falsity are bound.
These are in so much freedom that in view and thought they can as it
were range through the whole heaven to innumerable truths; but no one
can be in this freedom unless he is in good; for from good man is in
heaven, and in heaven truths appear from good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5097.">5097.</span></span>

And Joseph came unto them in the morning. That this signifies revealed
and clear to the celestial of the spiritual, is evident from the
representation of Joseph, as being the celestial of the spiritual (n.
4286, 4592, 4963); and from the signification of "morning," as being a
state of enlightenment, (n. 3458), thus what is revealed and clear. That
"morning" has this signification is because all times of the day, like
all times of the year, signify various states in accordance with the
variations of the light of heaven. The variations of the light of heaven
are not variations like those of the light of the world every day and
every year, but are variations of intelligence and love; for the light
of heaven is nothing else than Divine intelligence from the Lord, which
is bright before the eyes; and the heat of this light is the Lord's
Divine love, which is warm to the sense. It is this light which gives
man understanding, and this heat which gives him vital warmth and a will
of good. Morning in heaven is a state of enlightenment as to those
things which are of good and truth, which state exists when it is
acknowledged, and still more when it is perceived, that good is good and
that truth is truth. Perception is internal revelation; hence by the
"morning" is signified what is revealed; and because then that becomes
clear which before was obscure, by "morning" is also signified what is
clear. \[2\] Moreover, by "morning" is signified in the supreme sense
the Lord Himself, for the reason that the Lord is the Sun from which
comes all the light in heaven, and He is always in the rising, thus in
the morning. Moreover, He is always rising with everyone who receives
the truth which is of faith and the good which is of love, but He is
setting with everyone who does not receive these-not that the Sun there
sets, for as just said He is always in the rising; but that he who does
not receive, causes Him as it were to set with himself. This may be
compared in some degree to the changes of the sun of this world in
respect to the inhabitants of the earth; for neither does this sun set,
since it always remains in its place and is always shining thence; but
it appears as if it set, because the earth rotates about its axis once
every day, and at the same time removes its inhabitant from the sight of
the sun (see n. 5084); and therefore the setting is not in the sun, but
in the removal of the inhabitant of the earth from its light. This
comparison is illustrative; and because in every part of nature there is
something representative of the Lord's kingdom, it also instructs us
that the deprivation of the light of heaven-that is, of intelligence and
wisdom-does not take place because the Lord, who is the Sun of
intelligence and wisdom, sets with anyone, but because the inhabitant of
His kingdom removes himself, that is, suffers himself to be led by the
hell by which he is removed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5098.">5098.</span></span>

And saw them. That this signifies perception, is evident from the
signification of "seeing," as being to understand and perceive (n. 2150,
3764, 4567, 4723).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5099.">5099.</span></span>

And behold they were troubled. That this signifies that they were in a
sad state, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5100.">5100.</span></span>

And he asked Pharaoh's court ministers. That this signifies the sensuous
things in question, is evident from the signification of "Pharaoh's
court ministers" as being the sensuous things of both kinds-those which
are subordinate to the intellectual part, and those which are
subordinate to the will part (of which above, n. 5081).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[5072-1](ac102.htm#fr_131) That which
Swedenborg calls the sensuous region of the natural degree of the mind
(Divine Love and Wisdom n. 254:3), or more briefly "the sensuous
(sensuale)," is the lowest or ultimate of man's life (Arcana Coelestia
n. 9996); and what he calls "sensuous things (sensualia)," are those
which belong to this lowest region of the mind. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5101-5150](ac103)
