[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac116)  [Next](ac118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="5801.">5801.</span></span>

Have ye a father, or a brother? That this signifies the good which is
the source, and the truth which is the means, is evident from the
representation of Israel, who is here the "father," as being spiritual
good or the good of truth (see n. 3654, 4598), that it is the good which
is the source, is because the truths in the natural are from the
spiritual good; and from the representation of Benjamin, who is here the
"brother," as being truth; that it is the truth which is the means, is
because through this there is conjunction of the truths of the church in
the natural (which Jacob's sons represent) with the spiritual good which
is "Israel;" and as the conjunction is through this, it is described in
many passages how his father loved Benjamin who represents this truth,
and how Judah could not return with the others to his father unless
Benjamin were with them. (In regard to this truth, see below, n. 5835.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5802.">5802.</span></span>

And we said unto my lord. That this signifies reciprocal perception, is
evident from the signification of "saying," as being perception, as
often explained. That reciprocal perception is meant is plain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5803.">5803.</span></span>

We have a father, an old man. That this signifies that they have
spiritual good as the source, is evident from the representation of
Israel, who is here the "father," as being spiritual good which is the
source (of which just above, n. 5801). In regard to the representation
of Israel, it may be seen above (n. 4286, 4292, 4570) that he represents
the spiritual church, and indeed its internal, which is the good of
truth, or spiritual good from the natural. (What spiritual good or the
good of truth is, may also be seen above, n. 5526, 5733.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5804.">5804.</span></span>

And a child of his old age, the youngest. That this signifies truth
therefrom which is new, is evident from the representation of Benjamin,
who is here the "child, the youngest," as being truth (of which above,
n. 5801; as also that a "child" or "son" is truth, n. 489, 491, 1147,
2623, 3373); and from the signification of "old age," as being newness
of life (see n. 3492, 4220, 4676). Hence it is plain that by a "child of
old ages, the youngest," is signified truth which is new. The case
herein is this. The man who is being regenerated and becoming spiritual
is first led to good by means of truth; for man does not know what
spiritual good, or what is the same thing, Christian good is, except
through truth or through doctrine drawn from the Word. In this way he is
initiated into good. Afterward, when he has been initiated, he no longer
is led to good through truth, but to truth through good, for he then not
only sees from good the truths which he knew before, but also from good
brings forth new truths which he did not and could not know before; for
good is attended with a longing for truths, because with these it is, as
it were, nourished, it being perfected by them. These new truths differ
greatly from the truths which he had previously known; for those which
he then knew had but little life, while those which he now acquires have
life from good. \[2\] When a man has come to good by means of truth, he
is "Israel;" and the truth which he then receives from good, that is,
through good from the Lord, is new truth, which is represented by
Benjamin while he was with his father. By means of this truth good
becomes fruitful in the natural, and brings forth numberless truths
wherein is good. In this way the natural is regenerated, and through
fruitfulness first becomes like a tree with good fruits, and
successively like a garden. From all this it is evident what is meant by
new truth from spiritual good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5805.">5805.</span></span>

And his brother is dead. That this signifies that internal good is not,
is evident from the representation of Joseph, as being the celestial of
the spiritual (see n. 4592, 4963, 5249, 5307, 5331, 5332), thus internal
good, for this is the same as the celestial of the spiritual; and from
the signification of "being dead," as being to be no more (n. 494). The
difference between the representation of Joseph as being internal good,
and that of Israel as being spiritual good, is this. "Joseph" is
internal good from the rational, and "Israel" is internal good from the
natural (see n. 4286). This difference is such as is that between
celestial good, or the good that is of the celestial church, and
spiritual good, or the good that is of the spiritual church, which goods
have already been frequently treated of. It is said that such internal
or celestial good is not there; which is signified by "his brother is
dead."

<span class="margnote"><span id="5806.">5806.</span></span>

And he alone is left of his mother. That this signifies that this is the
only truth of the church, is evident from the representation of
Benjamin, who here is the "only one left," as being new truth, (as just
above, n. 5804); and from the signification of "mother," as being the
church (n. 289, 2691, 2717, 5581). In regard to this, that the truth
which Benjamin here represents, and which is described above (see n.
5804) is the only truth of the church, the case is this. This truth is
that truth which is from spiritual good (which is "Israel"), and which
is represented by Benjamin when with his father; but it is a still more
interior truth when with Joseph. The truth which Benjamin represents
when with his father, and which is called new truth, is that which alone
makes man to be the church; for in this truth, or in these truths, there
is life from good. That is to say, the man who is in truths of faith
from good, he is the church; but not the man who is in truths of faith
and not in the good of charity. For the truths with this man are dead,
even though they are the same truths. From this it may be seen what is
meant by this being the only truth of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5807.">5807.</span></span>

And his father loveth him. That this signifies that it has conjunction
with spiritual good from the natural, is evident from the signification
of "love," as being conjunction (of which presently); from the
representation of Israel, who here is he that "loves him," as being
spiritual good from the natural (see n. 4286, 4598); and from the
representation of Benjamin, who is he whom "the father loves," as being
new truth (as above, n. 5804, 5806). The conjunction of this truth with
that good is what is signified by "his father loving him." There cannot
fail to be conjunction with this truth, because it is from that good.
Between this truth and good there is conjunction like that between
father and son; also like that between the willing of the mind and its
understanding; for all good is of the will, and all truth is of the
understanding. When the will wills good, this good is insinuated into
the understanding, and there takes form according to the quality of the
good; and this form is truth. And because the new truth is thus born, it
is evident that there must be conjunction. \[2\] In regard to love as
being conjunction, be it known that love is spiritual conjunction,
because it is a conjunction of the minds, or of the thought and the
will, of two. From this it is evident that regarded in itself love is
purely spiritual, and that the natural of it is the delight of
consociation and conjunction. In its essence love is the harmony
resulting from changes of the state, and variations in the forms or
substances, of which the human mind consists. This harmony, if from the
heavenly form, is heavenly love. It is evident therefore that love
cannot have any other origin than the Divine love itself which is from
the Lord; thus that love is the Divine which flows into forms, and so
disposes them that their changes of state and variations may be in the
harmony of heaven. \[3\] But the opposite loves, namely, the loves of
self and of the world, are not conjunctions but disjunctions. They
indeed appear like conjunctions, but this is because each regards the
other as one with himself so long as they are in pursuit of gains and
honors, or in revenge and persecution toward those who oppose them. But
as soon as the one does not favor the other, there is disjunction. It is
otherwise with heavenly love, which is altogether averse to doing well
to another for the sake of self; but does it for the sake of the good
that is in the other, and which he receives from the Lord; consequently
for the sake of the Lord Himself from whom is the good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5808.">5808.</span></span>

And thou saidst unto thy servants. That this signifies perception given,
is evident from the signification of "saying" in the historicals of the
Word, as being perception; and because something was said to them, it
signifies perception given.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5809.">5809.</span></span>

Make him come down unto me. That this signifies that the new truth must
be in subjection to internal good, is evident from the signification of
"making to come down," for to come to the internal in order to be
conjoined, is to become subject to it, because everything which is below
or exterior must be wholly subordinate or subject to the higher or
interior, in order that there may be conjunction; and from the
representation of Benjamin, who here is he whom they should make to come
down, as being new truth (of which above, n. 5804, 5806); and from the
representation of Joseph, who is he to whom he should come down, as
being internal good, as shown before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5810.">5810.</span></span>

And I will set mine eye upon him. That this signifies the influx then of
truth from good, is evident from the signification of "setting the eye
upon" anyone, as being to communicate the truth which is of faith. (That
the "eye" corresponds to the intellectual sight, and to the truths of
faith, may be seen, n. 4403-4421, 4523-4534.) And because "to set the
eye upon" anyone is communication, it is also influx; for internal good,
which Joseph represents, does not communicate except by influx with the
truth represented by Benjamin, because this truth is below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5811.">5811.</span></span>

And we said unto my lord. This signifies reciprocal perception, as above
(n. 5802).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5812.">5812.</span></span>

The boy cannot leave his father. That this signifies that this truth
cannot be separated from spiritual good, is evident from the
signification of "leaving," as being to be separated; from the
representation of Israel as being spiritual good from the natural (as
shown above, n. 4286, 4598, 5807); and from the representation of
Benjamin as being new truth (see n. 5804, 5806). This truth is called a
"boy," because it is born last; for this truth is not born until the man
is regenerate. He then receives newness of life through this new truth
conjoined with good. Therefore also this truth is signified by "a child
of his old age, the youngest" (n. 5804).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5813.">5813.</span></span>

And should he leave his father, he will die. That this signifies that if
it were separated the church would perish, is evident from the
signification of "leaving," as being to be separated (as just above, n.
5812); and from the signification of "dying," as being to be no more (n.
494), thus to perish. As this truth conjoined with spiritual good makes
the church (n. 5806), if it were separated from that good, the church
would perish. Moreover Israel, who here is the "father," represents the
church (n. 4286), but not without this truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5814.">5814.</span></span>

And thou saidst unto thy servants, signifies perception concerning this
thing (as above, n. 5808).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5815.">5815.</span></span>

If your youngest brother come not down with you. That this signifies if
it be not subject to internal good, is evident from what has been said
above (n. 5809).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5816.">5816.</span></span>

Ye shall see my faces no more. That this signifies that there will be no
mercy and no conjunction with the truths in the natural, is evident from
the signification of the "face," when predicated of the Lord, as being
mercy (n. 222, 223, 5585); and therefore "not to see the faces" is that
there is no mercy (n. 5585, 5592); and when there is no mercy, there is
also no conjunction, for there is no love, which is spiritual
conjunction. The Divine love is called "mercy" in respect to the human
race, beset with miseries so great. That there would be no conjunction
with the truths in the natural, is because by the sons of Jacob, to whom
these words were said, are represented truths in the natural (n. 5403,
5419, 5427, 5458, 5512). \[2\] As to there being no mercy and no
conjunction with the truths in the natural, unless the truth which is
represented by Benjamin be subject to the internal good which is
"Joseph," the case is this. The truth which makes man to be the church
is the truth which is from good; for when man is in good then from good
he sees truths and perceives them, and thus believes that they are
truths; but not at all if he is not in good. Good is like a little flame
which gives light and illumines, and causes man to see, perceive, and
believe truths. For the affection of truth from good determines the
internal sight thither, and withdraws the sight from worldly and bodily
things, which induce darkness. Such is the truth which Benjamin here
represents. That this is the only truth of the church may be seen above
(n. 5806), that is, it is the only truth which makes man to be the
church. But this truth must be altogether subject to the internal good
which is represented by Joseph; for the Lord flows in through internal
good, and gives life to the truths which are below; thus also to this
truth which is from spiritual good from the natural, which is
represented by Israel (see n. 4286, 4598). \[3\] From these things it is
also plain that conjunction takes place by means of this truth with the
truths which are below; for unless this truth were subject to internal
good, so that it had therefrom an influx of good into itself, there
would be no reception of the mercy which continually flows in from the
Lord through internal good, for there would be no intermediate. And if
there were no reception of mercy, there would be no conjunction. This is
what is signified by "if your youngest brother come not down with you,
ye shall see my faces no more."

<span class="margnote"><span id="5817.">5817.</span></span>

And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father. That
this signifies elevation to spiritual good, is evident from the
signification of "coming up," as being elevation, of which presently;
and from the representation of Israel, who here is the "father," as
being spiritual good from the natural (see n. 4286, 4598). The elevation
which is signified by "coming up," is toward interior things, as here
from the truths in the natural which are represented by the ten sons of
Jacob, to the spiritual good from the natural which is represented by
Israel. For there is an exterior and an interior natural (n. 5497,
5649); in the interior natural is the spiritual good which is "Israel,"
and in the exterior natural are the truths of the church which are the
"sons of Jacob." Therefore by "coming up to the father" is signified
elevation to spiritual good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5818.">5818.</span></span>

We told him the words of my lord. That this signifies knowledge of this
thing, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5819.">5819.</span></span>

And our father said. That this signifies perception from spiritual good,
is evident from the signification of "saying" in the historicals of the
Word, as being perception (as frequently above); and from the
representation of Israel, who here is the "father," as being spiritual
good (n. 3654, 4286, 4598).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5820.">5820.</span></span>

Return ye, buy us a little food. That this signifies that the good of
truth should be appropriated, is evident from the signification of
"buying," as being to appropriate to oneself (see n. 5397, 5406, 5410,
5426); and from the signification of "food," as being the good of truth
(n. 5410, 5426, 5487, 5582, 5588, 5655). Spiritual food is in general
all good, but specifically it is the good which is acquired by means of
truth, that is, truth in the will and in act, for this good becomes good
from the willing and doing, and is called the good of truth. Unless
truth thus becomes good, it does not benefit the man in the other life;
for when he comes into the other life it is dissipated, because it does
not agree with his will, thus not with the delight of his love. He who
has learned truths of faith in the world, not for the sake of willing
and doing them and thus turning them into goods, but only that he may
know and teach them for the sake of honor and gain, even although he may
in the world be considered most learned, yet in the other life he is
deprived of the truths and is left to his own will, that is, his life.
And he then remains as he had been in his life; and wonderful to say he
is then averse to all the truths of faith: and denies them to himself,
howsoever he had before confirmed them. To turn truths to goods by
willing and doing them, that is, by life, is what is meant by
appropriating the good of truth, which is signified by "buy us a little
food."

<span class="margnote"><span id="5821.">5821.</span></span>

And we said, We cannot go down. That this signifies objection, is
evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5822.">5822.</span></span>

If our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down. That this
signifies unless there be with them a conjoining intermediate, is
evident from the representation of Benjamin, who here is the "youngest
brother," as being a conjoining intermediate (see n. 5411, 5413, 5443,
5639, 5668). In regard to this, that Benjamin represents the
intermediate between the celestial of the spiritual, or internal good,
which is "Joseph," and truths in the natural, which are the "ten sons of
Jacob," and also that he represents new truth (as in n. 5804, 5806,
5809), the case is this. An intermediate in order to be an intermediate
must derive something from each, namely from the internal and from the
external; otherwise it is not a conjoining intermediate. The
intermediate which Benjamin represents derives from the external or
natural that it is new truth there; for the new truth which he
represents is in the natural, because it is from the spiritual good from
the natural, which his father represents as Israel (n. 5686, 5689); but
the intermediate derives this by influx from the internal which is
represented by Joseph. Thus it derives something from each. This is the
reason why Benjamin represents a conjoining intermediate, and also new
truth-new truth when with his father, a conjoining intermediate when
with Joseph. This is a secret which cannot be more clearly set forth;
and it cannot be understood except by those who are in the thought that
there is with man an internal and an external distinct from each other;
and who are also in the affection of knowing truths. These are
enlightened in respect to the intellectual part by the light of heaven,
so that they see what others do not see, thus also this secret.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5823.">5823.</span></span>

For we cannot see the man's faces. That this signifies because there
will be no mercy or conjunction, is evident from what has been said
above (n. 5816), where are the same words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5824.">5824.</span></span>

And our youngest brother, he not with us. That this signifies except by
means of an intermediate, is evident from the representation of
Benjamin, as being an intermediate (as just above, n. 5822).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5825.">5825.</span></span>

And thy servant my father said unto us. That this signifies perception
from spiritual good, is evident from the signification of "saying," as
being perception (of which frequently above); and from the
representation of Israel, who here is the "father," as being spiritual
good from the natural (see n. 3654, 4598, 5801, 5803, 5807).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5826.">5826.</span></span>

Ye know that my wife bare me two sons. That this signifies that if there
be spiritual good which is of the church, there will be internal good
and truth, is evident from the representation of Israel, who says this
of himself, as being spiritual good from the natural (of which just
above, n. 5825); from the representation of Rachel, who is here the
"wife who bare him two sons," as being the affection of interior truth
(see n. 3758, 3782, 3793, 3819); and from the representation of Joseph
and Benjamin, who are the "two" whom she bare, as being internal good
and truth-Joseph internal good, and Benjamin interior truth. \[2\] In
regard to this, that there will be internal good and truth if there be
spiritual good which is of the church, the case is this. The spiritual
good which Israel represents is the good of truth, that is, truth in the
will and in act. This truth, or this good of truth, in man, makes him to
be the church. When truth has been implanted in the will (which is
perceived by the fact that the man is affected with truth for the sake
of the end that he may live according to it), then there is internal
good and truth. When man is in this good and truth, then the kingdom of
the Lord is in him, and consequently he is the church, and together with
others like him makes the church in general. From this it may be seen
that in order that the church may be the church, there must be spiritual
good, that is, the good of truth, but by no means truth alone-from which
at this day the church is called the church, and one church is
distinguished from another. Let everyone think within himself whether
truth would be anything unless it had life for the end. What are
doctrinal things without this end? and what the precepts of the
Decalogue without a life according to them? For if anyone is acquainted
with these, and with all their meaning in its fullness, and yet lives
contrary to them, of what benefit are they? have they any effect at all?
except, with some, damnation? The case is similar with the doctrinals of
faith from the Word, which are precepts of Christian life, for they are
spiritual laws. Neither do these conduce to anything unless they become
of the life. Let a man consider within himself whether there is anything
in him that is anything except what enters into his very life; and
whether the life of man, which is life, is anywhere else than in his
will. \[3\] From this then it is that it is said by the Lord in the Old
Testament, and confirmed in the New, that all the Law and all the
Prophets are founded in love to God, and love to the neighbor, thus in
the life itself, but not in faith without life; therefore by no means in
faith alone, consequently neither in confidence, for this is impossible
without charity. If this appears with the evil in times of danger, or
when death is at hand, it is a spurious or false confidence; for not the
least of this confidence appears in them in the other life, however much
they may have professed it with apparent ardor at the approach of death.
That faith, whether you call it confidence or trust, effects nothing
with the wicked, the Lord Himself teaches in John: As many as received,
to them gave He the power to be sons of God, to them that believe in His
name; who were born, not of bloods, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God (John 1:12, 13). \[4\] They who are "born of
bloods" are those who do violence to charity (see n. 374, 1005), also
who profane truth (n. 4735); they who are "born of the will of the
flesh" are those who are in evils from the love of self and of the world
(n. 3813); and they who are "born of the will of man" are those who are
in persuasions of falsity; for a "man" signifies truth, and in the
opposite sense falsity. They who are "born of God" are those who have
been regenerated by the Lord, and thence are in good. These are they who
receive the Lord, and these are they who believe in His name, and these
are they to whom He gives the power to be sons of God, but not to the
others; from which it is very plain what faith alone effects for
salvation. \[5\] Moreover in order that man may be regenerated and
become the church, he must be introduced through truth to good; and he
is introduced when truth becomes truth in the will and in act. This
truth is good, and is called the good of truth, and produces new truths
continually; for then for the first time it makes itself fruitful. The
truth which is thence brought forth or made fruitful is what is called
internal truth, and the good from which it is, is called internal good;
for nothing becomes internal until it has been implanted in the will,
because what is of the will is the inmost of man. So long as good and
truth are outside of the will, and in the understanding only, they are
outside of the man; for the understanding is without, and the will is
within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5827.">5827.</span></span>

And the one went out from me. That this signifies the seeming departure
of internal good, is evident from the signification of "going out," or
going away, as being departure; and from the representation of Joseph as
being internal good (of which above). That the departure was seeming
only is plain, for Joseph still lived. The case herein is this. By what
has been related of Joseph, from beginning to end, is represented in its
order the glorification of the Lord's Human, and consequently in a lower
sense the regeneration of man, for this is an image or type of the
Lord's glorification (see n. 3138, 3212, 3296, 3490, 4402, 5688). With
the regeneration of man the case is this. In the first state when a man
is being introduced through truth into good, the truth appears
manifestly, because it is in the light of the world, and not far from
the sensuous things of the body. But it is not so with good, for this is
in the light of heaven, and remote from the sensuous things of the body,
for it is within in man's spirit. Hence it is that the truth which is of
faith appears manifestly, but not good, although this is continually
present, and flows in, and makes the truths live. Man could not possibly
be regenerated in any other way. But when this state has been passed
through, then good manifests itself, and this by love to the neighbor,
and by the affection of truth for the sake of life. These also are the
things represented by Joseph's being carried away and not appearing to
his father, and by his afterward manifesting himself to him. This also
is meant by the seeming departure of internal good, which is signified
by "the one went out from me."

<span class="margnote"><span id="5828.">5828.</span></span>

And I said, Surely, tearing he is torn in pieces. That this signifies
perception that it has perished by evils and falsities, is evident from
the signification of "saying," as being perception (of which frequently
above); and from the signification of "being torn in pieces," as being
to perish by evils and falsities (that is, the internal good which is
represented by Joseph, n. 5805). That "to be torn in pieces" has this
signification, is because in the spiritual world there is no other
tearing in pieces than that of good by evils and falsities. The case
herein is like death and what relates to death. In the spiritual sense
these do not signify natural death, but spiritual death, which is
damnation, for there is no other death in the spiritual world. So
likewise "tearing" does not signify in the spiritual sense such tearing
as is done by wild beasts, but the tearing to pieces of good by evils
and falsities. Moreover the wild beasts which tear, signify in the
spiritual sense the evils of cupidities and the derivative falsities,
which also are represented by wild beasts in the other life. \[2\] The
good which continually flows in from the Lord with man, does not perish
except by evils and the derivative falsities, and by falsities and the
derivative evils. For as soon as this good, continuous through the
internal man, comes to the external or natural man, it is met by evil
and falsity, by which the good is torn in pieces and extinguished in
various ways as by wild beasts. By this the influx of good through the
internal man is checked and stayed, and consequently the inner mind,
through which is the influx, is closed, and only so much of the
spiritual is admitted through it as to enable the natural man to reason
and speak, but this only from earthly, bodily, and worldly things, and
indeed contrary to good and truth, or in accordance with them from
pretense or deceit. \[3\] It is a universal law that influx adjusts
itself according to efflux, and if efflux is checked influx is checked.
Through the internal man there is an influx of good and truth from the
Lord, and through the external there must be an efflux, namely into the
life, that is, in the exercise of charity. When there is this efflux
then there is continual influx from heaven, that is, through heaven from
the Lord; whereas if there is no efflux, but resistance in the external
or natural man (that is, evil and falsity which tear to pieces and
extinguish the inflowing good), it follows from the universal law just
mentioned that the influx adjusts itself to the efflux, consequently
that the influx of good draws back, and thereby the internal through
which is the influx is closed; and through this closing there comes
stupidity in spiritual things, even until the man who is such neither
knows nor is willing to know anything about eternal life, and at last
becomes insane, so that he opposes falsities against truths, calling
them truths and the truths falsities, and evils against goods, making
them goods and the goods evil. Thus he tears good completely to pieces.
\[4\] That which is "torn" is occasionally mentioned in the Word,
whereby in the proper sense is signified that which perishes through
falsities from evils; but that which perishes through evils is called a
"carcass." When only what is "torn" is mentioned, both are signified,
for the one involves the signification of the other; but it is otherwise
when both are mentioned, for then a distinction is made. Because that
which is "torn" signified in the spiritual sense that which had perished
by falsities from evils, therefore it was forbidden in the
representative church to eat anything torn, which by no means would have
been thus forbidden unless that spiritual evil had been understood in
heaven. Otherwise what harm would there have been in eating flesh torn
by a wild beast? \[5\] Of "torn" things, that they were not to be eaten,
it is thus written in Moses: The fat of a carcass and the fat of that
which is torn may be for every use, provided in eating ye shall not eat
it (Lev. 7:24). Again: A carcass and that which is torn he shall not
eat, to be defiled therewith: I am Jehovah (Lev. 22:8). And again: Men
of holiness ye shall be to Me; therefore ye shall not eat the flesh that
is torn in the field; ye shall cast it forth to dogs (Exod. 22:31). In
Ezekiel: The prophet saith, Ah Lord Jehovih! behold my soul hath not
been defiled, and a carcass and that which is torn I have not eaten from
my youth until now, so that the flesh of abomination hath not come into
my mouth (Ezek. 4:14). From these passages it is plain that it was an
abomination to eat that which was torn, not because it was torn, but
because it signified the tearing of good to pieces by falsities which
are from evils, whereas a "carcass" signified the death of good by
evils. \[6\] The tearing of good to pieces by falsities from evils is
meant also in the following passages from David in the internal sense:
The likeness of the wicked is as a lion, he desireth to tear, and as a
young lion that sitteth in hiding places (Ps. 17:12). Again: They opened
their mouth against me, a tearing and a roaring lion (Ps. 22:13). And
yet again: Lest they tear my soul as a lion, tearing but none rescuing
(Ps. 7:2). A "lion" denotes those who vastate the church. Where it is
said above of Joseph, that he was sold by his brethren, and that his
tunic stained with blood was sent to his father, then his father also
said, "It is my son's tunic, an evil wild beast hath devoured him,
tearing, Joseph is torn in pieces" (Gen. 37:33). (That "to be torn in
pieces" is to be dissipated by falsities from evil may be seen where
this is explained, n. 4777.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5829.">5829.</span></span>

And I have not seen him hitherto. That this signifies because it has
vanished, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5830.">5830.</span></span>

And ye are taking this one also from my faces. That this signifies if
the new truth also should depart, is evident from the representation of
Benjamin, of whom this is said, as being new truth (see n. 5804, 5806,
5809, 5822); and from the signification of "taking him from my faces,"
as being to estrange from spiritual good, thus to depart. Because this
truth is from spiritual good which is "Israel," if it should depart, it
would be all over with the good itself; for good takes its quality from
truths, and truths take their being from good; thereby they have life
together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5831.">5831.</span></span>

And if harm befall him. That this signifies by evils and falsities, is
evident from the signification of "harm befalling" anyone, as being to
be injured by evils and falsities. No other "harm" is meant in the
spiritual sense, because in the spiritual world all harm is from evils
and falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5832.">5832.</span></span>

And ye will make my gray hairs go down in evil to the grave. That this
signifies that spiritual good, and thus the internal of the church,
would perish, is evident from the representation of Israel, as being
spiritual good (n. 5807, 5812, 5813, 5817, 5819, 5825), and the internal
of the spiritual church (n. 4286); from the signification of "gray
hairs," as being the ultimate of the church; and from the signification
of "going down in evil to the grave," as being to perish (n. 4785). "To
go down in good into the grave" is to rise again and to be regenerated
(n. 2916, 2917, 5551), wherefore "to go down in evil into the grave" is
the opposite, thus to perish. As to the internal of the church perishing
if the truth represented by Benjamin were to perish, the case is this.
In order that good may be good it must have its own truths; and truths
must have their own good in order to be truths. Good without truths is
not good, and truths without good are not truths. Together they form a
marriage, which is called the heavenly marriage. Wherefore if one
departs, the other perishes; and the one may depart from the other
through a tearing in pieces by evils and falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5833.">5833.</span></span>

And now when I come to thy servant my father. That this signifies the
good of the church corresponding to the spiritual good of the internal
church, is evident from the representation of Judah, who says this of
himself, as being the good of the church (see n. 5583, 5603, 5782); and
from the representation of Israel, who here is his "father," as being
spiritual good (n. 5807, 5812, 5813, 5817, 5819, 5825). The good of the
church which Judah represents is the good of the external church;
whereas the spiritual good which Israel represents is the good of the
internal church (n. 4286). For every church of the Lord is internal and
external; and the things of the external church correspond to those
which are of the internal church. Thus also the good of the church which
Judah represents, corresponds to the spiritual good represented by
Israel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5834.">5834.</span></span>

And the boy he not with us. That this signifies if the new truth is not
with it, is evident from the representation of Benjamin, who here is the
"boy," as being new truth (see n. 5804, 5806, 5822).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5835.">5835.</span></span>

And his soul is bound in his soul. That this signifies since there is
close conjunction, is evident from the signification of "soul," as being
life, thus "the soul of the one being bound in the soul of the other"
signifies the life of the one in the life of the other, consequently
that there is close conjunction-here of spiritual good, which is
"Israel," with the truth from this good, which is "Benjamin." As to
there being so close a conjunction between good and its truth, like the
soul of the one which is bound in the soul of the other, the case is
this. The mind of man, which is the man himself, and is where the man's
life is, has two faculties, one allotted to the truths of faith, the
other to the good of charity. The faculty which is allotted to the
truths of faith is called the understanding, and that which is allotted
to the good of charity is called the will. In order that man may be man,
these two faculties must make a one. \[2\] But that at the present day
these two faculties are altogether disjoined, may be seen from the fact
that a man can understand that a thing is true, and yet not will it. He
can understand that all things in the Decalogue are true, also in some
measure those in the doctrinals which are from the Word; nay, he may
also be able intellectually to confirm them, and even to preach them,
but yet will otherwise, and from willing act otherwise. It is plain from
this that these two faculties in man are disjoined. But that they ought
not to be disjoined may be known from the fact that to understand truth
would elevate a man toward heaven, and to will evil would draw him down
toward hell, and so he would hang between the two. But still his will,
in which his very life consists, would draw him downward, thus
inevitably into hell. Therefore lest this happen, these two faculties
must be conjoined, which is done through regeneration by the Lord, and
this through the implantation of the truth of faith in the good of
charity. For thus through the truth of faith the man is endowed with a
new understanding, and through the good of charity with a new will;
whence he has two faculties which make one mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5836.">5836.</span></span>

And it shall come to pass when he seeth that the boy is not, that he
will die. That this signifies that spiritual good will perish (that is,
if the truth which is "Benjamin" departs), is evident from the
representation of Israel as being spiritual good (of which above); and
from the representation of "dying," as being to cease to be such (see n.
494), thus to perish. (That good would perish if its truth should depart
has been shown above, n. 5830, 5832.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5837.">5837.</span></span>

And thy servants will make thy servant our father's gray hairs go down
in sorrow to the grave. That this signifies that all will be over with
the church, is evident from the things unfolded above (n. 5832), where
like things are said. That Israel, who is the "father," is here the
church, is because spiritual good, which he represents, makes the church
in man; insomuch that whether you say "spiritual good," or "the church,"
it is the same thing, for they cannot be separated. Therefore it is that
in the Word, especially in the prophets, "Israel" is the spiritual
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5838.">5838.</span></span>

Verses 32-34. For thy servant became surety for the boy from being with
my father, saying, If I bring him not back unto thee I shall sin to my
father all the days. And now I pray let thy servant remain instead of
the boy a servant to my lord, and let the boy go up with his brethren.
For how shall I go up to my father and the boy be not with me?
peradventure I shall see the evil that shall come upon my father. "For
thy servant became surety for the boy from being with my father,
saying," signifies adjunction to itself; "If I bring him not back unto
thee," signifies unless it be conjoined with spiritual good; "I shall
sin to my father all the days," signifies a turning away, and thus that
there would be no good of the church; "and now I pray let thy servant
remain instead of the boy a servant to my lord," signifies submission;
"and let the boy go up with his brethren," signifies in order that
interior truth may be conjoined with spiritual good; "for how shall I go
up to my father and the boy he not with me?" signifies that spiritual
good from the natural would be without interior truth; "peradventure I
shall see the evil that shall come upon my father," signifies perception
that it will perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5839.">5839.</span></span>

For thy servant became surety for the boy from being with my father,
saying. That this signifies adjunction, is evident from the
signification of "becoming surety for" another, as being to adjoin him
to oneself (as above, n. 5609). For the truth which Benjamin
represented, while it is not so much with spiritual good, which is the
"father," may in the meantime be with the good of the external church
which Judah represents; for this good and spiritual good act as one by
correspondence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5840.">5840.</span></span>

If I bring him not back unto thee. That this signifies unless it be
conjoined with spiritual good, is evident from the signification of
"bringing back," as being to be conjoined again; and from the
representation of Israel, as being spiritual good (of which frequently
above).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5841.">5841.</span></span>

I shall sin to my father all the days. That this signifies a turning
away, and thus that there would be no good of the church, is evident
from the signification of "sinning," as being disjunction (see n. 5229,
5474), thus a turning away; and if the good of the external church which
Judah represents, averts itself from the good of the internal church
represented by Israel, there is no longer any good of the church. The
conjunction itself causes that there is good from which is the church.
With these two goods, of the internal church and of the external, the
case is this. The good of the internal church, or internal good,
produces the good of the external church, or external good, by influx;
and because it is so, internal good elevates to itself external good in
order that this may look to it, and through it upward toward the Lord.
This takes place when there is conjunction; but if there is disjunction,
external good turns itself away, and looks downward, and thus perishes.
It is this turning away which is signified by "I shall sin to my father
all the days."

<span class="margnote"><span id="5842.">5842.</span></span>

And now I pray let thy servant remain instead of the boy a servant to my
lord. That this signifies submission, is evident from the fact that to
offer oneself as a servant in the place of another is to deprive oneself
of freedom from one's own, and to submit oneself altogether to the
other. By these words is signified the submission of the natural or
external man under the internal; for when the good there submits itself,
the very truths there submit themselves, for truths are of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5843.">5843.</span></span>

And let the boy go up with his brethren. That this signifies in order
that interior truth may be conjoined with spiritual good, is evident
from the representation of Benjamin, as being new truth (see n. 5804,
5806, 5809, 5822), thus interior truth; and from the signification of
"going up with his brethren," as being to be again conjoined with his
father, that is, with the spiritual good which is represented by Israel.
The interior truth which Benjamin here represents, is the new truth, for
this is interior relatively to the truths which are below. For the truth
which proceeds from good is interior truth; thus this truth is so
because it proceeds from spiritual good, which is "Israel." The good of
charity from the will, thus from affection, is internal good, or the
good of the internal church; but the good of charity not from affection
but from obedience, and not from the will but from doctrine, is external
good, or the good of the external church; and it is the same with the
truths which are from it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5844.">5844.</span></span>

For how shall I go up to my father, and the boy be not with me? That
this signifies that spiritual good from the natural would be without
interior truth, is evident from the representation of Israel, who here
is the "father," as being spiritual good from the natural (of which
above); and from the representation of Benjamin, who here is the "boy,"
as being interior truth (see just above, n. 5843).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5845.">5845.</span></span>

Peradventure I shall see the evil that shall come upon my father. That
this signifies a perception that it will perish, is evident from the
signification of "seeing," as being to understand (as above, n. 2807,
3863, 4403-4421), and thence to perceive (n. 3764, 4567, 5400). That it
will perish is signified by the "evil which shall come upon him," the
same as by "making his gray hairs go down in evil to the grave" (n.
5832), also that if his father did not see him with his brethren, he
"would die" (n. 5836). This is the evil that is signified. (That
spiritual good, which is "Israel," would perish if the truth which is
"Benjamin" should depart, may be seen above, n. 5832.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5846.">5846.</span></span>

Of the angels and spirits with man. The influx from the spiritual world
into man is in general of such a nature that man cannot think or will
anything of himself, but everything flows in; good and truth from the
Lord through heaven, thus through the angels who are with the man; evil
and falsity from hell, thus through the evil spirits who are with the
man; and this into the man's thought and will. This I know will appear a
very great paradox because it is contrary to the appearance; but
experience itself shall declare how the matter stands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5847.">5847.</span></span>

No man, spirit, or angel ever has any life from himself, thus neither
can he think and will from himself; because in thinking and willing is
the life of man, and speaking and acting is the life thence derived. For
there is one only life, that of the Lord, which flows into all, but is
variously received, and indeed according to the quality which a man has
induced on his soul by his life. Hence with the evil, goods and truths
are turned into evils and falsities, but with the good they are
received-goods as goods, and truths as truths. This may be compared to
the light of the sun flowing into objects, which is modified and varied
in them diversely according to the form of the parts, and thus is turned
into colors, some sad and some cheerful. While a man lives in the world
he induces a form on the purest substances of his interiors, so that it
may be said that he forms his soul, that is, its quality; and according
to this form is received the life of the Lord, which is the life of His
love toward the universal human race. (That there is one only life, and
that men, spirits, and angels are recipients of life, see n. 1954, 2021,
2706, 2886-2889, 2893, 3001, 3318, 3337, 3338, 3484, 3741-3743, 4151,
4249, 4318-4320, 4417, 4524, 4882.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5848.">5848.</span></span>

In order that the life of the Lord may flow in and be received according
to all law in man, there are continually with him angels and
spirits-angels from heaven, and spirits from hell; and I have been
informed that there are with everyone two spirits and two angels. That
there are spirits from hell is because man of himself is continually in
evil, for he is in the delight of the love of self and of the world, and
insofar as man is in evil, or in this delight, so far angels from heaven
cannot be present.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5849.">5849.</span></span>

The two spirits adjoined to man cause him to be in communication with
hell, and the two angels cause him to be in communication with heaven.
Without communication with heaven and hell, man could not live even a
moment. If these communications were taken away, the man would fall dead
as a stock; for then would be taken away the connection with the First
Esse, that is, with the Lord. This has also been shown me by much
experience. The spirits with me were removed a little, and then as they
were removed I began as it were to expire, and indeed should have
expired if they had not been sent back. But I know that few will believe
there is any spirit with them, nor even that there are any spirits; and
this chiefly for the reason that at this day there is no faith, because
no charity, and thus it is not believed that there is a hell, nor even
that there is a heaven, nor consequently that there is any life after
death. Another reason is that they do not see spirits with their eyes;
for they say, "If I should see, I would believe; what I see, this is;
but what I do not see, I do not know whether it is." When yet they know,
or might know, that man's eye is so dull and gross that it does not even
see many things that exist in ultimate nature, as is evident from
microscopes which make them visible. How then could it see what is
within even purer nature, where spirits and angels are? These man cannot
see except with the eye of his internal man, for this is accommodated to
such vision. But the sight of this eye is not opened to man while he is
in this world, for many reasons. From all this it is evident how far
distant is the faith of this day from the faith of ancient times, when
it was believed that every man had his angel with him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5850.">5850.</span></span>

The truth of the matter is this. From the Lord through the spiritual
world into the subjects of the natural world there is a general influx
and also a particular influx-a general influx into those things which
are in order, a particular influx into those things which are not in
order. Animals of every kind are in the order of their nature, and
therefore into them there is general influx. That they are in the order
of their nature is evident from the fact that they are born into all
their faculties, and have no need to be introduced into them by any
information. But men are not in their order, nor in any law of order,
and therefore they receive particular influx; that is, there are with
them angels and spirits through whom the influx comes. And unless these
were with men, they would rush into every wickedness and would plunge in
a moment into the deepest hell. Through these spirits and angels man is
kept under the auspices and guidance of the Lord. The order into which
man was created would be that he should love the neighbor as himself,
and even more than himself. Thus do the angels. But man loves only
himself and the world, and hates the neighbor, except insofar as he
favors his commanding and possessing the world. Therefore as the life of
man is altogether contrary to heavenly order, he is ruled by the Lord
through separate spirits and angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5851-5900](ac118)
