[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac111)  [Next](ac113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="5551.">5551.</span></span>

In sorrow to the grave. That this signifies without hope of
resuscitation, is evident from the signification of "sorrow" here, as
being without hope, for when there is no longer any hope there is
sorrow; and from the signification of the "grave," as being resurrection
and regeneration (see n. 2916, 2917, 3256, 4621), thus the resuscitation
of the church; for if in the church there is neither an internal which
is "Joseph," nor an intermediate which is "Benjamin," nor faith in the
will, or charity, which is "Simeon," there is no longer any hope of its
resuscitation. It appears strange that the "grave" should denote
resuscitation, but this is because of man's idea concerning it; for he
does not separate the grave from death, nor even from the dead body in
the grave. Yet the angels in heaven cannot have such an idea of the
grave, but one entirely different from man's, namely, an idea of
resurrection or resuscitation. For when man's dead body is committed to
the grave he is resuscitated into the other life; and therefore the idea
angels have about the grave is not an idea of death, but of life,
consequently of resuscitation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5552.">5552.</span></span>

Continuation concerning the correspondence with the Grand Man; here
concerning the correspondence of the skin, the hair, and the bones
therewith. In regard to correspondence the case is this. The things in
man which have the most life correspond to those societies in the
heavens which have the most life and hence the most happiness there, as
do those to which man's external and internal sensories correspond, and
the things of his understanding and will. But the things in man which
have less life correspond to such societies there as are in less life,
as the cuticles which invest the whole body, the cartilages and bones
which support and hold together all the parts of the body, and also the
hairs which grow out from the cuticles. What the societies are to which
these correspond, and what is their quality, is also to be told.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5553.">5553.</span></span>

The societies to which the skins correspond are in the entrance to
heaven, and to them is given a perception of the quality of the spirits
who throng to the first threshold, whom they either reject or admit; so
that they may be called entrances or thresholds to heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5554.">5554.</span></span>

There are very many societies that constitute the external integuments
of the body, with differences from the face to the soles of the feet;
for there are differences everywhere. I have spoken much with them. In
regard to spiritual life they had been such that they suffered
themselves to be persuaded by others that a thing is so; and when they
heard it confirmed from the literal sense of the Word, they wholly
believed it, and remained in the opinion, and instituted a life, not
evil, in accordance with it. Others who are not of a similar nature
cannot easily have interaction with them; for they cling tenaciously to
the opinions they have received, and do not suffer themselves to be led
away from them by reasons. Very many such are from this earth, because
our planet is in externals, and also reacts against internals, as does
the skin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5555.">5555.</span></span>

There are those who in the life of the body have known nothing but the
general things of faith-as that the neighbor ought to be loved-and who
from this general principle have done good to the evil and to the
upright alike without discrimination, saying that everyone is the
neighbor. When these lived in the world they suffered themselves to be
led much astray by the deceitful, hypocritical, and pretending; and the
same thing happens to them in the other life; nor do they care what is
said to them, for they are sensuous and do not enter into reasons. These
also constitute the skin, but the outer and less sensitive part. I have
spoken with those who constitute the skin of the skull. There is as
great a difference in those who constitute the skin, as there is in the
skin itself in various places-as on different parts of the skull, about
the occiput, sinciput, and temples, on the face, and on the chest,
abdomen, loins, feet, arms, hands, and fingers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5556.">5556.</span></span>

It has also been given me to know who constitute the scarf skin. This
skin is less sensitive than any other of the coverings, for it is
covered over with scales that are nearly like a thin cartilage. The
societies which constitute it are they who reason about all things as to
whether it be so or not so, and go no further. When I spoke with them,
it was given to perceive that they do not at all apprehend what is true
or not true; and the more they reason, the less they apprehend. Yet they
seem to themselves wiser than others, for they vest wisdom in the
faculty of reasoning. They are altogether ignorant that the chief thing
in wisdom is to perceive without reasoning, that a thing is so or not
so. Many such are from those who in the world became so from a confusion
of good and truth through philosophical subtleties, and who thereby have
the less common sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5557.">5557.</span></span>

There are also spirits through whom others speak, and who hardly
understand what they say. This they confessed, but still talked much.
They become so who in the life of the body only prated, without thinking
at all about what they said, and loved to talk about everything. I was
told that they are in companies, and that some of these relate to the
membranes which cover the viscera of the body, and some to the cuticles
which have but little sensitiveness; for they are only passive powers,
and do nothing from themselves, but from others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5558.">5558.</span></span>

There are spirits who when they wish to know anything, say that it is
so, one after another in the society; and when they say it, they observe
whether it flows freely without any spiritual resistance; for when it is
not so, they usually perceive a resistance from within; and if they
perceive no resistance they think that it is so, and do not know it in
any other way. Such are they who constitute the little glands of the
skin. But there are two kinds of them, one which affirms because there
appears a free flow, as was said, from which they surmise that as there
is no resistance it is in agreement with the heavenly form, consequently
with the truth, and thereby that it is affirmed; and another kind which
boldly affirms that it is so, although they do not know it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5559.">5559.</span></span>

The conformation of the interweavings of the skins has been shown to me
representatively. The conformation with those in whom these outermost
things corresponded to the interiors, or in whom the material things
there were obedient to spiritual things, was a beautiful weaving of
spirals wonderfully intertwined in a kind of lace-work which it is
impossible to describe. They were of a blue color. Afterward were
represented forms still more elaborate, more delicate, and more
beautifully interwoven. Of such a structure appear the skins of a
regenerate man. But with those who have been deceitful, these outermost
things appear like knottings together of mere serpents; and with those
who have used magical arts, like foul intestines.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5560.">5560.</span></span>

The societies of spirits to which the cartilages and bones correspond
are very many; but they are such as have little spiritual life in them,
just as there is little life in the bones as compared with the soft
parts which they enclose-as for example in the skull and the bones of
the head compared with either brain and the medulla oblongata and the
sensitive substances there; and also as in the vertebrae and ribs in
comparison with the heart and lungs; and so on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5561.">5561.</span></span>

It has been shown me how little spiritual life they have who relate to
the bones. Other spirits speak through them, and they themselves know
little of what they say; but still they speak, vesting delight in this
only. Into such a state are they reduced who have led an evil life, and
yet have had some remains of good stored up in them. These remains make
that little of spiritual life, after the vastations of many ages. (What
remains are, may be seen above, n. 468, 530, 560-561, 660, 1050, 1738,
1906, 2284, 5135, 5342, 5344.) It is said that they have little
spiritual life, and by spiritual life is meant the life which the angels
in heaven have. To this life man is introduced in the world by the
things of faith and charity; the very affection of the good which is of
charity, and the affection of the truth which is of faith, are spiritual
life, man's life without these is a natural, worldly, bodily, and
earthly life, which is not spiritual life, unless spiritual life is in
it, but is such a life as he has in common with animals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5562.">5562.</span></span>

They who come out of vastations, and serve the uses of the bones, have
not any determinate thought, but general, almost indeterminate; they are
like those who are called distraught, as if not in the body; they are
slow, heavy, stupid, sluggish in everything. Yet sometimes they are not
untranquil, because cares do not penetrate, but are dispersed in their
general obscurity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5563.">5563.</span></span>

Pains are sometimes felt in the skull, now in one part, now in another;
and nuclei seem to be perceived there which are separate from the other
bones, and which thus are in pain. It has been given me to know by
experience that such pains come from falsities originating in
cupidities; and wonderful to say the genera and species of falsities
have fixed places in the skull, as has also been made known to me by
much experience. Such nuclei, which are indurations, are broken up and
made soft in those who are being reformed; and this is done in various
ways, in general by instructions in good and truth, by harsh influxes of
truths which cause inward pain, and by actual rendings which cause
outward pain. Falsities from cupidities are of such a nature that they
produce hardness; for they are contrary to truths, which because they
are determined according to the form of heaven, flow as it were
spontaneously, freely, gently, and softly, while falsities, being of a
contrary tendency, have opposite determinations, so that the flow which
is of the form of heaven is stopped; hence the indurations. From this
cause they who have been in deadly hatred and in the revengefulness of
such hatred, and from these in falsities, have skulls completely
indurated, and some have skulls like ebony, through which no rays of
light, which are truths, penetrate, but are wholly reflected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5564.">5564.</span></span>

There are spirits small in stature who when they speak, thunder, one
sometimes like a troop. It is innate in them to speak so. They are not
from this earth, but from another, which of the Lord's Divine mercy will
be spoken of when I speak of the inhabitants of the various earths. It
was said that they relate to the shield like cartilage in front of the
chest, and which serves as a support in front to the ribs, and also to
the various muscles of tone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5565.">5565.</span></span>

There are also some spirits who relate to bones still harder, as the
teeth; but it has not been granted me to know much about them, merely
that having scarcely any spiritual life left, when presented to view in
the light of heaven, they do not appear with any face, but only with
teeth in place of a face; for the face represents man's interiors, thus
his spiritual and celestial things, that is, those of faith and charity;
and therefore they appear thus who in the life of the body have not
acquired anything of this life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5566.">5566.</span></span>

There came toward me one who appeared like a black cloud about which
were shooting stars. When shooting stars appear in the other life they
signify falsities; but fixed stars signify truths. I perceived that it
was a spirit who wished to approach. When he came near he struck me with
fear; this certain spirits can do, especially robbers, and therefore I
was able to conclude that he had been a robber. When he was near me, he
made every effort to infest me by magic arts, but in vain. He stretched
out his hand that he might exert his imaginary power, but with no effect
whatever. The kind of face he had was afterward shown. It was no face,
but something very black in place of one; and in it appeared a mouth
gaping so dreadfully and ferociously that it was a very maw in which
teeth were set in rows. In a word, it was like a mad dog with distended
jaws, so that it was a wide open mouth, not a face.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5567.">5567.</span></span>

A certain one applied himself to my left side, and at that time I did
not know where he came from, nor what he was; he also acted obscurely.
He wanted to penetrate inwardly into me, but was kept out. He induced a
general sphere of ideas of thought that is indescribable, and I do not
remember having previously noticed any general sphere like it. He was
bound by no principles, but in general was against all whom he could
readily and ingeniously refute and censure, although he did not know
what truth is. I wondered at his having the cleverness to show others to
be wrong, and yet do this from no knowledge of truth in himself.
Afterward he went away, but soon returned with an earthen jug in his
hand, and wanted to give me something out of it to drink. There was in
the jug, from phantasy, something that would take away the understanding
of those who drank. This was represented because he had deprived those
who were attached to him in the world of the understanding of truth and
good; but still they clung to him. He also, in the light of heaven, did
not appear with any face, but only with teeth, for the reason that he
could ridicule others, and still knew nothing of truth himself. I was
told who he was, and that when he lived, he was one of the men of note,
and his nature had been known to some.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5568.">5568.</span></span>

There have been with me at times those who gnashed with their teeth.
They were from the hells where are those who had not only led an evil
life, but had also confirmed themselves against the Divine, and had
referred all things to nature. These gnash with their teeth when they
speak, which is horrible to hear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5569.">5569.</span></span>

As there is a correspondence of the bones and the skins, so there is of
the hairs; for these push forth from roots in the skins. Whatever has a
correspondence with the Grand Man is possessed by angels and spirits;
for each one as an image represents the Grand Man; therefore the angels
have hair arranged becomingly and in order. Their hair represents their
natural life and its correspondence with their spiritual life. That
"hair" signifies the things of natural life, may be seen above (n.
3301); and also that "to poll the hair" is to accommodate natural things
so that they may be becoming and thus comely (n. 5247).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5570.">5570.</span></span>

There are many, especially women, who have vested everything in
adornment, nor have they thought higher, and scarcely anything about
eternal life. This is pardoned to women until the age of womanhood, when
the ardor which is wont to precede marriage ceases; but if they persist
in such things in adult age, when they can know better, they then
contract a nature which remains after death. Such appear in the other
life with long hair spread over the face, which they also comb, vesting
elegance therein; for "to comb the hair" signifies to accommodate
natural things so that they appear becoming (see n. 5247). From this
their quality is known by others; for spirits can tell from the color,
length, and arrangement of the hair what the persons had been as to
natural life in the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5571.">5571.</span></span>

They who have believed nature to be everything, and have confirmed
themselves in this, and therefore have led a careless life, not
acknowledging any life after death, thus neither hell nor heaven, being
merely natural, do not appear in the light of heaven to have any face,
but in its place something bearded, hairy, unshorn; for as before said,
the face represents spiritual and heavenly things inwardly in man, but
hairiness natural things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5572.">5572.</span></span>

There are very many at this day in the Christian world who ascribe all
things to nature, and scarcely anything to the Divine; but there are
more of these in one nation than in another. I may therefore relate a
conversation I had with some from that nation in which there are very
many such.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5573.">5573.</span></span>

A certain one was present above the head who was unseen, but whose
presence was perceived from an odor of burnt horn or bone, and from a
stench of teeth. Afterward a great multitude, like a black cloud, came
unseen from beneath upward behind the back, and stopped above the head.
I supposed they were unseen because they were subtle; but I was told
that where there is a spiritual sphere they are invisible, but where
there is a natural sphere they are visible. They are called invisible
natural spirits. The first thing disclosed about them was that they
strove with the utmost diligence, skill, and artfulness to prevent
anything from being divulged about them, to which end they were skilled
in stealing from others their ideas, and inducing other ideas, by which
they hindered detection. This continued quite a long time. Hence it was
given to know that in the life of the body they had been such as not to
desire to have anything divulged of what they did or thought, assuming a
different face and a different speech. Nevertheless they had not used
these things in order to deceive in a lying manner. \[2\] It was
perceived that they who were present had been traders in the life of the
body, but traders whose delight of life consisted rather in trading
itself than in riches, so that trading had been as it were their soul, I
therefore spoke to them about this, and was given to say that trading
does not at all prevent anyone from coming into heaven, and that the
rich as well as the poor are in heaven. But they objected, saying that
it had been their opinion that if they were to be saved they would have
to renounce trade, give all they had to the poor, and make themselves
miserable. But it was given to reply to them that such is not the case,
and that those among them who are in heaven because they had been good
Christians, had thought otherwise, and yet they had been wealthy, and
some of them very wealthy. These had the common good and love toward the
neighbor as their end, and had engaged in mercantile pursuits merely for
the sake of employment in the world, and moreover had not set their
heart on these things. And the reason why they themselves are below is
that they had been merely natural, and therefore had not believed in a
life after death, nor in hell and heaven, nor even in any spirit; and
that they had not hesitated to deprive others of their goods by any
artifice whatever, and could without mercy see whole families ruined for
the sake of their own gain; and that they therefore had ridiculed
everyone who spoke to them about a spiritual life. \[3\] The kind of
faith they had had about the life after death, and about heaven and
hell, was also shown. There appeared one who was taken up into heaven
from the left toward the right; and it was said that it was one who had
recently died, and was being immediately conducted by the angels into
heaven. There was a conversation about this. But although they also saw
it they nevertheless had a very strong sphere of unbelief, and spread it
around, so much so that they wanted to make themselves and others
believe contrary to what they saw. And as their unbelief was so great I
was given to say to them, Suppose that in the world you had seen someone
resuscitated who was lying dead in a coffin. They said that at first
they should not have believed unless they had seen many dead persons
resuscitated; and if they had seen this, still they would have
attributed it to natural causes. And after they had been left awhile to
their own thoughts, they said that at first they would have believed it
to be a fraud; and when it was proved to be no fraud they would have
believed that the soul of the dead person had a secret communication
with him who resuscitated it; and finally that there was some secret
thing they did not comprehend, because there are very many
incomprehensible things in nature; so that they could never have
believed that such a thing took place from any force above nature.
Hereby was disclosed the nature of their faith that they could never
have been brought to believe that there is any life after death, nor
that there is a hell, nor that there is a heaven; thus that they were
wholly natural. When such persons appear in the light of heaven, they
appear without a face, and with a thick mass of hair in place thereof.
Genesis 43 1. And the famine became grievous in the land. 2. And it came
to pass when they had finished the eating of the produce which they had
brought from Egypt, and their father said unto them, Go back, buy us a
little food. 3. And Judah spoke unto him, saying, Protesting the man did
protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my faces except your brother
be with you. 4. If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down
and buy thee food. 5. And if thou wilt not send, we will not go down;
for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my faces except your brother
be with you. 6. And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye ill with me, to tell
the man whether ye had yet a brother? 7. And they said, Asking the man
asked unto us, and unto our birth, saying, Is your father yet alive?
Have ye a brother? And we told him according to the mouth of these
words. Knowing could we know that he would say, Bring your brother down?
8. And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the boy with me, and we
will arise and go; and we will live, and not die, both we and thou, and
also our little ones. 9. I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou
require him; if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then
I shall sin to thee all the days. 10. For except we had lingered, surely
we had now returned these two times. 11. And their father Israel said
unto them, If therefore this be so, do this: take of the song of the
land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little resin
and a little honey, wax and stacte, terebinth <span
id="fr_135"></span>[5573-1](#fn_135) nuts and almonds. 12. And take
double silver in your hands, and the silver that was returned in the
mouth of your bags carry back in your hand; peradventure it was an
error. 13. And take your brother, and arise, and return unto the man.
14. And God Shaddai give you mercies before the man, and send you your
other brother and Benjamin. And I, as I have been bereaved, I shall be
bereaved. 15. And the men took this present, and they took double silver
in their hand, and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and
stood before Joseph. 16. And Joseph saw Benjamin with them, and he said
to him that was over his house, Bring the men to the house, and slaying
slay, and make ready; for the men shall eat with me at noon. 17. And the
man did as Joseph said; and the man brought the men to Joseph's house.
18. And the men were afraid because they were brought to Joseph's house;
and they said, Over the word of the silver that was returned in our bags
in the beginning are we brought; to roll down upon us, and to cast
himself upon us, and to take us for servants, and our asses. 19. And
they came near to the man that was over Joseph's house, and they spoke
unto him at the door of the house, 20. And said, In me, my lord, in
coming down we came down in the beginning to buy food; 21. And it came
to pass, when we came to the inn and we opened our bags, and behold
everyone's silver in the mouth of his bag, our silver in its weight; and
we have brought it back in our hand. 22. And the other silver have we
brought down in our hand to buy food; we know not who put our silver in
our bags. 23. And he said, Peace be to you, fear not; your God and the
God of your father gave you a hidden gift in your bags; your silver came
to me. And he brought Simeon out unto them. 24. And the man brought the
men to Joseph's house, and gave water, and they washed their feet; and
he gave their asses provender. 25. And they made ready the present
against Joseph came at noon; for they heard that they should eat bread
there. 26. And Joseph came to the house, and they brought him the
present which was in their hand to the house, and bowed down themselves
to him to the earth. 27. And he asked them to peace, and said, Is there
peace to your father, the old man of whom ye spoke? Is he yet alive? 28.
And they said, There is peace to thy servant our father; he is yet
alive. And they bent themselves, and bowed themselves down. 29. And he
lifted up his eyes, and saw Benjamin his brother, his mother's son, and
said, Is this your youngest brother, of whom ye spoke unto me? And he
said, God be gracious unto thee, my son. 30. And Joseph made haste, for
his compassions were moved toward his brother; and he sought to weep,
and he came to the bed-chamber, and wept there. 31. And he washed his
faces, and went out, and he restrained himself, and said, Set on bread.
32. And they set on for him alone, and for them alone, and for the
Egyptians who did eat with him, alone; because the Egyptians cannot eat
bread with the Hebrews; because this is an abomination to the Egyptians.
33. And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright,
and the youngest according to his youth; and the men were amazed,
everyone at his companion. 34. And he brought out portions from his
faces unto them; and he multiplied Benjamin's portion above the portions
of them all, five measures. And they drank and drank largely with him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5574.">5574.</span></span>

The Contents. The subject is continued of the conjunction in the natural
of the truths of the church, which are the "ten sons of Jacob," with the
celestial of the spiritual, or truth from the Divine, which is "Joseph,"
through the intermediate which is "Benjamin;" but in this chapter, in
the internal sense, only the general influx which precedes conjunction
is treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5575.">5575.</span></span>

The Internal Sense. Verses 1-5. And the famine became grievous in the
land. And it came to pass when they had finished the eating of the
produce which they had brought from Egypt, and their father said unto
them, Go back, buy us a little food. And Judah spoke unto him, saying,
Protesting the man did protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my
faces except your brother be with you. If thou wilt send our brother
with us, we will go down and buy thee food. And if thou wilt not send,
we will not go down; for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my faces
except your brother be with you. "And the famine became grievous,"
signifies desolation from want of spiritual things; "in the land,"
signifies about the things that were of the church; "and it came to
pass," signifies what is new; "when they had finished the eating of the
produce," signifies when truths failed; "which they had brought from
Egypt," signifies which were from memory-knowledges; "and their father
said unto them," signifies perception from the things of the church; "Go
back, buy us a little food," signifies that in order to live they must
procure for themselves the good of spiritual truth; "and Judah spoke
unto him," signifies the good of the church; "saying, Protesting the man
did protest unto us," signifies that the spiritual derived from the
internal was averse to them; "saying, Ye shall not see my faces,"
signifies that there will be no compassion; "except your brother be with
you," signifies unless there is an intermediate for you; "if thou wilt
send our brother with us," signifies that if it is so done by the church
that adjunction shall take place, there must be an intermediate; "we
will go down and buy thee food," signifies that then the good of truth
will be procured there; "and if thou wilt not send him," signifies if
not; "we will not go down," signifies that it cannot be procured; "for
the man said unto us," signifies perception concerning the spiritual;
"Ye shall not see my faces," signifies that there will be no compassion;
"except your brother be with you," signifies unless there is an
intermediate for you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5576.">5576.</span></span>

And the famine became grievous. That this signifies desolation from the
want of spiritual things, is evident from the signification of "famine,"
as being a lack of the knowledges of good and truth (see n. 3364, 5277,
5279, 5281, 5300), and hence desolation (n. 5360, 5376, 5415); and
because desolation comes from a scarcity and consequent want of
spiritual things, this also is signified by "famine." \[2\] Hunger in
the spiritual world or in heaven is not hunger for food, because the
angels do not feed upon material food, which is for the body that man
carries about in the world; but it is hunger for such food as nourishes
their minds. This food, which is called spiritual food, is to understand
truth and be wise in good; and wonderful to say the angels are nourished
by this food; which has been made evident to me from the fact that after
little children who die have been instructed in heaven in the truths of
intelligence and the goods of wisdom, they no longer appear as little
children, but as adults, and this according to their increase in good
and truth; and also from the fact that the angels continually long for
the things of intelligence and wisdom, and that when they are in the
evening, that is, in a state in which these things fail, they are so far
in what is relatively not happiness, and they then hunger and long for
nothing more than that the morning may dawn for them afresh, and that
they may return into their life of happiness, which is of intelligence
and wisdom. \[3\] That to understand truth and to will good is spiritual
food, may also appear to everyone who reflects that when anyone is
enjoying material food for the nourishment of the body, his food is more
nourishing if he is at the same time in cheerful spirits and conversing
on agreeable topics, which is a sign that there is a correspondence
between spiritual food for the soul and material food for the body. And
the same is further evident from the fact that when one who longs to
imbue his mind with the things of knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom is
kept from them, he begins to be saddened and distressed, and like one
who is famished longs to return to his spiritual food, and thereby to
the nourishment of his soul. \[4\] That there is spiritual food which
nourishes the soul as material food nourishes the body may also be seen
from the Word, as in Moses: Man doth not live by bread only; but by
every utterance of the mouth of Jehovah doth man live (Deut. 8:3; Matt.
4:4). The "utterance of the mouth of Jehovah" is in general the Divine
truth which proceeds from the Lord, thus all truth of wisdom,
specifically the Word, in which and from which are the things of wisdom.
And in John: Labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat
which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give
unto you (John 6:27); that this meat is the truth of wisdom which
proceeds from the Lord is evident. \[5\] From this too it may be known
what is meant by these words of the Lord in the same chapter: My flesh
is meat indeed, and My blood is drink indeed (John 6:55); namely, that
the Lord's "flesh" is Divine good (n. 3813), and His "blood" Divine
truth (n. 4735); for when the Lord made His whole Human Divine, then His
flesh was nothing else than Divine good, and His blood Divine truth. It
is evident that in the Divine nothing material is to be understood; and
therefore "food" in the supreme sense, that is, when predicated of the
Lord, is the good of the Divine love for saving the human race. This
food is what is meant by the Lord's words in John: Jesus said to the
disciples, I have meat to eat that ye know not of. My meat is to do the
will of Him that sent Me, and to perfect His work (John 4:32, 34); "to
do the will of Him that sent Him, and to perfect His work" is to save
the human race; the Divine from which this is done is the Divine love.
From all this it is now plain what is meant in the spiritual sense by
"famine."

<span class="margnote"><span id="5577.">5577.</span></span>

In the land. That this signifies about the things that were of the
church, is evident from the signification of "land" in the Word, as
being the church, here therefore the things that are of the church,
because anything that signifies the church, signifies also the things
that are of the church; for these produce it. That in the Word "land"
signifies the church is because the land of Canaan was the place where
the church had been from most ancient times. So when "land" or "earth"
is mentioned in the Word, the land of Canaan is meant; and when this is
meant, the church is meant; for when a land is mentioned they who are in
the spiritual world do not stay in the idea of the land, but in that of
the nation which is there, nor in the idea of the nation, but in that of
the quality of that nation; thus in the idea of the church when "land"
is spoken of and the land of Canaan is meant. From this it is plain how
deluded are they who believe that at the day of the last judgment a new
earth and new heaven will come into existence, according to the
prophecies in the Old Testament, and in John in the New (where however
by the "new earth" nothing else is meant than a new external church, and
by the "new heaven" a new internal church), and also they who believe
that anything but the church is meant where the "whole earth" is
mentioned in the Word. Hence it is plain how little they apprehend the
Word who think there is no holier sense in it than that which shines
forth from the letter alone. That the church was in the land of Canaan
from the most ancient times may be seen above (n. 3686, 4447, 4454,
4516, 4517, 5136); that by "land" in the Word is signified the church
(n. 662, 1066, 1068, 1262, 1413, 1607, 2928, 4447); and that by the "new
heaven and new earth" is signified a new church internal and external
(n. 1733, 1850, 2117, 2118, 3355, 4535).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5578.">5578.</span></span>

And it came to pass. That this signifies what is new, is evident from
the signification of "it was," or "it came to pass," as involving a new
state (see n, 4979, 4987, 4999, 5074, 5466). In the original tongue the
meaning was not at first distinguished by punctuation, but the text was
continuous, in imitation of heavenly speech; and instead of punctuation
marks, "and" was used, and also "it was," or "it came to pass." This is
the reason why these words occur so often, and why "it was," or "it came
to pass," signifies something new.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5579.">5579.</span></span>

When they had finished the eating of the produce. That this signifies
when truths failed, is evident from the signification of "produce," as
being truth (see n. 5276, 5280, 5292, 5402); that truth failed is
signified by their "finishing the eating of it." Those who are in the
spiritual world are sated with things true and good, for these are their
food (n. 5576); but when these have served their purpose, they come
again into want. This is as with the nourishment of man by material food
when this has fulfilled its use, hunger comes on again. The hunger that
is a need of spiritual things, in the spiritual world is evening or the
twilight of their day; but after it comes daybreak and morning. Thus
there are alternations there. They come into that evening or into
spiritual hunger, in order that they may feel hungry and long for truths
and goods, which yield them more nourishment when they are hungry, just
as does material food to one who is famishing. From all this it is
evident what is meant by the need of spiritual things when truths
failed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5580.">5580.</span></span>

Which they had brought from Egypt. That this signifies which were from
memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification of "Egypt," as
being memory-knowledges (see n. 1164-1165, 1186, 1462), that they were
"from these," is signified by their "bringing it thence." By "Egypt" in
a good sense are signified the memory-knowledges of the church, namely,
those which are of service for the form of the church (see n. 4749,
4964, 4966). By means of such knowledges man is introduced into the
truths of the church as through a court into a house; for these
knowledges are what first strike the senses, and thereby open a way to
interior things; for it is known that the outward things of sense are
first opened in man, and then the inner things of sense, and at last the
things of the understanding; and that when these last have been opened,
they are represented in the former so as to be comprehended. The reason
is that things of the understanding arise from those of sense by a sort
of extraction, for things of the understanding are conclusions, which
when formed are separated, and rise to a higher plane. This is brought
about by the influx of spiritual things through heaven from the Lord.
From all this it is plain how it is that truths are from
memory-knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5581.">5581.</span></span>

And their father said unto them. That this signifies perception from the
things of the church, is evident from the signification of "saying" in
the historicals of the Word, as being perception (of which often above);
and from the representation of Israel, who here is the "father," as
being the church (that "Israel" is the internal spiritual church, and
"Jacob" the external, may be seen above, n. 4286, 4292, 4570). He is
called "father" because by "father" in the Word is also signified the
church, and likewise by "mother;" but by "mother" the church as to
truth, and by "father" the church as to good. The reason of this is that
the church is a spiritual marriage, which is from good as the father,
and from truth as a mother.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5582.">5582.</span></span>

Go back, buy us a little food. That this signifies that in order to live
they must procure for themselves the good of spiritual truth, is evident
from the signification of "buying," as being to procure for one's self
and to appropriate (see n. 4397, 5374, 5406, 5410, 5426); and from the
signification of "food," as being the good of truth (n. 5340, 5342),
here the good of spiritual truth, for it is this good that is treated of
in what follows. That it means in order to live, follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5583.">5583.</span></span>

And Judah spoke unto him. That this signifies the good of the church, is
evident from the representation of Judah, as being the good of the
church (see n. 3654). Judah's now speaking about Benjamin, and Reuben's
speaking about him before (in the preceding chapter, Genesis 42:36-37)
is a secret which cannot be unfolded except from the internal sense. And
so when Reuben spoke about Benjamin, Jacob was called "Jacob" (see
Genesis 42:36); while here when Judah speaks about him, Jacob is called
"Israel" (verses 6, 8, 11). That there is something involved in this no
one can deny; but what it is cannot be known from the historical sense
of the letter. So too in other places where Jacob is now called "Jacob"
and now "Israel" (n. 4286). The secret involved will of the Lord's
Divine mercy be told in the following pages. That Judah now speaks is
because the subject treated of is the good of spiritual truth, that it
is to be procured (n. 5582); and therefore Judah, who is the good of the
church, speaks with Israel, who is the good of spiritual truth, and
makes himself answerable for Benjamin, who is the intermediate; for the
intermediate must be conjoined by means of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5584.">5584.</span></span>

Saying, Protesting the man did protest unto us. That this signifies that
the spiritual from the internal was averse to them, is evident from the
signification of "protesting to protest," as being to be averse; for he
protested that they should not see his faces unless their brother were
with them; such protesting is of aversion, for by not seeing his faces
is signified that there will be no compassion (of which in what
presently follows); and from the representation of Joseph, as being the
Divine spiritual, or what is the same, truth from the Divine (n. 3969),
who here, being called "the man," is the spiritual, or truth flowing in
from the internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5585.">5585.</span></span>

Saying, Ye shall not see my faces. That this signifies that there will
be no compassion, is evident from the signification of "faces" when
predicated of man, as being his interiors, that is, his affections and
derivative thoughts (see n. 358, 1999, 2434, 3527, 3573, 4066, 4796,
4797, 5102); but when predicated of the Lord, they denote mercy or
compassion. Therefore "not to see his faces" means that there will be no
mercy, or no compassion; for in the supreme sense the Lord is here
represented by Joseph. Not that the Lord has no compassion, for He is
mercy itself; but when there is no intermediate that conjoins, it
appears to the man as if there were no compassion in the Lord. The
reason is that if there is not a conjoining intermediate, there is no
reception of good, and when there is no reception of good; there is evil
in its stead. If the man then cries to the Lord, and because he cries
from evil and thus for himself against all others, is not heard, it
appears to him as if there were no compassion. That the "faces" of
Jehovah or the Lord denote mercy, is evident from the Word; for the
"face" of Jehovah or the Lord in the proper sense denotes the Divine
love itself; and because it denotes the Divine love, it denotes what is
of mercy, for this from love is shown toward the human race steeped in
miseries so great. \[2\] That the "face" of Jehovah or the Lord is the
Divine love, is evident from the face of the Lord when He was
transfigured before Peter, James, and John, that is, when He showed them
His Divine; for then His face did shine as the sun (Matt. 17:2); that
the "sun" is the Divine love may be seen shown above (n. 30-38, 1521,
1529-1531, 2441, 2495, 3636, 3643, 4060, 4321, 4696). The Lord's Divine
Itself never appeared in any face, but His Divine Human, and through
this as in it the Divine love, or relatively to the human race, the
Divine mercy. This Divine mercy in the Divine Human is called the "angel
of faces," in Isaiah: I will make mention of the mercies of Jehovah. He
will recompense them according to His mercies, and according to the
multitude of His mercies, and He became for them a Saviour. And the
angel of His faces saved them, for the sake of His love, and for the
sake of His pity (Isa. 63:7-9); it is called an "angel" because "angels"
in the internal sense of the word signify something of the Lord (n.
1925, 2821, 4085), here His mercy and therefore it is said "the angel of
His faces." \[3\] That the "face" of Jehovah or the Lord is mercy, and
also peace and good, because these are of mercy, may likewise be seen
from the following passages. In the benediction: Jehovah make His faces
to shine upon thee, and be merciful unto thee. Jehovah lift up His faces
unto thee, and give thee peace (Num. 6:25-26); it is very evident that
"to make the faces to shine" is to be merciful, and "to lift up the
faces" is to give peace. In David: God be merciful unto us, and bless
us, and cause His faces to shine upon us (Ps. 67:2); the "faces" here
again denote mercy. In the same: Bring us back, O God, and cause Thy
faces to shine, that we may be saved (Ps. 80:3, 7, 19); with a similar
meaning. Again: Deliver me from the hands of mine enemies, and from them
that persecute me. Make Thy faces to shine upon Thy servant (Ps. 31:15,
16; so too Ps. 119:134-135). In Daniel: Hear, O our God, the praying of
Thy servant, and his prayers, and cause Thy faces to shine upon Thy
sanctuary that is desolate (Dan. 9:17); "causing the faces to shine"
denoting to be merciful. \[4\] In David: There are many that say, Who
will make us see good? Lift up the light of Thy faces upon us (Ps. 4:6,
7); "lifting up the light of the faces" denotes to give good from mercy.
In Hosea: Let them seek My faces when distress is theirs; in the morning
let them seek Me (Hos. 5:15). Again in David: Seek ye My faces; Thy
faces, Jehovah, will I seek (Ps. 27:8-9). Seek Jehovah and His strength;
seek His faces continually (Ps. 105:4); "to seek the faces of Jehovah"
denotes to seek His mercy. Again: I shall see Thy faces in righteousness
(Ps. 17:15); and in Matthew: See that ye despise not one of these little
ones; for I say unto you that their angels in the heavens do always
behold the face of My Father who is in the heavens (Matt. 18:10); "to
behold the face of God" denotes to enjoy peace and good from mercy.
\[5\] But the opposite is "to conceal," or "hide," and also "to turn
away the faces" which signifies not to be merciful; as in Isaiah: In the
overflowing of My anger I hid My faces from thee for a moment; but with
mercy of eternity will I have mercy on thee (Isa. 54:8); where the
"overflowing of anger" denotes temptation, and because the Lord appears
not to be merciful therein, it is said "I hid My faces from thee for a
moment." In Ezekiel: I will turn away My faces from them (Ezek. 7:22).
In David: How long wilt Thou forget me, O Jehovah? to eternity? How long
wilt Thou hide Thy faces from me? (Ps. 13:1.) In the same: Hide not Thy
faces from me; put not Thy servant away in anger (Ps. 27:9). Again:
Wherefore Jehovah dost Thou forsake my soul? why hidest Thou Thy faces
from me? (Ps. 88:14.) And again: Make haste, answer me, O Jehovah; my
spirit is consumed. Hide not Thy faces from me, lest I become like them
that go down into the pit. Cause me to hear Thy mercy in the morning
(Ps. 143:7-8). And in Moses: My anger shall wax hot against this people
in that day, so that I will forsake them; and I will hide My faces from
them, whence it will be for consuming; I will surely hide My faces in
that day for all the evil which they have done (Deut. 31:17-18); \[6\]
"the anger waxing hot" denotes a turning away (n. 5034); and "hiding the
faces" denotes not being merciful. These things are predicated of
Jehovah or the Lord, although He is never angry, and never turns away or
hides His faces; but it is so said from the appearance with the man who
is in evil; for the man who is in evil turns himself away, and hides
from himself the Lord's faces, that is, removes His mercy from himself.
That it is the evils in man that do this, may also be seen from the
Word, as in Micah: Jehovah will hide His faces from them at that time,
according as they have rendered their works evil (Micah 3:4). In
Ezekiel: Because they trespassed against Me, therefore I hid My faces
from them. According to their uncleanness and according to their
transgressions did I with them; and I hid My faces from them (Ezek.
39:23-24). And especially in Isaiah: It is your iniquities that separate
between you and your God, and your sins do hide His faces from you (Isa.
59:2). From these and many other passages the internal sense is plain,
which here and there stands forth, and is found by him who seeks it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5586.">5586.</span></span>

Except your brother be with you. That this signifies unless there is an
intermediate for you, is evident from the representation of Benjamin, as
being an intermediate (see n. 5411, 5413, 5443). The intermediate which
Benjamin represents is the intermediate between the internal and the
external, or between the spiritual and the natural man, and is the truth
of good which proceeds from the truth from the Divine which is
represented by Joseph. This truth of good is called the spiritual of the
celestial, and that this is "Benjamin" may be seen above (n. 3969,
4592). Man's internal and external are most distinct from each other,
for his internal is in the light of heaven, and his external in the
light of the world; and because they are most distinct, they cannot be
conjoined except by means of an intermediate that partakes of both.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5587.">5587.</span></span>

If thou wilt send our brother with us. That this signifies that if it is
so done by the church that adjunction shall take place, there must be an
intermediate, is evident from the representation of Israel, who was to
send, as being the church (see n. 4286), and hence "if thou wilt send"
denotes if it is so done by the church; and from the representation of
Benjamin, who here is their "brother," as being an intermediate (of
which just above, n. 5586). From this it is plain that by "if thou wilt
send our brother with us" is signified that if it is so done by the
church that its external be adjoined to its internal, there must be an
intermediate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5588.">5588.</span></span>

We will go down and buy thee food. That this signifies that then the
good of truth will be procured, is evident from the signification of
"buying," as being to procure and appropriate, and from the
signification of "food," as being the good of truth (as may be seen
above, n. 5582).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5589.">5589.</span></span>

But if thou wilt not send him. That this signifies if not, that is, if
it be not of the church that adjunction shall take place, is plain from
what was said just above (n. 5587).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5590.">5590.</span></span>

We will not go down. That this signifies that it cannot be procured, is
evident from what was said just above (n. 5588).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5591.">5591.</span></span>

For the man said unto us. That this signifies perception concerning the
spiritual, is evident from the signification of the "man," as being the
spiritual from the internal (of which above, n. 5584); and from the
signification of "saying" in the historicals of the Word, as being
perception (of which often above).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5592.">5592.</span></span>

Ye shall not see my faces. That this signifies that there will be no
compassion, is evident from what was unfolded above (n. 5585), where the
same words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5593.">5593.</span></span>

Except your brother be with you. That this signifies unless there is an
intermediate for you, is evident from what was said above in regard to
Benjamin, who is here the "brother," that he is an intermediate (n.
5586, 5587).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5594.">5594.</span></span>

Verses 6-10. And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye ill with me, to tell
the man whether ye had yet a brother? And they said, Asking the man
asked unto us, and unto our birth, saying is your father yet alive? Have
ye a brother? And we told him according to the mouth of these words.
Knowing could we know that he would say, Bring your brother down? And
Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the boy with me, and we will
arise and go; and we will live, and not die, both we and thou, and also
our little ones. I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require
him; if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, and I shall
sin to thee all the days; for except we had lingered, surely we had now
returned these two times. "And Israel said," signifies perception from
spiritual good; "Wherefore dealt ye ill with me to tell the man whether
ye had yet a brother?" signifies that they separated from them the truth
of good, to conjoin it with the spiritual from the internal; "and they
said, Asking the man asked unto us," signifies that it clearly perceived
the things in the natural; "and unto our birth," signifies concerning
the truths of faith there; "saying, is your father yet alive?" signifies
and concerning the spiritual good from which they were; "have ye a
brother?" signifies concerning interior truth; "and we told him
according to the mouth of these words," signifies that he perceived them
conformably; "knowing could we know that he would say, Bring your
brother down?" signifies that we did not believe that he wished the
truth of good to be conjoined with him; "and Judah said unto Israel his
father," signifies perception from the good of the church concerning
those things; "Send the boy with me," signifies that he should be
adjoined to him; "and we will arise and go; and we will live, and not
die," signifies spiritual life according to degrees; "both we,"
signifies the external of the church; "and thou," signifies its
internal; "and also our little ones," signifies the things which are
still more interior; "I will be surety for him," signifies that in the
meantime it will be adjoined to itself; "of my hand shalt thou require
him," signifies that it shall not be torn away insofar as lies in its
power; "if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee,"
signifies unless he is quite restored to the church; "and I shall sin to
thee all the days," signifies that the good of the church will no longer
be; "for except we had lingered," signifies tarrying in a state of
doubt; "surely we had now returned these two times," signifies that
there would have been spiritual life both exterior and interior.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5595.">5595.</span></span>

And Israel said. That this signifies perception from spiritual good, is
evident from the signification of "saying," as being to perceive (of
which above); and from the representation of Israel, as being spiritual
good (see n. 3654, 4598); and because Israel is spiritual good, he is
also the internal spiritual church (n. 3305, 4286), for this church is a
church from spiritual good. Spiritual good is truth that has become
good; for truth becomes good when the man lives according to it, for it
then passes into the will, and from the will into act, and becomes of
the life; and when it becomes of the life it is no longer called truth
but good. But the will which transforms truth into good is the new will
in the intellectual part; it is this good that is called spiritual good.
Spiritual good is distinguished from celestial good in that celestial
good is implanted in man's will part itself; but this subject has often
been treated of before. \[2\] That Jacob is not now called "Jacob," as
in the previous chapter (Genesis 42:36), but "Israel," is because good
is the subject treated of in this chapter, and truth in the preceding;
wherefore in that chapter Reuben was the one to speak, by whom is
represented the truth of doctrine of the church (see n. 3861, 3866,
4731, 4734, 4761, 5542), while in this chapter it is Judah who speaks,
by whom is represented the good of the church (n. 3654, 5583). That good
is now treated of is because this time the conjunction between the
internal, which is Joseph, and the external, which is the ten sons of
Jacob, is effected by means of the intermediate which is Benjamin; and
the conjunction of the internal with the external is effected by means
of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5596.">5596.</span></span>

Wherefore dealt ye ill with me, to tell the man whether ye had yet a
brother? That this signifies that they separated from them. the truth of
good, to conjoin it with the spiritual from the internal, is evident
from the signification of "dealing ill," as being to separate, for it is
their separating Benjamin from him that he calls "dealing ill;" and from
the signification of "telling," as being to give something for another
to think and reflect upon (n. 2862, 5508), consequently to communicate
(see n. 4856), thus also to conjoin; for when anything passes into the
will of another, conjunction is effected by what is communicated, as
when Joseph heard that Benjamin was still living and with his father, he
wanted him to come to him, and then to be alone with him, conjoined with
him, as is plain from the historicals that follow; and from the
representation of Joseph, as being the Divine spiritual, and as being,
when called "the man," the spiritual from the internal (n. 5584); and
from the representation of Benjamin, who is here their brother of whom
they told, as being the truth of good (n. 5586). From all this it is
plain that by "Wherefore dealt ye ill with me to tell the man whether ye
had yet a brother?" is signified that they separated from them the truth
of good, to conjoin it with the spiritual from the internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5597.">5597.</span></span>

And they said, Asking the man asked unto us. That this signifies that it
clearly perceived the things in the natural, is evident from the
signification of "asking," as being to perceive another's thought (of
which in what follows); and from the representation of the ten sons of
Jacob, who are here meant by "us," as being the things of the church
which are in the natural (see n. 5403, 5419, 5427, 5458, 5512). That by
"asking" is meant perceiving another's thought, is because in heaven
there is a communication of all thoughts, so that no one has need to ask
another what he is thinking. Hence it is that "asking" signifies
perceiving another's thought; for in the internal sense the quality of a
thing on earth is its quality in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5598.">5598.</span></span>

And unto our birth. That this signifies concerning the truths of faith
there, is evident from the signification of "birth," as being the birth
of truth from good, or of faith from charity (see n. 1145, 1255, 4070,
4668). That "birth" in the internal sense denotes this is because in
heaven no other birth is understood than that which is called
regeneration, which is effected by means of the truth of faith and the
good of charity. By this birth, from being sons of man men become sons
of the Lord; these are they who are said to be "born of God" (John
1:13). According to the varieties of good from truth and of truth from
good in this birth are the brotherhoods or relationships by blood and by
marriage in heaven; for in heaven there are perpetual varieties, but the
varieties are so disposed by the Lord as to represent families in which
are brothers, sisters, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, grandsons,
granddaughters, and so on. In general, however, all are disposed in such
a form that together they make a one, as is the case with the varieties
in the human body, where no member is exactly like another, nor indeed
any part in one member the same as another part, and yet all the various
parts are disposed in such a form that they act as a one, and each
concurs intimately or remotely with the action of every other. Such
being the form in man, it may be inferred what the form in heaven must
be, with which all the things in man have correspondence-that it must be
most perfect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5599.">5599.</span></span>

Saying, Is your father yet alive? That this signifies and concerning the
spiritual good from which they were, is evident from the representation
of Israel, who is the "father" here, as being spiritual good (see n.
3654, 4598, 5595). It is said "from which they were" because from this
good, as from a father, the truths of faith come down (n. 5598).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5600.">5600.</span></span>

Have ye a brother? That this signifies concerning interior truth, is
evident from the representation of Benjamin, as being the spiritual of
the celestial, or what is the same, the truth of good, or interior
truth. (That "Benjamin" is truth in which is good, or the spiritual of
the celestial, may be seen above, n. 3969, 4592.) This interior truth is
the intermediate between truth from the Divine and truth in the natural.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[5573-1](ac112.htm#fr_135) pistachio

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5601-5650](ac113)
