[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac124)  [Next](ac126.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="6201.">6201.</span></span>

The thought appeared in this way among the spirits when I was a little
withdrawn from the things of sense. But when the thought was in the
things of sense, no such undulating sphere appeared; but it was all
material, and not unlike external sight. In this case the man is said to
think in the sensuous. But when he thinks interiorly, he is said to be
withdrawn from the things of sense. That man can be withdrawn from
things of sense was known to the ancients, and therefore also some of
them have written about this state. They who think in things of sense
are called sensuous, and the like spirits are adjoined to them. Such
spirits scarcely apprehend more things with a man than those which come
down to his sensation; for they are more gross than all other spirits.
It has been observed that when a man is in what is sensuous, and is not
elevated therefrom, he thinks of nothing else than what is of the body
and of the world, and is not then desirous to know anything about what
belongs to eternal life, and is even averse to hearing of that life.
\[2\] That I might know that this is the case, I have sometimes been let
down into what is sensuous, and then such things instantly presented
themselves, and then also the spirits who were in that grosser sphere
poured in base and scandalous things; but as soon as I was withdrawn
from what is sensuous, such things were dissipated. In sensuous life are
many who indulge in the pleasures of the body, and also those who have
altogether rejected thought beyond what they see and hear, and
especially those who have rejected thought about eternal life. Wherefore
such persons make light of all such things; and when they hear of them,
they loathe them. Spirits of this kind abound in the other life at the
present day, for troops of them come from the world; and the influx from
them prompts man to indulge his natural inclination, and to live for
himself and the world, but not for others except insofar as they favor
him and his pleasures. In order for a man to be uplifted from these
spirits, he must think about eternal life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6202.">6202.</span></span>

Another influx has also been observed, which is not effected through the
spirits who are with the man, but through others who are sent forth from
some infernal society into the sphere of the man's life. These speak
together about such things as are adverse to the man, from which there
usually flows in what is troublesome, undelightful, sad, or anxious,
with much variety. Such spirits have often been with me, and they who
infused anxieties were felt in the province of the stomach, without my
knowing whence these anxieties came. But they were always detected, and
I then heard what they said among themselves, which were such things as
were adverse to my affections. The avaricious have sometimes appeared in
the same region, but a little higher, and infused anxiety from care for
the future; and it was given me to chide them and tell them that they
have relation to such things in the stomach as are undigested, have a
bad smell, and thus are nauseous. I have also seen that they were driven
away, and that then the anxiety entirely ceased, and this repeatedly,
that I might know of a certainty that it came from them. Such is the
influx with those who for no reason are oppressed with melancholy
anxiety, and likewise with those who are in spiritual temptation. But in
this latter case such spirits not only inflow in general, but also
infernal spirits in particular call up the evils which the man has done,
and pervert and put a wrong interpretation upon the goods. With these
the angels then engage in combat. Into such a state comes a man who is
being regenerated, whereby he is let down into his own; and this takes
place when he immerses himself too much in worldly and bodily things,
and when he is to be elevated to spiritual things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6203.">6203.</span></span>

In regard to the origin of the influx of evil from hell, the case is
this. When a man first from consent, then from purpose, and at last from
the delight of affection, casts himself into evil, then a hell is opened
which is in such evil (for the hells are distinct from one another
according to evils and all their varieties), and there afterward takes
place an influx from that hell. When a man comes into evil in this way,
it clings to him, for the hell in the sphere of which he then is, is in
its very delight when in its evil; and therefore it does not desist, but
obstinately presses in, and causes the man to think about that evil, at
first occasionally, and afterward as often as anything presents itself
which is related to it, and at last it becomes with him that which
reigns universally. And when this takes place, he then seeks for such
things as confirm that it is not an evil, and this until he wholly
persuades himself; and then, insofar as he can, he studies to remove
external bonds, and makes evils allowable and clever, and at last even
becoming and honorable-such as adulteries, thefts effected by art and
deceit, various kinds of arrogance and boasting, contempt for others,
vituperations, persecutions under an appearance of justice, and the
like. The case with these evils is like that with downright thefts,
which when committed of set purpose two or three times, cannot be
desisted from; for they continually cling to the man's thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6204.">6204.</span></span>

Be it known further that the evil which enters into the thought does no
harm to the man, because evil is continually infused by spirits from
hell, and is continually repelled by angels. But when evil enters into
the will, then it does harm, for then it also goes forth into act
whenever external bonds do not restrain. Evil enters into the will by
being kept in the thought, by consent, especially by act and the
consequent delight.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6205.">6205.</span></span>

I have often noticed that evil spirits put on especially man's
persuasions and cupidities, and that when they put them on they rule the
man despotically; for he who introduces himself into a man's cupidities,
and into his persuasions, subjects the man to himself, and makes him his
servant; whereas influx through angels takes place in accordance with
the man's affections, which they gently lead and bend to good, and do
not break, the very influx being tacit and scarcely perceptible, for it
flows into the interiors, and continually acts by means of freedom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6206.">6206.</span></span>

Be it further known that all evil flows in from hell, and all good
through heaven from the Lord. But the reason why evil is appropriated to
a man is that he believes and persuades himself that he thinks and does
it from himself, and in this way makes it his own. If he believed as is
really the case, then evil would not be appropriated to him, but good
from the Lord would be appropriated to him; for the moment that evil
flowed in, he would reflect that it was from the evil spirits with him,
and as soon as he thought this, the angels would avert and reject it.
For the influx of the angels is into what a man knows and believes, but
not into what a man does not know and does not believe; for their influx
is not fixed anywhere except where there is something appertaining to
the man. \[2\] When a man appropriates evil to himself in this way, he
gets for himself a sphere of that evil, which sphere is that to which
those spirits from hell adjoin themselves who are in the sphere of a
like evil; for like is conjoined with like. The spiritual sphere with a
man or a spirit is an exhalation flowing forth from the life of his
loves, from which his quality is known at a distance. All in the other
life are conjoined together in accordance with the spheres, and so also
are the societies one with another; and according to their spheres they
are also dissociated, for opposite spheres come into collision, and
mutually repel each other. Therefore the spheres of the loves of evil
are all in hell, and the spheres of the loves of good are all in heaven;
that is, they who are in these spheres.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6207.">6207.</span></span>

The influx of the angels is especially into the conscience of man: there
is the plane into which they operate. This plane is in the interiors of
man. Conscience is twofold, interior and exterior. Interior conscience
is of spiritual good and truth; exterior conscience is of justice and
equity. At the present day this latter conscience exists with many; but
interior conscience with few. Nevertheless they who enjoy exterior
conscience are saved in the other life; for they are of such a character
that if they act contrary to what is good and true, or contrary to what
is just and equitable, they are inwardly distressed and tormented; not
because by so doing they suffer loss of honor, of gain, or of
reputation; but because they have acted contrary to good and truth, or
to justice and equity. But where these consciences do not exist, there
is something else of a very low nature which sometimes counterfeits
conscience, and which leads men to do what is true and good, and what is
just and equitable, not from the love of these, but for the sake of self
and their own honor and advantage. These persons also are distressed and
tormented when adverse things befall them. But this conscience is no
conscience, because it belongs to the love of self and of the world, and
there is nothing in it which regards the love of God and of the
neighbor; and therefore in the other life it does not show itself. Men
of this description can also perform duties of considerable eminence,
like those who enjoy genuine conscience; for in the external form they
act in a similar way; but for the sake of their own honor and
reputation; and therefore the more they fear the loss of these, the
better do they perform public duties in favor of their neighbor and of
their country; whereas those who do not fear the loss of these things
are members of the commonwealth who are worthy only of rejection. They
who are in this false conscience do not even know what conscience is,
and when they are told by others what it is, they deride it and believe
it to be the result of simplicity or of mental disorder. These things
have been said in order that it may be known how the case is with
influx, namely, that conscience is the plane into which the angels flow,
and indeed into the affections of good and truth, and of justice and
equity therein; and that in this way they hold the man bound, yet still
in freedom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6208.">6208.</span></span>

There are many who enjoy an hereditary natural good, by virtue of which
they feel delight in doing well to others, but who have not been imbued
with principles of doing what is good, either from the Word, the
doctrine of the church, or from their religiosity. Thus they could not
be endowed with any conscience, for conscience does not come from
natural or hereditary good, but from the doctrine of truth and good and
a life in accordance therewith. When such persons come into the other
life, they marvel that they are not received into heaven, saying that
they have led a good life. But they are told that a good life from what
is natural or hereditary is not a good life, but that a good life is
from those things which belong to the doctrine of good and truth and the
consequent life; for by means of these, men have principles impressed on
them that concern what is true and good, and they receive conscience,
which is the plane into which heaven flows. In order that such persons
may know that this is the case, they are sent into various societies,
and they then suffer themselves to be led astray into evils of every
kind, by mere reasonings and the derivative persuasions that evils are
goods and goods evils, and in this way they are persuaded in every
direction, and are carried away like chaff before the wind; for they are
devoid of principles, and also of a plane into which the angels may
operate and withdraw them from evils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6209.">6209.</span></span>

The influx of the angels with a man is not noticed as is the influx of
spirits, for that which inflows from the angels is not material, but is
spiritual, and all appears like a stream of air (fluviatile aereum);
from the interior angels, like a luminous one; and from the still more
interior angels, like a flaming one. Of the Lord's Divine mercy more
shall be said about this at the end of the following chapters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6210.">6210.</span></span>

It has sometimes happened that I was earnestly thinking about worldly
things, and about such things as give great concern to most persons,
namely, about possessions, the acquirement of riches, about pleasures,
and the like. At these times I noticed that I was sinking down into what
is sensuous and that in proportion as my thought was immersed in such
things, I was removed from the company of the angels. By this it was
also made plain to me that they who are deeply immersed in such cares
cannot have interaction with those who are in the other life. For when
such thoughts possess the whole of the mind, they carry the lower mind
downward, and are like weights which drag it down; and when they are
regarded as the end, they remove the man from heaven, to which he cannot
be elevated except by means of the good of love and of faith. This was
made still more manifest to me from the fact that once when I was led
through the abodes of heaven, and was at the time in a spiritual idea,
it happened that I suddenly began to sink into thought about worldly
things, and then all that spiritual idea was dissipated and became as
naught.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6211.">6211.</span></span>

I have sometimes wondered why speech and action are not directed by
means of particular spirits, as are thought and will; but I was
instructed that speech follows from thought, and action from will, and
that this flows from order, thus by means of general influx.
Nevertheless spirits are allotted to each member of speech, and to each
member of action; but these spirits are not aware of it. General influx
is a continuous endeavor from the Lord through the universal heaven into
everything pertaining to the life of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6212.">6212.</span></span>

It is known from the Word that there was an influx from the world of
spirits and from heaven into the prophets, partly by dreams, partly by
visions, and partly by speech; and also with some into the very speech
and into the very gestures, thus into the things that belong to the
body; and that at the time they did not speak from themselves, nor act
from themselves, but from the spirits who were then in possession of
their bodies. At such times some of them behaved like insane persons, as
did Saul when he lay naked; others when they wounded themselves; others
when they put horns on themselves, and others in similar ways. \[2\] And
as I longed to know in what manner these men were actuated by spirits, I
was shown by means of a living experience. To this end I was for a whole
night possessed by spirits, who so took possession of my bodily things
that I had only a very obscure sensation that it was my own body. When
these spirits came, they appeared like little clouds heaped together
into various forms, for the most part pointed; the little clouds were
black. In the morning I saw a chariot with a pair of horses, in which a
man was being conveyed. Afterward I saw a horse on which someone was
sitting, who was thrown off from the horse backward, and there lay while
the horse was kicking. Afterward another was seen seated on a horse.
They were noble horses. \[3\] After these things were seen, the angels
told me what they signified, namely, that the chariot in which the man
was, signified the spiritual sense that was in the prophetical things
that were uttered, and which these represented; that the horse which
threw his rider and kicked, signified the Jewish and Israelitish people
with whom were these things, that people being solely in externals, and
therefore the intellectual rejected them, and as it were by kicking put
them away; and that the other sitting on the horse signified the
intellectual with those who are in the internal sense of the prophetic
Word. \[4\] From this state, in which I was during the night until
morning, I was instructed how the prophets, through whom spirits spake
and acted, were possessed; namely, that the spirits had possession of
their bodies, insomuch that scarcely anything was left except that they
knew that they existed. There were certain spirits appointed to this
use, who did not desire to obsess men, but merely to enter into the
man's bodily affections; and when they entered into these, they entered
into all things of the body. The spirits who were usually with me said
that I was absent from them while I remained in this state. \[5\] The
spirits who possessed my body, as formerly the bodies of the prophets,
afterward talked with me, and said that at the time they knew no
otherwise than that they had life as when in the body, besides saying
much more. I was told further that there were also other influxes with
the prophets, to enable them to be at their own disposal, and to use
their own thought, only that spirits spake with them, for the most part
at that time within them; but that this influx was not into the thought
and the will, but was merely a discourse that came to their hearing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6213.">6213.</span></span>

That hell through its spirits continually injects evil and falsity, and
that these spirits pervert and extinguish truths and goods, and that the
Lord through the angels continually averts, removes, mitigates, and
moderates these efforts, has been made so familiar to me by the almost
continual experience of many years, that I cannot even think of any
doubt. But in order that the angels may be able to avert the influxes
from hell, there must be in the man truths of faith joined to good of
life into which they may flow. These must be the plane into which they
may operate. But if a man have no such things, he is carried away by
hell, and then the Lord through angels rules him as to externals, which
are called external bonds, which belong to the man's own prudence, in
order that he may appear in external form as a lover of his neighbor and
his country; but only for the sake of his own honor, of his own
advantage, of reputation for the sake of these, of the fear of the
penalties of the law, and also of death. These are the external bonds by
which a man is ruled, when there are no internal bonds which are of
conscience. But these external bonds are of no avail in the other life,
for they are taken away from the man, and when they are taken away he
appears such as he had been inwardly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6214.">6214.</span></span>

How difficult it is for man to believe that spirits know his thoughts,
was made evident to me by the following circumstance. Before I spoke
with spirits it happened that a certain spirit said a few words to me
about that of which I was thinking. It amazed me that a spirit should
know this; because I supposed that such things were hidden, and known
only to God. Afterward, when I began to speak with spirits, I was
indignant that I could not think anything that they did not know, and
because this would be troublesome to me. But after I had been accustomed
to it for a few days it became familiar to me. At last I found that
spirits not only perceive all things of man's thought and will, but also
many more things than the man himself perceives; and that the angels
perceive still more, namely the intentions and ends, from the first
through the middle to the last; and that the Lord knows not only the
quality of the whole man, but also what his quality will be to eternity.
From this it is evident that nothing whatever is hidden; but that what a
man inwardly thinks and plots is in the other life made manifest as in
clear day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6215.">6215.</span></span>

A continuation about influx and the interaction of the soul and the body
will be found at the end of the following chapter. Genesis 48 1. And it
came to pass after these words, that one said unto Joseph, Behold thy
father is sick; and he took his two sons with him, Manasseh and Ephraim.
2. And one told Jacob, and said, Behold thy son Joseph cometh unto thee;
and Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed. 3. And Jacob said
unto Joseph, God Shaddai appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan,
and blessed me, 4. And He said unto me, Behold I will make thee
fruitful, and will cause thee to be multiplied, and will make of thee a
company of peoples; and I will give this land to thy seed after thee for
an eternal possession. 5. And now thy two sons, who were born to thee in
the land of Egypt, before I came unto thee into Egypt, they are mine;
Ephraim and Manasseh, as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine. 6. And
thy generation, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine; upon
the name of their brethren they shall be called in their inheritance. 7.
And I, in my coming from Paddan, Rachel died upon me in the land of
Canaan, in the way, when there was still a tract of land to come unto
Ephrath; and I buried her there in the way to Ephrath, the same is
Bethlehem. 8. And Israel saw the sons of Joseph, and said, Whose are
these? 9. And Joseph said unto his father, These are my sons, whom God
hath given me here. And he said, Take them I pray unto me, and I will
bless them. 10. And the eyes of Israel were heavy with old age; he could
not see. And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them and
embraced them. 11. And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see
thy faces; and lo God hath made me see thy seed also. 12. And Joseph
brought them away from his thighs; and he bowed himself with his face to
the earth. 13. And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand on
Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand on Israel's right
hand, and brought them near unto him. 14. And Israel put forth his right
hand, and put it upon Ephraim's head, and he was the younger, and his
left hand upon Manasseh's head, he put forth his hands crosswise; for
Manasseh was the firstborn. 15. And he blessed Joseph, and said, The God
before whom my fathers walked, Abraham and Isaac, the God who feedeth me
since I am unto this day, 16. The Angel who redeemeth me from all evil,
bless the boys; and let my name be called in them, and the name of my
fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow unto a multitude in the
midst of the earth. 17. And Joseph saw that his father put his right
hand upon the head of Ephraim, and it was evil in his eyes; and he laid
hold of the hand of his father to remove it from upon Ephraim's head
upon Manasseh's head. 18. And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my
father; for this is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head. 19.
And his father refused, and said, I know, my son, I know; he also shall
be for a people, and he also shall become great; and nevertheless his
younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall be the
fullness of the nations. 20. And he blessed them in this day, saying, In
thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as
Manasseh; and he set Ephraim before Manasseh. 21. And Israel said unto
Joseph, Behold, I die; and God shall be with you, and shall bring you
back unto the land of your fathers. 22. And I give thee one portion
above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my
sword and with my bow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6216.">6216.</span></span>

The Contents In this chapter the subject treated of in the internal
sense is the intellectual of the church, which is from truth, and its
will, which is from good. The intellectual of the church is "Ephraim,"
and the will of the church is "Manasseh."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6217.">6217.</span></span>

That in the church the truth of faith which is of the intellectual is
apparently in the first place, and the good of charity which is of the
will is apparently in the second, is signified by Israel's putting his
right hand upon the head of Ephraim, and his left upon the head of
Manasseh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6218.">6218.</span></span>

The Internal Sense Verses 1, 2. And it came to pass after these words,
that one said unto Joseph, Behold thy father is sick; and he took his
two sons with him, Manasseh and Ephraim. And one told Jacob, and said,
Behold thy son Joseph cometh unto thee; and Israel strengthened himself,
and sat upon the bed. "And it came to pass after these words," signifies
what follows from what has gone before; "that one said unto Joseph,"
signifies an eminent perception; "Behold thy father is sick," signifies
what is successive of regeneration; "and he took his two sons with him,
Manasseh and Ephraim," signifies the will of the church and the
intellectual of the church born from the internal; "and one told Jacob,"
signifies a perception from the truth of the natural; "and said, Behold
thy son Joseph cometh unto thee," signifies concerning the presence of
the internal; "and Israel strengthened himself," signifies new forces
through spiritual good; "and sat upon the bed," signifies that this was
turned to the natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6219.">6219.</span></span>

And it came to pass after these words. That this signifies what follows
from what has gone before, is evident from the signification of "words,"
as being things (as already shown); thus "after these words" denotes
what follows from what has gone before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6220.">6220.</span></span>

That one said unto Joseph. That this signifies an eminent perception, is
evident from the signification of "saying," as being perception (see n.
1791, 1815, 1819, 1822, 1898, 1919, 2080, 2619, 2862, 3509, 5687); that
it is an eminent perception is because the subject treated of in what
follows is the intellectual and the will of the church, thus its truth
and good, and this from influx through the internal celestial, which is
"Joseph."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6221.">6221.</span></span>

Behold thy father is sick. That this signifies what is successive of
regeneration, is evident from the signification of "dying," as being
resurrection into life, and regeneration (see n. 3326, 3498, 3505, 4618,
4621, 6036); hence "to be sick," which precedes, denotes what is
progressive toward regeneration, thus what is successive of
regeneration. That "dying" denotes regeneration, and "being sick" what
is successive of regeneration, cannot but appear too remote to be
believed; but he who knows anything about angelic thought and speech
will acknowledge that it is so. The angels know nothing of death, nor of
sickness, and therefore have no idea of them, but in their place, when
man reads of them, they have the idea of the continuation of life and of
resurrection; and this because when man dies, he puts off only that
which had served him for use in the world, and enters into the life in
which he had been with his spirit. This is the idea that presents itself
to the angels when "dying" and "being sick" are read of, and likewise
the idea of regeneration, because this is resurrection into life; for
before this the man had been spiritually dead; but when he has been
regenerated he becomes alive and a son of the resurrection. If when he
lives in the body, the man himself longs for heaven, he thinks no
otherwise of death and the sickness which precedes it than as being
resurrection into life; for when he thinks about heaven, he withdraws
himself from the idea of the body, especially when he is sick and comes
near to death. From this it is plain that the spiritual idea of the
death of the body is that of newness of life; therefore when the subject
of resurrection or regeneration is considered in heaven, and this idea
flows down and is determined into such things as are of the world, it
falls only into such as these. Thus is it with the Word, which as to
each and all things has descended from the Lord and passed through
heaven down into the world; in the descent it has clothed itself with
forms adapted to apprehension in the three heavens, and at last with a
form adapted to the apprehension of man, which is the literal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6222.">6222.</span></span>

And he took his two sons with him, Manasseh and Ephraim. That this
signifies the will and the intellectual of the church born from the
internal, is evident from the representation of Manasseh, as being the
new will in the natural, and its quality (concerning which see n.
5354e); and from the representation of Ephraim, as being the new
intellectual in the natural, and its quality (n. 5354); that they were
born from the internal is signified by their being the sons of Joseph,
by whom is represented the internal celestial (n. 5869, 5877). \[2\] It
is necessary to explain what is meant by the intellectual and the will
of the church. The intellectual of the church is to perceive from the
Word what the truth of faith is, and what the good of charity. It is
known that the literal sense of the Word is of such a nature that
whatever tenet a man embraces, he confirms from that sense; and this
because the things of the literal sense of the Word are general vessels
which receive truths, and because the quality of these vessels does not
appear as through a transparency until they have received truths; thus
because they are only generals, which must first be learned by man, in
order that he may receive the particulars and singulars in a fit and
proper manner. That the literal sense of the Word is of such a nature
that whatever tenet a man embraces he confirms from that sense, is very
manifest from so many heresies which have existed in the church, and
still do so, each of which is confirmed by its partisans from the
literal sense of the Word, and so confirmed that they thoroughly believe
it to be true; and thereafter if they were to hear from heaven the very
truth, they would not receive a bit of it. \[3\] The reason is that they
have not the intellectual of the church; for the intellectual of the
church consists in a man's perceiving, when he reads the Word and
carefully compares one passage with another, what is to be believed, and
what is to be done. This intellectual is to be found in such men only as
are enlightened by the Lord, and who in the Christian world are also
called the enlightened; and this enlightenment is to be found in such
men only as desire to know truths, not for the sake of reputation and
glory, but for the sake of life and use. This very enlightenment is
received by the intellectual in a man, for it is the intellectual which
is enlightened. This is very evident from the fact that they who have
little of the intellectual cannot possibly see such things from the
Word; but have faith in those whom they believe to be enlightened. Be it
known further that they who have been regenerated, receive from the Lord
an intellectual capable of being enlightened. It is the light of heaven
from the Lord which flows into the intellectual and enlightens it; for
the intellectual has its light, its sight, and consequently its
perception, from no other source. \[4\] But this intellectual, which is
called the intellectual of the church, is more interior than the
intellectual which comes from mere memory-knowledges, for it is a
perception that the thing is so, not from the dictate of
memory-knowledges and philosophy, but from the dictate of the Word in
its spiritual sense. For example, they who are in the intellectual of
the church are able clearly to perceive that the Word everywhere teaches
that love to the Lord and charity toward the neighbor are essentials of
the church; and that the life of man remains after death; and that his
life is from his loves; also that faith separate from charity is not
faith; and that faith avails nothing for eternal life except insofar as
it is joined to the good of love to the Lord and to the good of charity
toward the neighbor; consequently that these and faith must be conjoined
together for there to be spiritual life. That these are truths can be
clearly perceived by those who have the intellectual enlightened, but
not at all by those who have not this. \[5\] It is believed that those
have an intellectual in the things of the church who are skillful in
confirming the tenets or doctrinals of their own church by many things,
and this even to persuasion that it is so, and who also are skillful in
dexterously confuting many heresies. But this is not the intellectual of
the church; for to confirm a tenet is not of the intellectual, but of
ingenuity in the sensuous, and it is sometimes found in the worst of
men, and can also be done by those who believe nothing whatever, and
also by those who are in very falsities. Nothing is more easy than for
all such persons to confirm whatever they please, even to the point of
persuading the simple. But the intellectual of the church is to perceive
and see, before any tenet is confirmed, whether it is true or not, and
then to confirm it. \[6\] This is the intellectual which is represented
by Ephraim; but the good of the church, which is represented by
Manasseh, is the good of charity which is insinuated by the Lord into
the man of the church by means of the truths of faith; for these,
together with the good of charity, are what flow into the intellectual
and enlighten it, and also make the intellectual and the will constitute
one mind. That both the intellectual and the will are born from the
internal, may be seen from what has frequently been said and shown
above; for all the affection of good and truth, by which comes
enlightenment, flows from no other source, and thus is born from no
other source, than the internal; that is, through the internal from the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6223.">6223.</span></span>

And one told Jacob. That this signifies a perception from the truth of
the natural, is evident from the signification of "telling," as being
perception (see n. 3608, 5601); and from the representation of Jacob, as
being the truth of the natural (see n. 3305, 3509, 3525, 3546, 3599,
3775, 4009, 4234, 4520, 4538, 6001).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6224.">6224.</span></span>

And said, Behold thy son Joseph cometh unto thee. That this signifies
the presence of the internal, is evident from the representation of
Joseph, as being the internal (see n. 6177); and from the signification
of "coming to" anyone, as being presence (see n. 5934, 5941, 5947, 6063,
6089). That "Joseph" is here the internal, and in other places the
internal celestial, is in application to those things which are beneath
in the natural; when it is applied to the lower things of the natural
which are represented by Jacob, it is then called the "internal," and in
like manner when it is applied to Pharaoh; but when it is applied to the
interior things of the natural, which are represented by Israel, and
also by his ten sons, it is then called the "internal celestial," and
"internal good," and this on account of the influx.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6225.">6225.</span></span>

And Israel strengthened himself. That this signifies new forces through
spiritual good, is evident from the signification of "strengthening
himself," as being to receive new forces; and from the representation of
Israel, as being spiritual good from the natural (see n. 4286, 4598,
5801, 5803, 5806, 5812, 5817, 5819, 5826, 5833). That it is through
spiritual good, is because in what immediately precedes, Jacob is called
"Jacob," and here "Israel," for it is said, "One told Jacob, and said,
Behold thy son Joseph cometh unto thee; and Israel strengthened
himself;" for "Israel" is spiritual good from the natural; but "Jacob"
is the truth of the natural; and the truth of the natural, which is of
faith there, is confirmed (or strengthened) by means of spiritual good,
which is the good of charity. "Israel" is also the internal of the
church, and "Jacob" its external (see n. 4286, 4292, 4570). The external
of the church is strengthened and receives forces from no other source
than its internal. In the internal of the church are they who are in the
good of charity, which is the good of faith, and also the good of truth,
and likewise spiritual good, which are "Israel;" but in the external of
the church are they who are in the truth of faith, and not as yet
manifestly in good, but in whose truth there is nevertheless good; this
truth is "Jacob."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6226.">6226.</span></span>

And sat upon the bed. That this signifies that this was turned to the
natural, is evident from the signification of "bed," as being the
natural (see n. 6188). "Israel's sitting upon the bed" denotes that
spiritual good was turned to the natural, because by "Israel's bowing
himself on the head of the bed" (Gen. 47:31) was signified that
spiritual good turned itself to those things which are of the interior
natural (n. 6188); and therefore by his removing himself thence and
sitting upon the bed is signified that spiritual good turned itself to
the natural. What is meant by turning to the interior natural, and to
the exterior, cannot be stated to the apprehension, because very few
know that the natural is interior and exterior, and that the thought is
now in the one and now in the other; and they who do not know this, do
not reflect upon it, and consequently cannot have acquired knowledge of
it by any experience. And yet this is common with everyone, but with a
difference; for the thought is now elevated to what is higher, and now
is again let down to what is lower; thus the thought of man now looks
upward, and now looks downward. \[2\] Besides, everyone can see that
Israel's bowing himself on the head of the bed, and afterward sitting
upon the bed, are matters too slight to be mentioned in the most holy
Word, unless they enfolded some secret which can be disclosed only by
means of the internal sense, consequently only by a knowledge of what
each word signifies in the spiritual sense, that is, in the sense in
which are the angels. For the angels do not, like man, think from the
objects of the world, of the body, and of the earth, but from those of
heaven; and what the difference is between these two classes of objects
is especially evident from the correspondences treated of at the end of
several chapters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6227.">6227.</span></span>

Verses 3-7. And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Shaddai appeared unto me at
Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me. And He said unto me, Behold I
will make thee fruitful, and will cause thee to be multiplied, and will
make of thee a company of peoples; and I will give this land to thy seed
after thee for an eternal possession. And now thy two sons who were born
to thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, they
are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh, as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be
mine. And thy generation which thou begettest after them shall be thine;
upon the name of their brethren they shall be called in their
inheritance. And I, in my coming from Paddan, Rachel died upon me in the
land of Canaan, in the way, when there was still a tract of land to come
unto Ephrath; and I buried her there in the way to Ephrath, the same is
Bethlehem. "And Jacob said unto Joseph," signifies the communication of
the truth of the natural with the internal; "God Shaddai appeared unto
me at Luz in the land of Canaan," signifies the Divine appearing in the
natural in a former state; "and blessed me," signifies prediction about
vivification; "and He said unto me, Behold I will make thee fruitful,
and will cause thee to be multiplied" signifies vivification through the
good of charity and the truth of faith; "and will make of thee a company
of peoples," signifies increase indefinitely; "and I will give this land
to thy seed after thee for an eternal possession," signifies the Lord's
kingdom for those who are in that good and truth; "and now thy two sons,
who were born to thee in the land of Egypt," signifies good and truth in
the natural from the internal; "before I came unto thee into Egypt,"
signifies before the truth of the natural was in the memory-knowledges
there; "they are mine," signifies that they are in me; "Ephraim and
Manasseh," signifies the intellectual and the will of the church; "as
Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine," signifies that they shall be
truth and the good of truth; "and thy generation which thou begettest
after them," signifies interior truths and goods, which are afterward;
"shall be thine," signifies that they shall be in the rational which is
from the internal; "upon the name of their brethren they shall be called
in their inheritance," signifies that they would be of the quality of
the truths and goods of the church, and together among them; "and I, in
my coming from Paddan," signifies from a state of knowledges; "Rachel
died upon me in the land of Canaan," signifies the end of the former
affection of interior truth; "in the way, when there was still a tract
of land," signifies what is intermediate; "to come unto Ephrath,"
signifies the spiritual of the celestial in the former state; "and I
buried her there in the way to Ephrath," signifies the rejection of that
state; "the same is Bethlehem," signifies in its place a state of new
affection of truth and good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6228.">6228.</span></span>

And Jacob said unto Joseph. That this signifies the communication of the
truth of the natural with the internal, is evident from the
signification of "saying," as being perception (of which above, n.
6220), and also communication (see n. 3060, 4131), for that which is
perceived by another is communicated; from the representation of Jacob,
as being the truth of the natural (of which just above, n. 6223); and
from the representation of Joseph, as being the internal (of which also
above, n. 6224).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6229.">6229.</span></span>

God Shaddai appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan. That this
signifies the Divine appearing in the natural in a former state, is
evident from the signification of "God Shaddai," as being the Divine,
for the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, was called "Shaddai"
(see n. 3667, 5628), and that He was Jehovah, or the Lord, thus the
Divine, may be seen from what is said in Genesis 28:13, 20; from the
signification of "appeared unto me," as being that He appeared; from the
signification of "Luz," as being the natural in a former state (n.
4556); and from the signification of the "land of Canaan," as being the
church (of which above). Hence it is plain that by "God Shaddai appeared
unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan" is signified the Divine appearing
in the natural, where is the truth of the spiritual church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6230.">6230.</span></span>

And blessed me. That this signifies a prediction about vivification, is
evident from the signification of "blessing," as here being a prediction
about vivification; for the blessing was that He would make him
fruitful, and multiply him, and make him a company of peoples, and give
the land to his seed after him for an eternal possession; all which are
predictions about vivification. Not that the posterity of Jacob were
vivified; but they who are in the truth of faith and the good of
charity; for these are "Jacob" and "Israel" in the internal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6231.">6231.</span></span>

And He said unto me, Behold I will make thee fruitful, and will cause
thee to be multiplied. That this signifies vivification through the good
of charity and the truth of faith, is evident from the signification of
"being made fruitful," as being said of the good of charity, and of
"being multiplied," as being said of the truths of faith (see n. 43, 55,
913, 983, 2846, 2847). As these are what make man live, vivification is
predicated of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6232.">6232.</span></span>

And will make of thee a company of peoples. That this signifies increase
indefinitely, is evident from the signification of a "company of
peoples," as being truths from good without limit; for "peoples" signify
truths (see n. 1259, 1260, 3295), and "company," abundance. Hence "to
make a company of peoples" is to cause truths to increase in abundance;
that it is indefinitely is because all things in the spiritual world
which proceed from the Infinite, as do truths and goods, are capable of
being multiplied and increasing indefinitely. That is called indefinite
which cannot be defined and limited by number; nevertheless what is
indefinite is finite relatively to what is infinite, and so finite that
there is no ratio between the two. \[2\] That truths and goods can
increase indefinitely comes from the fact that they proceed from the
Lord, who is infinite. That truths and goods are of this nature, may be
seen from the fact that the universal heaven is in truth and good, and
yet no one is in exactly the same truth and good as another. This would
still be the case if heaven were a thousand and a thousand times
greater. The same may be seen from the fact that the angels are being
perfected to eternity, that is, they continually grow in good and truth,
and yet cannot arrive at the grade of any perfection, because there
always remains an indefinite scope; for truths are indefinite in number,
and each truth has an indefinite scope within it; and so on. \[3\] This
is still more evident from things in nature: though men should increase
in number indefinitely, still no one would have the same face as
another, nor the same internal face, that is, the same mind, and not
even the same tone of voice; hence it is plain that there is an
indefinite variety of all things, and that there is never one thing the
same as another. This variety is still more indefinite in the truths and
goods that belong to the spiritual world; because one thing in the
natural world corresponds to thousands and thousands in the spiritual
world; and therefore the more interior things are, the more indefinite
they are. \[4\] That there are such indefinite things pertaining to all
things in the spiritual world, and also in the natural world, is because
they come forth from the Infinite, as was said above; for unless they so
came forth they would never be indefinite; and therefore from the
indefinite things in both worlds it is very evident that the Divine is
infinite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6233.">6233.</span></span>

And I will give this land to thy seed after thee for an eternal
possession. That this signifies the Lord's kingdom for those who are in
this good and truth, is evident from the signification of the "land,"
here the land of Canaan, as being the Lord's kingdom (n. 1607, 3038,
3481, 3705, 4240, 4447); from the signification of "seed," as being the
truth of faith and the good of charity (n. 1025, 1447, 1610, 1940, 2848,
3038, 3310; that the "seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob" are those who
are in goods and truths, and are called the "sons of the kingdom," see
above n. 3373); and from the signification of an "eternal possession,"
as being to have the Lord's life. These are the "sons of the kingdom."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6234.">6234.</span></span>

And now thy two sons, who were born to thee in the land of Egypt. That
this signifies good and truth in the natural from the internal, is
evident from the representation of Manasseh and Ephraim, who here are
the "two sons," as being the will and the intellectual of the church in
the natural, born from the internal (of which above, n. 6222), and
because good is of the will, and truth is of the intellectual, by the
same are signified the good and truth of the church; from the
signification of "who were born to thee," namely, to Joseph, as being
from the internal; and from the signification of the "land of Egypt," as
being the natural mind, in which are the memory-knowledges of the church
(of which above, n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301), and as being the
natural (n. 6147).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6235.">6235.</span></span>

Before I came unto thee into Egypt. That this signifies before the truth
of the natural was in the memory-knowledges there, is evident from the
signification of "before I came unto thee," as being before it was; from
the representation of Jacob, who says this of himself, as being the
truth of the natural (see n. 6223); and from the signification of
"Egypt," as being memory-knowledges in the natural (n. 1164, 1165, 1186,
1462, 4749, 4964, 4966, 5700, 6004). That by Jacob and his sons coming
into Egypt was represented that truths were to be insinuated into the
memory-knowledges of the church, was shown in the two preceding chapters
(n. 6004).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6236.">6236.</span></span>

They are mine. That this signifies that they are in me, is evident from
the representation of Jacob, who says this of himself, as being the
truth of the natural (of which below); and from the representation of
Manasseh and Ephraim, as being the will and the intellectual of the
church in the natural (see n. 5354, 6222). That these words, "they are
mine," denote that they are in me, is because Jacob is the truth of the
natural, thus also the natural as to truth, and in the natural are the
intellectual and the will which are represented by Ephraim and Manasseh;
and therefore as they are in this natural, by their "being mine" is
signified that they are in me. That "Jacob" is the natural, in the
supreme sense the Lord's Divine natural, may be seen above (n. 3305,
3509, 3525, 3576, 4009, 4538, 4570, 6098), and in the relative sense
truth in the natural, thus also the natural as to truth (n. 3509, 3525,
3546); and as "Jacob" in general is truth in the natural, therefore his
"ten sons" are the truths of the church there in particular (n. 5403,
5419, 5427, 5458, 5512), thus now also the "sons of Joseph." By Pharaoh
also is represented the natural, yet not as to truths, but as to
memory-knowledges, which are lower, and into which truths can be
initiated and insinuated, which was represented by the coming of Jacob
and his sons into Egypt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6237.">6237.</span></span>

Ephraim and Manasseh. That this signifies the intellectual and the will
of the church, may be seen above (n. 5354, 6222).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6238.">6238.</span></span>

As Reuben and Simeon they shall be mine. That this signifies that they
shall be truth and the good of truth, is evident from the representation
of Reuben, as being faith in the understanding, and the truth of
doctrine whereby men can attain to the good of life (see n. 3861, 3866),
thus in general the truth of the intellectual; and from the
representation of Simeon, as being faith in the will, consequently truth
in act, which is the good of faith or the good of truth (n. 3869-3872,
4497, 4502, 4503, 5626, 5630), thus in general the good that belongs to
the new will. That the like are represented by Ephraim and Manasseh, is
evident; but as Reuben profaned his representative (n. 4601), and Simeon
defiled his (see n. 4497, 4502, 4503), and as on this account they were
cursed (see the following chapter, verses 3-7), therefore they lost
their birthright, and in their stead Ephraim and Manasseh the sons of
Joseph were acknowledged as the firstborn (1 Chron. 5:1). Nevertheless
the representative still remained with Reuben and Simeon, for it matters
not what may be the quality of the person who represents (n. 665, 1097,
4281); that is to say, there remained the representative of faith in the
understanding with Reuben, and the representative of faith in the will
with Simeon; but with Ephraim there was the representative of the
intellectual of the church, and with Manasseh of the will of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6239.">6239.</span></span>

And thy generation which thou begettest after them. That this signifies
interior truths and goods, which are afterward, is evident from the
signification of "generation," as being the things that belong to faith
and charity (see n. 613, 2020, 2584), thus truths and goods; and from
the signification of "after them" as being the interior things which are
afterward. That interior things are signified is because the things
which are begotten from the internal afterward, are more interior; for
those things which have been begotten previously serve successively for
producing those which are begotten afterward more interiorly, for the
internal elevates the natural to itself by degrees. This is plain from
the generation of all things of the intellectual in man; for man is
first sensuous, afterward he becomes more and more interior, even until
he becomes intellectual. It is the same with the new generation which is
effected by means of faith and charity. Hence it is that man is
perfected by degrees (see what was said above about the successive
elevation toward the interiors when man is being regenerated, n. 6183).
\[2\] That "generation" in the Word signifies the things that belong to
faith and charity, is because no other generation than a spiritual one
can be understood in the internal sense. This generation is also meant
in David: They shall fear a fear; for God is in the generation of the
righteous (Ps. 14:5); the "generation of the righteous" denotes truths
from good, for "righteousness" is predicated of good. In Isaiah: They
shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for terror; they are the seed
of the blessed of Jehovah (Isa. 65:23). Again: Who hath wrought and done
it? Who calleth the generations from the beginning? I, Jehovah, the
first, and with the last I am the same (Isa. 41:4). In Ezekiel: Thy
tradings and thy generations are of the land of the Canaanite; thy
father was an Amorite, and thy mother was a Hittite. As to thy
generations, in the day when thou wast born thy navel was not cut off,
and thou wast not washed with waters for My sight (Ezek. 16:3, 4);
speaking of the abominations of Jerusalem, where it is very manifest
that "generations" are generations in a spiritual sense. \[3\] Again in
Isaiah: Awake as in the days of eternity, the generations of eternities
(Isa. 51:9); the "days of eternity" denote the state and time of the
Most Ancient Church, of which "eternity" is predicated because it was in
the good of love to the Lord, to which good, because it is immediately
from the Lord, "eternity" is ascribed; "generations of eternities" are
the goods thence derived. \[4\] So in Moses: Remember the days of
eternity, understand the years of generation and generation (Deut.
32:7); where the "days of eternity" denote the state and time of the
Most Ancient Church which was before the flood, and was a celestial
church; the "years of generation and generation" denote the state and
time of the Ancient Church which was after the flood, and was a
spiritual church; which churches are here treated of. \[5\] And in Joel:
Judah shall abide to eternity, and Jerusalem to generation and
generation (Joel 3:20); "eternity" is here predicated of Judah, because
by Judah is represented the celestial church (n. 3881); and "generation
and generation" is predicated of Jerusalem, because by "Jerusalem" is
signified the spiritual church (n. 402). \[6\] In Isaiah: My
righteousness shall be to eternity, and My salvation to generation of
generations (Isa. 51:8); where "eternity" is predicated of the good of
love, for "righteousness" is predicated of this good (n. 612, 2235); and
"generation," of the good of faith. \[7\] And in David: Thy kingdom is a
kingdom of all eternities, and Thy dominion to all generation and
generation (Ps. 145:13); where the sense is the same; for unless
"eternity" is predicated of what is celestial, and "generation" of what
is spiritual, only one would be mentioned; both would be a useless
repetition. \[8\] The things that belong to a state of faith are also
signified by the command that a bastard should not come into the
congregation of Jehovah to the tenth generation (Deut. 23:2); an
Ammonite and a Moabite not even to the tenth generation (Deut. 23:3),
and that an Edomite and an Egyptian might come into the congregation of
Jehovah in the third generation (Deut. 23:8). So in the commandment of
the Decalogue, in that Jehovah God would visit the iniquity of the
fathers upon the sons, upon the third and fourth generation with respect
to those who hate Him (Exod. 20:5). \[9\] That "generations" denote the
things of faith and charity, is because in the spiritual sense no other
generations can be meant than those which are of regeneration, or of one
who is regenerate; in like manner as the "births," "childbearings," and
"conceptions" in the Word: that these terms denote the births,
childbearings, and conceptions of faith and charity (n. 1145, 1255,
3860, 3868, 4668, 5160, 5598).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6240.">6240.</span></span>

Shall be thine. That this signifies that they shall be in the rational,
which is the internal, is evident from the fact that the internal
celestial which is represented by Joseph, is in the rational (see n.
4286, 4963); and therefore by "being thine" is signified that they shall
be in the rational, as before by "being mine" was signified that they
should be in the natural, in which is the truth of the natural which is
represented by Jacob (n. 6236). What the rational is shall be briefly
told. The intellectual of the internal man is called "rational," but the
intellectual of the external man is called "natural;" thus the rational
is internal, and the natural is external; and they are perfectly
distinct from each other. But a truly rational man is no other than he
who is called a celestial man, and who has perception of good, and from
good perception of truth; whereas he who has not this perception, but
only the knowledge that a thing is true because he is so instructed, and
from this has conscience, is not truly a rational man, but is an
interior natural man. Such are they who are of the Lord's spiritual
church. They differ from the celestial as the light of the moon differs
from the light of the sun; and therefore the Lord appears to the
spiritual as a moon, but to the celestial as a sun (see n. 1521,
1529-1531, 4060, 4696). \[2\] Many in the world suppose that a rational
man is one who can reason acutely about many things, and so join his
reasonings together that his conclusions may appear like truth; but this
is found in the very worst of men, who are able to reason skillfully and
persuade that evils are goods, and that falsities are truths; and the
reverse. But he who reflects can see that this is vicious phantasy, and
not what is rational. The rational consists in inwardly seeing and
perceiving that good is good, and from this that truth is truth; for the
sight and perception of such men are from heaven. That they who are of
the Lord's spiritual church are interiorly natural, is because they only
acknowledge as truth that which they have received from their parents
and masters, and afterward have confirmed in themselves; and do not see
inwardly, and perceive, whether it is true from any other source than
that they have confirmed it in themselves. It is otherwise with the
celestial; and it is from this that the latter are rational, but the
former interiorly natural. The internal celestial which is represented
by Joseph, is in the rational; whereas the spiritual good which is
represented by Israel, is in the interior natural (n. 4286); for it is
the spiritual who are represented by Israel, and the celestial who are
represented by Joseph.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6241.">6241.</span></span>

Upon the name of their brethren they shall be called in their
inheritance. That this signifies that they would be of the quality of
the truths and goods of the church, and together among them, is evident
from the signification of a "name," and of "being called by name," as
being the quality (see n. 144, 145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 2724, 3006, 3421);
from the representation of Ephraim and Manasseh, who here are the
"brethren," as being the intellectual and the will of the church (n.
3969, 5354, 6222), thus truth and good (n. 6234); and from the
signification of "in their inheritance," as being together among them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6242.">6242.</span></span>

And I, in my coming from Paddan. That this signifies from a state of
knowledges, is evident from the signification of "Paddan-aram," as being
the interior knowledges of truth and good (see n. 3664, 3680, 4107);
thus "Paddan" is a state of knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6243.">6243.</span></span>

Rachel died upon me in the land of Canaan. That this signifies the end
of the former affection of interior truth, is evident from the
signification of "dying," as being to cease to be such (see n. 494), and
as being the end of the former representation (n. 3253, 3259, 3276,
5975); and from the representation of Rachel, as being the affection of
interior truth (see n. 3758, 3782, 3793, 3819).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6244.">6244.</span></span>

In the way, when there was still a tract of land. That this signifies
what is intermediate, may be seen without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6245.">6245.</span></span>

To come unto Ephrath. That this signifies the spiritual of the celestial
in the former state, is evident from the signification of "Ephrath," as
being the spiritual of the celestial in the former state (see n. 4585,
4594).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6246.">6246.</span></span>

And I buried her there in the way to Ephrath. That this signifies the
rejection of that state, is evident from the signification of "burying,"
as being rejection (n. 4564); and from the signification of "Ephrath,"
as being the spiritual of the celestial in the former state (n. 6245).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6247.">6247.</span></span>

The same is Bethlehem. That this signifies in its place a state of new
affection of truth and good, is evident from the signification of
"Bethlehem," as being the spiritual of the celestial in a new state (see
n. 4594), thus a state of new affection of truth and good; for the
spiritual of the celestial is the truth of good, thus the affection of
truth from good. It is necessary to say how the case is with the
contents of this verse in the internal sense. The subject treated of is
the rejection of a former affection of truth, and the reception of a new
one. The former affection of truth exists while man is being
regenerated, but the latter, which is the new one, when he has been
regenerated. In the former state the man is affected with truth for the
sake of the end that he may become intelligent, but in the latter state
that he may become wise; or what is the same, in the former state he is
affected with truth for the sake of doctrine, but in the latter for the
sake of life; when for the sake of doctrine, then from truth he looks to
good; but when for the sake of life, he from good looks to truth. Thus
the latter state is the inverse of the former; and therefore the former
state is rejected while the man is being regenerated; and the latter,
which is a new state, is received. Moreover relatively to the latter new
state, the former state is impure; for when a man is affected with truth
for the sake of doctrine in order that he may become intelligent, he is
also at the same time affected with reputation and glory. This affection
cannot then but be present, and it is also permitted as being
introductory, because the man is of such a nature. But when he is
affected with truth for the sake of life, he then rejects glory and
reputation as ends, and embraces the good of life, that is, charity
toward the neighbor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6248.">6248.</span></span>

Verses 8, 9. And Israel saw the sons of Joseph, and said, Whose are
these? And Joseph said unto his father, These are my sons, whom God hath
given me here. And he said, Take them I pray unto me, and I will bless
them. "And Israel saw the sons of Joseph," signifies a perception about
the intellectual and the will of the church; "and said, Whose are
these?" signifies and about their origin; "and Joseph said unto his
father," signifies an answer from within; "These are my sons, whom God
hath given me here," signifies that they were from the internal in the
natural; "and he said, Take them I pray unto me," signifies that they
should accede to spiritual good; "and I will bless them," signifies a
prediction about good and truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6249.">6249.</span></span>

And Israel saw the sons of Joseph. That this signifies a perception
about the intellectual and the will of the church, is evident from the
signification of "seeing," as being perception (see n. 2150, 3764,
4403-4421, 4567, 4723, 5400); and from the representation of Ephraim and
Manasseh, as being the intellectual and the will of the church, born
from the internal, which is "Joseph" (n. 5354, 6222).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6250.">6250.</span></span>

And said, Whose are these? That this signifies, and about their origin,
namely, a perception, is evident from the signification of "saying," as
being perception (see n. 6220); and from the signification of "Whose are
these?" as being about their origin; for in the internal sense an
interrogation denotes knowledge from perception (n. 2693, 6132).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6251-6300](ac126.md)
