[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac123)  [Next](ac125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="6151.">6151.</span></span>

Wherefore they sold not their ground. That this signifies that for this
reason they had no need to renounce and submit them, is evident from the
signification of "selling," as being to renounce (of which above, n.
6143), thus to submit, for that which is renounced is submitted to
another; and from the signification of the "ground," that is, of the
priests of Egypt, as being the capacity to receive good in the natural
(of which also above, n. 6148). That for this reason they had no need,
namely, to renounce and submit them, is signified by the expression,
"Wherefore not."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6152.">6152.</span></span>

And Joseph said unto the people. That this signifies the influx of the
internal into the truths of memory-knowledge, is evident from the
signification of "saying," as being perception (see n. 6063); and
because it is predicated of the internal, which is "Joseph," it denotes
influx, for that which is perceived in the external flows in from the
internal; and from the representation of Joseph, as being the internal
(as may be seen frequently above); and from the signification of the
"people," as being the truths of memory-knowledge (n. 6146).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6153.">6153.</span></span>

Behold I have bought you the day and your ground for Pharaoh. That this
signifies that it procured these for itself, and made them subject to
what is general in the natural that was under the auspices of the
internal, is evident from the signification of "buying," as being to
appropriate and procure (n. 4397, 5374, 5397, 5406, 5410, 5426); and
from the signification of "ground," as being receptacles of truth (n.
6135-6137). That it subjected them to what is general in the natural is
signified by his "buying them for Pharaoh," by whom is represented the
natural in general (n. 5160, 5799, 6015). It is said "under the auspices
of the internal" in accordance with what was unfolded above (n. 6145).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6154.">6154.</span></span>

Lo here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the ground. That this
signifies the good of charity and the truth of faith that were to be
implanted, is evident from the signification of "seed," as being truth
from good, or as being faith from charity, thus both (see n. 1025, 1447,
1610, 1940, 2848, 3038, 3310, 3373, 3671); from the signification of
"sowing," as being to implant; and from the signification of the
"ground," as being receptacles (n. 6135-6137). But when truth and good
have been implanted, the "ground" no longer signifies a receptacle, but,
like a "field," that which is of the church (n. 566).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6155.">6155.</span></span>

And it shall be in the ingatherings. That this signifies the fruits
thence derived, is evident from the signification of the "ingatherings,"
as being the fruits; for the harvest, which is gathered in from the
field, is the fruit of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6156.">6156.</span></span>

That ye shall give a fifth to Pharaoh. That this signifies remains, that
these are for the general in the natural which is under the auspices of
the internal, is evident from the signification of "five" and of a
"fifth part," as being remains (see n. 5291, 5894); and from the
representation of Pharaoh, as being what is general in the natural (see
above, n. 6153). It is said "under the auspices of the internal" for the
reason spoken of above (n. 6145). What remains are may be seen above (n.
1050, 1738, 1906, 2284, 5135, 5897, 5898), namely, that they are goods
and truths from the Lord stored up in the interior man. These are let
down into the exterior or natural man when he is in a state of good; but
the moment he comes into a state of evil they are drawn back and stored
up again. The reason of their being drawn back and stored up again, is
to prevent their being mingled with evils, and thus perishing. When a
man cannot be regenerated, the remains in him are carefully preserved in
his interiors. But when a man is being regenerated, then, Insofar as
this is the case, the remains are let down from the interiors into the
exteriors, for the reason that by regeneration the interiors are
conjoined with the exteriors and act as a one. Remains are then first
let down to generals, and afterward successively to particulars. As the
subject here treated of in the internal sense is the regeneration of the
natural, it may be known from what has been said what is meant by
remains being for what is general in the natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6157.">6157.</span></span>

And four parts shall be for you. That this signifies those things which
were not yet remains, is evident from the signification of "four parts,"
when said of the residue when a fifth part, by which are signified
remains, has been taken away (see n. 6156), as being the things which
are not yet remains. By "four" is signified the like as by "two,"
namely, things which are pairs and which are conjoined together (n.
1686), as are good and truth. When these have not as yet become remains,
they are here signified by "four parts." For goods and truths do not
become remains until they are being appropriated to man, and they are
for the first time being appropriated to man when they are received from
affection in freedom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6158.">6158.</span></span>

For seed of the field. That this signifies for the nourishment of the
mind, is evident from the signification of "seed," as being truth and
good, thus as being faith and charity (of which above, n. 6154); and
from the signification of "field," as being in a general sense the
church (see n. 2971, 3766), and in a particular sense the church in a
man, thus a man in whom the church is, that is, who receives truth and
good. When he is called a "field," it is his mind that is meant; for man
is not man from his external form, but from his mind, that is, from his
understanding and will which constitute his mind, and also from the
truth of faith and the good of charity which constitute the still more
inward mind. This, namely, the mind, when it is in the genuine sense a
man, is nourished and sustained by truth and good; and as truth and good
are signified by "seed," nourishment also is signified by it, which
indeed is plain from the words that directly follow: "for your food, and
for them in your houses, and for food for your babes." Hence then it is
that the "seed of the field" denotes the nourishment of the mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6159.">6159.</span></span>

And for your food, and for them in your houses. That this signifies that
thereby the good of truth may be in each and all things, is evident from
the signification of "food," as being the good of truth (see n. 5410,
5426, 5487, 5582, 5588, 5655); and from the signification of "those who
are in the houses," as being each and all things of good derived from
truth. Thus "for food for those in the houses" denotes the good of truth
in each and all things. As regards the good of truth being in each and
all things, the case is this. In proportion as a man is being
regenerated, good insinuates itself into each and all things that
appertain to him; for the affection of good becomes that which reigns
universally in him; and that which reigns universally reigns also
singularly, that is, in each and all things. This may be seen from the
ruling affection with everyone. This affection, whatever it may be, is
present in each particular of his will, and also in each particular of
his thought, and although it does not always appear to be present in the
thought, nevertheless it is in it. The reason why it does not appear is
that at these moments it is clothed with affections that are insinuated
by means of objects; but as these affections are put off, the ruling
affection comes into plain view. \[2\] This cannot be better seen than
from the case of spirits and angels. Spirits who are evil, or with whom
evil is dominant, are evil in each and all things, even when they are
speaking what is true and are doing what is good, for in all this they
have no other intention than to deceive others so as to be believed to
be good, and thus to beguile under a semblance of good. When this is the
case, it is plainly heard from the very tone of their speech, and is
also perceived from their sphere. The angels in heaven, with whom good
rules, that is, universally reigns, are good in each and all things; or
in other words, with them good from the Lord shines forth in each and
all things; for even if they do anything of evil in the outward form, it
is nevertheless their end or intention that good may come therefrom.
From all this it is evident that where good universally reigns, it
reigns in each and all things; and it is the same with evil. For that
which reigns universally comes into existence for the first time when
each and all things are of the same nature; and the universal is
according to the quality and quantity of these; for that which is called
universal is universal from the fact that it is in all things
individually.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6160.">6160.</span></span>

And for food for your babes. That this signifies in those things which
are of innocence, is evident from the signification of "food," as being
the good of truth (as just above, n. 6159); and from the signification
of "babes," as being innocence (n. 430, 3183, 5608).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6161.">6161.</span></span>

And they said, Thou hast made us live. That this signifies spiritual
life in no other manner and from no other source, is evident from the
signification of "making live," as being spiritual life (see n. 5890).
As in what precedes the subject treated of has been the vivification or
regeneration of the natural, the whole process of which is there
described, which is of such a nature and no other, it is therefore added
that it is in no other manner and from no other source.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6162.">6162.</span></span>

Let us find grace in the eyes of my lord. That this signifies the will
that in this way they be made subject, and humiliation, is evident from
the fact that these words, uttered after all things appertaining to them
have been renounced, are words of acknowledgment, thus also of the will
that in this way they be subjected; thus that they are words of
humiliation. That this sense is within these words is evident from the
state in which the people then were, which state is also manifest from
the series of what goes before and of what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6163.">6163.</span></span>

And we will be Pharaoh's servants. That this signifies that they
renounce their own, and submit to the natural which is under the
auspices of the internal, is evident from the signification of
"servants," as being to be devoid of freedom from their own (see n.
5760, 5763), thus to renounce their own; and from the signification of
"being Pharaoh's," as being submitted to the natural which is under the
auspices of the internal (n. 6145).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6164.">6164.</span></span>

And Joseph made it a statute. That this signifies what is concluded from
consent, is evident from the signification of "making a statute," as
being to conclude from consent; for that which is made a statute is done
with consent on both sides, and is accounted among things ordained by
agreement, thus duly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6165.">6165.</span></span>

Even unto this day. That this signifies eternally, is evident from the
signification of "even unto this day," as being eternally (see n. 2838,
4304).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6166.">6166.</span></span>

Concerning the ground of Egypt, that Pharaoh should have the fifth. This
signifies remains, as before (n. 6156).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6167.">6167.</span></span>

Only the ground of the priests, only theirs, was not Pharaoh's. This
signifies capacities to receive good, which are immediately from the
internal (as also above, n. 6148). What has now been said about the
conjunction of the natural with the internal, and thus about its
regeneration by means of repeated desolations and vivifications, must
needs seem to the man of the church at this day as things unheard of.
Nevertheless the case is really so, and is one of those things with
which even simple spirits in the other life are well acquainted.
Wherefore when the Word is being read by a man, they who are in the
other life, being in the internal sense of the Word, not only perceive
all these things, but see besides innumerable arcana therein, and such
as cannot be expressed by any human speech. Those which have been
adduced are comparatively only few.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6168.">6168.</span></span>

Verses 27-31. And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the land of
Goshen; and they had a possession therein, and were fruitful, and
multiplied exceedingly. And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen
years; and the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were seven years,
and a hundred and forty years. And the days of Israel drew near to die;
and he called his son Joseph, and said to him, If I pray I have found
grace in thine eyes, put I pray thy hand under my thigh, and do mercy
and truth with me; bury me not I pray in Egypt; and I will lie with my
fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their
sepulcher. And he said, I will do according to thy word. And he said,
Swear to me; and he sware to him. And Israel bowed himself upon the
bed's head. "And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt," signifies that
spiritual good lived among the memory-knowledges which are of the
church; "in the land of Goshen," signifies in the midst of them; "and
they had a possession therein," signifies given and set in order in this
way by the internal; "and were fruitful and multiplied exceedingly,"
signifies the derivative goods of charity and truths of faith; "and
Jacob lived in the land of Egypt," signifies that the truth of the
natural was in memory-knowledges; "seventeen years," signifies the state
therein; "and the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were seven
years, and a hundred and forty years," signifies the general state and
its quality; "and the days of Israel drew near to die," signifies the
state immediately before regeneration; "and he called his son Joseph,"
signifies the presence of the internal; "and said to him, If I pray I
have found grace in thine eyes," signifies longing; "put I pray thy hand
under my thigh," signifies a sacred binding; "and do mercy and truth
with me," signifies humiliation; "bury me not I pray in Egypt,"
signifies regeneration not in memory-knowledges; "and I will lie with my
fathers," signifies life such as the ancients had; "and thou shalt carry
me out of Egypt," signifies that there may be elevation out of
memory-knowledges; "and bury me in their sepulcher," signifies such
regeneration; "and he said, I will do according to thy word," signifies
that so it shall be done of providence by the Divine; "and he said,
Swear to me," signifies that it may be irrevocable; "and he sware to
him," signifies that it was irrevocable; "and Israel bowed himself upon
the bed's head," signifies that he turned to those things which are of
the interior natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6169.">6169.</span></span>

And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt. That this signifies that
spiritual good lived among the memory-knowledges which are of the
church, is evident from the signification of "dwelling," as being to
live (see n. 1293, 3384, 3613, 4451); from the representation of Israel,
as being spiritual good (see n. 5801, 5803, 5807, 5812, 5817, 5819,
5826, 5833); and from the signification of the "land of Egypt," as being
the natural mind where memory-knowledges are (n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288,
5301); (that "Egypt" signifies the memory-knowledges of the church may
be seen above, n. 4749, 4964, 4966, 6004).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6170.">6170.</span></span>

In the land of Goshen. That this signifies in the midst of them, is
evident from the signification of the "land of Goshen," as being the
midst or inmost in the natural (see n. 5910, 6028, 6031, 6068), thus in
the midst of memory-knowledges, because Goshen was the best tract of
land in Egypt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6171.">6171.</span></span>

And they had a possession therein. That this signifies given and set in
order in this way by the internal, is evident from the signification of
a "possession," as being the residence of spiritual life (see n. 6103);
and as Joseph gave them this possession (verse 11), it is signified that
this residence was given and set in order by the internal. That this is
signified, follows from the series.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6172.">6172.</span></span>

And were fruitful, and multiplied exceedingly. That this signifies the
derivative goods of charity and truths of faith, is evident from the
signification of "being fruitful," as being to bring forth the goods of
charity; and from the signification of "multiplying," as being to bring
forth the truths of faith (see n. 43, 55, 913, 983, 2846, 2847); for the
expression "to be fruitful" comes from "fruits," which in the internal
sense signify the works of charity; and "to be multiplied," from
"multitude," which in the internal sense is predicated of the truths of
faith; for in the Word "many" is said of truths, and "great" of goods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6173.">6173.</span></span>

And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt. That this signifies that the truth
of the natural was in memory-knowledges, is evident from the
signification of "living," as being spiritual life (see n. 5890); from
the representation of Jacob, as being the truth of the natural (n. 3305,
3509, 3525, 3546, 3599, 3775, 4009, 4234, 4520, 4538); and from the
signification of the "land of Egypt," as being the memory-knowledges of
the church (as just above, n. 6169).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6174.">6174.</span></span>

Seventeen years. That this signifies the state therein, is evident from
the signification of "seventeen," as being from beginning to end, or
from the beginning to what is new (n. 755, 4670); and from the
signification of "years," as being states (n. 487, 488, 493, 893). Thus
here by the "seventeen years which Jacob lived in Egypt" is signified
the beginning of a state of spiritual life in the natural among
memory-knowledges even to its end. (That all numbers in the Word are
significative of things, see n. 575, 647, 648, 755, 813, 1963, 1988,
2075, 2252, 3252, 4264, 4495, 4670, 5265.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="6175.">6175.</span></span>

So the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were seven years and a
hundred and forty years. That this signifies the general state and its
quality, may be seen if the numbers "seven," "forty," and a "hundred"
are unfolded. What "seven" signifies may be seen above (n. 395, 433,
716, 728, 881, 5265, 5268); what "forty" signifies (n. 730, 862, 2272,
2273); and what a "hundred" (n. 1988, 2636, 4400). But the numbers thus
compounded cannot be easily unfolded, for they contain more things than
can be reduced to a summary statement, and be expressed to the
apprehension. These numbers in general contain the whole state of that
which is represented by Jacob, and its quality. These things the angels
see in one complex from the very number a hundred and forty-seven; for
all numbers in the Word fall with them into ideas of things, as has been
made plain to me from the fact that sometimes numbers in a long
succession have appeared to me, and the angels then said that those
numbers enfolded within them in succession likewise the things of which
they were conversing. From this also the most ancient people, who were
of the celestial church, made a computation consisting of numbers, by
which were conveyed heavenly things not easily comprehensible to the
ideas of the natural mind. But after their times these computations
perished, together with the perception of heavenly things, and there
remained only the knowledge of the general signification of the simple
numbers, as "three," "six," "seven," "twelve;" and not so much of the
signification of compound numbers. But at this day it is not known that
the numbers in the Word signify anything except number, and therefore
what has been said on the subject will perhaps be thought incredible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6176.">6176.</span></span>

And the days of Israel drew near to die. That this signifies the state
immediately before regeneration, is evident from the signification of
"drawing near," as being to be nigh, thus immediately previous; from the
signification of "days," as being states (see n. 23, 487, 488, 493, 893,
2788, 3462, 3785, 4850); from the representation of Israel, as being
spiritual good (of which above, n. 6169); and from the signification of
"dying," as being to rise again and be awakened into spiritual life (n.
3326, 3498, 3505, 4618, 4621, 6036), thus to be regenerated; for he who
is being regenerated rises again from spiritual death, and is awakened
into new life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6177.">6177.</span></span>

And he called his son Joseph. That this signifies the presence of the
internal, is evident from the signification of "calling unto himself,"
as being to make present with himself, thus as being presence; and from
the representation of Joseph, as being the internal (as frequently shown
above, n. 6089, 6117, 6120, 6128, 6132, 6136, 6145, 6149, 6152, 6153,
6156, 6163, 6167).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6178.">6178.</span></span>

And said to him, If I pray I have found grace in thine eyes. That this
signifies longing, is evident from the affection in which Jacob was when
he spoke these words to Joseph. This affection is within this form of
speech; for the words "If I pray I have found grace in thine eyes" are
merely a form of speech by which is expressed the affection, thus the
longing of the will (as also above, n. 6162).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6179.">6179.</span></span>

Put I pray thy hand under my thigh. That this signifies a sacred
binding, is evident from the signification of "putting the hand under
the thigh," as being a binding, with all power, by means of that which
belongs to conjugial love; for by the "hand" is signified power (see n.
878, 3091, 4931-4937, 5328, 5544), and by the "thigh" that which is of
conjugial love (n. 3021, 4277, 4280, 4575, 5050-5062). In the supreme
sense the conjugial is the union of the Divine and the Divine Human In
the Lord; and from this it is the union of the Divine good and the
Divine truth in heaven; for that which proceeds from the Lord is the
Divine truth from the Divine good. From this, heaven is heaven, and is
called a "marriage," for it is the conjunction of the good and the truth
there, which proceed from the Lord, that makes it. And as the Lord is
the good there, and heaven is the truth thence derived, therefore in the
Word the Lord is called the "bridegroom," and heaven and also the church
are called the "bride;" for good and truth make a marriage, and their
conjunction is what is meant by the conjugial. Hence it is plain how
sacred a thing it was to be bound by means of what is conjugial, which
was signified by "putting the hand under the thigh." From this marriage
of good and truth descends genuine conjugial love, In regard to which
and its sanctity see what was said above (n. 2727-2759).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6180.">6180.</span></span>

And do mercy and truth with me. That this signifies humiliation, is
evident from the signification of "doing mercy," as being the good of
love; and from the signification of "doing truth," as being the truth of
faith (of which significations in what follows). These words are uttered
as words of supplication, thus of humiliation. That "doing mercy"
denotes the good of love is because all mercy is of love; for he who is
in love or charity is also in mercy, and the love and charity in him
become mercy when the neighbor is In need or misery, and he affords him
help in that state. Hence it is that by "mercy" is signified the good of
love. That "doing truth" denotes the truth of faith is because all truth
is of faith, and for this reason in the original tongue faith is meant
by the same expression. \[2\] Because the good of love and the truth of
faith are in the closest conjunction, and the one is not possible
without the other, therefore this form of speaking was usual among the
ancients, because they knew that the good of love is inseparable from
the truth of faith, and for this reason also these two are often spoken
of conjointly in the Word, as in Exodus: Jehovah great in mercy and
truth (Exod. 34:6). In the second book of Samuel: David said unto the
men of Jabesh, Jehovah do mercy and truth with you (2 Sam. 2:5, 6). In
the same: David said unto Ittai the Gittite, Return thou, and take back
thy brethren with thee, with mercy and truth (2 Sam. 15:20). In Hosea:
Jehovah hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because
there is no truth, and no mercy, and no knowledge of God in the land
(Hos. 4:1). In David: All the ways of Jehovah are mercy and truth to
them that keep His covenant (Ps. 25:10). Again: Thou wilt not withhold
Thy mercies from me, O Jehovah; Thy mercy and Thy truth will perpetually
guard me (Ps. 40:11). Again: I will sing the eternal mercies of Jehovah;
with my mouth will I make known Thy truth to generation and generation.
For I have said, Eternally shall mercy be builded; in the very heavens
Thou wilt confirm Thy truth. Righteousness and judgment are the support
of Thy throne; mercy and truth stand before Thy faces (Ps. 89:1, 2, 14);
and in other passages in David (Ps. 26:3; 36:5; 57:3, 10; 61:7; 85:10;
86:15; 89:24, 33; 92:2).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6181.">6181.</span></span>

Bury me not I pray in Egypt. That this signifies regeneration not in
memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification of "burying," as
being resurrection and regeneration (see n. 2916, 2917, 4621, 5551); and
from the signification of "Egypt," as being memory-knowledges (of which
frequently above). What is meant by regeneration not in
memory-knowledges, may be seen in what presently follows (n. 6183).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6182.">6182.</span></span>

And I will lie with my fathers. That this signifies life such as the
ancients had, is evident from the signification of "lying," as being
life; for "to lie" here means to be buried with them, and as "being
buried" denotes resurrection and regeneration, "lying with them" denotes
life, because resurrection is into life, and in like manner
regeneration; and from the signification of "fathers," as being those
who were of the Ancient and Most Ancient Churches (see n. 6075), thus
the ancients.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6183.">6183.</span></span>

And thou shalt carry me out of Egypt. That this signifies that there may
be elevation out of memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification
of "carrying me," as being elevation; for "going up" is said of passing
from Egypt to the land of Canaan, whereby is signified elevation (see n.
3084, 4539, 4969, 5406, 5817, 6007), and the same by "carrying there out
of Egypt;" and from the signification of "Egypt," as being
memory-knowledges (of which above). What elevation from
memory-knowledges is, shall be briefly stated. The regeneration of the
natural is effected by means of the insinuation by the Lord of spiritual
life through the internal man into the memory-knowledges in the natural.
This insinuation has been treated of in this chapter. But if when the
man has been regenerated thus far, he is of such a character that he can
be further regenerated, he is elevated thence to the interior natural,
which is under the immediate auspices of the internal; whereas if the
man is not of such a character, in this case his spiritual life is in
the exterior natural. The elevation is effected by a withdrawing from
things of sense and memory-knowledge, thus by elevation above them, and
then the man comes into a state of interior thought and affection, thus
interiorly into heaven. They who are in this latter state are in the
internal church; but they who are in the former state are in the
external church, and are represented by Jacob, whereas they who are in
the latter state are represented by Israel. To the end therefore that
"Jacob" may be "Israel," and thus by him as "Israel" may be represented
the spiritual good which is in the interior natural, thus the internal
spiritual church, these words were said by Jacob.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6184.">6184.</span></span>

And bury me in their sepulcher. That this signifies such regeneration,
is evident from the signification of "burying," as being regeneration
(of which above, n. 6181). Thus "to be buried in their sepulcher," that
is, in the same one, denotes such regeneration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6185.">6185.</span></span>

And he said, I will do according to thy word. That this signifies that
so it shall be done of providence by the Divine, is evident from the
signification of "doing according to the word" of anyone, as being that
so it shall be done. It is added "of providence by the Divine" because
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob represented three things which make a one. In
the supreme sense, Abraham represented in the Lord the Divine Itself,
Isaac the Divine rational, and Jacob the Divine natural (see n. 3305,
4615, 6098); and in the sense that regards man, these three patriarchs
represented the inmost which is celestial good, the interior which is
spiritual good, and the exterior which is natural good. These are
signified by those three in one sepulcher, because by a "sepulcher" is
signified resurrection into life and regeneration (n. 2916, 2917, 4621,
5551).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6186.">6186.</span></span>

And he said, Swear to me. That this signifies that it may be
irrevocable, is evident from the signification of "swearing," as being
irrevocable confirmation (see n. 2842).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6187.">6187.</span></span>

And he sware to him. That this signifies that it was irrevocable, is
evident from the signification of "swearing," as being what is
irrevocable (as just above, n. 6186).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6188.">6188.</span></span>

And Israel bowed himself upon the bed's head. That this signifies that
he turned to those things which are of the interior natural, is evident
from the signification of "bowing oneself," as here being to turn
himself; and from the signification of "bed," as being the natural (of
which in what follows). Thus the "head of the bed" is what is higher in
the natural, that is, what is interior; for by "head" when mentioned in
the Word is signified what is interior, and this in respect to the body,
which is exterior. By his turning himself to those things which are of
the interior natural, is signified that natural truth, which is "Jacob,"
was being elevated to spiritual good, which is "Israel," according to
what was said and unfolded above (n. 6183). \[2\] That a "bed" denotes
what is natural, is because the natural is beneath the rational, and
serves it as a bed; for the rational as it were lies down upon the
natural; and because the natural is thus spread out underneath, it is
called a "bed," as also in Amos: As the shepherd hath rescued out of the
mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear; so shall the sons of
Israel be rescued that dwell in Samaria, In the corner of a bed, and on
the end of a couch (Amos 3:12); "in the corner of a bed" denotes in the
lowest of the natural; and "on the end of a couch" denotes in what is
sensuous. For by the "people Israel," whose metropolis was Samaria, was
represented the Lord's spiritual kingdom. Of this it is said, as of the
father Israel here, that it is "upon the head of the bed," for spiritual
good, which is represented by the father Israel, is the "head of the
bed." But when they turn themselves thence to those things which are of
the lowest natural and which are of the sensuous, it is then said that
they are "in the corner of the bed," and "on the end of the couch."
\[3\] Again in the same prophet: They that lie upon beds of ivory, and
stretch themselves upon their couches; but they are not grieved for the
breach of Joseph (Amos 6:4, 6); "beds of ivory" denote the pleasures of
the lowest natural, which are those of the proud; "not to be grieved for
the breach of Joseph," is to have no concern about the dissipation of
good from the internal. So in David: If I come into the tent of my
house, If I go up upon the couch of my bed (Ps. 132:3); the "tent of my
house" denotes the holy of love (n. 414, 1102, 2145, 2152, 3312, 4128,
4391, 4599); "to go up upon the couch of the bed" denotes upon the
natural, to the truth which is from the good of love. Everyone can see
that "coming into the tent of the house," and "going up upon the couch
of the bed," is a prophetic saying, which cannot be understood without
the internal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6189.">6189.</span></span>

Continuation about influx and the interaction of the soul and the body.
That two angels from heaven and two spirits from hell are with man, and
that thereby he has communication with both heaven and hell, and also
has freedom thereby to turn to the one or to the other, has been shown
at the end of chapters 44 and 45. But that each and all things with man
flow in according to his freedom-evil from hell, and good from heaven,
that is, through heaven from the Lord-is what man does not know, and
therefore will perhaps scarcely believe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6190.">6190.</span></span>

As the subject here treated of is Influx, and this is mentioned so
frequently, it is necessary to say in advance what influx is. What is
meant by spiritual influx cannot be better seen than by means of the
natural influxes which take place and appear in this world-as by the
influx of heat from the sun into all things of the earth, with all
variety in accordance with the seasons of the year and the climates of
the earth; and by the influx of light into the same, with all variety
likewise in accordance with the times of the days and also of the years,
also in a varied manner according to the climates. From the influx of
heat from the sun into all things of the earth, whence comes vegetative
life; and from the influx of light into the same, whence comes support
to that life, and also colors and displays of beauties; in like manner
from the influx of the same heat into the surface of our bodies, and
also of light into the eye; likewise from the influx of sound into the
ear; and from other instances of a similar kind, it may be comprehended
what is the influx of life from the Lord, who is the Sun of heaven, from
whom comes heavenly heat, which is the good of love, and heavenly light,
which is the truth of faith. The influx of these is also plainly felt,
for heavenly heat which is love produces the vital heat which is in man,
and heavenly light which is faith produces his understanding, because
the truth of faith which proceeds from the Lord enlightens his
intellectual; but in both cases with much variety, for it is according
to the reception on the part of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6191.">6191.</span></span>

That man is governed by the Lord by means of angels and spirits, has
been given me to know by experience so manifest as not to leave even the
smallest doubt concerning it; for now through a course of many years all
my thoughts and all my affections, even to the most minute of all, have
flowed in by means of spirits and angels. This it has been given me to
perceive so plainly that nothing could be more plain; for I have
perceived, I have seen, and I have heard, who they were, what was their
quality, and where they were. And when anything adverse fell into my
thought or will, I have spoken with them and chided them. And I have
also observed that the power they had of infusing such things was
restrained by the angels; and also in what manner; and likewise often
that they were driven away, and that then new spirits were present in
their place, from whom again there was influx. It has also been given me
to perceive whence those spirits came, or of what societies they were
the subjects; and an opportunity of speaking with those societies
themselves has likewise frequently been granted. And notwithstanding
that everything, even to the most minute, of the thoughts and
affections, flowed in through the spirits and angels, still I thought as
before, and willed as before, and conversed with men as before, no
difference from my former life being observed by anyone. I am aware that
scarcely anyone will believe that such is the fact, but still it is an
eternal verity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6192.">6192.</span></span>

It has been shown me to the life in what manner spirits flow in with
man. When they come to him, they put on all things of his memory, thus
all things which the man has learned and imbibed from infancy, and the
spirits suppose these things to be their own. Thus they act as it were
the part of the man in the man. But they are not allowed to enter
further with a man than to his interiors which are of the thought and
will, and not to the exteriors which are of the actions and speech; for
these latter come into act by means of a general influx from the Lord
without the mediation of particular spirits and angels. But although the
spirits act the part of the man with a man in respect to those things
which are of his thought and will, they nevertheless do not know that
they are with a man, for the reason that they possess all things of his
memory, and believe that these are not another's, but their own; and
this for the reason also that they may not injure the man. For unless
the spirits from hell who are with a man believed these things to be
their own, they would attempt in every way to destroy the man both body
and soul, because this is the infernal delight itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6193.">6193.</span></span>

As in this way spirits possess all things of a man's thought and will,
and angels things which are still more interior, and as the man is thus
most closely conjoined with them, therefore the man must necessarily
perceive and feel that it is he himself who thinks and wills; for the
communications in the other life are of such a nature that in a society
containing similar spirits each one believes that to be his own which is
another's. And therefore when the good come into heavenly society, they
at once enter into all the intelligence and wisdom of that society,
insomuch that they know no otherwise than that these are in themselves.
And such also is the case with a man, and with a spirit who is attendant
upon him. The things which flow in from the spirits who are from hell
are evils and falsities, but those which flow in from the angels who are
from heaven are goods and truths. Thus by means of influxes opposite to
each other the man is kept in the midst, thus in freedom. As the things
which flow in from the angels, flow in through the more inward
interiors, they are not so apparent to the outward sense as are those
which flow in from evil spirits. Moreover the angels are of such a
character that they never desire to hear that the influxes of good and
truth are from themselves, but that they are from the Lord, and they are
indignant if it is thought otherwise; for they are in the manifest
perception that it is so, and they love nothing more than to will and
think not from themselves, but from the Lord. On the other hand, evil
spirits are angry if told that they do not think and will from
themselves, because this is contrary to the delight of their loves; and
they are more angry when told that life is not in them, but that it
flows in. When this is shown them by experience to the life, which has
often been done, they then indeed confess that it is so, for they cannot
speak contrary to experience; but still after some delay they deny it,
and then they are not willing that it should be any further confirmed by
experience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6194.">6194.</span></span>

It has sometimes happened that I have meditated by myself, and have also
talked with others, without reflecting that spirits were present who
excited these activities. But directly afterward the spirits accosted
me, and told me the state in which they had then been, namely, that they
knew no otherwise than that they were the ones who were thinking, and
this in my case in such a manner that the nearest believed themselves to
be absolutely those who were thinking, but the more remote less so, and
they who were still more remote, still less so. And it was also shown
what societies flowed into the spirits as into their subjects.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6195.">6195.</span></span>

There were spirits with me a long time, neither very good nor very evil,
a little above the head. They had the power to inflow deeply into the
affections, and because they so willed, after a while they entered, and
then bound themselves with me in such a manner that it seemed as if they
could scarcely be separated. I spoke with them in regard to this, saying
that they ought to separate themselves; but they could not. When they
attempted it, and separated themselves a little, they then so dulled my
thoughts that I could not think except confusedly and disconnectedly,
and a painful sensation was felt in my head, like that with those who
fall into a swoon. By this it was made evident in what manner loves
conjoin, and that thereby is the conjunction of all in the other life.
Wherefore spirits who enter into the very affections possess the other,
as is also the case In the world when a man favors another's love;
whereas truths do not conjoin, but the affections of truth. From this it
was made evident to me how man is conjoined either with heaven or with
hell, namely, by means of his loves; with hell by means of the loves of
self and of the world, but with heaven by means of the loves of the
neighbor and of God. It was also evident that a man bound to hell can in
no wise be loosed therefrom except through Divine means by the Lord; as
was also shown from those who were bound with me only by slight
affections, and yet I was not loosed from them except by means of
intermediate loves, whereby they were gradually conjoined with others.
And as they were separated they appeared to be removed to a distance
from me toward the left in front, and the separation was observed by
means of changes of state of the affections; for as the affections were
changed, so they receded. From this it is also evident whence come the
appearances of distance in the other life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6196.">6196.</span></span>

That spirits are associated with a man in accordance with his loves, has
been made known to me by manifold experience, for as soon as I have
begun to intensely love anything, spirits were present who were In such
love, and they were not removed until the love ceased.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6197.">6197.</span></span>

As often as anything has fallen into my thought and the desires of my
will, the source of which I have not known, so often when I have desired
to know the source, I have been shown from what societies it came, and
sometimes through what spirits as subjects. They have also then spoken
with me, and confessed that they were thinking that thing, and likewise
that they knew that it flowed in with me and appeared to me as in
myself. The deceitful, who appear directly above the head, have
occasionally flowed in with me with such subtlety that I knew not whence
the influx was, and also that I scarcely perceived any otherwise than
that what flowed in was in myself and from myself, as is usual with
others. But as I knew of a certainty that it was from another source,
perception was given me by the Lord so exquisite that I perceived each
single influx from them, also where they were and who they were. When
they observed this, they were very indignant, especially because I
reflected upon what came from them. This reflection flowed in through
angels. Those deceitful ones chiefly insinuated such things as were
contrary to the Lord; and then it was given me to reflect upon the fact
that no one in hell acknowledges the Lord; but that insofar as they may,
they are full of abuse of Him; yet they are not unwilling to hear
mention made of the Father, the Creator of the universe. From this very
plain indication it is evident that it is the Lord who rules the
universal heaven, as He Himself teaches in Matthew: "All power is given
unto Me in heaven and in earth" (Matt. 28:18); and that they are opposed
to the Lord because they are opposed to heaven, where the Lord is all in
all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6198.">6198.</span></span>

There were spirits with me who supposed that it was they themselves who
live, and that I had life from no other source than they, thus that they
were I. But when they were told that they were separate spirits, and
that I also was a spirit as to my interiors: this they could not
believe. That they might know it, they were separated, and in this way
it was shown that they were spirits by themselves. But still they were
unwilling to believe, and were obstinately insistent. They went away for
a time, and when they returned they were in the same persuasion. From
this also it is evident that spirits know no otherwise than that the
things appertaining to man are their own. But such as obstinately
believe so are not readily admitted to men, because they cannot be
separated without difficulty. A like persuasion is indeed impressed on
all other spirits, to the intent that they may be of service to man, but
with a difference.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6199.">6199.</span></span>

Another spirit also supposed himself to be me, insomuch that when he
talked with me In my native language he believed that he was speaking
from his own, saying that the language was his. But it was shown that
the language that belongs to spirits is entirely different, and that it
is the universal language of all, and that from it ideas flowed into my
native language, and thus they speak, not from themselves, but in me;
and that this is a proof that they not only come into those things which
are man's, but also that they suppose them to be their own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6200.">6200.</span></span>

As I have been now continuously for nine years in company with spirits
and angels, I have carefully observed how the case is with regard to
influx. While I have been thinking, the material ideas of my thought
appeared as it were In the middle of a kind of undulation, <span
id="fr_144"></span>[6200-1](#fn_144) and I noticed that this undulation
was nothing else than such things as had been adjoined to that subject
in the memory, and that the full thought appears in this way to the
spirits; but that nothing else then comes to the man's apprehension than
that which is In the middle and which had appeared as material. I have
likened that surrounding undulation to spiritual wings, by which the
thing thought of is elevated out of the memory. From this the man has
perception of a subject. That in that surrounding undulation there were
innumerable things which agreed with the subject thought of, was made
evident to me from the fact that the spirits who were in a more subtle
sphere thereby knew all those things which I had ever known on that
subject; and thus that they fully imbibe and put on all things which
belong to the man; and genii, who attend solely to the cupidities and
affections, imbibe and put on those things which are of the loves. To
illustrate this by an example: When I thought of a man whom I know, then
the idea of him, such as it appears when his name is mentioned before a
man, was presented in the midst; but round about, like an undulating
volatile something (undans volatile), was everything that I had known
and thought about him from childhood; whereby the whole of him, such as
he was in my thought and affection, appeared among the spirits In an
instant. Moreover when I have been thinking about any city, then from
that undulating sphere that was round about, the spirits instantly knew
all that I had seen and known about it. The case was the same with
matters of science.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_144"></span>[6200-1](ac124.htm#fr_144) Thought represented
by an undulating sphere with a solid in the middle. When a stone is
thrown into clam water it produces a concentric undulation. This however
is only in a plane. But imagine a sphere or globe of some fluid medium
with such an exciting object in the middle, and undulations going away
from it in all directions. This may give some idea of the "material
ideas in the middle" and the "volatile undulating sphere" all around it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6201-6250](ac125)
