[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac122)  [Next](ac124.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="6101.">6101.</span></span>

Verses 11, 12. And Joseph made his father and his brethren dwell, and
gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in
the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded. And Joseph sustained his
father, and his brethren, and all his father's house, with bread,
according to the mouth of the babe. "And Joseph made his father and his
brethren dwell," signifies the life of spiritual good and of the truths
of the church from the internal celestial; "and gave them a possession
in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land," signifies in the inmost
of the natural mind where memory-knowledges are; "in the land of
Rameses," signifies the inmost of the mind and its quality; "as Pharaoh
had commanded," signifies with the consent of the natural where
memory-knowledges are; "and Joseph sustained his father, and his
brethren, and all his father's house, with bread," signifies that from
the internal celestial there was a continuous influx of good into
spiritual good and the truths of the church in the natural, whence was
their life; "according to the mouth of the babe," signifies each
according to the quality of the good of innocence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6102.">6102.</span></span>

And Joseph made his father and his brethren dwell. That this signifies
the life of spiritual good and of the truths of the church from the
internal celestial, is evident from the signification of "to dwell," as
being life (n. 1293, 3384, 3613, 4451, 6051); from the representation of
Israel, who is here the "father," as being spiritual good from the
natural (n. 5801, 5803, 5807, 5812, 5817, 5819, 5826, 5833); from the
representation of his sons, who are here the "brethren," as being the
truths of the church in the natural (n. 5414, 5879, 5951); and from the
representation of Joseph, as being the internal celestial (n. 5869,
5877). From all which it is evident that by the words "Joseph made his
father and his brethren dwell" is signified the life of spiritual good
and of the truths of the church from the internal celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6103.">6103.</span></span>

And gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the
land. That this signifies in the inmost of the natural mind where
memory-knowledges are, is evident from the signification of a
"possession," as being the residence of the spiritual life (see n.
2658); from the signification of the "land of Egypt," as being the
natural mind where memory-knowledges are (n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288,
5301); and from the signification of "the best of the land," as being
the inmost (of which above, see n. 6084). Hence it is plain that by the
words "and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of
the land" is signified the residence of spiritual life in the inmost of
the natural mind where memory-knowledges are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6104.">6104.</span></span>

In the land of Rameses. That this signifies the inmost of the mind and
its quality, is evident from the fact that all the names in the Word,
both of persons and of places, signify things (see n. 1888, 3422, 4298,
4442, 5095, 5225); and as the "land of Goshen" denotes the inmost of the
natural mind (n. 5910, 6028, 6031, 6068), therefore "Rameses," which was
the best tract of land in the land of Goshen, denotes the inmost of what
is spiritual in the natural mind. But the nature of this inmost can
scarcely be comprehended by man, for it contains innumerable and also
ineffable things, which can only be seen in the light of heaven, thus by
angels; as is the case with the rest of the names, of both places and
persons, which occur in the word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6105.">6105.</span></span>

As Pharaoh had commanded. That this signifies with the consent of the
natural where memory-knowledges are, is evident from the signification
of "commanding," as being influx (see n. 5486, 5732), but here consent,
because the natural which is represented by Pharaoh has all that belongs
to it by influx from the internal; and therefore that which the natural
commands, does indeed appear like a command from it, but it is really
from the internal; thus it is consent. Relatively to the internal, man's
natural is almost like his speech relatively to his thought; for it
appears as if the speech of man commands or gives orders, but it is the
thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6106.">6106.</span></span>

And Joseph sustained his father, and his brethren, and all his father's
house, with bread. That this signifies that from the internal celestial
there was a continuous influx of good into spiritual good and the truths
of the church in the natural, whence was their life, is evident from the
signification of "sustaining with bread," as being the influx of good;
for "to sustain" here denotes to continually flow in, whence man has
spiritual life, and "bread" is the good of love (see n. 276, 680, 2165,
2177, 3464, 3478, 3735, 3813, 4211, 4217, 4735, 4976, 5915); from the
representation of Joseph, as being the internal celestial (n. 5869,
5877); from the representation of Israel, who is here the "father," as
being spiritual good from the natural; from the representation of his
sons, who are here the "brethren," as being the truths of the church in
the natural (of which above, n. 6102); and from the signification of
"all his father's house," as being all in one complex that is of
spiritual good and from this good. Hence it is plain that by "Joseph
sustained his father, and his brethren, and all his father's house, with
bread," is signified the continuous influx of the good of love from the
internal celestial into spiritual good and the truths of the church in
the natural, and into all things that are of spiritual good and from it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6107.">6107.</span></span>

According to the mouth of the babe. That this signifies each according
to the quality of the good of innocence, is evident from the
signification of "according to the mouth," as being each, and according
to quality; and from the signification of "babe," as being the good of
innocence (see n. 430, 2126, 3183, 5608). In regard to influx from the
internal celestial into spiritual good and into the truths of the church
in the natural according to the quality of the good of innocence, the
case is this. Innocence is that from the inmost which qualifies all the
good of charity and of love. For the Lord flows in through innocence
into charity, and in proportion to the innocence, such is the reception
of charity; for innocence is the very essential of charity (n. 2780,
3111, 3183, 3994, 4797, 6013). The nature of innocence may be seen as in
a mirror from little children, in that they love their parents and trust
in them alone, having no care but to please them; and accordingly they
have food and clothing not merely for their needs, but also for their
delight; and as they love their parents, they do with the delight of
affection whatever is agreeable to them, thus not only what they
command, but also what they suppose them to wish to command, and
moreover have no self-regard whatever; not to mention many other
characteristics of infancy. But be it known that the innocence of little
children is not innocence, but only its semblance. Real innocence dwells
solely in wisdom (n. 2305, 2306, 3494, 4797), and wisdom consists in
bearing oneself toward the Lord, from the good of love and of faith, as
do little children toward their parents in the way just stated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6108.">6108.</span></span>

Verses 13-26. And there was no bread in all the land, because the famine
was very grievous, and the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan labored
by reason of the famine. And Joseph gathered together all the silver
that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the
produce which they bought; and Joseph brought the silver into Pharaoh's
house. And when the silver was all spent in the land of Egypt, and in
the land of Canaan, all Egypt came unto Joseph, saying, Give us bread;
for why should we die beside thee because the silver faileth? And Joseph
said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if silver
fail. And they brought their cattle unto Joseph; and Joseph gave them
bread \[in exchange\] for the horses, and for the cattle of the flock,
and for the cattle of the herd, and for the asses; and he provided them
with bread \[in exchange\] for all their cattle in this year. And when
this year was ended, they came unto him in the second year, and said to
him, We will not hide from my lord how that the silver is spent; and the
cattle of the beast is to my lord; there is naught left before my lord,
besides our body, and our ground: wherefore should we die before thine
eyes, both we and our ground? buy us and our ground for bread, and we
shall live, and our ground, servants to Pharaoh; and give seed, that we
may live, and not die, and the ground be not laid waste. And Joseph
bought all the ground of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold
everyone his field, because the famine grew strong upon them; and the
land was Pharaoh's. And as for the people, he removed it to the cities
from one end of the border of Egypt even to the other end thereof. Only
the ground of the priests bought he not; because a portion was appointed
for the priests by Pharaoh, and they ate their appointed portion which
Pharaoh had given them; wherefore they sold not their ground. And Joseph
said unto the people, Behold I have bought you this day and your ground
for Pharaoh; lo here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the ground. And
it shall be in the ingatherings that ye shall give a fifth to Pharaoh,
and four parts shall be for you, for seed of the field, and for your
food, and for them in your houses, and for food for your babes. And they
said, Thou hast made us live; let us find grace in the eyes of my lord,
and we will be Pharaoh's servants. And Joseph made it a statute even
unto this day, concerning the ground of Egypt, that Pharaoh should have
the fifth; only the ground of the priests, only theirs, was not
Pharaoh's. "And there was no bread in all the land," signifies that good
no longer appeared; "because the famine was very grievous," signifies
desolation; "and the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan labored by
reason of the famine," signifies that this was in the natural and within
the church; "and Joseph gathered together all the silver," signifies all
true and adaptable memory-knowledge; "that was found in the land of
Egypt, and in the land of Canaan," signifies that was in the natural and
in the church; "for the produce which they bought," signifies that
thereby they were sustained; "and Joseph brought the silver into
Pharaoh's house," signifies that it was all brought into relation to
what is general in the natural; "and when the silver was all spent in
the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan," signifies that on account
of the desolation, true and adaptable memory-knowledge was no longer to
be seen in the natural and within the church; "all Egypt came unto
Joseph," signifies application to the internal; "saying, Give us bread,"
signifies an entreaty concerning the sustenance of the spiritual life;
"for why should we die beside thee because silver faileth?" signifies
that otherwise by reason of the lack of truth there would be spiritual
death; "and Joseph said," signifies the internal from which is the
answer; "Give your cattle, and I will give you \[in exchange\] for your
cattle," signifies that they should bring forward the goods of truth,
and they would be sustained; "if silver fail," signifies if truth is no
longer visible to them; "and they brought their cattle unto Joseph,"
signifies the goods of truth, that they were brought forward; "and
Joseph gave them bread," signifies sustenance in respect to the
spiritual life; "\[in exchange\] for the horses," signifies
memory-knowledges from the intellectual; "and for the cattle of the
flock, and for the cattle of the herd," signifies interior and exterior
goods of truth; "and for the asses," signifies things of service; "and
he provided them with bread \[in exchange\] for all their cattle,"
signifies sustenance through the influx of good from the internal; "in
this year," signifies the period of this state; "and when this year was
ended," signifies desolation after the period of this state; "they came
unto him in the second year," signifies the beginning of the following
state; "and said to him, We will not hide from my lord," signifies a
perception that it was known to the internal; "how that the silver is
spent," signifies truth not visible on account of the desolation; "and
the cattle of the beast is to my lord," signifies the good of truth in
like manner; "there is nought left before my lord, besides our body and
our ground," signifies that the receptacles of good and truth were
completely desolated; "wherefore should we die before thine eyes, both
we and our ground?" signifies that if they should be desolated there
would no longer be spiritual life under the internal; "buy us and our
ground for bread," signifies the appropriation of both receptacles, that
they may be sustained with good; "and we shall live, and our ground,
servants to Pharaoh," signifies total submission; "and give seed,"
signifies in this way an influx of the good of charity and of the truth
of faith; "that we may live and not die," signifies spiritual life from
this source, and no longer any fear of damnation; "and the ground be not
laid waste," signifies that the mind must be cultivated with the
memory-knowledges of the church; "and Joseph bought all the ground of
Egypt for Pharaoh," signifies that the internal appropriated to itself
the whole natural mind where memory-knowledges are, and placed it under
general auspices; "for the Egyptians sold every one his field,"
signifies the renunciation and subjection of all things which are of
service to the church; "because the famine grew strong upon them,"
signifies because there was desolation even to despair; "and the land
was Pharaoh's," signifies that all things were subjected to the natural
that was under the auspices of the internal; "and as for the people he
removed it to the cities," signifies that truths of memory-knowledge
were referred to doctrinal things; "from one end of the border of Egypt
even to the other end thereof," signifies extension through the whole
natural where memory-knowledges are; "only the ground of the priests
bought he not," signifies that the internal procured for itself from the
natural capacities to receive good, because these are from itself;
"because a portion was appointed for the priests by Pharaoh," signifies
that it was set in order by the natural that was under the auspices of
the internal; "and they ate their appointed portion which Pharaoh had
given them," signifies that goods did not appropriate to themselves more
than was according to the setting in order; "wherefore they sold not
their ground," signifies that for this reason they had no need to
renounce and submit them; "and Joseph said unto the people," signifies
the influx of the internal into the truths of memory-knowledge; "Behold
I have bought you this day and your ground for Pharaoh," signifies that
it procured these for itself, and made them subject to the general in
the natural that was under the auspices of the internal; "lo here is
seed for you, and ye shall sow the ground," signifies the good of
charity and the truth of faith that were to be implanted; "and it shall
be in the ingatherings," signifies the fruits thence derived; "that ye
shall give a fifth to Pharaoh," signifies remains, that these are for
the general in the natural that is under the auspices of the internal;
"and four parts shall be for you," signifies those things which were not
yet remains; "for seed of the field," signifies for the nourishment of
the mind; "and for your food, and for them in your houses," signifies
that thereby the good of truth may be in each and all things; "and for
food for your babes," signifies in those things which are of innocence;
"and they said, Thou hast made us live," signifies spiritual life in no
other manner and from no other source; "let us find grace in the eyes of
my lord," signifies the will that in this way they be made subject, and
humiliation; "and we will be Pharaoh's servants," signifies that they
renounce their own, and submit to the natural that is under the auspices
of the internal; "and Joseph made it a statute," signifies what is
concluded from consent; "even unto this day," signifies eternally;
"concerning the ground of Egypt, that Pharaoh should have the fifth,"
signifies remains, as before; "only the ground of the priests, only
theirs, was not Pharaoh's," signifies capacities to receive good, that
these are immediately from the internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6109.">6109.</span></span>

And there was no bread in all the land. That this signifies that good no
longer appeared, is evident from the signification of "bread," as being
the good of love and of charity (of which just above, n. 6106); and from
the signification of there "being none in all the land," as being that
it no longer appeared. In what now follows, the internal celestial is
treated of, that it reduced all things in the natural into order under a
general principle, to the end that there might be effected a conjunction
of memory-knowledges with the truths of the church, and through these
truths with spiritual good, and through this good with the internal
celestial. But as the reduction of memory-knowledges into order under a
general principle cannot be effected otherwise than through vastations
of good and desolations of truth, and, soon afterward, through the
giving of sustenance; therefore in what now follows, all these things
are treated of in the internal sense. But for many reasons these things
rarely take place with a man during his life in this world; whereas in
the other life they take place with all who are being regenerated. And
as they do not take place with man in this world, it is no wonder if
they appear to him as things unknown, and seem to him like secret things
never before heard of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6110.">6110.</span></span>

Because the famine was very grievous. That this signifies desolation, is
evident from the signification of "famine," as being a lack of good and
of knowledges (see n. 1460, 3364, 5277, 5279, 5281, 5300, 5579, 5893);
thus a "very grievous famine" denotes desolation (n. 5360, 5376, 5415,
5576). With regard to desolation, be it known that truths and goods and
the knowledges thereof make the spiritual life of those who are in
heaven, for these are the celestial and spiritual foods with which they
are nourished. These foods are given them daily by the Lord. When it is
morning with them, goods are supplied; when it is noon, truths are
supplied; but when it is evening, goods and truths are lacking, and this
even unto twilight and the return of morning. The angels are then kept
in a state of appetite, which is of such a nature that they long for
these things more than those who are hungry on earth long for food. This
state is signified by "famine," and it is a kind of desolation, but not
such as exists with those who are in the lower earth (n. 698, 699,
1106-1113). \[2\] Scarcely anyone in this world can believe that the
angelic heaven has such an appetite for truths and goods and the
knowledges of these; for they who are intent on nothing else than gain
and glory and indulgence in pleasures, will wonder that such things are
a matter of life to the angels, and will say, "What are knowledges of
good and of truth to me? what have these to do with life? The things
which give life and the delight of life are riches, honors, and
pleasures." But be it known to them that the life which is from these
things is the life of the body, and not the life of the soul, and that
the former life perishes with the body, but the latter remains to
eternity; and that they consult their own evil who during their abode in
this world think nothing about the spiritual life. \[3\] As further
regards desolation, it is for the sake of inducing appetite, for goods
and truths are received in accordance with this; and when the desires
excited by appetite are obtained, they cause satisfaction and happiness.
Wherefore in the other life they who are in desolation are soon
afterward refreshed, and attain their desires. By means of such
alternations are all made perfect. It is worthy of note that the
alternations of the day in the natural world-morning, midday, evening,
night, and again morning-perfectly represent the alternations in the
spiritual world, with only this difference: that the alternations of the
spiritual world flow into the understanding and the will, and sustain
those things which are of the life; while the alternations in the
natural world flow into those things which are of the body, and sustain
them. \[4\] What is still more worthy of note is that the shades of
evening and the darkness of night do not come from the Lord, but from
things that belong to angels, spirits, and men. For the Lord as a Sun is
continually shining and flowing in, but evils and falsities from what is
one's own, being in men, spirits, and angels, turn and convert them from
the Lord, and thus lead them into the shades of evening, and those who
are evil into the darkness of night; in like manner as the sun of our
world is continually shining and inflowing, but the earth by its
rotation turns itself away from it, and brings itself into shade and
darkness. \[5\] The reason why these alternations take place in the
natural world is that the natural world comes forth from the spiritual
world, and therefore also subsists from it; and hence it is that
universal nature is a theater representative of the Lord's kingdom (see
n. 3483, 4939). The reason why these alternations exist in the spiritual
world is that all who are in heaven may be continually perfected. From
this there are such alternations also in the natural world, for
otherwise all things therein would perish with drought. \[6\] Yet be it
known that in heaven there is no night, but only evening, which is
succeeded by the twilight that precedes the morning. But in hell there
is night. There are alternations there also, but these are opposite to
the alternations in heaven; for in hell morning is the heat of
cupidities, noon is the itching of falsities, evening is anxiety, and
night is torment. Yet through all these alternations the night
dominates, and it is only the variations of shade and of the darkness of
night that present these alternations. \[7\] Be it further known that in
the spiritual world the alternations with one person are not like those
with another; and also that the alternations there are not distinguished
into stated times, because it is the variations of state that present
them to view; for in place of times in the natural world there are
states in the spiritual world (n. 1274, 1382, 2625, 2788, 2837, 3254,
3356, 4814, 4882, 4901, 4916).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6111.">6111.</span></span>

And the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan labored by reason of the
famine. That this signifies that this was in the natural where
memory-knowledges are, and within the church, is evident from the
signification of the "land of Egypt," as being the natural mind where
memory-knowledges are (n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301); from the
signification of the "land of Canaan," as being the church (of which
above, see n. 6067); and from the signification of "famine," as being
desolation (as just above, n. 6110). Hence it is evident that by the
words "the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan labored by reason of the
famine" is signified that there was desolation in the natural where
memory-knowledges are, and within the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6112.">6112.</span></span>

And Joseph gathered together all the silver. That this signifies all
true and adaptable memory-knowledge, is evident from the signification
of "gathering together," as being to bring together into a one; from the
representation of Joseph, as being the internal celestial (of which
often above); and from the signification of "silver," as being truth
(see n. 1551, 2954, 5658), but here true and adaptable memory-knowledge,
for it is said of the silver in the land of Egypt and in the land of
Canaan, as presently follows. Hence it is that by "Joseph gathered
together all the silver" is signified that the internal celestial
brought together into a one all the true and adaptable memory-knowledge.
A memory-knowledge is said to be true and adaptable that has not been
darkened by fallacies, which, so long as they cannot be dispelled,
render the memory-knowledge unadaptable; and so also is a
memory-knowledge which has not become perverted by applications to
falsities and to evils by others or by oneself, for when these have once
been impressed on any memory-knowledge, they remain. Therefore all
memory-knowledge that is free from such vitiations, is true and
adaptable memory-knowledge.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6113.">6113.</span></span>

That was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan. That
this signifies that was in the natural and in the church, is evident
from the signification of the "land of Egypt," as being the natural
where memory-knowledges are (of which above, n. 6111); and from the
signification of the "land of Canaan," as being the church (of which
also above, n. 6067). By the church is here meant that which is of the
church with man, for man is a church when he is in good and truth, and
an assemblage of such men makes the church in general.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6114.">6114.</span></span>

For the produce which they bought. That this signifies that thereby they
were sustained, is evident from the signification of "produce," as being
the truth of the church (n. 5402); and from the signification of
"buying," as being to appropriate (see n. 4397, 5374, 5397, 5406, 5410,
5426). Thus the signification is, to be sustained, for the subject
treated of is the spiritual food which is signified by "produce," which
food when appropriated sustains the spiritual life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6115.">6115.</span></span>

And Joseph brought the silver into Pharaoh's house. That this signifies
that it was all brought into relation to what is general in the natural,
is evident from the signification of "bringing into," as being to bring
into relation and to introduce; from the signification of "silver," as
being true and adaptable memory-knowledge (see n. 6112); and from the
representation of Pharaoh, as being the natural in general (see n. 5160,
5799, 6015); thus the "house of Pharaoh" is what is general in the
natural, because it is everything therein in the complex. \[2\] In
regard to true and adaptable memory-knowledges being brought into
relation to what is general, be it known that in order to be anything,
all memory-knowledges and also all truths whatsoever, must be brought
into relation to their generals, and must be placed and contained in and
under a general, as otherwise they are at once dissipated. For in order
that memory-knowledges and truths may be anything, they must be brought
into a form in which they shall mutually regard each other, which cannot
be effected unless they are consociated under a general; and therefore
it is this general which holds them together in form, and causes that
each constituent therein may have its own quality. The general itself,
together with other generals, must also be brought into relation under
things more general; and the more general things again, under the most
general; for otherwise the general things, and likewise the more general
things, would be dissipated. \[3\] The most general universal, by virtue
of which all things are held together, is the Lord Himself, and that
which holds together is the Divine truth proceeding from Him. The more
general things are the general societies in the spiritual world, into
which the Divine truth flows and distinguishes them in kind from one
another. The general things are the societies less general under each
more general society. The more general societies are those to which the
members, organs, and viscera in man correspond, which by a wonderful
connection are in such a form that they mutually regard each other, and
thus mutually hold each other together, and also present themselves as a
one. In man, the most general universal, which holds the single things
together, is the soul; thus also it is the Divine truth proceeding from
the Lord, for this is continually flowing in and causing the soul to be
such as it is. \[4\] The Divine truth proceeding from the Lord is what
is called the "Word through which all things were created" (John 1:1-3),
or through which all things have come into existence, consequently
through which all things subsist. That all things in the universal
natural world are under a general, and each thing under its own general;
and that otherwise they cannot subsist, will be plainly discerned by him
who is willing to pay attention to the things in nature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6116.">6116.</span></span>

And when the silver was all spent in the land of Egypt, and in the land
of Canaan. That this signifies that on account of the desolation, true
and adaptable memory-knowledge was no longer to be seen in the natural
and within the church, is evident from the signification of "being all
spent," as being to be no longer visible; from the signification of
"silver," as being true and adaptable memory-knowledge (of which above,
n. 6112); from the signification of the "land of Egypt," as being the
natural where memory-knowledges are (of which above, n. 6111); and from
the signification of the "land of Canaan," as being the church (of which
also above, n. 6067). That it was on account of the desolation, is
evident from what goes before (n. 6110).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6117.">6117.</span></span>

And all Egypt came unto Joseph. That this signifies application to the
internal, is evident from the signification of "coming unto him," as
being to be applied; from the signification of "Egypt," as being
knowledge (of which above); and from the representation of Joseph, as
being the internal (of which also above). That all the memory-knowledge
in the natural was under the auspices of the internal, is signified by
Joseph's being ruler over all the land of Egypt. But the conjunction of
the truths of the church with the memory-knowledges in the natural is
what is now described in the internal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6118.">6118.</span></span>

Saying, Give us bread. That this signifies an entreaty concerning the
support of the spiritual life, is evident from the signification of
"giving," when predicated of bread, as being to sustain; and from the
signification of "bread," as being spiritual life. For by "bread" is
specifically signified the good of love and of charity, but in general
spiritual life, for in this case by "bread" is meant all food (as shown
above, see n. 2165); and when all food in general is meant, spiritual
life is meant, for in the spiritual sense food in general is all the
good of love and also all the truth of faith, and these two are what
make spiritual life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6119.">6119.</span></span>

For why should we die beside thee because the silver faileth? That this
signifies that otherwise by reason of the lack of truth there would be
spiritual death, is evident from the signification of "dying," as being
spiritual death (of which in what follows); and from the signification
of "silver failing," as being a lack of truth (that "silver" denotes
true and adaptable memory-knowledge may be seen above, n. 6112). In
regard to the fact that there is spiritual death when there is a lack of
truth, the case is this. Spiritual life consists in activities according
to truths, consequently in uses; for they who are in spiritual life have
an appetite and a longing for truths with a view to life, that is, that
they may live according to them, thus with a view to uses. So far
therefore as they are able to receive truths in accordance with which
uses may be done, so far they are in spiritual life, because so far they
are in the light of intelligence and of wisdom. When therefore truths
fail, as is the case when a state of shade comes, which is signified in
the Word by "evening" (n. 6110), the spiritual life labors; for such
things present themselves as belong to shade, that is, to spiritual
death; for in this case they are not as before kept in the light, but
are in part let back into their own; and hence there arises from the
shade an image of spiritual death, that is, of damnation. \[2\] That by
"death" is signified spiritual death, or damnation, is evident from very
many passages in the Word, of which it will suffice to adduce the
following. In Isaiah: In righteousness He shall judge the poor, and
reprove with rectitude the wretched of the earth. But He shall smite the
earth with the rod of His mouth, and with the breath of His lips shall
He cause the wicked to die (Isa. 11:4); speaking of the Lord. The "rod
of His mouth," and the "breath of His lips," denote the Divine truth
from which is judgment; "to die" denotes to be damned. Again: He will
swallow up death eternally; and the Lord Jehovih will wipe away the tear
from upon all faces (Isa. 25:8). Again: The dead shall not live; the
Rephaim shall not rise; because Thou hast visited, Thou hast
extinguished them (Isa. 26:14). Again: Thy dead shall live, my carcass,
they shall arise (Isa. 26:19). Again: Ye have said, We have made a
covenant with death, and with hell have we made a vision; your covenant
with death shall be abolished, and your vision with hell shall not stand
(Isa. 28:15, 18). \[3\] In Jeremiah: Ye wait for the light, but He turns
it into the shadow of death, He makes it thick darkness (Jer. 13:16). In
Ezekiel: Ye have profaned Me among My people for handfuls of barley and
for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to make
the souls live that should not live (Ezek. 13:19). In Hosea: I will
redeem them from the hand of hell; from death I will deliver them; O
death, I will be thy pests; O hell, I will be thy destruction (Hos.
13:14). In David: Thou liftest me up from the gates of death (Ps. 9:13).
Again: Enlighten mine eyes, lest perchance I sleep death (Ps. 13:3).
Again: The cords of death compassed me, and the cords of hell (Ps. 18:4,
5). Again: They shall be set as a flock in hell; death shall pasture
them (Ps. 49:14). In John: I have the keys of hell and of death (Rev.
1:18). Again: He that overcometh shall not be hurt in the second death
(Rev. 2:11). \[4\] Again: I know thy works, that thou hast a name that
thou livest, but thou art dead. Be thou watchful, and establish the
things that remain, which are ready to die (Rev. 3:1, 2). In Matthew:
The people that sitteth in darkness saw a great light; and to them that
sit in the region and shadow of death, to them light hath arisen (Matt.
4:16). In John: He that heareth My word, and believeth on Him that sent
Me, shall have eternal life, and shall not come into judgment, but hath
passed from death unto life (John 5:24). Again: I go away, and ye shall
seek Me, but ye shall die in your sin. I said therefore unto you that ye
shall die in your sins; for unless ye believe that I am, ye shall die in
your sins. If anyone shall keep My word, he shall never see death (John
8:21, 24, 51, 52). As "death" signified damnation, the people of the
representative church were forbidden to touch the dead, and if they
touched they were unclean, and were to be cleansed (Ezek. 44:25; Lev.
15:31; 21:1, 2; 22:8; Num. 6:6-12; 19:11 to the end).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6120.">6120.</span></span>

And Joseph said. That this signifies the internal from which is the
answer, is evident from the representation of Joseph, as being the
internal (of which above); that it signifies the answer is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6121.">6121.</span></span>

Give your cattle; and I will give you \[in exchange\] for your cattle.
That this signifies that they should bring forward the goods of truth
and they would be sustained, is evident from the signification of
"cattle," as being the goods of truth (n. 6016, 6045); and from the
signification of "giving \[in exchange\] for them," namely, bread, as
being the sustenance of the spiritual life (of which above, see n.
6118).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6122.">6122.</span></span>

If silver fail. That this signifies if truth is no longer visible to
them, is evident from the signification of "silver failing," as being a
lack of truth, thus that truth is no longer visible (of which above, n.
6116, 6119). Truth is said to be not visible, because in a state of
desolation truth appears as if it had fled away. Yet it is present, for
all the truth and good which have at any time been given by the Lord to
man, spirit, and angel, remain, and nothing of them is taken away; but
in a state of desolation they are obscured by what is their own, so as
not to appear; but when a state of light returns, they become present
and visible. From this it is plain what is meant by truth not being
visible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6123.">6123.</span></span>

And they brought their cattle unto Joseph. That this signifies the goods
of truth, that they were brought forward, is evident from the
signification of "bringing," as being to be brought forward; and from
the signification of "cattle," as being the goods of truth (see n. 6016,
6045).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6124.">6124.</span></span>

And Joseph gave them bread. That this signifies sustenance in regard to
the spiritual life, is evident from the signification of "giving bread,"
as being the sustenance of the spiritual life (of which above, n. 6118).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6125.">6125.</span></span>

\[In exchange\] for the horses. That this signifies memory-knowledges
from the intellectual, is evident from the signification of "horses," as
being things intellectual (n. 2760-2762, 3217, 5321); and because they
are predicated of Egypt, by which are signified memory-knowledges,
"horses" here denote memory-knowledges from the intellectual. It is here
necessary to state what these memory-knowledges from the intellectual
are. Man has an intellectual, and he has a will, and this not only in
his internal man, but also in his external. The intellectual in a man
grows and increases from his infancy to his maturity, and consists in
viewing things from what belongs to experience and to memory-knowledge;
and also in viewing causes from effects; and in viewing consequences in
connection with their causes. Thus the intellectual consists in the
comprehension and perception of such things as are of civic and moral
life. It comes into existence from the influx of light from heaven; and
therefore every man can be perfected in respect to the intellectual. The
intellectual is given to everyone according to his application,
according to his life, and according to his nature; nor is it lacking in
anyone, provided he is of sound mind. It is given to man to the end that
he may be in freedom and in choice, that is, in the freedom of choosing
good or evil. Unless man has such an intellectual as has been described,
he cannot do this of himself, thus neither could anything be
appropriated to him. \[2\] Be it known further, that it is man's
intellectual which receives what is spiritual, so as to be a recipient
of spiritual truth and good. For nothing of good, that is, of charity,
and nothing of truth, that is, of faith, can be insinuated into anyone
who has not an intellectual, but they are insinuated according to his
intellectual; and therefore also man is not regenerated by the Lord
until in adult age and possessed of an intellectual, before which period
the good of love and truth of faith fall as seed into ground that is
quite barren. But when a man has been regenerated, his intellectual
performs the use of seeing and perceiving what is good, and thereby what
is true; for the intellectual carries over those things which are of the
light of heaven into those which are of the light of nature, whereby the
former appear in the latter as do the interior affections of man in a
face free from pretence; and as the intellectual performs this use,
therefore in the Word, in many passages where the spiritual of the
church is treated of, its intellectual also is treated of, as of the
Lord's Divine mercy shall be shown elsewhere. \[3\] From all this it is
now evident what is meant by memory-knowledges from the intellectual,
namely, that they are memory-knowledges which confirm those things that
a man intellectually apprehends and perceives, whether these are evil or
good. These memory-knowledges are signified in the Word by "horses from
Egypt;" as in Isaiah: Woe to them that go down into Egypt for help, and
lean on horses; and trust on the chariot, because they are many, and
upon the horsemen, because they are very strong; and they look not unto
the Holy One of Israel, and seek not Jehovah. For Egypt is man, and not
God; and his horses flesh, and not spirit (Isa. 31:1, 3); where "horses
from Egypt" denote memory-knowledges from a perverted intellectual.
\[4\] In Ezekiel: He rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors
into Egypt, that it might give him horses and much people. Shall he
prosper? shall he escape that doeth this? (Ezek. 17:15); where also
"horses from Egypt" denote memory-knowledges from a perverted
intellectual, which are consulted in matters of faith, while the Word,
that is, the Lord, is not believed except from these; thus it is not
believed at all, for denial reigns in a perverted intellectual. \[5\]
That such memory-knowledges were destroyed is represented by the horses
and chariots of Pharaoh being drowned in the sea Suph; and because these
knowledges are signified by "horses," and false doctrinal things by
"chariots," therefore "horses and chariots" are so often mentioned in
the Word (see Exod. 14:17, 18, 23, 26, 28; and thereafter in the Song of
Moses and Miriam): The horse of Pharaoh went in, and also his chariot,
and also his horsemen, into the sea; but Jehovah caused the waters of
the sea to return upon them. Sing ye to Jehovah, for exalting He hath
exalted Himself; the horse and his rider hath He cast into the sea
(Exod. 15:19, 21). \[6\] Similar memory-knowledges are also signified by
what was prescribed in Moses for the king over Israel: If they desire a
king, a king from the midst of the brethren shall be set over them; only
he shall not multiply horses for himself, nor bring back the people into
Egypt in order that he may multiply horses (Deut. 17:15, 16); a king
represented the Lord as to Divine truth (n. 1672, 1728, 2015, 2069,
3009, 3670, 4575, 4581, 4789, 4966, 5044, 5068), thus as to
intelligence, for this when genuine is from Divine truth. That
intelligence ought to be procured by means of the Word, which is Divine
truth, and not by means of memory-knowledges from one's own
intellectual, is signified by the injunction that the king "should not
multiply horses, and should not bring back the people into Egypt in
order that he may multiply horses."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6126.">6126.</span></span>

And for the cattle of the flock, and for the cattle of the herd. That
this signifies the interior and exterior goods of truth, is evident from
the signification of "flock," as being interior goods, and from the
signification of "herd," as being exterior goods (see n. 5913); and as
it is the goods of truth that are signified, it is said "cattle of the
flock, and cattle of the herd," "cattle" being the good of truth (see n.
6016, 6045, 6049).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6127.">6127.</span></span>

And for the asses. That this signifies things of service, is evident
from the signification of "asses," as being things of service (see n.
5958, 5959).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6128.">6128.</span></span>

And he provided them with bread \[in exchange\] for all their cattle.
That this signifies sustenance through the influx of good from the
internal, is evident from the signification of "providing with bread,"
or giving them bread, as being the sustenance of the spiritual life (of
which above, n. 6118); from the signification of "cattle," as being the
good of truth (of which just above, n. 6126); and from the
representation of Joseph who provided them, as being the internal (as
also above). That it was through the influx of good from the internal,
follows, because all the sustenance of spiritual life in the natural is
effected by means of influx from the internal, that is, from the Lord
through the internal. As mention is so frequently made of influx, and
perhaps few know what is meant by influx, it is necessary to state what
it is. The nature of influx may be seen from a comparison with such
things as inflow in nature, as from the influx of heat from the sun into
all things of the earth, whence comes vegetative life; and from the
influx of light into the same, whence comes what is helpful to
vegetative life, and besides is the source of the consequent colors and
beauties; in like manner from the influx of heat into the surface of our
bodies, and also of light into the eye; in like manner from the influx
of sound into the ear; and so on. From this it may be comprehended what
is the influx of life from the Lord, who is the Sun of heaven, from whom
comes the heat which is love, and the spiritual light which is faith.
Moreover the influx itself is plainly felt; for heavenly heat, which is
love, causes the vital heat which is in man; and heavenly light, which
is faith, causes the intellectual light which is in man; but these are
varied according to the reception.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6129.">6129.</span></span>

In this year. That this signifies the period of this state, is evident
from the signification of a "year," as being an entire period from
beginning to end (see n. 2906).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6130.">6130.</span></span>

And when this year was ended. That this signifies desolation after the
period of this state, is evident from the signification of "this year
being ended," as being after the period of this state. That a "year"
denotes the period of an entire state, may be seen just above (n. 6129).
That there was desolation after that period, is plain from what now
follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6131.">6131.</span></span>

They came unto him in the second year. That this signifies the beginning
of the following state, is evident from what goes before, thus without
further explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6132.">6132.</span></span>

And said to him, We will not hide from my lord. That this signifies that
it was known to the internal, is evident from the signification of
"saying," as being perception (of which above, n. 6063); from the
representation of Joseph, who is here the "lord," as being the internal
(of which also above); and from the signification of "not hiding it from
him," as being to be known. That in the internal sense "not to hide"
denotes to be known, is because everything that comes forth and takes
place in the natural is known to the internal, for the natural has from
the internal all that belongs to itself, and therefore nothing can be
concealed from the internal. Nevertheless in the external sense, and
especially in the historical sense, the present form of speech is made
use of; just as when the Lord speaks to a man He first questions him
concerning the matter in hand, although it is fully known to Him; as for
instance when the angel of Jehovah spake unto Hagar (Gen. 16:7, 8); unto
Abraham (Gen. 18:9); and unto Moses (Exod. 4:2); and indeed in no other
way would the external feel satisfied, for unless it utters a thing, it
believes that it is not known.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6133.">6133.</span></span>

How that our silver is spent. That this signifies truth not visible on
account of the desolation, is evident from what was said above (n.
6116), where like words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6134.">6134.</span></span>

And the cattle of the beast is to my lord. That this signifies the good
of truth in like manner, is evident from the signification of the
"cattle of the beast," or of the "cattle of the flock and of the herd,"
as being the interior and exterior good of truth (of which above, n.
6126). That this in like manner was no longer visible on account of the
desolation, is plain from what was said just above concerning the silver
(n. 6133).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6135.">6135.</span></span>

There is naught left before my lord besides our body and our ground.
That this signifies that the receptacles of good and truth were
completely desolated, is evident from the signification of "body," as
being a receptacle of good (of which in what follows); and from the
signification of "ground," as being a receptacle of truth. That "ground"
denotes a receptacle of truth is because it receives seeds, and by the
seeds that are sown in it are specifically signified those things which
are of faith from charity, thus which are of truth from good (see n.
1025, 1447, 1610, 1940, 2848, 3038, 3310, 3373); hence "ground" denotes
a receptacle of truth, as may be seen from what has before been said and
shown concerning "ground" (n. 566, 1068, 3671). That these receptacles
were desolated is signified by there being "naught left before my lord
besides." \[2\] In the genuine sense "body" signifies the good which is
of love, and "ground" the truth which is of faith; but when the truths
and goods of truth which are signified by "silver" and "cattle" are no
longer visible on account of the desolation, then by "body" is signified
only a receptacle of good, and by "ground" only a receptacle of truth.
That in the genuine sense "body" signifies the good which is of love, is
because the body, or the whole man which is meant by the "body," is a
receptacle of life from the Lord, thus a receptacle of good; for the
good of love makes the life itself in man, because the vital heat, which
is love, is the vital heat itself; and unless this heat is in a man, he
is a dead thing. Therefore it is that by the "body" in the internal
sense is meant the good of love. And even if a man has no heavenly love,
but only infernal love, still the inmost of his life is from heavenly
love, for this love continually flows in from the Lord and effects in
him vital heat in its beginning; but in its progress it is perverted by
the man, whence comes infernal love, from which there is an unclean
heat. \[3\] That in the genuine sense "body" is the good of love, is
very evident from the angels, for when they become present, love so
pours out of them that you would believe them to be nothing but love,
and this from their whole body, which also appears bright and shining
from the light which is from the love; for the good of love is like a
flame which emits from itself light, which is the truth of faith thence
derived. This being the character of the angels in heaven, what must not
the Lord Himself be, from whom the angels have everything of love, and
whose Divine Love appears as a Sun from which the universal heaven has
its light, and all who are therein have their heavenly heat, that is,
their love, thus their life. It is the Lord's Divine Human which so
appears, and from which all these things are. From this it is evident
what is meant by the Lord's "body," namely, the Divine love, in like
manner as by His "flesh" (see n. 3813). Moreover the Lord's very body
when glorified, that is, made Divine, is nothing else. What else must we
think about the Divine, which is infinite? \[4\] From all this it may be
known that by the "body" in the Holy Supper nothing else is meant than
the Lord's Divine love toward the universal human race, concerning which
it is thus written in the Gospels: Jesus taking the bread, and blessing,
brake and gave to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is My body
(Matt. 26:26; Mark 14:22; Luke 22:19); "this is My body," He said of the
bread, because by the "bread" also is signified the Divine love (n. 276,
680, 2165, 2177, 3464, 3478, 3735, 4735, 5915). \[5\] The Divine love is
also signified by the Lord's "body" in John: Jesus said, Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it up. But He spake of the temple
of His body (John 2:19, 21); the "temple of His body" is the Divine
truth from the Divine good (that the "temple" is the Lord as to Divine
truth, see above, n. 3720). And because His "body" in the supreme sense
is the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love, therefore all who are in
heaven are said to be "in the Lord's body." \[6\] That the Lord's "body"
is the Divine good, is evident also from these words in Daniel: I lifted
up mine eyes, and saw, and behold, a man clothed in linen, whose loins
were girded with gold of Uphaz; his body also was like the tarshish, and
his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as torches of
fire, and his arms and his feet like the shining of burnished brass, and
the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude (Dan. 10:5, 6); by
the "gold of Uphaz with which the loins were girded," by the "appearance
of lightning which was on his face," by the "torches of fire which his
eyes presented," and by the "shining of brass which was of his arms and
his feet," are signified the goods of love; that "gold" is the good of
love, may be seen above (n. 113, 1551, 1552, 5658), and also "fire" (n.
934, 4906, 5215), and because "fire" so also "lightning;" and that
"brass" is the good of love and of charity in the natural (n. 425,
1551); by the "tarshish," like to which the rest of the body appeared,
namely-the middle of the body between the head and the loins, is
signified the good of charity and of faith, for the tarshish is a
flashing precious stone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6136.">6136.</span></span>

Wherefore should we die before thine eyes, both we and our ground? That
this signifies that if they should be desolated there would no longer be
spiritual life under the internal, is evident from the signification of
"before thine eyes," as being under the internal; for by Joseph, to whom
these words were spoken, is represented the internal; from the
signification of "both we and our ground," as being the receptacles of
good and truth (as just above, n. 6135), thus the receptacles of
spiritual life. These receptacles are said to "die" when there is not
within anything of spiritual life; for by "dying" is signified
desolation, that is, the privation of good and truth, which good and
truth make spiritual life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6137.">6137.</span></span>

Buy us and our ground for bread. That this signifies the appropriation
of both receptacles that they may be sustained with good, is evident
from the signification of "buying," as being appropriation (see n. 4397,
5374, 5397, 5406, 5410, 5426); from the signification of "us and our
ground," as being the receptacles of good and truth (as above, n. 6135,
6136), thus both receptacles; and from the signification of, "for
bread," as being sustenance from good. That "bread" is the good both of
love and of faith, is because by it is meant also all food in general
(n. 6118).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6138.">6138.</span></span>

And we shall live, and our ground, servants to Pharaoh. That this
signifies total submission, is evident from the signification of "we and
our ground," as being the receptacles of good and of truth (as just
above, see n. 6135-6137); and from the signification of "servants," as
being to be without freedom from man's own (see n. 5760, 5763), thus
total submission. By receptacles are meant the very forms of men; for
men are nothing else than forms receptive of life from the Lord, and
these forms are such by inheritance and by actual life that they refuse
to admit the spiritual life which is from the Lord. But when these
receptacles have been so far renounced that they no longer have any
freedom from the man's own, there is total submission. A man who is
being regenerated is at last so far reduced by repeated alternations of
desolation and sustenance that he no longer wills to be his own, but the
Lord's; and when he has become the Lord's he comes into a state of such
a nature that when he is left to self he grieves and is seized with
anxiety; and when he is delivered from this state of self he returns
into his happiness and bliss. In such a state are all the angels. \[2\]
In order that He may make a man blessed and happy, the Lord wills a
total submission, that is, that he be not partly his own and partly the
Lord's, for then there are two lords, which no one can serve at the same
time (Matt. 6:24). Total submission is also meant by the Lord's words in
Matthew: He that loveth father and mother more than Me is not worthy of
Me; and he that loveth son and daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me
(Matt. 10:37); where by "father and mother" are signified in general
those things which are man's own from inheritance, and by "son and
daughter" those things which are his own from actual life. Man's own is
also signified by "soul" in John: He that loveth his soul shall lose it;
but he that hateth his soul in this world shall keep it unto life
eternal. If anyone will minister to Me, let him follow Me; and where I
am, there shall also My servant be (John 12:25, 26). Total submission is
also signified by the Lord's words in Matthew: Another disciple said,
Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father. But Jesus said to him,
Follow Me; and let the dead bury their dead (Matt. 8:21, 22). \[3\] That
submission must be total is very evident from the first commandment of
the church: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God from all thy heart, and
from all thy soul, and from all thy mind, and from all thy forces; this
is the first commandment (Mark 12:30). Thus because love to the Lord
does not come from man, but from the Lord Himself, therefore all the
heart, all the soul, all the mind, and all the forces, which are
recipients, must be the Lord's, consequently submission must be total.
Such is the submission which is here signified by the words "we shall
live, and our ground, servants to Pharaoh," for by Pharaoh is
represented the natural in general which is under the auspices of the
internal celestial, in the supreme sense under the auspices of the Lord,
who in this sense is "Joseph."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6139.">6139.</span></span>

And give seed. That this signifies in this way an influx of the good of
charity and of the truth of faith, is evident from the signification of
"seed," as being the good of charity and the truth of faith (see n.
1025, 1447, 1610, 1940, 2848, 3038, 3310, 3373). That "to give" these is
influx, is evident, because they come into man by influx from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6140.">6140.</span></span>

That we may live, and not die. That this signifies spiritual life from
this source and no longer any fear of damnation, is evident from the
signification of "living," as being spiritual life (see n. 5890); and
from the signification of "dying," as being damnation (n. 6119), here
the fear of damnation; because in a state of desolation, when a man is
being regenerated, there is no damnation, but fear of damnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6141.">6141.</span></span>

And the ground be not laid waste. That this signifies that the mind must
be cultivated with the memory-knowledges of the church, is evident from
the signification of the "ground," as being the receptacle of truth (see
n. 6135-6137)-the receptacle itself being the mind, here the natural
mind, because it is the ground of Egypt that is spoken of; and from the
signification of "being laid waste," as being to be without truth that
is visible; in the present case, without the memory-knowledges of the
church, for by the "Egyptians" are signified the memory-knowledges of
the church (n. 4749, 4964, 4966, 6004), which also are the truths of the
natural. That the "land of Egypt" is the natural mind where
memory-knowledges are, may be seen above (n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288,
5301); wherefore the "ground of Egypt" signifies this mind specifically.
Therefore by "the ground not being laid waste" is signified that the
mind must be cultivated with memory-knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6142.">6142.</span></span>

And Joseph bought all the ground of Egypt for Pharaoh. That this
signifies that the internal appropriated to itself the whole natural
mind where memory-knowledges are, and placed it under general auspices,
is evident from the representation of Joseph, as being the internal (of
which often above); from the signification of "buying," as being to
appropriate to oneself (see n. 4397, 5374, 5406, 5410, 5426); from the
signification of the "ground of Egypt," as being the natural mind where
memory-knowledges are (as just above, n. 6141); and from the
representation of Pharaoh, as being the natural in general (n. 5160,
5799, 6015). Thus that it was "for Pharaoh" denotes to place under
general auspices in the natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6143.">6143.</span></span>

For the Egyptians sold everyone his field. That this signifies the
renunciation and subjection of all things that are of service to the
church, is evident from the signification of "selling," as being to
alienate so as to be no longer one's own (see n. 4098, 4752, 4758,
5886), thus to renounce and to subject; and from the signification of
"field," as being the doctrine of the church, and in a general sense,
the church (n. 368, 2971, 3310, 3766). From this it is plain that by
"the Egyptians sold everyone his field," is signified the renunciation
and subjugation of all things that are of service to the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6144.">6144.</span></span>

Because the famine grew strong upon them. That this signifies because
there was desolation even to despair, is evident from the signification
of "famine," as being desolation in respect to those things which are of
the church (n. 5415, 5576); and when the famine is said "to grow
strong," it denotes despair (n. 5279), for the last of desolation is
despair. There are many reasons why despair is the last of desolation
and of temptation (see n. 5279, 5280), of which only these following may
be adduced. Despair causes those who feel it to acknowledge in an
effectual and feeling manner that there is nothing of truth and good
from themselves, and that from themselves they are condemned; but that
they are delivered from condemnation by the Lord; and that salvation
flows in by means of truth and good. Despair also causes them to feel
the happiness of life which is from the Lord; for when they come out of
that state, they are like those who have been condemned to death, and
are set free from prison. Moreover by means of desolations and
temptations, states contrary to heavenly life are felt, the result of
which is the implantation of a sense and perception of the satisfaction
and happiness of heavenly life; for a sense and perception of what is
satisfying and happy is impossible without comparison with the
opposites. To the end therefore that full comparisons may be made,
desolations and temptations are brought to their utmost, that is, to
despair.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6145.">6145.</span></span>

And the land was Pharaoh's. That this signifies that all things were
subjected to the natural that was under the auspices of the internal, is
evident from the signification of "the land was Pharaoh's," as being the
appropriation and subjection of all things which are signified by the
"land;" and from the representation of Pharaoh, as being the natural in
general (see n. 5160, 5799, 6015), into which were brought the
memory-knowledges which are signified by "Egypt" (n. 6115). That it is
under the auspices of the internal, is because the whole natural, both
in general and in part, as being under the auspices of the internal, is
signified by Joseph's being ruler over all the land of Egypt, and also
by his being set over Pharaoh's house (Gen. 41:40-43), as we read:
Joseph said unto his brethren, God hath set me for a father to Pharaoh,
and for a lord to all his house, and I rule in all the land of Egypt
(Gen. 45:3, 8). This is the reason why it is said of the natural that it
is under the auspices of the internal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6146.">6146.</span></span>

And as for the people, he removed it to the cities. That this signifies
that the truths of memory-knowledge were brought into relation to
doctrinal things, is evident from the signification of the "people," as
being truths (see n. 1259, 1260, 3295, 3581), here truths of
memory-knowledge because they are predicated of the people of Egypt; and
from the signification of "cities," as being doctrinal things (n. 402,
2449, 3216, 4492, 4493). Therefore "to remove the people to the cities,"
is to bring the truths of memory-knowledge into relation to doctrinal
things. This follows from what goes before, namely, from this, that
truths were brought into relation to what is general in the natural (n.
6115); for doctrinal things are the generals to which truths are brought
into relation; because the doctrine of the church is divided into its
heads, and each head is a general of the church. For this reason also
the people was removed to the cities by Joseph, that thereby might be
represented the relation of truths to generals, thus to doctrinal
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6147.">6147.</span></span>

From one end of the border of Egypt even to the other end thereof. That
this signifies extension through the whole natural where
memory-knowledges are, is evident from the meaning of the expression,
"from one end of the border to the other end thereof," as being
extension through the whole; and from the signification of "Egypt," as
being memory-knowledge in the natural (of which often above), thus the
natural where memory-knowledges are. For the natural is what contains,
and memory-knowledges are what are contained. Thus by "Egypt" is
signified both what contains and what is contained, that is, both the
natural and the memory-knowledge. Wherefore also by "Pharaoh the king of
Egypt," is signified the natural in general (n. 5160, 5799), and also
memory-knowledge in general (n. 6015); and by the "land of Egypt," the
natural mind (n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6148.">6148.</span></span>

Only the ground of the priests bought he not. That this signifies that
the internal procured for itself from the natural, capacities to receive
good, because these are from itself, is evident from the representation
of Joseph, of whom these things are said, as being the internal (of
which above); from the signification of the "ground," as being the
receptacle of truth (of which also above, n. 6135-6137), here the
capacity to receive good, for capacity is receptibility, and this must
be within it, in order that a receptacle may be a receptacle. This
capacity comes from good, that is, through good from the Lord; for
unless the good of love flowed in from the Lord, no man would have the
capacity to receive either truth or good. It is the influx of good of
love from the Lord which causes all things within man to be disposed for
reception. That the capacity to receive good is from the natural, is
signified by the ground being in Egypt, for by "Egypt" is signified the
natural in respect to memory-knowledges (n. 6142). The internal sense as
given above is further evident from the signification of "priests," as
being good (of which in what follows); and from the signification of
"not buying," as being not to appropriate to himself these capacities as
he had appropriated to himself truths and the goods of truth with their
receptacles (which was done by means of desolations and sustainings),
for the reason that these capacities were from himself, that is, from
the internal. Thus it is that by these words, "Only the ground of the
priests bought he not" is signified that the internal procured for
itself from the natural, capacities to receive good, because these are
from itself. \[2\] The case herein is this. The capacities in man to
receive truth and good are immediately from the Lord, nor does man
render any aid in the procuring of them. For man is always kept in the
capacity to receive good and truth, and from this capacity he has
understanding and will; but a man's not receiving them is the result of
his turning to evil: the capacity does indeed then remain, but the
approach to the thought and feeling of them is closed against him; and
therefore the capacity to see truth and feel good perishes in proportion
as a man turns himself to evil and confirms himself therein in life and
faith. That man contributes nothing whatever to the capacity to receive
truth and good, is known from the doctrine of the church, that nothing
of the truth of faith and nothing of the good of charity comes from man,
but that all comes from the Lord. Nevertheless a man can destroy this
capacity in himself. From this it may now be seen how it is to be
understood that the internal procured for itself from the natural,
capacities to receive good, because these are from itself. It is said
"from the natural," because the influx of good from the Lord is effected
by the Lord through the internal into the natural. When a capacity to
receive has been acquired in the natural, then there is influx, for then
there is reception (as may be seen above, n. 5828). \[3\] In regard to
goods being signified by "priests," be it known that there are two
things which proceed from the Lord, namely, good and truth. The Divine
good was represented by priests, and the Divine truth by kings. Hence it
is that by "priests" are signified goods, and by "kings" truths.
(Concerning the priesthood and royalty which are predicated of the Lord,
see n. 1728, 2015, 3670.) In the Ancient Representative Church the
priesthood and the royalty were joined together in one person, because
the good and truth which proceed from the Lord are united, and in heaven
with the angels are also joined together. \[4\] The person in whom these
two things in the Ancient Church were joined together was called
"Melchizedek," or "King of Righteousness," as may be seen from the
Melchizedek who came to Abraham, of whom it is thus written: Melchizedek
king of Salem brought forth bread and wine; and he was priest to God
Most High; and he blessed Abraham (Gen. 14:18, 19). That he represented
the Lord as to both is manifest from the fact that he was king and at
the same time priest, and that he was allowed to bless Abraham and to
offer him bread and wine, which at that time also were symbols of the
good of love and the truth of faith. That Melchizedek represented the
Lord as to both is further manifest from David: Jehovah hath sworn and
He will not repent, Thou art a priest eternally after the manner of
Melchizedek (Ps. 110:4); which was said of the Lord; "after the manner
of Melchizedek" means that he was both king and priest, that is, in the
supreme sense, that from Him proceed the Divine good and the Divine
truth together. \[5\] Moreover as a representative church was instituted
with the posterity of Jacob, therefore in one person conjointly was
represented the Divine good and the Divine truth which proceed united
from the Lord. But on account of the wars and of the idolatry of that
people, these two offices were at first divided, and they who ruled over
the people were called "leaders," and afterward "judges;" while they who
officiated in holy things were called "priests," and were of the seed of
Aaron, and Levites. Yet afterward these two offices were joined together
in one person, as in Eli and in Samuel. But because the people were of
such a character that a representative church could not be instituted
among them, but only the representative of a church, by reason of the
idolatrous disposition which prevailed among them, therefore it was
permitted that the two offices should be separated, and that the Lord as
to Divine truth should be represented by kings, and as to Divine good by
priests. That this was done at the will of the people, and not of the
Lord's good pleasure, is manifest from the word of Jehovah unto Samuel:
Obey the voice of the people in all that they shall say unto thee; for
they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected Me, that I should
not reign over them; and thou shalt show them the king's right (1 Sam.
8:7 to the end; 12:19, 20). \[6\] The reason why these two offices were
not to be separated, was that the Divine truth separated from the Divine
good condemns everyone; whereas the Divine truth united to the Divine
good saves. For from the Divine truth man is condemned to hell, but by
the Divine good he is taken out therefrom, and is elevated into heaven.
Salvation is of mercy, thus from the Divine good; but damnation is when
man refuses mercy, and thus rejects from himself the Divine good;
wherefore he is left to judgment from truth. (That kings represented the
Divine truth may be seen, n. 1672, 1728, 2015, 2069, 3009, 3670, 4575,
4581, 4966, 5044, 5068.) \[7\] That priests represented the Lord as to
Divine good, and that from this they signify good, may be seen from all
those things in the internal sense which were instituted with respect to
the priesthood when Aaron was chosen, and afterward the Levites; as that
the high priest alone should enter into the Holy of holies and there
minister; that the holy things of Jehovah should be for the priest (Lev.
23:20; 27:21); that they should not have a portion and inheritance in
the land, but that Jehovah should be their portion and inheritance (Num.
18:20; Deut. 10:9; 18:1); that the Levites were given to Jehovah instead
of the firstborn, and that by Jehovah they were given to Aaron (Num.
3:9, 12, 13, 40, to the end; 8:16-19); that the high priest with the
Levites should be in the midst of the camp when they pitched and when
they set forward (Num. 1:50-54; 2:17; 3:23-38; 4:1 to the end); that no
one of the seed of Aaron in whom was any blemish should come near to
offer burnt-offerings and sacrifices (Lev. 21:17-21); besides many other
things (see Lev. 21:9-13, and elsewhere). \[8\] All these things
represented in the supreme sense the Divine good of the Lord, and thus
in the relative sense the good which is of love and of charity. But the
garments of Aaron, which were called the "garments of holiness,"
represented the Divine truth from the Divine good; concerning which
garments of the Lord's Divine mercy more shall be said in the
explications of what is written in Exodus. \[9\] As truth is signified
by "kings," and good by "priests," therefore in the Word "kings and
priests" are frequently mentioned together; as in Revelation: Jesus
Christ hath made us kings and priests to God and His Father (Rev. 1:5,
6; 5:10); "kings" are said to be "made" from the truth which is of
faith, and "priests" from the good which is of charity. Thus with those
who are in the Lord truth and good are joined together, as they are in
heaven (as was said above), and this is meant by "being made kings and
priests." \[10\] In Jeremiah: It shall come to pass in that day that the
heart of the king and of the princes shall perish; and the priests shall
be amazed; and the prophets shall wonder (Jer. 4:9). Again: The house of
Israel are ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests,
and their prophets (Jer. 2:26). Again: The kings of Judah, the princes,
the priests, and the prophets, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem (Jer.
8:1). In these passages "kings" denote truths; "princes," primary truths
(n. 1482, 2089, 5044); "priests," goods; and "prophets," those who teach
(n. 2534). \[11\] Be it known further that the fact of Joseph's not
buying the ground of the priests was a representative that all capacity
to receive truth and good is from the Lord, is evident from a similar
law concerning the fields of the Levites in Moses: The field of the
suburbs of the cities of the Levites may not be sold; for it is their
eternal possession (Lev. 25:34); by this is meant in the internal sense
that no man ought to claim for himself anything of the good of the
church, which is the good of love and of charity, because this is from
the Lord alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6149.">6149.</span></span>

Because a portion was appointed for the priests by Pharaoh. That this
signifies that therefore it was set in order by the natural that was
under the auspices of the internal, is evident from the signification of
an "appointed portion," as being what is set in order; and from the
representation of Pharaoh, as being the natural in general (see n. 5160,
5799, 6015). And because this setting in order in the natural comes from
the internal, it is added that it was under the auspices of the
internal, which was also represented by Joseph's being lord over all
Egypt, and also over Pharaoh's house (as may be seen above, n. 6145).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6150.">6150.</span></span>

And they ate their appointed portion which Pharaoh had given them. That
this signifies that goods did not appropriate to themselves more than
according to the setting in order, is evident from the signification of
"eating," as being to appropriate to oneself (see n. 3168, 3513, 3596,
3832, 4745); and from the signification of "their appointed portion," as
being that which is set in order (see n. 6149). Thus by "eating their
appointed portion" is signified that goods did not appropriate to
themselves more than according to the setting in order. That it was from
the natural which is represented by Pharaoh, that is, in the natural
under the auspices of the internal, may also be seen just above (n.
6149).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6151-6200](ac124.md)
