[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac120)  [Next](ac122.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="6001.">6001.</span></span>

And He said, Jacob, Jacob. That this signifies to natural truth, is
evident from the representation of Jacob, as being natural truth (see n.
3305, 3509, 3525, 3546, 3599, 3775, 4009, 4234, 4520, 4538). The reason
why it is said "Jacob," and not "Israel," is that natural truth with all
belonging to it must be initiated into the memory-knowledges of the
church, which is signified by Jacob with his sons going down into Egypt
(see below, n. 6004).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6002.">6002.</span></span>

And he said, Behold me. That this signifies notice, is evident without
explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6003.">6003.</span></span>

And He said, I am God, the God of thy father. That this signifies the
Divine intellectual from which is the influx, is evident from the
representation of Isaac, who is here the "father," as being the Divine
rational or intellectual of the Lord (see above n. 5998); for it is
said, "God, the God of thy father." That the influx is from this is
because all truth is of the intellectual, thus also natural truth, which
is represented by Jacob (n. 6001). (What the Divine rational or
intellectual is which is represented by Isaac, see n. 1893, 2066, 2072,
2083, 2630, 3012, 3194, 3210.) In the original tongue, "God" is named in
the first place in the singular, but in the second place in the plural;
that is, in the first the name is "El," and in the second it is
"Elohim." The reason is that by "God" in the first place is signified
that there is one God and only one, and by "God" in the second place
that He has many attributes. Thus arises the name "Elohim" or "God" in
the plural, as in the Word almost everywhere. As there are many
attributes, and the Ancient Church assigned a name to each, therefore
its descendants, with whom the knowledge of such things was lost,
believed there were many gods, and each family chose one of them for its
God-as Abraham, Shaddai (n. 1992, 3667, 5628), and Isaac, the God who
was called "Pachad" or "Dread." And as the God of each was one of the
Divine attributes, therefore the Lord said unto Abram, "I am God
Shaddai" (Gen. 17:1), and here unto Jacob, "I am the God of thy father."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6004.">6004.</span></span>

Fear not to go down into Egypt. That this signifies that natural truth
with all things appertaining to it must be initiated into the
memory-knowledges of the church, is evident from the representation of
Jacob, who is he that was to go down into Egypt, as being natural truth
(of which just above, n. 6001); and from the signification of "going
down," as being to be initiated, for in order that this initiation might
be represented, Jacob with all that appertained to him went down into
Egypt; and from the signification of "Egypt," as being the
memory-knowledges of the church (n. 1462, 4749, 4964, 4966). \[2\] In
regard to truth being initiated into the memory-knowledges of the
church, the case is this. The memory-knowledges of the church were at
that time the representatives and significatives of their rituals, for
all the rituals of the church were from such things, as also were the
memory-knowledges which served as their doctrinals of charity. From
these memory-knowledges they knew who are meant by the poor, the needy,
the miserable, the afflicted, the oppressed, widows, orphans,
sojourners, the bound in prison, the naked, the sick, the hungry, the
thirsty, the lame, the blind, the deaf, the maimed, and by many other
classes into which they distinguished the neighbor, and thus taught how
charity was to be exercised. Such were the memory-knowledges of that
time. That at this day these are altogether blotted out of remembrance
is evident from the fact that where the above are mentioned in the Word,
scarcely anyone knows but that such are meant as are so called-as that
widows are meant where "widows" are mentioned, sojourners where
"sojourners" are mentioned, the bound in prison where these are
mentioned, and so on. Such memory-knowledges flourished in Egypt; and
therefore by "Egypt" are signified memory-knowledges. That natural truth
which is "Jacob" was to be initiated into such memory-knowledges, is
represented by Jacob's going down into Egypt with all that belonged to
him. \[3\] Truths are said to be initiated into such memory-knowledges
when they are brought into them, so as to be in them. This is effected
for the reason that when a memory-knowledge comes into the thought, the
truths which have been brought into it may come at the same time into
remembrance; as for example, when a sojourner is presented to the
thought, seeing that by him are signified those who are to be
instructed, that there should instantly come into thought all the
exercises of charity toward such, thus truths. In like manner in all
other cases. When memory-knowledges are thus filled, then when anyone is
thinking from them, the thought extends and diffuses itself far and
wide, and indeed to many societies in the heavens at the same time. For
such a memory-knowledge, consisting as it does of so many truths within
itself, unknown to the man, unfolds itself in this way; but it is
necessary that truths be in them. \[4\] It is also of Divine order for
interior things to bestow themselves in exterior ones, or what is the
same, prior things in posterior ones, thus at last all prior things in
the ultimates, and for them to be together there. This is the case in
universal nature. Unless this is done the man cannot be fully
regenerated, for by such a bringing of truths into memory-knowledges,
things interior and exterior agree together and make a one which
otherwise would be in disagreement; and if they are in disagreement, the
man is not in good, because he is not in what is sincere. Moreover
memory-knowledges are in a light nearly the same as that in which is the
sensual of man's sight, and this light is such that unless it is
enlightened within by the light which is from truths, it leads into
falsities, especially into those derived from the fallacies of the
senses; and also into evils from falsities. That this is the case will
be seen from the experience about influx that is related at the close of
the chapters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6005.">6005.</span></span>

For I will there make of thee a great nation. That this signifies that
truths shall become good, is evident from the representation of Jacob,
of whom these words are spoken, as being natural truth (see above n.
6001); and from the signification of "nation," as being good (n. 1259,
1260, 1416, 1849). "Nations" and "peoples" are often mentioned in the
Word, but everywhere with this difference: that by "nations" are
signified goods or evils, and by "peoples," truths or falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6006.">6006.</span></span>

I will go down with thee into Egypt. That this signifies the presence of
the Lord in that state, is evident from the signification of "going down
with thee," as being the presence of the Lord, for by the God who spoke
with Jacob in the visions of the night is meant the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6007.">6007.</span></span>

And I will cause thee to go up, even in going up. That this signifies
elevation afterward, is evident from the signification of "going up," as
being elevation (see n. 3084, 4539, 5406, 5817). The elevation which is
here signified is from memory-knowledges to things more interior. For
after memory-knowledges have been filled with truths (according to what
was said above, n. 6004), the man is elevated from memory-knowledges
toward things more interior, and then the memory-knowledges serve him as
the ultimate plane of his mental activities (intuitionum). To be
elevated toward things more interior is to think more interiorly, and at
last as a spirit and as an angel; for the more interiorly thought
proceeds, the more perfect it is, because it is nearer the influx of
truth and good from the Lord. (That thought is more interior and more
exterior may be seen, n. 5127, 5141.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="6008.">6008.</span></span>

And Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes. That this signifies that
the internal celestial shall vivify, is evident from the representation
of Joseph, as being the internal celestial (see n. 5869, 5877); and from
the signification of "putting the hand upon the eyes," as being to
vivify. For by "putting the hand upon the eyes" is meant that the
external sensual, or that of the body, shall be closed, and the internal
sensual shall be opened; thus that elevation shall be effected, and thus
vivification. It was customary to lay the hand upon the eyes of a dying
person, because by "death" was signified resuscitation into life (n.
3498, 3505, 4618, 4621). For when a man dies, he does not die, but only
lays aside the body which had served him for use in the world, and he
passes into the other life in a body which serves him for use there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6009.">6009.</span></span>

Verses 5-7. And Jacob rose up from Beersheba; and the sons of Israel
carried Jacob their father, and their babes, and their women, in the
carts which Pharaoh had sent to carry him. And they took their cattle,
and their acquisition which they had acquired in the land of Canaan, and
came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him: his sons, and his
sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his
seed, brought he with him into Egypt. "And Jacob rose up," signifies the
enlightening of natural truth; "from Beersheba," signifies from the
doctrine of charity and faith; "and the sons of Israel carried Jacob
their father," signifies that truths which are spiritual caused natural
truth to advance; "and their babes," signifies together with those
things which are of innocence; "and their women," signifies and those
things which are of charity; "in the carts which Pharaoh had sent to
carry him," signifies doctrinals from the memory-knowledges of the
church; "and they took their cattle," signifies the goods of truth; "and
their acquisition which they had acquired in the land of Canaan,"
signifies truths procured from prior truths which are of the church;
"and came into Egypt," signifies initiation into the memory-knowledges
of the church; "Jacob, and all his seed with him," signifies of natural
truth and of all things of faith appertaining thereto; "his sons, and
his sons' sons with him," signifies truths in order; "his daughters, and
his sons' daughters," signifies goods in order; "and all his seed"
signifies everything of faith and of charity; "brought he with him into
Egypt," signifies that they were brought into the memory-knowledges
which are of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6010.">6010.</span></span>

And Jacob rose up. That this signifies the enlightening of natural
truth, is evident from the signification of "rising up," as being
elevation into a state of light, thus an enlightening (see n. 4881); and
from the representation of Jacob, as being natural truth (see above, n.
6001).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6011.">6011.</span></span>

From Beersheba. That this signifies from the doctrine of faith and of
charity, is evident from the signification of "Beersheba," as being the
doctrine of faith and charity (see n. 2858, 2859, 3466).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6012.">6012.</span></span>

And the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father. That this signifies
that truths which are spiritual caused natural truth to advance, is
evident from the representation of the sons of Israel, as being
spiritual truths (see n. 5414, 5879); and from the representation of
Jacob, as being natural truth (n. 3305, 3509, 3525, 3546, 3599, 3775,
4009, 4234, 4520, 4538). The reason why "they carried" denotes that they
caused to advance, is that it is predicated of spiritual truths
relatively to natural truth, and natural truth cannot be advanced from
any other source than spiritual truth, for its life and force of acting
are thence derived. It is for this reason that the sons of Jacob are
here called the "sons of Israel," and that Jacob is called "Jacob."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6013.">6013.</span></span>

And their babes. That this signifies together with those things which
are of innocence, is evident from the signification of "babes," as being
innocence (see n. 3183, 5608). It is said "with those things which are
of innocence," also "which are of charity," for the reason that without
innocence and charity, natural truth cannot be caused to advance by
spiritual truths; for in order that truth may be genuine, it must derive
its essence and life from charity, and charity from innocence. For the
interior things which vivify truth succeed one another in the following
order: inmost is innocence; next lower is charity; and lowest is work of
charity from truth or according to truth. The reason why they succeed
one another in this order is that they so succeed one another in the
heavens. For the inmost or third heaven is the heaven of innocence; the
middle or second heaven is the heaven of charity, within which is
innocence from the inmost heaven; and the ultimate or first heaven is
the heaven of truth, within which is charity from the second heaven, and
within this is innocence from the third. All these must be in the same
order with man, for in respect to his interiors man is formed after the
image of the three heavens; and therefore a regenerated man is a heaven
in particular or in the least form. But in respect to his exteriors,
especially the body, he is formed after the image of the world, and
therefore he was called by the ancients a microcosm. For the ear is
formed after the whole nature of air and sound; the eye after the whole
nature of ether and light; the tongue after the whole sense of the
solvent and fluent parts in liquids; the nostrils after the sense of
things fluent in the atmosphere; the touch after the sense of cold and
heat, also of things of the earth that have weight; and so on. As man's
external senses are formed after the whole image of the natural world,
so his internal senses, which belong to his understanding and will, are
formed after the whole image of heaven, to the end that every man may be
in particular a recipient of Divine good from the Lord, as heaven is in
general.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6014.">6014.</span></span>

And their women. That this signifies and those things which are of
charity, is evident from the signification of "women," as being goods,
when their "men" are truths (see n. 4823), consequently the things which
are of charity; for all spiritual goods are of charity toward the
neighbor, and all celestial goods are of love to the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6015.">6015.</span></span>

In the carts which Pharaoh had sent to carry him. That this signifies
doctrinals from the memory-knowledges of the church, is evident from the
signification of "carts," as being doctrinal things (see n. 5945); and
from the representation of Pharaoh, as being the memory-knowledge of the
church in general; for by "Egypt" is signified the memory-knowledge of
the church (n. 1462, 4749, 4964, 4966), and therefore by its "king" is
signified this memory-knowledge in general, as also elsewhere in the
Word; but in most passages, as by "Egypt," so also by "Pharaoh," is
signified perverted memory-knowledge. That "Pharaoh" is memory-knowledge
in general, is evident in Isaiah: Fools are the princes of Zoan, the
wise ones of the counselors of Pharaoh; counsel has become brutish; how
say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of the kings of
antiquity? (Isa. 19:11); here "Pharaoh" is the memory-knowledge of the
church in general, and therefore he is called the "son of the wise," and
the "son of the kings of antiquity;" the "wise," and the "kings of
antiquity," denote the truths of the Ancient Church. But such knowledge
made foolishness is here meant, for it is said, "fools are the princes
of Zoan; the counsel is become brutish." \[2\] Again: They depart to go
down into Egypt, but they have not asked at My mouth; to strengthen
themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of
Egypt. Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh become to you for a
shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt for a reproach (Isa. 30:2,
3); "to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust
in the shadow of Egypt" denotes to trust to memory-knowledges in the
things of faith, and not to have faith in any spiritual truth, unless
memory-knowledge and what is sensuous dictate it, which nevertheless is
of perverted order; for the truths of faith ought to be in the first
place, and confirming memory-knowledges in the second place, because if
these are in the first place nothing whatever of truth is believed.
\[3\] In Jeremiah: Hath said Jehovah Zebaoth the God of Israel, Behold I
visit upon Amon in No, and upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt, and upon its
gods, and upon its kings; especially upon Pharaoh, and them that trust
in him (Jer. 46:25); here also "Pharaoh" denotes memory-knowledge in
general; "they that trust in him" are those who trust in
memory-knowledges, but not in the Word, that is, in the Lord in the
Word. Thus everything is perverted in the doctrinals of faith, and hence
comes falsity, and also denial that the Divine and heavenly is anything.
Such especially are in the habit of saying, "Make me see these things
with the eye, or show me scientifically that it is so, and then I will
believe." And yet if they were to see, and if it were shown, they would
not believe, because what is negative reigns universally. \[4\] In the
same: Against Pharaoh: Behold waters rise up from the north, which shall
become an overflowing stream, and shall overflow the land and the
fullness thereof, the city and them that dwell therein; so that the men
shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl, at the voice
of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses, and at the tumult of
his chariot, the rumbling of his wheels (Jer. 47:1, 2, 3); from each of
the things here said about Pharaoh, it is clear that "Pharaoh" is
memory-knowledge in general, here in perverted order, which destroys the
truths of faith. An "overflowing stream" is memory-knowledge destroying
the understanding of truth, and thus vastating; "they shall overflow the
land and the fullness thereof" denotes that this is done to the whole
church; "the city and them that dwell therein" denotes to the truth of
the church and the good thence derived; "the stamping of the hoofs of
the horses" denotes the lowest memory-knowledges, which are direct from
things of sense; "the tumult of the chariot" denotes the derivative
false doctrine; "the rumbling of the wheels" denotes things of sense and
their fallacies, which cause to advance. \[5\] In Ezekiel: Hath said the
Lord Jehovih; Behold I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great
whale that lieth in the midst of his rivers, that saith, The river is
mine, and I have made myself. Therefore I will put hooks in thy jaws,
and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick to thy scales (Ezek.
29:3, 4); here also "Pharaoh" denotes memory-knowledge in general, as in
like manner is evident from all that is said of him. \[6\] Again: Take
up a lamentation upon Pharaoh king of Egypt. Thou art as whales in the
seas; and thou hast come forth with thy streams, and troubled the waters
with thy feet, and fouled their streams. When I shall extinguish thee I
will cover the heavens, and make the stars thereof black; I will cover
the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not make her light to shine;
all the luminaries of light will I make black over thee, and will set
darkness upon thy land (Ezek. 32:2, 3, 7, 8); that these things, like
many in the prophets, cannot be comprehended by anyone without the
internal sense, is evident, as that Pharaoh is as whales in the seas,
that he came forth from his streams, and troubled the waters with his
feet; that over him the heavens should be covered, the stars should be
made black, and all the luminaries of light; that the sun should be
covered with a cloud, the moon not give her light, and darkness be set
upon his land. But the internal sense teaches what these things signify,
namely, that memory-knowledges pervert the truths of the church if a man
enters by their means into the secrets of faith and believes nothing
unless he sees it from them, nay, unless he sees it from things of
sense. That this is the internal sense is evident from the explication
of each expression. \[7\] Pharaoh is called "king of Egypt" from
memory-truth; for memory-knowledge is truth in the natural (that a
"king" denotes truth, see n. 1672, 1728, 2015, 2069, 3009, 3670, 4575,
4581, 4966, 5044), and that the king of a people has the like
signification as the people (n. 4789); thus "Pharaoh" has the like
signification as "Egypt," but in general. That "Egypt" is
memory-knowledge has been frequently shown. Pharaoh is compared to
"whales in the seas," because a "whale" or "sea-monster" signifies the
generals of memory-knowledges (n. 42), and "seas" signify collections of
memory-knowledges (n. 28). It is also said that he "came forth with his
streams," because by "streams" are signified the things of intelligence
(see n. 108, 109, 2702, 3051), here of insanity, because derived from
things of sense and memory-knowledges (see n. 5196). It is then said
that he "troubled the waters with his feet, and fouled their streams,"
because by "waters" are signified spiritual truths (n. 680, 739, 2702,
3058, 3424, 4976, 5668), and by "feet," the things of the natural (n.
2162, 3147, 3761, 3986, 4280, 4938-4952), thus "to trouble the waters
with his feet" denotes to defile and pervert the truths of faith through
the memory-knowledges of the natural; and "to foul their streams" is to
do thus to intelligence. \[8\] It is finally said that "when he shall be
extinguished the heavens shall be covered," because by the "heavens" are
signified the interiors of man, since these are indeed his heavens.
These are closed when memory-knowledges have dominion over the truths of
faith, or the natural over the spiritual. That then the knowledges of
truth and of good perish, is signified by the words, "I will make the
stars of the heavens black, and all the luminaries of light" (that the
"stars" are these knowledges see n. 2495, 2849, 4697; and that
"luminaries" are goods and truths, n. 30-38). That then neither can the
good of love anymore flow in, is signified by "I will cover the sun with
a cloud;" and that neither can the good of faith flow in, is signified
by "the moon shall not make her light to shine" (that the "sun" is the
good of love, and the "moon" the good of faith, see n. 1529, 1530, 2120,
2495, 3636, 3643, 4060, 4696). And that thus only falsities will have
possession of the natural mind, is signified by "I will set darkness
upon thy land" (that "darkness" is falsities, see n. 1839, 1860, 4418,
4531; and that the "land of Pharaoh" or the "land of Egypt" is the
natural mind, n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301). From all this it is now
evident what is the sense contained in these prophetic words. As by
"Pharaoh" is signified memory-knowledge in general, by him is also
signified the natural in general (n. 5799).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6016.">6016.</span></span>

And they took their cattle. That this signifies the goods of truth, is
evident from the signification of "cattle," as being the good of truth;
for by "cattle" are meant both flocks and herds, and also horses,
camels, mules, and asses. And as "flocks" in the internal sense are
interior goods, and "herds" exterior goods, but "horses," "camels,"
"mules," and "asses" such things as are of the intellectual, all of
which bear relation to truths, therefore by "cattle" is signified the
good of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6017.">6017.</span></span>

And their acquisition which they had acquired in the land of Canaan.
That this signifies truths procured from prior truths which are of the
church, is evident from the signification of "acquisition," as being
truth procured (see n. 4105), and also good procured (n. 4391, 4487);
and from the signification of the "land of Canaan," as being the church
(n. 3686, 3705, 4447, 4517, 5136). That they were procured from prior
truths of the church, follows, because when truths multiply themselves
from good, they are multiplied from prior truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6018.">6018.</span></span>

And came into Egypt. That this signifies initiation into the
memory-knowledges of the church, is evident from the signification of
"coming" or "going down, into Egypt," as being the initiation of truth
into the memory-knowledges of the church (see n. 6004).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6019.">6019.</span></span>

Jacob, and all his seed with him. That this signifies of natural truth
and of all things of faith appertaining thereto (that is, their
initiation into the memory-knowledges of the church), is evident from
the representation of Jacob, as being natural truth (see n. 3305, 3509,
3525, 3546, 3599, 3775, 4009, 4234, 4520, 4538); and from the
signification of "seed," as being the faith of charity (n. 255, 1025,
1447, 1610, 1940, 2848, 3310). Thus "all his seed with him" denotes all
things of faith appertaining to natural truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6020.">6020.</span></span>

His sons, and his sons' sons, with him. That this signifies truths in
their order, is evident from the signification of "sons," as being
truths (see n. 489, 491, 533, 1147, 2623, 3373), thus also "sons' sons,"
but truths which are from the former in their order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6021.">6021.</span></span>

His daughters, and his sons' daughters. That this signifies goods in
order, is evident from the signification of "daughters," as being goods
(see n. 489-491, 2362, 3963), thus also "sons' daughters," but the goods
which are from the former, thus in their order (as just above in the
case of the sons).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6022.">6022.</span></span>

And all his seed. That this signifies everything of faith and of
charity, is evident from the signification of "seed," as being the faith
of charity (as above, n. 6019), thus both faith and charity; for where
the one is, there is the other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6023.">6023.</span></span>

Brought he with him into Egypt. That this signifies that they were
brought into the memory-knowledges of the church, is evident from the
signification of "coming" or "going down, into Egypt," as being to
initiate and bring truths into the memory-knowledges of the church (of
which above, n. 6004, 6018). The same is also signified by "bringing
with him into Egypt" (n. 5373, 6004). Truths are initiated and brought
in when memory-knowledges are ruled by truths; and they are ruled by
truths when truth is acknowledged because the Lord has so said in the
Word, and the memory-knowledges which affirm it are accepted, but those
which oppose it are removed. Thus truth becomes lord over those
memory-knowledges which are affirmative of it, while those not
affirmative are rejected. When this is the case, then the man in
thinking from memory-knowledges is not led into falsities, as is the
case where truths are not within. For memory-knowledges are not true
from themselves, but from the truths within them, and such as are the
truths in them, such a general truth is the memory-knowledge. For a
memory-knowledge is merely a vessel (n. 1469, 1496), which is capable of
receiving both truths and falsities, and this with endless variety.
\[2\] As for example the memory-knowledge of the church that every man
is the neighbor. Into this memory-knowledge may be initiated and brought
truths in endless abundance; as that every man is indeed the neighbor,
but each one with a difference; that he is most the neighbor who is in
good, and this also with a difference according to the quality of the
good; that the origin of the neighbor is from the Lord Himself, so that
the nearer any are to Him, that is, the more they are in good, the more
they are the neighbor; and the more remote they are from Him, the less;
and also that a society is more the neighbor than an individual man, and
a kingdom in general more than a society, but our own country more than
other kingdoms; that the church is still more the neighbor than our
country, and the Lord's kingdom still more; and also that the neighbor
is loved when anyone discharges his office aright for the good of
others, or of his country, or of the church; and so on. This shows how
many truths can be brought into this one memory-knowledge of the church,
for they are so many that it is difficult to distribute them into
genera, and to assign to each genus some specific truths, in order that
it may be distinguished and recognized. This was a study in the ancient
churches. \[3\] That the same memory-knowledge can be filled with
falsities in endless abundance, may also be seen by inverting the above
truths, and saying that everyone is neighbor to himself, and that in
every instance the origin of the neighbor is from self; and that
therefore a man's nearest neighbor is he who most favors him, and makes
one with him, and thereby presents himself in him as an image of
himself; nay, that neither is his country the neighbor, except insofar
as concerns his own advantage; and so on without end. Yet the
memory-knowledge remains the same: that every man is the neighbor. But
by one this is filled with truths, by another with falsities. The case
is similar with all other memory-knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6024.">6024.</span></span>

Verses 8-27. And these are the names of the sons of Israel, who came
into Egypt, of Jacob and of his sons: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn. And the
sons of Reuben: Hanoch, and Pallu, and Hezron, and Carmi. And the sons
of Simeon: Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul
the son of a Canaanitish woman. And the sons of Levi: Gershon, and
Kohath, and Merari. And the sons of Judah: Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and
Perez, and Zerah; but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the
sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul. And the sons of Issachar: Tola, and
Puvah, and Iob, and Shimron. And the sons of Zebulun: Sered, and Elon,
and Jahleel. These are the sons of Leah, whom she bare unto Jacob in
Paddan-aram, and his daughter Dinah: all the souls of his sons and of
his daughters were thirty and three. And the sons of Gad: Ziphion, and
Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli. And the sons of
Asher: Imnah, and Ishvah, and Ishvi, and Beriah, and Serah their sister;
and the sons of Beriah: Ber, and Malchiel. These are the sons of Zilpah,
whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter, and these she bare to Jacob:
sixteen souls. The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife: Joseph and Benjamin.
And to Joseph were born in the land of Egypt, whom Asenath the daughter
of Potiphera priest of On bare unto him, Manasseh and Ephraim. And the
sons of Benjamin: Bela, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi,
and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard. These are the sons of Rachel, who
were born to Jacob: all the souls were fourteen. And the sons of Dan:
Hushim. And the sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and
Shillem. These are the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave unto Rachel his
daughter, and these she bare to Jacob: all the souls were seven. All the
souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, that came out of his thigh,
besides Jacob's sons' women, all the souls were sixty and six. And the
sons of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt, were two souls. All the
souls of the house of Jacob, that came into Egypt, were seventy. \[2\]
"And these are the names of the sons of Israel, who came into Egypt,"
signifies the quality of truths from the spiritual in order, which were
brought into the memory-knowledges of the church; "of Jacob and his
sons," signifies the truth of the natural in general, and the truths of
the natural in particular; "Reuben, Jacob's firstborn," signifies faith
in the understanding, which is apparently in the first place. "And the
sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Pallu, and Hezron, and Carmi," signifies the
doctrinals of faith in general. "And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and
Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar," signifies faith in the will and
its doctrinals in general; "and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman,"
signifies a doctrinal not from a genuine origin. "And the sons of Levi;
Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari," signifies spiritual love and its
doctrinals in general. \[3\] "And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and
Shelah, and Perez, and Zerah," signifies celestial love and its
doctrinals; "but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan," signifies that
falsity and evil were extirpated. "And the sons of Perez were Hezron and
Hamul," signifies the truths of that good, which are goods of charity.
"And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Puvah, and Iob, and Shimron,"
signifies celestial conjugial love and its doctrinals. "And the sons of
Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel," signifies the heavenly marriage
and its doctrinals. "These are the sons of Leah, whom she bare unto
Jacob in Paddan-aram," signifies that these doctrinals were from
spiritual affection in the natural through the knowledges of good and
truth; "and his daughter Dinah," signifies the church; "all the souls of
his sons and of his daughters were thirty and three," signifies the
state of spiritual life and its quality. \[4\] "And the sons of Gad;
Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli,"
signifies the good of faith and the derivative works and their
doctrinals. "And the sons of Asher; Imnah, and Ishvah, and Ishvi, and
Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Ber, and
Malchiel," signifies the happiness of eternal life and the delight of
the affections and their doctrinals. "These are the sons of Zilpah,"
signifies that these are of the external church; "whom Laban gave to
Leah his daughter," signifies from the affection of external good; "and
these she bare to Jacob," signifies that they were from the natural;
"sixteen souls," signifies their state and quality. \[5\] "The sons of
Rachel Jacob's wife," signifies which were from celestial affection;
"Joseph and Benjamin," signifies the internal of the church, "Joseph"
its good and "Benjamin" the truth thence derived. "And to Joseph were
born in the land of Egypt," signifies internal celestial and spiritual
things in the natural; "whom Asenath the daughter of Potiphera priest of
On bare unto him," signifies from the marriage of good with truth and of
truth with good; "Manasseh and Ephraim," signifies the new will and its
intellectual, which are of the church. "And the sons of Benjamin; Bela,
and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and
Huppim, and Ard," signifies the spiritual internal and its doctrinals.
"These are the sons of Rachel, who were born to Jacob," signifies that
they were from celestial affection; "all the souls were fourteen,"
signifies their state and quality. \[6\] "And the sons of Pan; Hushim,"
signifies the holy of faith and good of life, and the doctrinal of
these. "And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and
Shillem," signifies temptations in which is victory and the doctrinals
about them. "These are the sons of Bilhah," signifies that these are of
the internal church; "whom Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter,"
signifies from the affection of internal good; "all the souls were
seven," signifies their state and quality. \[7\] "All the soul that came
with Jacob into Egypt," signifies all the truths and goods initiated
into the memory-knowledges of the church; "that came out of his thigh,"
signifies that were from the marriage; "besides Jacob's sons' women,"
signifies except the affections of those things which were not from this
marriage; "all the souls were sixty and six," signifies their state and
quality; "and the sons of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt,"
signifies things celestial and spiritual in the natural; "were two
souls," signifies the will and the intellectual thence derived, which
are of the church; "all the souls of the house of Jacob, that came into
Egypt, were seventy," signifies what is full in order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6025.">6025.</span></span>

The further explication of these words will be omitted, because they are
mere names. What they signify may be seen from the general explication
given just above (n. 6024). And what the sons of Jacob themselves
signify may be seen in the explication where their birth is treated of.
This is worthy of note: that no son was born to the sons of Jacob in
Egypt, whither they came, although they were still young; but their sons
were all born in the land of Canaan, while they themselves were born in
Paddan-aram, except Benjamin. This was of the Lord's special Divine
providence, in order that the things of the church might be represented
by them from their very birth. The sons of Jacob being born in
Paddan-aram represented that the man of the church must be born anew or
regenerated by means of the knowledges of good and truth; for
"Paddan-aram" signifies the knowledges of good and truth (n. 3664, 3680,
4107), and their birth represented the new birth through faith and
charity (n. 4668, 5160, 5598), thus at first through the knowledges of
these. But that their sons were all born in the land of Canaan
represented that from thence are such things as are of the church, for
the "land of Canaan" denotes the church (n. 3686, 3705, 4447, 4454,
4516, 5136, 5757). But that to Joseph were born sons in Egypt, was in
order that there might be represented the dominion of the internal man
in the external, especially the dominion of the celestial spiritual in
the natural, "Manasseh" being the will, and "Ephraim" the intellectual,
of the church, in the natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6026.">6026.</span></span>

Verses 28-30. And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to show before
him unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen. And Joseph
harnessed his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen;
and he was seen of him, and fell upon his necks, and wept upon his necks
a long while. And Israel said unto Joseph, Let me die this time, after
that I have seen thy faces, that thou art yet alive. "And he sent Judah
before him unto Joseph," signifies the communication of the good of the
church with the internal celestial; "to show before him unto Goshen,"
signifies with respect to the midst in the natural; "and they came into
the land of Goshen," signifies the residence of life there; "and Joseph
harnessed his chariot," signifies doctrine from the internal; "and went
up to meet Israel his father," signifies influx; "to Goshen," signifies
into the midst in the natural; "and he was seen of him," signifies
perception; "and fell upon his necks," signifies conjunction; "and wept
upon his necks a long while," signifies mercy; "and Israel said unto
Joseph," signifies the perception of spiritual good; "Let me die this
time," signifies new life; "after that I have seen thy faces," signifies
after the noticing of mercy; "that thou art yet alive," signifies the
noticing of the consequent life in himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6027.">6027.</span></span>

And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph. That this signifies the
communication of the good of the church with the internal celestial, is
evident from the representation of Judah, as being the good of the
church (see n. 5583, 5603, 5782, 5794, 5833); and from the
representation of Joseph, as being the internal celestial (n. 5869,
5877); that "to send before him" denotes to communicate, is plain. The
reason why Judah was sent, and not another, was that there might be
signified the communication of good with good, which is immediate;
namely, the communication of external good, which Judah represents, with
internal good, which Joseph represents. For the good which is of love to
the Lord and of charity toward the neighbor flows in from the Lord
through the internal into the external; and so much is received in the
external as there is of good there. But if in the man's external there
is only the truth of faith, and not good, then the influx of good from
the Lord through the internal is not received in the external; for
immediate communication with truth is not possible, but only mediate
communication through good. This is the reason why no other than Judah
was sent by Jacob unto Joseph.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6028.">6028.</span></span>

To show before him unto Goshen. That this signifies with respect to the
midst in the natural, namely, that there was communication, is evident
from the signification of "Goshen," as being the midst (that is, the
inmost) in the natural (see n. 5910). By the midst or the inmost in the
natural is signified the best therein, for what is best is in the midst,
that is, in the center or inmost, and round about it on all sides are
goods, arranged in the heavenly form, nearer and more remote according
to the gradations of goodness from the best in the midst. Such is the
arrangement in order of goods in the regenerate. But with the wicked the
most evil things are in the midst, and goods are relegated to the
extremes, where they are continually being pushed outside. This is the
form with the wicked individually, and in the hells in general. Thus it
is the infernal form. From what has been said about the best in the
midst and about goods being arranged in order toward the sides, it is
evident what is meant by the communication of the good of the church
with the internal celestial, with respect to the midst in the natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6029.">6029.</span></span>

And Joseph harnessed his chariot. That this signifies doctrine from the
internal, is evident from the representation of Joseph, as being the
internal (as often above); and from the signification of "chariot," as
being doctrine (n. 5321).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6030.">6030.</span></span>

And went up to meet Israel his father. That this signifies influx,
namely, from the internal celestial into spiritual good from the
natural, is evident from the representation of Joseph, who "goes up to
meet," as being the internal celestial (see n. 5869, 5877); and from the
representation of Israel, as being spiritual good (see n. 5801, 5803,
5806, 5812, 5817, 5819, 5826, 5833). Thus it follows that "to go up to
meet him" denotes influx, for "to go up to meet," here, is to betake
himself and come unto him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6031.">6031.</span></span>

To Goshen. That this signifies into the midst in the natural, is evident
from what has been said just above about Goshen (n. 6028).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6032.">6032.</span></span>

And he was seen of him. That this signifies perception, is evident from
the signification of "to see," as being to understand and to perceive
(see n. 2150, 3764, 4567, 4723, 5400), and also to have faith (n. 2325,
2807, 3863, 3869, 4403, 4421, 5400). In regard to "seeing" as denoting
to understand and thence to perceive and also to have faith, be it known
that there are two things with man which make his life, namely,
Spiritual Light and Spiritual Heat. Spiritual light makes the life of
his understanding, and spiritual heat the life of his will. Spiritual
light is from its first origin Divine truth from the Divine good of the
Lord, and hence is the truth of faith from the good of charity. And
spiritual heat is from its first origin the Divine good of the Divine
love of the Lord, and hence is the good of celestial love, which is love
to the Lord, and the good of spiritual love, which is love toward the
neighbor. These two, as before said, constitute the whole life of man.
\[2\] As regards spiritual light, it is with this in the understanding
of man as it is with natural light in his external sight; namely, in
order that the eye may see, it is necessary that there be light to
illumine, and then the eye sees in the light all things which are round
about outside of it. So the intellectual mind, which is man's internal
eye-in order that this eye may see, it is necessary for the light of
heaven, which is from the Lord, to illumine it; and when this eye is
illumined by this light, it then sees the things which are round about
outside of itself; but the objects which it sees are spiritual, namely,
memory-knowledges and truths. But when this light does not illumine, the
intellectual mind or internal eye of man, like the external or bodily
eye, is in darkness and sees nothing, that is, from memory-knowledges
nothing of truth, and from truths nothing of good. The light which
illumines the intellectual mind is in very truth light, and such light
that it a thousand times surpasses the midday light of the world, which
I bear witness to because I have seen it. By this light all the angels
in the heavens see the things which are round about outside of
themselves, and also by the same light they see and perceive the truths
which are of faith, and their quality. Hence then it is that by "seeing"
is signified in the spiritual sense not only the understanding, but also
whatever is of the understanding, as thought, reflection, observation,
prudence, and many such things; likewise not only faith, but also
whatever is of faith, as truth, doctrine from the Word, and the like.
\[3\] But as regards spiritual heat, it is with this in the will of man
as it is with natural heat in the body, in that it vivifies. But in its
first origin, which origin is from the Lord, spiritual heat is nothing
else than the Divine love toward the universal human race, and from this
the reciprocal love of man to Him and also toward the neighbor. And this
spiritual heat is in very truth heat, which gladdens the bodies of the
angels with heat, and at the same time their interiors with love. Hence
it is that by "heat," "flame," and "fire" in the Word are signified in
the genuine sense those things which are of love, as the affections of
good and of truth, and also good itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6033.">6033.</span></span>

And fell upon his necks. That this signifies conjunction, is evident
from the signification of "falling upon the necks," as being conjunction
close and intimate (see n. 5926). That "to fall upon the necks"
signifies conjunction is because the neck joins together the head and
the body, and by the "head" are signified the interiors, and by the
"body" the exteriors. Hence the "neck" denotes the conjunction of the
interiors with the exteriors, and thus the communication of the
interiors with the exteriors, and also of celestial things with
spiritual (see n. 3542, 5320, 5328), which communication is by virtue of
conjunction also signified by these same words, for "Joseph" is the
internal, and "Israel" is relatively the external.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6034.">6034.</span></span>

And wept upon his necks a long while. That this signifies mercy, is
evident from the signification of "weeping," as being mercy (see n.
5480, 5873, 5927). It is said "upon his necks a long while," because the
beginning and also the continuance of conjunction is mercy, namely, the
mercy of the Lord who in the supreme sense is "Joseph."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6035.">6035.</span></span>

And Israel said unto Joseph. That this signifies the perception of
spiritual good, namely, from the internal celestial, is evident from the
signification of "saying," in the historicals of the Word, as being
perception; from the representation of Israel, upon whose necks Joseph
wept, as being spiritual good; and from the representation of Joseph, as
being the internal celestial; all of which have been frequently spoken
of above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6036.">6036.</span></span>

Let me die this time. That this signifies new life, is evident from the
signification of "dying," as being resurrection into life, thus new life
(see n. 3326, 3498, 3505, 4618, 4621, 6008). The reason why "dying"
signifies newness of life, has also been shown in the sections just
quoted; namely, that when a man dies, there immediately begins a newness
of his life; for he is raised up into life, the material body being cast
off which had served him for use in the world. New life is here
signified by "dying," because it comes from influx by the internal
(which is signified by Joseph's going up to meet Israel his father, see
n. 6030), and from conjunction, which is signified by Joseph's falling
on the necks of Israel (n. 6033).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6037.">6037.</span></span>

After that I have seen thy faces. That this signifies after the noticing
of mercy, is evident from the signification of "to see," as being a
noticing (of which above, n. 6032); and from the signification of the
"faces," when predicated of the Lord, as being mercy (see n. 222, 223,
5585, 5816).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6038.">6038.</span></span>

That thou art yet alive. That this signifies the perception of the
consequent life in himself, is evident from the signification of "being
alive," as in the internal sense being spiritual life (n. 5890). That
the perception of this life in himself is signified, follows from what
goes before (that he had new life from influx and conjunction, n. 6036),
and from the affection of joy at seeing him. This affection gives the
perception of life in himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6039.">6039.</span></span>

Verses 31-34. And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's
house, I will go up, and will tell Pharaoh, and will say unto him, My
brethren, and my father's house, who were in the land of Canaan, are
come unto me; and the men are shepherds of the flock, for they are men
of cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all
that they have. And it may be that Pharaoh will call you, and will say,
What are your works? And ye shall say, Thy servants have been men of
cattle from their youth even until now, both we, and our fathers; in
order that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd of the
flock is an abomination of the Egyptians. "And Joseph said unto his
brethren," signifies the perception of truths in the natural; "and unto
his father's house" signifies of goods there; "I will go up and will
tell Pharaoh" signifies communication with the natural where are the
memory-knowledges of the church; "and will say unto him, My brethren,
and my father's house, who were in the land of Canaan, are come unto
me," signifies in respect to the truths and the goods of the church,
that they are to be initiated; "and the men are shepherds of the flock,"
signifies that they lead to good; "for they are men of cattle,"
signifies that they have good from truths; "and they have brought their
flocks, and their herds, and all that they have," signifies that good
interior and exterior, and whatever is thence, is present; "and it may
be that Pharaoh will call you," signifies if the natural in which are
the memory-knowledges of the church wills to be conjoined; "and will
say, What are your works?" signifies and to know your goods; "and ye
shall say, Thy servants have been men of cattle from their youth even
until now," signifies that from the beginning and as yet they have
truths from which is good; "both we, and our fathers" signifies that it
was so from the first goods; "in order that ye may dwell in the land of
Goshen," signifies so shall your residence be in the midst of the
natural where are the memory-knowledges of the church; "for every
shepherd of the flock is an abomination of the Egyptians," signifies
separation thus from perverted memory-knowledges which are opposed to
the memory-knowledges of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6040.">6040.</span></span>

And Joseph said unto his brethren. That this signifies the perception of
truths in the natural, is evident from the signification of "saying," as
being perception (of which often above); from the representation of the
sons of Israel, as being spiritual truths in the natural (n. 5414,
5879); and from the representation of Joseph, as being the internal
celestial (n. 5869, 5877). Hence it is evident that by "Joseph said unto
his brethren" is signified the perception of truths in the natural from
the internal celestial. That by "Joseph said," is not signified his
perception, is because Joseph is the internal, and all perception flows
in through the internal into the external or natural. For of itself the
natural perceives nothing whatever, but its perceiving is from what is
prior to itself; nay, neither does the prior perceive from itself, but
from what is still prior to itself, thus finally from the Lord, who Is
of Himself. Such is the nature of influx, and therefore such is the
nature of perception. It is with influx as it is with coming forth
(exsistentia) and subsistence. Nothing comes forth (exsistit) of itself,
but from what is prior to itself, thus finally all things from the
First, that is, from the Esse and the Existere of Itself. And also from
the same all things subsist, for it is with subsistence as with coming
forth, for to subsist is perpetually to come forth. The reason why it is
said "the perception of truths in the natural," but not "the perception
of those who are in these truths," is that such is the nature of
spiritual speech. For in this way ideas of thought are abstracted from
persons, and are determined to things; and things, that is, truths and
goods, are what live with man and cause man to live, for they are from
the Lord, from whom is everything of life. In this way also the thought
is withdrawn from attributing truths and goods to the person. By such
speech also a general idea is had, which extends itself more widely than
if the idea of person is adjoined to it; as for instance if it is said
"the perception of those who are in these truths," the ideas are at once
determined to such persons, as is usually the case, and thus they are
withdrawn from the general idea; and in this way the enlightenment from
the light of truth is diminished. Moreover in the other life thought
about persons excites those who are being thought of; for in the other
life all thought is communicated. These are the reasons why an abstract
form of speech is used, as here: "the perception of truths in the
natural."

<span class="margnote"><span id="6041.">6041.</span></span>

And unto his father's house. That this signifies of goods therein, that
is, the perception of these, is evident from the signification of
"house," as being good (see n. 3128, 3652, 3720, 4982); and from the
signification of "father," as also being good (n. 2803, 3703, 3704,
5581, 5902).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6042.">6042.</span></span>

I will go up, and will tell Pharaoh. That this signifies communication
with the natural where are the memory-knowledges of the church, is
evident from the signification of "telling," as being communication (see
n. 4856); and from the representation of Pharaoh, as being the natural
where are the memory-knowledges of the church (n. 5799, 6015).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6043.">6043.</span></span>

And will say unto him, My brethren, and my father's house, who were in
the land of Canaan, are come unto me. That this signifies in respect to
the truths and goods of the church, that they are to be initiated, is
evident from the representation of the sons of Israel, who are here his
"brethren," as being spiritual truths in the natural (of which just
above, n. 6040); from the signification of "father's house," as being
goods therein (of which also just above, n. 6041); from the
signification of the "land of Canaan," as being the church (n. 3686,
3705, 4447, 4517, 5136); and from the signification of "coming unto
Joseph," or to Egypt where Joseph was, as being to be initiated into
memory-knowledges which are of the church (of which above, n. 6004,
6018). (As to the initiation of truths which are of the church into
memory-knowledges which are of the natural, see above, n. 6023; and as
to their conjunction, see below, n. 6047.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="6044.">6044.</span></span>

And the men are shepherds of the flock. That this signifies that they
lead to good, is evident from the signification of "shepherds of the
flock," as being those who lead to good (see n. 343, 3795, 5201). For he
is a "shepherd" who teaches and leads, and that is the "flock" which is
taught and led. But in the internal sense are meant truths which lead to
good, for by the sons of Israel, who here are the "men, shepherds of the
flock," are represented spiritual truths (n. 6040). Moreover with those
who teach it is truths that lead. That truths which are of faith lead to
good which is of charity, was shown above; and the same is evident from
the fact that all things both in general and in particular have relation
to an end, and look to it, and those which do not look to an end cannot
subsist. For the Lord has created nothing whatever except for the sake
of an end; in so much that it may be said that the end is the all in all
things that have been created; and all things that have been created are
in such an order that as the end from the First through the
intermediates looks to the last or ultimate, so the end within the last
or ultimate has regard to the end in the First. Hence comes the
connection of things. In its first origin the end itself is nothing but
the Divine good of the Divine love; thus it is the Lord Himself.
Wherefore also in the Word He is called the "First and the Last," the
"Alpha and Omega" (Isa. 41:4; 44:6; 48:12; Rev. 1:8, 11, 17; 2:8; 21:6;
22:13). This being the case, it is necessary that each and all things
which pertain to the life with man should have relation to an end and
should look to it. He who has any rational ability can see that the
memory-knowledges with a man look to truths as their end, and that the
truths look to goods, and that the goods look to the Lord as the last
and the first end; as the last end when they look at Him from truths,
and as the first end when they look at Him from good. Such is the case
with the truths of the church that they lead to good, which is signified
by the "men being shepherds of the flock," and by their being "men of
cattle," as now follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6045.">6045.</span></span>

For they are men of cattle. That this signifies that they have good from
truths, is evident from the signification of "cattle," as being the good
of truth, or good from truths (see n. 6016). This is said of the sons of
Israel, who are spiritual truths in the natural (n. 5414, 5879); thus it
is said of truths, here that they lead to good (of which just above, n.
6044).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6046.">6046.</span></span>

And they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they
have. That this signifies that good interior and exterior, and whatever
is therefrom, is present, is evident from the signification of "flock,"
as being interior good; from the signification of "herd," as being
exterior good (see n. 5913); from the signification of "all that they
have," as being whatever is therefrom (n. 5914); and from the
signification of "they have brought," as being to be present.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6047.">6047.</span></span>

And it may be that Pharaoh will call you. That this signifies, if the
natural in which are the memory-knowledges of the church wills to be
conjoined, is evident from the signification of "to call to himself," as
being to will to be conjoined; for to call to himself from the affection
that they should dwell in his land and become one nation with his own,
is to will to be conjoined; and from the representation of Pharaoh, as
being the natural in which are the memory-knowledges of the church (as
above, n. 6042). By Pharaoh's calling is signified what is reciprocal of
initiation and conjunction, namely, of the memory-knowledges of the
church with truths and goods in the natural; for all conjunction needs
reciprocity, whereby there is consent on both sides. \[2\] The
conjunction of the truths of the church with its memory-knowledges is
here treated of, but it is necessary to know in what manner they are to
be conjoined. For indeed the start must not be made from
memory-knowledges, and through these an entrance be made into the truths
of faith, because the memory-knowledges with a man are derived from
things of sense, thus from the world, from which spring innumerable
fallacies. But the start must be made from truths of faith, in this way.
First there must be learned the doctrinal things of the church, and then
the Word must be examined to see whether these are true; for they are
not true because the heads of the church have said so and their
followers confirm it, because in this way the doctrinal things of all
churches and religions would have to be called true, merely because they
exist in the country, and men hold them from their birth; and in this
wise not only would the doctrinal things of Papists and also of Quakers
be true, but also those of Jews and even of Mohammedans, because their
leaders have said so and their followers confirm it. This shows that the
Word must be searched, and there it must be seen whether the doctrinal
things are true. When this is done from the affection of truth, then the
man is enlightened by the Lord so as to perceive, without knowing
whence, what is true; and he is confirmed therein in accordance with the
good in which he is. If these truths disagree with the doctrinal things,
let him take heed not to disturb the church. \[3\] Afterward, when he
has been confirmed, and is thus in the affirmative from the Word that
the doctrinal things are truths of faith, it is then allowable for him
to confirm them by all the memory-knowledges he possesses, of whatsoever
name and nature; for then, because what is affirmative reigns
universally, he accepts the memory-knowledges which agree, and rejects
those which by reason of the fallacies they contain disagree; for faith
is strengthened by means of memory-knowledges; and therefore no one is
forbidden to search the Scriptures from the affection of knowing whether
the doctrinal things of the church within which he was born, are true;
for in no other way can he be enlightened. After doing this no one is
forbidden to fortify himself by means of memory-knowledges; but he may
not do so before. This is the way and the only way of conjoining the
truths of faith with memory-knowledges; not only with the
memory-knowledges of the church, but also with any memory-knowledges
whatever. Yet very few at this day proceed in this way; for most persons
who read the Word do not read it from the affection of truth, but from
the affection of confirming therefrom the doctrinal things of the church
within which they were born, no matter what these may be. \[4\] In the
Word there is described the Lord's kingdom, in that the spiritual, the
rational, and memory-knowledge are therein conjoined together; but this
is described by names which signify these; namely, by "Israel,"
"Assyria," and "Egypt." By "Israel" is described the spiritual, by
"Assyria" the rational, and by "Egypt" memory-knowledge, in these words
of Isaiah: In that day there shall be an altar to Jehovah in the midst
of the land of Egypt, and a pillar near the border thereof to Jehovah.
And it shall be for a sign and for a witness thereof to Jehovah Zebaoth
in the land of Egypt; for they shall cry unto Jehovah because of the
oppressors, and He shall send them a savior, and a prince, and he shall
deliver them. And Jehovah shall become known to Egypt, and the Egyptians
shall know Jehovah in that day, and shall offer sacrifice and meat
offering, and shall vow a vow to Jehovah, and shall perform it. In that
day there shall be a path from Egypt unto Assyria, and Assyria shall
come into Egypt, and Egypt into Assyria, and Egypt shall serve Assyria.
In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, a
blessing in the midst of the land; which Jehovah Zebaoth shall bless,
saying, Blessed be Egypt My people, and Assyria the work of My hands,
and Israel Mine inheritance (Isa. 19:19-25). \[5\] Everyone can see that
Egypt is not meant here, nor Assyria, nor yet Israel, but something else
by each of them. (That by "Israel" is meant the spiritual of the church,
has already been shown, n. 3654, 5801, 5803, 5806, 5812, 5817, 5819,
5826, 5833; and by "Assyria," the rational, n. 119, 1186; and by
"Egypt," memory-knowledges, n. 1164, 1165, 1186, 1462, 4749, 4964, 4966,
5700, 6004, 6015.) These three conjoined together in the man of the
church are described in the prophet by the words, "there shall be a path
from Egypt to Assyria, and Assyria shall come into Egypt, and Egypt into
Assyria, and Egypt shall serve Assyria; in that day shall Israel be the
third with Egypt and with Assyria, a blessing in the midst of the land."
For in order that a man may be a man of the church, it is necessary for
him to be spiritual, and also rational, with memory-knowledge
subservient to these. From all this it is now evident that
memory-knowledge is by no means to be rejected from the truths of faith,
but that it is to be conjoined with them; but by the prior way, that is,
by the way from faith; and not by the posterior way, that is, by the way
from memory-knowledges. (See also what has been already shown, n.
128-130, 195, 196, 232, 233, 1226, 1911, 2568, 2588, 4156, 4760, 5510,
5700.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="6048.">6048.</span></span>

And will say, What are your works? That this signifies, and to know your
goods, is evident from the signification of "works," as being goods.
That "works" are goods is because they are from the will, and things
from the will are good or evil, but things from the understanding, such
as discourse, are true or false. The works of the sons of Jacob, and
also the works of their fathers, were to pasture cattle, thus to act as
shepherds. These works also signify goods, specifically goods from
truths. That they have this signification is from correspondences, for
lambs, sheep, kids, and goats, which are of the flock, correspond to the
goods of charity; in like manner bullocks and oxen, which are of the
herd. That they correspond is evident from the fact that when from
heavenly affection the angels are conversing together about the goods of
charity, there appear in some places in the world of spirits, and also
in the first or ultimate heaven, flocks and herds-flocks, when they are
speaking of the interior goods of charity; and herds when of the
exterior goods (n. 3218-3220). For this reason it is that in the Word
such things are signified by "flocks and herds." In general be it known
that every significative in the Word derives its origin from
representatives in the other life, and these from correspondences. The
reason is that the natural world is from the spiritual world as an
effect from its cause, to the end that the spiritual world may flow into
the natural world and there act as the causes. In this way also all
things of this world are held together in their tenor and in order.
(That universal nature is a theater representative of the Lord's
kingdom, that is, of the spiritual and heavenly things therein, may be
seen, n. 2758, 2987-3002, 4939, 5116.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="6049.">6049.</span></span>

And ye shall say, Thy servants have been men of cattle from their youth
even until now. That this signifies that from the beginning and as yet
they have truths from which is good, is evident from the signification
of "men of cattle," as being truths from which is good (see n. 6016,
6045); and from the signification of "from their youth even until now,"
as being from the beginning and as yet. In regard to "cattle" signifying
truths from which is good, be it known that "cattle" are all beasts of
burden greater and less, in both the flock and the herd, and also
camels, horses, mules, and asses. These latter beasts of burden signify
such things as relate to truths; but the former, namely, those of the
herd and the flock, signify such things as relate to good. Therefore it
is that all those beasts of burden in general which are "cattle" signify
truths from which is good. The term "cattle" in the original tongue is
from a word which also means "acquisition," and "acquisition" in the
spiritual sense is also truth from which is good, for the reason that
good is acquired by means of truth. But "small cattle" signify interior
goods, for these are of the flock, such as lambs, sheep, kids, goats,
and rams. "Cattle" also signify truths from which is good in other
passages of the Word, as in Isaiah: Then shall He give the rain of thy
seed, wherewith thou shalt sow the land; and the bread of increase; and
it shall be fat and rich: in that day shall thy cattle pasture in a
broad meadow (Isa. 30:23); "to pasture" denotes to be instructed in
truths and about goods (n. 5201); a "broad meadow" denotes the doctrine
of truth; it is called "broad" because "breadth" is truth (n. 3433,
3434, 4482). Thus it is plain that "cattle" are truths from which is
good. In Ezekiel: To bring back thine hand upon the wastes that are
inhabited, and upon the people that are gathered out of the nations,
working with cattle and possession, that dwell upon the navel of the
earth (Ezek. 38:12); where in like manner "cattle" denote truths through
which is good; and "possession" denotes good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6050.">6050.</span></span>

Both we, and our fathers. That this signifies that it was so from the
first goods, is evident from the signification of "fathers," as being
goods (see n. 2803, 3703, 3704, 5581, 5902). Thus that they were men of
cattle, and also their fathers, denotes from the first goods. By
"fathers" also in many passages in the Word in the internal sense are
not meant Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but they who were of the Ancient
Church who were in good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6051-6100](ac122.md)
