[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac142)  [Next](ac144.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="7101.">7101.</span></span>

And let us sacrifice to Jehovah our God. That this signifies that they
may worship the Lord, see n. 6905, where also are the like words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7102.">7102.</span></span>

Lest He fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword. That this
signifies to avoid the damnation of evil and falsity, is evident from
the signification of "lest He fall upon us," as being lest they should
incur damnation; from the signification of "pestilence," as being the
damnation of evil (of which below); and from the signification of "the
sword," as being the vastation of truth, and also the punishment of
falsity (see n. 2799), thus also damnation, for the punishment of
falsity when truth is devastated, is damnation. \[2\] Mention is made in
the Word of four kinds of vastations and punishments; namely, the Sword,
Famine, the Evil Beast, and Pestilence; and by the "sword" is signified
the vastation of truth and the punishment of falsity; by "famine," the
vastation of good and the punishment of evil; by the "evil beast," the
punishment of the evil from falsity; by "pestilence," the punishment of
the evil not from falsity but from evil. And as punishment is signified,
damnation is also signified, for this is the punishment of those who
persevere in evil. Of these four kinds of punishments it is thus written
in Ezekiel: When I send upon Jerusalem My four evil judgments, the
sword, and the famine, and the evil beast, and the pestilence, to cut
off from it man and beast (Ezek. 14:21). Again: I will send upon you
famine, and the evil beast, and will make thee bereaved; and pestilence
and blood shall pass through thee; especially will I bring the sword
upon thee (Ezek. 5:17). \[3\] That by "pestilence" is signified the
punishment of evil, and its damnation, is evident from the following
passages. In Ezekiel: They who are in the waste places shall die by the
sword, and he who is upon the faces of the field I will give to the wild
beast to devour him, and they who are in the strongholds and caverns
shall die with the pestilence (Ezek. 33:27); "to die by the sword in
waste places" denotes to be in the vastation of truth, and thence in the
damnation of falsity; "he who is upon the faces of the field being given
to the wild beast to devour" denotes the damnation of those who are in
evil from falsity; "they who are in strongholds and caverns dying with
the pestilence" denotes the damnation of evil which fortifies itself by
falsity. \[4\] Again: The sword is without, and the pestilence and
famine within; he that is in the field shall die by the sword; and he
that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him (Ezek.
7:15); the "sword" here denotes the vastation of truth and the damnation
of falsity; "famine and pestilence," the vastation of good and the
damnation of evil. The sword is said to be "without," and famine and
pestilence "within," because the vastation of truth is without, but the
vastation of good within; but when a man lives in accordance with
falsity, damnation is signified by "him who is in the field dying by the
sword;" and when he lives in evil which is defended by falsity,
damnation is signified by "famine and pestilence devouring him who is in
the city." \[5\] In Leviticus: I will bring upon you a sword avenging
the vengeance of the covenant; where, if ye shall be gathered together
into your cities, I will send the pestilence into the midst of you, and
I will deliver you into the hand of the enemy, when I shall break the
staff of your bread (Lev. 26:25-26); where in like manner the "sword"
denotes the vastation of truth and the damnation of falsity; the
"pestilence" the damnation of evil; the vastation of good, which is
signified by "famine," is described by "breaking the staff of their
bread;" by "the cities into which they were to be gathered together," in
like manner as above, are signified the falsities by which they defend
evils (that "cities" are truths, thus in the opposite sense falsities,
see n. 402, 2268, 2712, 2943, 3216, 4492, 4493). \[6\] In Ezekiel: In
that thou hast defiled My sanctuary with all thine abominations, a third
part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine shall they
be consumed in the midst of thee; a third part shall fall by the sword
round about thee; and a third part I will scatter to every wind, and
will draw out a sword after them (Ezek. 5:11-12); where "famine" denotes
the damnation of evil; "sword," the damnation of falsity; "to scatter to
every wind, and to draw out the sword after them" denotes to dissipate
truths and seize on falsities. \[7\] In Jeremiah: If they shall offer
burnt-offering or meat-offering, I will not approve them; but I will
consume them with sword, and with famine, and with pestilence (Jer.
14:12). Again: I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and
beast; they shall die of a great pestilence; afterward I will give
Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and those who
are left in this city from the pestilence, and from the sword, and from
the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar. He that abideth in this
city shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence;
but he that goeth out and falleth away to the Chaldeans that besiege
you, he shall live, and his soul shall be unto him for a spoil (Jer.
21:6-7, 9). Again: I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the
pestilence, till they be consumed from upon the earth (Jer. 24:10);
where also by the "sword" is signified the vastation of truth, by the
"famine" the vastation of good, by the "pestilence" damnation. The like
is signified by "the sword, the famine, and the pestilence" in the
following passages, Jer. 27:8; 29:17, 18; 32:24, 36; 34:17; 38:2; 42:17,
22; 44:13; Ezek. 12:16. \[8\] As these three follow in their order,
therefore these three were proposed to David by the prophet Gad, namely,
whether there should come seven years of famine; or he should flee three
months before his enemies; or whether there should be three days'
pestilence in the land (2 Sam. 24:13); "to flee before his enemies"
stands for "the sword." In Amos: I have sent among you the pestilence in
the way of Egypt; I have slain your young men with the sword, with the
captivity of your horses (Amos 4:10); "the pestilence in the way of
Egypt" denotes the vastation of good by means of falsities, which are
"the way of Egypt;" "I have slain your young men with the sword, with
the captivity of the horses," denotes the vastation of truth. (By "young
men" are signified truths, and by "horses" things of the intellect, see
n. 2761, 2762, 3217, 5321, 6534.) \[9\] In Ezekiel: Pestilence and blood
shall pass through thee (Ezek. 5:17). Again: I will send unto her
pestilence and blood in her streets (Ezek. 28:23); where "pestilence"
denotes adulterated good; and "blood," falsified truth. (That "blood"
denotes falsified truth, see n. 4735, 6978). \[10\] In David: Thou shalt
not be afraid for the dread of night, nor for the arrow that flieth by
day; for the pestilence that creepeth in thick darkness, nor for the
death that wasteth at noonday (Ps. 91:5-6). Here the "dread of night"
denotes the falsity which is in secret; the "arrow that flieth by day,"
the falsity which is in the open; the "pestilence that creepeth in thick
darkness," the evil which is in secret; the "death that wasteth at
noonday," the evil which is in the open. That "pestilence" denotes evil
and the damnation of evil, is plain from death's being spoken of also,
which is here distinguished from the pestilence merely by its being said
of death that "it wasteth at noonday," and of the pestilence that "it
creepeth in thick darkness." Again: He directed the way of His anger; He
forbade not their soul from death, and closed their life with the
pestilence (Ps. 78:50); speaking of the Egyptians; the "pestilence"
denotes every kind of evil and its damnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7103.">7103.</span></span>

And the king of Egypt said unto them. That this signifies the answer
from those who are in falsities, is evident from the signification of
"saying," when by Pharaoh to Moses and Aaron, as being contrary thought
(as above, n. 7094); thus the thought which is for the answer; and from
the representation of Pharaoh, or the king of Egypt, as being false
memory-knowledge (n. 6651, 6679, 6683, 6692), thus those who are in
falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7104.">7104.</span></span>

Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, draw away the people from their works?
That this signifies that their Divine law and doctrine will not release
them from sufferings, is evident from the representation of Moses, as
being the Lord as to the Divine law (see n. 6723, 6752); from the
representation of Aaron, as being the Lord as to the doctrine thence
derived (n. 6998, 7009); from the signification of "drawing away," as
being to release; and from the signification of "works," as being
sufferings; for the works were labors, and also burdens (as follows),
thus sufferings from combats, which are signified by "works" and
"burdens" in the internal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7105.">7105.</span></span>

Go ye unto your burdens. That this signifies that they must live in
combats, is evident from the signification of "going," as being to live
(see n. 3335, 4882, 5493, 5605); and from the signification of
"burdens," as being infestations by falsities (n. 6757), thus combats
against them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7106.">7106.</span></span>

Verses 5-9. And Pharaoh said, Behold the people of the land are now
many, and ye have made them cease from their burdens. And Pharaoh
commanded in that day the taskmasters in the people, and their officers,
saying, Ye shall no more give the people straw to make bricks, as
yesterday and the day before yesterday; let them go and gather straw for
themselves. And the tale of the bricks which they made yesterday and the
day before yesterday, ye shall lay upon, them; ye shall not take away
from it; for they are idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and
sacrifice to our God. Let the service be made heavier upon the men, and
let them do it; and let them not regard the words of a lie. "And Pharaoh
said," signifies the will of those who infest the truths of the church;
"Behold the people of the land are now many," signifies the multitude of
those who are of the spiritual church; "and ye have made them cease from
their burdens," signifies that they have not infested enough; "and
Pharaoh commanded in that day," signifies the cupidity of infesting the
truths of the church while in that state; "the taskmasters in the
people, and their officers, saying," signifies those who most closely
infest and most closely receive; "Ye shall no more give the people
straw," signifies the lowest memory-knowledges which are the most
general of all; "to make bricks," signifies for the things fictitious
and false that will be injected; "as yesterday and the day before
yesterday," signifies not as in the former state "let them go and gather
straw for themselves," signifies that they should procure for themselves
these lowest memory-knowledges; "and the tale of bricks, which they made
yesterday and the day before yesterday, ye shall lay upon them,"
signifies that the things fictitious and false must be injected in
abundance as before; "ye shall not take away from it," signifies without
diminution; "for they are idle," signifies that they are not assaulted
enough; "therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our
God," signifies that consequently they have so much thought about such
worship; "let the service be made heavier upon the men," signifies that
the assault should be increased; "and let them do it," signifies to
obtain the effect; "and let them not regard the words of a lie,"
signifies lest they turn to truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7107.">7107.</span></span>

And Pharaoh said. That this signifies the will of those who infest the
truths of the church, is evident from the signification of "saying," as
being will (of which in what follows); and from the representation of
Pharaoh, as being those who infest the truths of the church (see n.
6651, 6679, 6683), thus who infest those who are of the spiritual
church, for these are said to be in the truths of the church. That
"saying" signifies to will, or the will, is because it involves the
things which follow it; for when anyone wills anything, he utters it. As
"he saith" involves the things which follow, it consequently signifies
various things, as command (n. 7036); exhortation (n. 5012, 7033, 7090);
communication (n. 3060, 4131, 6228); thought (n. 7094); properly,
perception (n. 1791, 1815, 1819, 1822, 1898, 1919, 2080, 2862, 3509,
5687).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7108.">7108.</span></span>

Behold the people of the land are now many. That this signifies the
multitude of those who are of the spiritual church, is evident from the
signification of "the people of the land," as being those who are of the
spiritual church (see n. 2928) for by "people" are signified those who
are in the truths of faith (n. 1259, 1260, 3581), and by "land" is
signified the church (n. 662, 1066, 1067, 1262, 1733, 1850, 2117, 2118,
3355, 4447, 4535, 4577).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7109.">7109.</span></span>

And ye have made them cease from their burdens. That this signifies that
they have not infested enough, is evident from the signification of
"burdens," as being infestations by falsities and the consequent combats
(see n. 6757, 7104, 7105); hence "to make them cease from their burdens"
denotes that they have not infested enough.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7110.">7110.</span></span>

And Pharaoh commanded in that day. That this signifies the cupidity of
infesting the truths of the church while in that state, is evident from
the signification of "commanding," as being a mandate, and as in a
mandate of the evil there is the cupidity of doing evil (for this is the
source of the mandate that comes from them), therefore here by "he
commanded" is also signified cupidity from the representation of
Pharaoh, as being those who infest the truths of the church (see n.
6651, 6679, 6683); and from the signification of "day," as being state
(n. 23, 487, 488, 493, 893, 2788, 3462, 3785, 4850).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7111.">7111.</span></span>

The taskmasters in the people, and their officers, saying. That this
signifies those who most closely infest, and those who most closely
receive, is evident from the signification of "taskmasters," as being
those who compel to serve (see n. 6852), and as this is effected by
means of infestations, by "taskmasters" are also signified those who
infest, but who most closely infest (of whom below); and from the
signification of "officers," as being those who most closely receive;
for the officers were of the sons of Israel, and the taskmasters were of
the Egyptians, as is evident from what follows. Thus in the internal
sense the "officers" are they who most closely receive, and the
"taskmasters" those who most closely infest. \[2\] Who these are can be
known from those in the other life who infest and inject falsities and
evils, and from those who receive and communicate them. They who infest
and inject falsities and evils are the hells, but in order that they may
effect their purpose, they send forth from themselves emissaries,
through whom they act. These appear not far from those who are being
infested; and this is done in order that the thoughts and intentions of
many may be concentrated, for otherwise they would be dispersed. These
emissaries appear in certain fixed places of their own in the world of
spirits, and from the very places where they appear it can be known from
what hell they are; some appear above the head at various altitudes and
in various directions; some near the head to the right or to the left,
and also behind it; some below the head in various situations relatively
to the body, in planes from the head down to the soles of the feet. They
flow in with such things as are ejected from hell, and the spirit or the
man does not perceive or know otherwise than that the things which flow
in are in himself; that is, that he himself thinks and intends them.
These emissaries are called "subjects" (of whom see what was shown
above, from experience, n. 4403, 5856, 5983-5989). As these infest the
most closely, they are signified by the "taskmasters;" but they who
receive from them and communicate are the "officers," and are
intermediate spirits; for as before said the officers were of the sons
of Israel, but the taskmasters were of the Egyptians. \[3\] Those were
called "officers" among the Israelitish and Jewish people, who said what
was to be done, and who gave commandment; wherefore they also sat in the
gates with the judges and elders, and spoke to the people the sentences
of judgment, and also the things commanded by the leader, as can be seen
from the following passages in Moses: Judges and officers shalt thou
make thee in all thy gates, according to thy tribes, who shall judge the
people with the judgment of justice (Deut. 16:18). When they shall go
forth to war, the priest shall speak to the people, and shall admonish
them not to be afraid; afterward the officers shall say that he who has
built a house shall return, and also the fearful (Deut. 20:3, 5, 8). In
Joshua: Joshua commanded the officers to say to the people that they
should prepare provision for the journey, before they passed over Jordan
(Josh. 1:10-11). At the end of three days it came to pass, when the
officers passed through the midst of the camp, they gave commandment
that when they saw the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, they should also
go forward (Josh. 3:2-3). That the officers were governors of the
people, distinct from their princes, see Deut. 1:15; also that they were
distinct from the elders, Deut. 31:28; and from the judges, Joshua 8:33.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7112.">7112.</span></span>

Ye shall no more give the people straw. That this signifies the lowest
memory-knowledges and the most general of all, is evident from the
signification of "chaff" or "straw," as being truths of memory-knowledge
(see n. 3114), and indeed memory-knowledges the lowest and most general
of all, for the lowest food in a spiritual sense is straw or chaff,
because it is the food of beasts. Those knowledges are called lowest
which are full of fallacies of the senses, which the evil abuse to
pervert goods and truths, and thus to defend evils and falsities; for on
account of fallacies these knowledges can be turned in favor of
principles of falsity and of cupidities of evil. Moreover such
knowledges are the most general of all, and unless they are filled with
truths less general and more particular, they may be of service to
falsities and evils, but in proportion as they are filled with truths,
they are of less service to them. Such are the knowledges whereby they
who in the world have professed faith alone, and yet have lived a life
of evil, infest the upright in the other life; but as these knowledges
are dispelled by the angels, it is now said that they should not give
straw to make brick, that is, that they did not add these to the
fictitious and false things that would be injected. Such is the internal
sense of these words, which indeed appears remote from the sense of the
letter; but be it known that there is nothing in the natural world which
does not correspond to something in the spiritual world; and the angels
with a man understand all things spiritually which the man understands
naturally; they do not know what straw is, nor bricks; such things were
known to them when they were in the world, but were forgotten when they
came into heaven, because there they put on spiritual things. Hence it
is that when the angels perceive the ideas of such things with a man,
they turn them into corresponding spiritual things. That "straw" or
"grass" denotes the lowest memory-knowledge, and that "bricks" denote
things fictitious and false, can be seen from many considerations; for
all herbage and straw have no other signification; but seeds, barley,
wheat, and the like denote interior truths and goods; and stones not
artificial denote truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7113.">7113.</span></span>

To make bricks. That this signifies to make things fictitious and false
that will be injected, is evident from the signification of "making
bricks," as being to invent falsities (see n. 1296, 6669). In the
historic sense of the letter it is said that the sons of Israel made
bricks, and thus as it were that they invented falsities; but in the
internal sense it is signified that the infernals who are in falsities
injected them And since - as before said - such things appear to pertain
to those who receive them, the sense of the letter is according to the
appearance, which, however, is explained by the internal sense. (That
there are very many such things in the sense of the letter, see n. 5094,
6400, 6948.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7114.">7114.</span></span>

As yesterday and the day before yesterday. That this signifies not as in
the former state, is evident from the signification of "yesterday and
the day before yesterday," as being what is past (see n. 6983); and as
all times signify states (n. 2625, 2788, 2837, 3254, 3356, 4814, 4882,
4901, 4916), therefore "yesterday and the day before yesterday"
signifies the former state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7115.">7115.</span></span>

Let them go and gather straw for themselves. That this signifies that
they should procure for themselves these lowest memory-knowledges, is
evident from the signification of "gathering" as being to procure; and
from the signification of "straw," as being the lowest memory-knowledges
(of which just above, n. 7112).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7116.">7116.</span></span>

And the tale of the bricks which they made yesterday and the day before
yesterday, ye shall lay upon them. That this signifies that things
fictitious and false must be injected in abundance as in the former
state, is clear from the signification of "the tale," as being
abundance, here the same abundance; from the signification of "bricks,"
as being things fictitious and false (of which just above, n. 7113);
from the signification of "yesterday and the day before yesterday," as
being the former state (of which also just above, n. 7114); and from the
signification of "laying upon them," as being to inject, because it is
said of things fictitious and false. From all this it is evident that by
"laying upon them the tale of the bricks which they made yesterday and
the day before yesterday" is signified that things fictitious and false
were to be injected in the same abundance as in the former state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7117.">7117.</span></span>

Ye shall not take away from it. That this signifies without diminution,
is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7118.">7118.</span></span>

For they are idle. That this signifies that they are not assaulted
enough, is evident from the signification of "being idle," as being not
to be sufficiently infested by falsities, thus not to be assaulted
enough. How the case herein is can also be known from those who are
being infested by falsities in the other life. They who infest, as far
as possible hinder the upright whom they infest from thinking about the
Lord; as soon as any thought of the Lord openly occurs, they at once
take it away, which they know how to do in a skillful manner. But as
with those who are being infested, thought about the Lord is
nevertheless universal, thus too interior to be in plain view (for it
flows in through heaven), therefore as soon as they cease to be
infested, they come into thought about the Lord, for that which flows in
from heaven and reigns universally, reveals itself in every free state.
From all this it is evident what is the internal sense of the words "for
they are idle, therefore they cry, saying Let us go and sacrifice to our
God."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7119.">7119.</span></span>

Therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice unto our God. That
this signifies that consequently they have so much thought about such
worship, is evident from the signification of "crying," as here being
thought; for by "saying" and "speaking" is signified thought (see n.
2271, 2287, 7094), and therefore also by "crying," but by "crying" is
signified strong thought and with full intention of doing, hence it is
said "so much thought;" and from the signification of "sacrificing to
their God," as being the worship of the Lord (n. 6905, 7101). But
because Pharaoh said that he did not know Jehovah (n. 7095, 7097), and
because the Egyptians were averse to sacrifices (n. 1343), and because
Moses said that they would go a way of three days into the wilderness
(n. 6904, 7100), therefore it is said, "such worship."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7120.">7120.</span></span>

Let the service be made heavier upon the men. That this signifies that
the assault should be increased, is evident from the signification of
"making heavier," as being to be increased; from the signification of
"service," when said by those who infest by means of falsities, as being
the intention to subjugate (n. 6666, 6670, 6671), thus assault, for they
intend to subjugate by means of this assault; and from the signification
of "the men," as being those who are of the spiritual church. There are
two words in the original language which signify man; the one is "Adam,"
and the other "Enosh." By the man called "Adam" is meant the man of the
celestial church; but by the man called "Enosh" is meant the man of the
spiritual church. Here "the men" are expressed by "Enosh," because the
subject treated of is those who are of the spiritual church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7121.">7121.</span></span>

And let them do it. That this signifies to obtain the effect, is evident
without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7122.">7122.</span></span>

And let them not regard the words of a lie. That this signifies lest
they turn to truths, is evident from the signification of "regarding,"
as being to turn one's self; and from the signification of "the words of
a lie," when said by those who are in falsities, as being truths; for
they who are in falsities call truths falsities, thus "the words of a
lie;" and falsities they call truths, for they are in what is opposite.
In these verses, in the internal sense, there has now been described the
infestation by falsities of the upright in the other life; and there has
also been set forth the way in which they are infested. Such infestation
is permitted to the end that falsities may be removed, and truths be
instilled, which cannot possibly be done without infestation; for after
death there clings to a man, and there is in his memories, everything of
his thought in the world, of his intention, of his will, of his speech,
and of his action, for nothing is obliterated. That these things have
been impressed on his memories, especially on the interior memory, which
is properly the memory of his spirit, see n. 2469, 2470, 2474, 2475. And
this being so, it must needs be that there cling to him things foul and
filthy, and also evil and false, from his life in the world; and which
cause the truths which the man has also learned, and the goods which he
has imbued, to be hidden. For truths and goods cannot come forth among
such things; and therefore before truths and goods can appear, and the
man be thus associated with those who are in heaven, it is necessary
that these evils and falsities be uncovered, so that he may see them and
know them, and thus learn what is true and what is good. This cannot
possibly be done without combat with the evils and falsities in himself;
which combat takes place actually, the evil spirits exciting falsities
and evils, and the angels excusing if the end has been good, and
instilling truths. This is perceived as if it were in himself, as is the
case with temptation in man, which is felt no otherwise than as being in
him, when yet it is the combat of angels with evil spirits outside of
him (see n. 3927, 4249, 4307, 5036, 6657). That this is so has been
granted me to know with certainty from much experience. These things
have been said in order that it may be known why infestation by
falsities takes place with those who are of the spiritual church, which
infestation has been treated of in the above verses, and is treated of
also in those which follow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7123.">7123.</span></span>

Verses 10-13. And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their
officers, and they spoke to the people, saying, Thus said Pharaoh, I
will by no means give you straw. Go ye yourselves, get you straw where
ye can find it; for nothing whatever shall be taken away from your
service. And the people scattered into all the land of Egypt to gather
stubble for straw. And the taskmasters were urgent, saying, Complete ye
your works, the work of a day in its day, as when there was straw. "And
the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers," signifies
the sending forth and presence of those who most closely infest, and of
those who most closely receive; "and they spoke to the people, saying,"
signifies perception; "Thus said Pharaoh," signifies about the
infestations; "I will by no means give you straw," signifies no longer
thence the most general memory-knowledges; "Go ye yourselves, get you
straw where ye can find it," signifies that they should procure these
for themselves elsewhere, wherever they could; "for nothing whatever
shall be taken away from your service," signifies injections of
falsities without diminution; "and the people scattered into all the
land of Egypt," signifies that they overspread the natural mind on every
side; "to gather stubble for straw," signifies to find some truth of
memory-knowledge; "and the taskmasters were urgent," signifies that they
who most closely infested were insistent; "saying, Complete ye your
works, the work of a day in its day," signifies that they should serve
falsities so called in every state; "as when there was straw," signifies
just as they served their truths so called.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7124.">7124.</span></span>

And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers. That
this signifies the sending forth and presence of those who most closely
infest, and of those who most closely receive, is evident from the
signification of "going out," as being a sending forth, because they who
are signified by "taskmasters" are sent forth in order to serve as a
means of communication, as can be seen from what was said above (n.
7111); moreover, that "to go out" denotes to present oneself before
another in a form accommodated to him, see n. 5337; therefore it also
denotes presence; from the signification of "taskmasters," as being
those who most closely infest; and from the signification of "officers,"
as being those who most closely receive and communicate the infestations
(n. 7111).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7125.">7125.</span></span>

And they spoke to the people, saying. That this signifies perception, is
evident from the signification of "saying," in the historicals of the
Word, as being perception (see n. 1791, 1815, 1819, 1822, 1898, 1919,
2080, 2862, 3509, 5687).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7126.">7126.</span></span>

Thus said Pharaoh. That this signifies about the infestations, is
evident from the representation of Pharaoh, as being those who infest
such as are of the spiritual church (see what has been said above), thus
it denotes infestation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7127.">7127.</span></span>

I will by no means give you straw. That this signifies no longer thence
the most general memory-knowledges, is evident from the signification of
"by no means giving," as being no longer to furnish; and from the
signification of "straw," as being the most general memory-knowledges of
all (see n. 7112). How the case herein is has already been told. But it
must be told further, that in the other life those who have been of the
church, and have persuaded themselves that faith alone saves, yet have
not lived the life of faith, but a life of evil, especially put straw
(that is, the most general memory-knowledges of all) before the upright
whom they are infesting. These men are of the same character there as
they had been in the world; they are acquainted with confirming
arguments in favor of faith alone, by which they say that man is saved
no matter how he had lived; but these confirming arguments are nothing
but reasonings that agree with the given proposition; for everything,
even what is most false, can be confirmed by reasonings, and can also be
presented to the simple as true, by means of the arts of eloquence and
of inference. \[2\] For this purpose they especially employ such things
from the Word as are the most general of all, and which without the
internal sense of the word can be drawn to favor any opinion whatever.
Such are the things which they put before those who are of the spiritual
church; and by means of which they infest them; although they are
nothing but chaff or straw for making bricks, for they exclude the most
essential thing of all, namely, charity. They indeed say that works of
charity are the fruits of faith, but still they make these works of no
account, and persuade their hearers that man is saved by faith alone no
matter what his life has been, even in life's last moments; thus by
faith without its fruits, consequently without the life of faith and
charity. \[3\] So long as such things are put before the upright in the
other life, these wield fighting arguments, and are able to defend
themselves, for they see that reasonings are fallacious when the
essential, which is charity, is thus excluded, and also when they see
that no regard is paid to the life. From everything in the other life,
both in general and in particular, they see these things as in clear
day. Such then is what is meant by the memory-knowledges the lowest and
most general of all, which are signified by "straw." They who have
persuaded themselves that faith alone saves, and yet have lived a life
of evil, are in hell at a considerable depth toward the right, a little
in front; and I have heard them from thence infesting the upright with
reasonings; but these, being led of the Lord by the angels, rejected the
reasonings as being empty, and they also exposed the fallacies which
were in the confirmations and arguments from the general things of the
Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7128.">7128.</span></span>

Go ye yourselves, get you straw where ye can find it. That this
signifies that they should procure these for themselves elsewhere,
wherever they could, is evident from the signification of "getting
wherever they could find," as being to procure for themselves elsewhere,
wherever they could; and from the signification of "straw," as being
memory-knowledges, the lowest and most general of all (n. 7112, 7127).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7129.">7129.</span></span>

For nothing whatever shall be taken away from your service. That this
signifies injections of falsities without diminution, is evident from
the signification of "nothing whatever being taken away," as being
without diminution; and from the signification of "service," as being an
assault by falsities (see above, n. 7120), thus also infestation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7130.">7130.</span></span>

And the people scattered into all the land of Egypt. That this signifies
that they overspread the natural mind on every side, is evident from the
signification of "scattering themselves," as being to overspread; and
from the signification of the "land of Egypt," as being the natural mind
(n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301). There are two minds in man; one is
the natural, and the other the rational mind; the natural mind is the
mind of the external man, but the rational mind is the mind of the
internal man. The things of the natural mind are called
memory-knowledges, but those of the rational mind are called
intellectual reasons; they are also distinguished from each other by the
fact that the things of the natural mind are for the most part in the
light of the world, which is called the light of nature; whereas the
things of the rational mind are in the light of heaven, which light is
spiritual light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7131.">7131.</span></span>

To gather stubble for straw. That this signifies to find some truth of
memory-knowledge, <span id="fr_152"></span>[7131-1](#fn_152.md) is evident
from the signification of "stubble for straw," as being the truth of
memory-knowledge, for "stubble" denotes such truth as is accommodated to
the memory-knowledge that is signified by "straw." That "stubble"
denotes such truth is because it is the stalk in the top of which is the
seed, and by "seeds" in the word are signified truths and goods; thus by
the stalk which is beneath them is signified the general vessel of
truth, consequently the truth of memory-knowledge; for the
memory-knowledges of faith and charity are indeed truths, but general
truths, thus are the recipient vessels of particular and singular
truths, as can also be seen by everyone. For example: it is a truth of
memory-knowledge that charity toward the neighbor is the essential of
the church; also that faith cannot be except where charity is; and
likewise that truth and good can be conjoined, but not truth and evil,
nor good and falsity; besides many similar truths, which are truths of
memory-knowledge. That these can be enriched with innumerable things,
can be seen from the fact that volumes can be written about them, and
yet the singular truths, which are the interior things of faith, can
never be described, for these can only be seen in the light of heaven,
and do not fall into natural words. These truths are like charity, which
is spiritual affection, and which for the most part cannot be expressed
by words, except its most general things, namely, those which put on a
natural dress, and which can be compared with such things as are in the
world. These things have been said in order that it may be known what
general memory-knowledges are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7132.">7132.</span></span>

And the taskmasters were urgent. That this signifies that they who most
closely infest were insistent, is evident from the signification of
"taskmasters," as being those who most closely infest (see n. 7111); and
from the signification of "urging," as being to insist.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7133.">7133.</span></span>

Saying, Complete ye your works, the work of a day in its day. That this
signifies that they should serve falsities so called in every state, is
evident from the signification of "completing your works," as being to
serve falsities; for by "making bricks" are signified things fictitious
and false that are injected (see n. 7113), and as these are the works
which they were to complete, it signifies that they should serve these;
it is said "falsities so called," because the evil do not acknowledge
the falsities which they speak as being falsities, but as being truths;
and from the signification of "the work of a day in its day," as being
in every state (that a "day" denotes state, see n. 23, 487, 488, 493,
893, 2788, 3462, 3785, 4850).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7134.">7134.</span></span>

As when there was straw. That this signifies just as they served their
truths so called, is evident from the signification of "straw;" as being
general memory-knowledge, which is the vessel of truth (see n. 7112,
7131). It is said "truths so called," because these words are spoken by
the evil, who do not acknowledge truths to be truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7135.">7135.</span></span>

Verses 14-18. And the officers of the sons of Israel were beaten, whom
Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, saying, Wherefore do ye not
complete your task in making brick, as yesterday and the day before
yesterday, also yesterday, also today? And the officers of the sons of
Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore doest thou so to
thy servants? There is no straw given to thy servants, and they say to
us, Make ye bricks; and behold thy servants are beaten; and thy people
have sinned. And he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle; therefore ye say,
Let us go, let us sacrifice to Jehovah. And now go, serve ye, and straw
shall not be given you, and the tale of bricks shall ye give. "And the
officers of the sons of Israel were beaten," signifies that they who
most closely received and communicated the infestations were injured by
the injected falsities; "whom Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them,"
signifies those who were injected by the infesters; "saying, Wherefore
do ye not complete your task in making bricks?" signifies that they do
not receive and communicate the injections of falsities as had been
enjoined; "as yesterday and the day before yesterday," signifies as in
the former state; "also yesterday also today," signifies the state that
will be therefrom; "and the officers of the sons of Israel came,"
signifies those who most closely received and communicated; "and cried
unto Pharaoh," signifies indignation testified before those who were
infesting; "saying, wherefore doest thou thus to thy servants?"
signifies that thus they could not perform the duty enjoined; "there is
no straw given to thy servants," signifies that memory-knowledges
containing truth are no longer furnished; "and they say to us, Make ye
bricks," signifies that they must nevertheless endure the injected
falsities; "and behold thy servants are beaten," signifies that in this
way the falsities inflict injury; "and thy people have sinned,"
signifies that thus they are guilty in having done evil; "and he said,"
signifies the answer; "Ye are idle, ye are idle," signifies that they
have not been sufficiently assaulted; "therefore ye say, Let us go, let
us sacrifice to Jehovah," signifies that from this comes the thought
about such worship; "and now go, serve ye," signifies continuation of
the infestation; "and straw shall not be given you," signifies without
such memory-knowledges; "and the tale of bricks ye shall give,"
signifies the falsities which were to be injected in abundance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7136.">7136.</span></span>

And the officers of the sons of Israel were beaten. That this signifies
that they who most closely received and communicated the infestations
were injured by the injected falsities, is evident from the
signification of "being beaten," as being to be injured by falsities,
because by the taskmasters, by whom are signified the infesters, for in
the spiritual sense "to be beaten" is not to be beaten, but to be
injured in respect to truth and good, that is, in respect to the things
of spiritual life; just as "to die" in the spiritual sense is not to
die, but to be deprived of truth and good, and to be in falsity and
evil, and therefore damned; from the signification of "the officers," as
being those who most closely receive and communicate the infestations
(see n. 7111); and from the representation of the sons of Israel, as
being those who are of the spiritual church (n. 6426, 6637), with whom
they who are signified by the "officers" were in communication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7137.">7137.</span></span>

Whom Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them. That this signifies those
who were injected by the infesters, is evident from the signification of
"being set over them," as being to be injected, because done by
injection (of which in what follows); and from the signification of
"taskmasters," as being those who infest (see n. 7111). How this is
cannot be known except from experience with such in the other life. It
was said above that by "taskmasters" are signified those who most
closely infest, and by "officers" those who most closely receive and
communicate (n. 7111); they who thus receive and communicate are simple,
upright spirits, who are of especial service for such a use; these
spirits, by means of arts known only in the other life, are injected by
the infesters toward the society with which they thus procure for
themselves communication; and this is effected by those who infest and
are signified by the "taskmasters;" thus the hells have communication on
their side, and they who are being infested on theirs. That this is the
case, I have seen a hundred times, if not a thousand, and have also
experienced. From all this it is evident that what is signified by these
words in the internal sense cannot be known except from experience
concerning such things in the other life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7138.">7138.</span></span>

Saying, Wherefore do ye not complete your task in making bricks? That
this signifies that they do not receive and communicate the injections
of falsities as had been enjoined, is evident from the signification of
the "officers" to whom these things are said, as being those who most
closely receive and communicate (see n. 7111); from the signification of
"completing the task," as being to do as had been enjoined; and from the
signification of "making bricks," as being to receive things fictitious
and false (n. 7113).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7139.">7139.</span></span>

As yesterday and the day before yesterday. That this signifies as in the
former state, is evident from the signification of "yesterday and the
day before" as being a former state (see n. 6983, 7114).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7140.">7140.</span></span>

Also yesterday, also today. That this signifies the state that will be
therefrom, is evident from the signification of "yesterday," as being
the former state (as just above); and from the signification of "today,"
as being what is perpetual (see n. 2838, 3998, 4304, 6165), consequently
what is everlasting, and thus that will be as before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7141.">7141.</span></span>

And the officers of the sons of Israel came. That this signifies those
who most closely received and communicated, is evident from the
signification of "the officers of the sons of Israel," as being those
who most closely receive and communicate the infestations (of which just
above, n. 7136).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7142.">7142.</span></span>

And cried unto Pharaoh. That this signifies indignation testified before
those who were infesting, is evident from the signification of "crying,"
as here being to attest indignation, namely, because they had been
beaten, that is, injured by the injected falsities; and because straw
was not given to make brick, that is, that they were receiving and
injecting only things fictitious and false; and from the representation
of Pharaoh, as being those who infest (see n. 6651, 6679, 6683, 7126).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7143.">7143.</span></span>

Saying, Wherefore doest thou this to thy servants? That this signifies
that thus they could not perform the duty enjoined, is evident from the
signification of a "servant," as being one who ministers, and performs a
duty; he is called a "servant" because he is of service, as occasionally
occurs in the Word. That he is called a "servant" who obeys, see n.
1713; and that to "serve" denotes study, n. 3824, 3846; and as what now
follows involves that they could not endure that service, it is plain
that by "wherefore doest thou thus to thy servants?" is signified that
thus they could not perform the duty enjoined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7144.">7144.</span></span>

There is no straw given to thy servants. That this signifies that
memory-knowledges containing truth are no longer furnished, is evident
from the signification of " straw," as being memory-knowledges the most
general of all (see n. 7112), which, being like vessels that can be
filled with truths (n. 4345, 4383, 5208, 7131), are called
memory-knowledges, the containers of truth; from the signification of
"not being given," as being not to be furnished; and from the
signification of "servants," as being those who minister and perform a
duty (of which just above, n. 7143).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7145.">7145.</span></span>

And they say to us, Make ye bricks. That this signifies that they must
nevertheless endure the injected falsities, is evident from the
signification of "making bricks," as being to receive things fictitious
and false which are injected by the evil (n. 7113), here to endure them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7146.">7146.</span></span>

And behold thy servants are beaten. That this signifies that in this way
the falsities inflict injury, is evident from the signification of
"being beaten," as being to be injured by falsities (see n. 7136).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7147.">7147.</span></span>

And thy people have sinned. That this signifies that thus they are
guilty in that they have done evil, is evident from the signification of
"sinning," as being to become guilty of evil, and in this case that they
would deserve to be punished. How the case is in general with what is
contained in this and the preceding verse must be told. They who are in
the lower earth are infested by falsities and evils injected from the
hells round about, in order that evils and falsities may be removed, and
truths and goods be instilled, and that in this way they may be brought
into a state in which they can be raised up into heaven (see n. 7090,
7122). But near the end they are more severely infested than before; for
then truths are taken from them, and mere falsities are permitted to
infest them, and this even to despair; for it is of Divine order that
the last of infestation and of temptation should be despair (see n.
1787, 2694, 5279, 5280). This was done by Pharaoh in order that this
state of those who are of the spiritual church might be represented by
the sons of Israel, and this when the infestations were near to the end,
that is, when the people were to be liberated and conducted into the
land of Canaan. Be it known that infestations are effected in this
manner, namely, that falsities and evils from the hells are injected
into the thoughts, and also truths and goods from heaven, that is,
through heaven from the Lord; this is done because a man and a spirit do
not think from themselves, but all things flow in, which although it is
quite foreign to our feeling, and therefore seems to be incredible, is
nevertheless most true (on this matter see what has already been adduced
and shown from experience, n. 2886, 4151, 4249, 5846, 5854, 6189-6215,
6307-6327, 6466-6495, 6598-6626). From all this it can be known how it
is to be understood that infestations are effected by means of the
injection of falsities, and that this is increased even to despair.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7148.">7148.</span></span>

And he said. That this signifies the answer, is evident from the
signification of "saying," as being answer (n. 7103).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7149.">7149.</span></span>

Ye are idle, ye are idle. That this signifies that they have not been
sufficiently assaulted, is evident from the signification of "being
idle," as being not to be sufficiently assaulted, namely, by falsities
(see n. 7118).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7150.">7150.</span></span>

Therefore ye say, Let us go, let us sacrifice to Jehovah. That this
signifies that from this comes the thought about such worship, is
evident from what was said above (n. 7119), where are the like words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_152"></span>[7131-1](ac143.htm#fr_152.md) Latin verum
scientificum. This, as here defined, is such truth as is accommodated
to, or is fitted into memory- knowledge, and which is "a general vessel
of truth." Such is the verum scientificum, or truth of
memory-knowledge.--Reviser.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7151-7200](ac144.md)
