[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac152)  [Next](ac154.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="7601.">7601.</span></span>

And the flax. That this signifies the truth of the exterior natural, is
evident from the signification of "flax," as being truth, but truth of
the exterior natural (of which below; that the natural is exterior and
interior, see n. 4570, 5118, 5497, 5649; consequently that the truth and
good therein are interior and exterior, n. 3293, 3294). The truth and
good of the exterior natural are signified by "the flax and the barley,"
and the good and truth of the interior natural by "the wheat and the
spelt." \[2\] The subject treated of in this and in the following verse
is the truths and goods which were destroyed and vastated, and the goods
and truths which were not destroyed and vastated; thus the truths and
goods which were stored up and reserved for use, and those which were
not stored up and reserved. For when the evil are being vastated, that
is, when they are being separated from truths and goods, and are left to
their own evils and falsities, they are then vastated in respect to
those truths and goods which are in the exterior natural, and which are
adjoined there to falsities and evils. That these truths and goods look
downward, and therefore cannot be reserved, will be seen below (n. 7604,
7607); but the truths and goods of the interior natural are not
vastated, but are brought further inward, and are there reserved for
use; and then the communication between the interior natural and the
exterior is so far closed that nothing of good and truth can inflow from
the interior natural into the exterior natural, except only something
general, to enable them to reason, and to string together arguments to
confirm falsities and evils. Those goods and truths which are reserved,
are signified in the Word by "remains" (as to which see n. 468, 530,
560, 561, 576, 661, 798, 1738, 1906, 2284, 5135, 5342, 5344, 5897-5899,
6156, 7556). These are now treated of in these two verses, and are
signified by "the flax and the barley were smitten, because the barley
was a ripening ear, and the flax was a stalk;" and by "the wheat and
spelt were not smitten, because they were hidden." It is from
representatives in heaven that "flax" signifies truth. In heaven they
who are in the truth of the natural appear clothed in white, which white
appears as of linen. \[3\] The truth itself of the natural is also there
represented as if woven from the purer threads of the flax. These
threads appear like threads of silk-bright, beautifully translucent, and
soft; and the clothing made of them appears similar if the truth which
is so represented is from good; but on the other hand these threads,
which are like those of flax, do not appear translucent, nor bright, nor
soft, but hard and brittle, and yet white, if the truth which is so
represented is not from good. \[4\] From all this it can now be seen
what is signified by the angels who were seen by men appearing in linen
garments; as those spoken of in John: There went out from the temple the
seven angels that had the seven plagues, clothed in linen white and
shining, and girt about their breasts with golden girdles (Rev. 15:6). I
lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and behold a man clothed in linen, whose
loins were girded with gold of Uphas (Dan. 10:5). Behold six men came
from a way of the upper gate, every man with his weapons of dispersion
in his hand; but one man in the midst of them clothed in linen, and a
scribe's ink horn on his loins (Ezek. 9:2); which angel is further
mentioned in the same chapter (Rev. 15:3-4; 10:2-7). And in the same
prophet we read of the angel who measured the new temple, who had a line
of flax and a measuring reed in his hand (Ezek. 40:3). The angels also
who were seen in the Lord's sepulcher appeared clothed in white, bright
and shining (Matt. 28:3; Mark 16:5; Luke 24:4; John 20:11, 12). \[5\] As
"flax" signified the truth of the exterior natural, and the exterior
natural is what clothes the interiors, therefore this truth is what was
represented by the linen garments with which the angels were clothed;
and also by the garments of flax (or linen) with which Aaron was clothed
when he ministered in the holy place, which garments are thus spoken of
in the following passages: When Aaron enters into the holy place, he
shall put on the holy coat of linen, and shall gird himself with the
belt of linen, and he shall put on himself the miter of linen; these are
the garments of holiness (Lev. 16:4). The priests, the Levites, the sons
of Zadok, when they enter at the gates of the inner court, they shall be
clothed with garments of linen, and no wool shall come up upon them when
they minister in the gates of the inner court and inward; miters of
linen shall be upon their head, breeches of linen shall be upon their
loins (Ezek. 44:17-18); speaking of the new temple and of the New
Jerusalem, by which is meant the Lord's kingdom. Therefore also the
priests wore ephods of linen (1 Sam. 22:18); and Samuel ministered
before Jehovah, a boy girded with an ephod of linen (1 Sam. 2:18). David
also, when the ark was brought over into his city, was girded with an
ephod of linen (2 Sam. 6:14). \[6\] From all this it can also be seen
why the Lord, when He washed the feet of His disciples, girded Himself
with a linen towel, and wiped their feet with the linen towel with which
He was girded (John 13:4, 5); for the washing of the feet signified
purification from sins, which is effected by means of the truths of
faith, for by means of these man is taught how to live. \[7\] By "flax"
(or "linen") is signified truth in the following passages also: Jehovah
said to the prophet, Go and buy thee a girdle of linen, and put it upon
thy loins, but draw it not through water. Take the girdle, and arise, go
to Euphrates, and hide it in a hole of the rock. At the end of many
days, when he took the girdle from the place where he had hidden it,
behold the girdle had rotted, it was fit for nothing (Jer. 13:1-7); by
the "girdle of flax upon the loins" was represented truth from good,
such as it is in the beginning when a church is being set up again by
the Lord, and such as it becomes afterward; that about its end it is
corrupt and is fit for nothing. In Isaiah: They who make linen of silk
shall blush, and the weavers of curtains (Isa. 19:9). This is said of
Egypt; "to make linen of silk" denotes to counterfeit truths. \[8\] In
Moses: Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an ass together. Thou shalt
not wear a mixed garment of wool and flax together (Deut. 22:10-11); by
"an ox" is signified the good of the natural; by "an ass" its truth; in
like manner by "wool and flax." That they were not to plough with an ox
and an ass together, nor to wear a mixed garment of wool and flax
together, signified that they were not to be in two states at once;
namely, in good and from it look to truth; and at the same time in truth
and from it look to good. These things involve the same as is involved
in the words of the Lord in Matthew: Let him that is upon the roof of
the house not come down to take anything out of his house; and let him
that is in the field not return back to take his garment (Matt.
24:17-18); as to which see above (n. 3652e). For they who from good look
to truth are in an interior heaven; but they who from truth look to good
are in an exterior heaven; the latter from the world look to heaven, the
former from heaven look to the world, whence they are in a kind of
opposition, and therefore if they were together, the one would destroy
the other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7602.">7602.</span></span>

And the barley. That this signifies its good, is evident from the
signification of "barley," as being the good of the exterior natural.
That "barley" has this signification is because it is produce of the
field, and is a grain that serves for food; for "grain" in general
signifies the good of truth (see n. 3580, 5295, 5410, 5959), especially
barley and wheat - "barley," the good of the exterior natural, and
"wheat," the good of the interior natural. The former good is signified
by "barley" in Joel: The meat-offering and the drink-offering are cut
off from the house of Jehovah; the priests, the ministers of Jehovah,
have mourned. The field hath been laid waste, the earth hath mourned,
because the grain hath been devastated, the new wine is dried up, the
oil languisheth. The husbandmen are ashamed, the vinedressers have
howled over the wheat and over the barley, because the harvest of the
field hath perished (Joel 1:9-11); the subject of this prophecy is the
vastation of good and truth, as is evident from what follows in the
chapter; and therefore by "grain," "new wine," "wheat," and "barley,"
are not signified these things, but spiritual things; thus by "wheat,"
interior good; and by "barley," exterior good. So with "barley" in Ezek.
4:9, and in Deut. 8:8. In the book of Judges: When Gideon was come to
the camp, a man was telling a dream to his fellow, and said, Behold, I
dreamed a dream, and lo a baked loaf of barley rolled unto the camp of
Midian, and came even unto the tent, and smote it that it fell, and
turned it upside down, and so the tent fell (Judg. 7:13); by "Midian"
are signified those who are in the truth of simple good, and in the
opposite sense those who are not in the good of life (n. 3242, 4756,
4788, 6773). This good is the good of the exterior natural, and is
signified by a "loaf of barley;" but the delight of pleasures, if
regarded as the end instead of this good, is what is signified by the
"baked loaf of barley;" this is the state which the Midianites at that
time represented, and which is there described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7603.">7603.</span></span>

Were smitten. That this signifies that they were destroyed, is evident
without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7604.">7604.</span></span>

For the barley was a ripening ear, and the flax was a stalk. That this
signifies that this good and truth stood forth, and looked downward, is
evident from the signification of "the barley" and "the flax," as being
the good and truth of the exterior natural (of which above, n. 7601,
7602); and from the signification of "a ripening ear," and also of "a
stalk," as being that they stood forth, for it is said of the wheat and
spelt that they "were hidden," that is, that they did not stand forth;
for the grains that are ripe stand forth on their ear and stalk, so that
they bend down; and in the spiritual sense, which treats of the good of
faith and charity, this signifies that they looked downward. How the
case herein is, is plain from what was said above (n. 7601). That with
the evil the goods and truths in the exterior natural look downward, is
because they are there together with evils and falsities, and are
adjoined to them. All evils and falsities look downward, that is,
outward to the earth and to the world; whence the goods and truths
adjoined to them also do the same, for the evils and falsities draw the
goods and truths with them, which is done by wrong applications. It is
these goods and truths which are vastated with the evil; for if they
were not vastated, the goods and truths would flow in which are stored
up and reserved by the Lord in the interior natural, and would conjoin
themselves with those which are in the exterior natural, and would thus
act as one with them, whence also they would be bent downward, and thus
would perish. Man is distinguished from brute animals by the fact that
he can look upward, that is, to the Divine; without this faculty man
would be like a beast, for a beast looks only downward. From this then
it is evident why the goods and truths with the evil which look downward
are taken away from them, and why when these have been taken away, the
communication is closed with the interiors, where goods and truths from
the Lord have been stored up and reserved for use.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7605.">7605.</span></span>

And the wheat and the spelt. That this signifies the good of the
interior natural and its truth, is evident from the signification of
"the wheat," as being the good of love and charity (n. 3941), and being
a more noble grain than barley, it denotes the good of the interior
natural; and from the signification of "the spelt," as being the truth
of the interior natural corresponding to the good signified by "the
wheat." That "spelt" denotes this truth, can be seen from the fact that
in the Word, where good is spoken of, truth also is spoken of, and this
because of the heavenly marriage which is of good and truth in every
detail of the Word; and in the supreme sense, because of the union of
the Divine Itself and the Divine Human in the Lord, to which the
marriage of good and truth in heaven corresponds. (Thus that the Lord
Himself as to the Divine Itself and the Divine Human is inmostly in the
Word, see n. 683, 793, 801, 2173, 2516, 2618, 2712, 2803, 3132, 4138,
5502, 6179, 6343.) From this it is evident that by "the spelt" is
signified truth corresponding to the good which is signified by "the
wheat."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7606.">7606.</span></span>

Were not smitten. That this signifies that they were not destroyed, is
plain without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7607.">7607.</span></span>

Because they were hidden. That this signifies because they did not stand
forth, and because they tended inward, is evident from the signification
of "they were hidden," as being not to stand forth; in the spiritual
sense, because they were in the interior natural, and there tended
inward. That these could not be destroyed is because they looked to
heaven and to the Lord, which is to look inward; and not to the earth
and the world, which is to look outward. What it is to look inward, and
to look outward, shall be briefly told. Man has been so created that he
can look above himself to heaven, even to the Divine, and can also look
below himself to the world and the earth. In this, man is distinguished
from the brute animals; and a man looks above himself, or to heaven,
even to the Divine, when he has as the end his neighbor, his country,
the church, heaven, especially the Lord; and he looks below himself when
he has self and the world as the end. To have as the end is to love, for
that which is loved is as the end, and that which is loved reigns
universally, that is, in every detail of the thought and of the will.
While a man looks one way, he does not look the other; that is to say,
while he looks to the world and to self, he does not look to heaven and
to the Lord; and the reverse; for the determinations are opposite. \[2\]
From the fact that man can look above himself, that is, can think of the
Divine, and be conjoined with the Divine by love, it is very evident
that there is an elevation of the mind by the Divine; for no one can
look above himself except by means of an elevation by Him who is above;
whence it is also evident that all the good and truth with a man are the
Lord's. From this it is also evident that when a man looks below
himself, he separates himself from the Divine, and determines his
interiors to self and to the world, in like manner as they have been
determined with brute animals, and that he then so far puts off
humanity. From all this it can now be seen what is meant by looking
inward or above himself, and what by looking outward or below himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7608.">7608.</span></span>

And Moses went out of the city from before Pharaoh. That this signifies
separation from them, is evident from what was unfolded above (n. 7595),
where are like words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7609.">7609.</span></span>

And spread out his palms unto Jehovah. That this signifies intercession,
see above (n. 7596).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7610.">7610.</span></span>

And the voices and the hail ceased, signifies the end of this state (as
above, n. 7597).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7611.">7611.</span></span>

And the rain was not poured upon the earth. That this signifies that
these falsities no more appeared, is evident from the signification of
"the rain," here the rain of hail, as being falsities (see n. 7553,
7574); and from the signification of "not being poured upon the earth,"
as being that they were ended, thus also that they did not appear,
namely, the falsities which are signified by "the rain of hail."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7612.">7612.</span></span>

And Pharaoh saw. That this signifies a noticing, is evident from the
signification of "seeing," as being a noticing (see n. 2150, 3764, 4723,
5400).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7613.">7613.</span></span>

That the rain and the hail and the voices had ceased, signifies the end
of this state (as above, n. 7597, 7610).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7614.">7614.</span></span>

He sinned yet more. That this signifies as yet a withdrawal, is evident
from the signification of "yet more," as being as yet, and longer; and
from the signification of "sinning," as being a sundering, withdrawal,
and separation from good and truth (see n. 5229, 5474, 5841, 7589).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7615.">7615.</span></span>

And made heavy his heart, he and his servants. That this signifies
obstinacy, is evident from the signification of "making heavy," "making
hard," and "making firm the heart," as being to be determined (see n.
7272, 7300, 7305).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7616.">7616.</span></span>

And the heart of Pharaoh was made firm. That this signifies that from
evil they were determined, is evident from the signification of the
"heart being made firm," as being to be determined (as just above, n.
7615), where it is said that "he made his heart heavy;" the difference
being that "to make the heart heavy" is from falsity, but "to make the
heart firm" is from evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7617.">7617.</span></span>

And he did not let the sons of Israel go. That this signifies that they
did not leave them, is evident from the signification of "to let go," as
being to leave (as frequently above); and from the signification of "the
sons of Israel," as being those who were of the spiritual church whom
they were infesting (see n. 6426, 6637, 6862, 6868, 7035, 7062, 7198,
7201, 7215, 7223).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7618.">7618.</span></span>

As Jehovah had spoken. That this signifies according to the prediction,
see n. 7302, 7340, 7414, 7432, 7535.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7619.">7619.</span></span>

By the hand of Moses. That this signifies by means of the law from the
Divine, is evident from the signification of "by the hand of" anyone as
being by means of (of which below); and from the representation of
Moses, as being the law from the Divine (see n. 6771, 6827). That "to
speak by the hand of" anyone denotes by his means, or mediately, is
because by the "hand" is signified power, thus by the "hand" of another,
vicarious power, which is the same as mediately, for what is done
mediately is done by the power of another in one's self. This is the
reason why there is this form of speech in the Word, as in the Books of
Kings, where it is sometimes said, "the word which Jehovah spoke by the
hand of" some one, as "by the hand of Ahijah the prophet" (1 Kings
14:18), "by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite" (1 Kings 15:29), "by the
hand of Jehu the prophet" (1 Kings 16:7, 12), "by the hand of Joshua" (1
Kings 16:34), "by the hand of Elijah" (1 Kings 17:16), "by the hand of
Jonah the prophet" (2 Kings 14:25).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7620.">7620.</span></span>

CONTINUATION ABOUT THE SPIRITS AND INHABITANTS OF THE EARTH MARS. I saw
a certain most beautiful flame; it was of various colors, crimson, and
also from white reddening, and the colors likewise sparkled beautifully
from the flame. I saw also a certain hand, which did not hold this
flame, but to which it adhered, at first on the back part, afterward on
the palm or hollow of the hand, and thence it played around the hand.
This continued for some time. Then the hand together with the flame were
removed to a distance, and where they rested, there was light; in this
light the hand withdrew, and then the flame was changed into a bird,
which at first had like colors with the flame, the colors in like manner
sparkling. But the colors gradually changed, and with the colors the
vigor of life in the bird. It flew around, and at first about my head,
then forward into a kind of narrow chamber; and as it flew forward, its
life in proportion departed, until at last it became stone, at first of
the color of a pearl, afterward dark; but although devoid of life, it
continued flying.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7621.">7621.</span></span>

While the bird was flying about my head, and was still in the vigor of
life, there was seen a spirit rising up from beneath, through the region
of the loins to that of the breast, who desired to take away the bird
from that place. But because it was so beautiful, the spirits around me
prevented him from taking it away; for they all kept their eyes upon it.
Then the spirit who rose up from beneath strongly persuaded them that
the Lord was with him, and thus that he did this from the Lord. And
although most of the spirits about me did not believe this, because he
rose up from beneath, they no longer hindered him from taking away the
bird; but as heaven then flowed in, he could not retain it, but
presently let it fly out of his hand at liberty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7622.">7622.</span></span>

When this had passed, the spirits who were about me who had gazed
intently upon the bird and its successive changes, began to converse
together about it, and this for a long time. They perceived that such a
sight must signify something heavenly. They knew that a flame signifies
celestial love and its affections; that a hand, to which the flame
adhered, signifies life and its power; that changes of color signify
varieties of life in respect to wisdom and intelligence; that a bird
signifies the same, but with this difference, that a flame signifies
celestial love and what is of this love, whereas a bird signifies
spiritual love and what is of this love; celestial love is love to the
Lord, and spiritual love is mutual love and charity toward the neighbor;
and the changes of color and likewise of life in the bird until it
became stone, signify successive varieties of spiritual life in respect
to intelligence. They also knew that the spirits who ascend from beneath
through the region of the loins to that of the breast, are in a strong
persuasion that they are in the Lord, and thence believe that all that
they do, even though evil and wicked, is done according to the Lord's
will. Nevertheless they could not from this know who were meant by this
sight. At last they were instructed from heaven that the inhabitants of
Mars were meant; that their celestial love, in which many of them still
are, was signified by the flame which adhered to the hand; and their
wisdom and intelligence by the successive variations of color; and that
the bird in the beginning, when it was in the beauty of its colors and
the vigor of its life, signified their spiritual love; but that the bird
becoming as of stone and void of life, and then of a dark color,
signified the inhabitants who had removed themselves from the good of
love, and are in evil, and yet believe that they are in the Lord. But as
more things have been disclosed and also shown as to those inhabitants
who are of this quality, and as to the state of their life, I may relate
them at the end of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7623.">7623.</span></span>

Exodus 10 THE DOCTRINE OF CHARITY There are two things which proceed
from the Lord and from this in their origin are Divine: the one is Good,
and the other is Truth. These consequently are the two things which
reign in heaven, nay, which make heaven. In the church these two things
are called charity and faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7624.">7624.</span></span>

When Good and Truth proceed from the Lord they are completely united,
and so united as to be not two, but one. Consequently they are one in
heaven; and because they are one in heaven, heaven is an image of the
Lord. It would be the same with the church if charity and faith therein
were a one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7625.">7625.</span></span>

An idea of the good which is of charity and of the truth which is of
faith may be formed from the sun and its light; when the light which
proceeds from the sun is conjoined with heat, as is the case in spring
and summer, then all things of the earth sprout forth and live; but when
there is no heat in the light, as in winter time, then all things of the
earth become torpid and die. Moreover, in the Word the Lord is compared
to the "sun;" and truth conjoined with good, which proceeds from Him, is
compared to "light;" and also in the Word the truth of faith is called
"light," and the good of love is called "fire." Moreover, love is the
fire of life, and faith is the light of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7626.">7626.</span></span>

From all this an idea can also be formed about the man of the church, as
to what he is when with him faith is conjoined with charity, namely,
that he is like a garden and a paradise; and what he is when with him
faith is not conjoined with charity, namely, that he is like a desert
and a land covered with snow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7627.">7627.</span></span>

From the mere light of his natural man everyone can see that Truth and
Good are in agreement, and also that they can be conjoined together; and
that truth and evil are in disagreement, and that they cannot be
conjoined together; and in like manner faith and charity. Experience
itself testifies the same; that he who is in evil as to life is either
in falsity as to faith, or is in no faith, or is quite opposed to faith.
And (what is a secret) he who is in evil as to life is in the falsity of
his evil, although he believes that he is in truth. That he so believes
is because he is in persuasive faith, of which in what follows. EXODUS
10 1. And Jehovah said unto Moses, Come unto Pharaoh; because I have
made heavy his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I may put
these My signs in the midst of him. 2. And that thou mayest tell in the
ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought in
Egypt, and My signs which I have set in them, and that ye may know that
I am Jehovah. 3. And Moses and Aaron came unto Pharaoh, and said unto
him, Thus saith Jehovah the God of the Hebrews, How long dost thou
refuse to be humbled before Me? let My people go, that they may serve
Me. 4. For if thou refuse to let My people go, behold tomorrow I will
bring the locust into thy border. 5. And it shall cover the surface of
the land, and one shall not be able to see the land; and it shall devour
the residue of that which is escaped that is left to you from the hail;
and it shall devour every tree that sprouteth forth to you out of the
field. 6. And thy houses shall be filled, and the houses of all thy
servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; which thy fathers saw
not, nor thy father's fathers, since the day that they were upon the
ground even unto this day. And he looked back, and went out from before
Pharaoh. 7. And Pharaoh's servants said unto him, How long shall this be
a snare to us? Send the men away, and let them serve Jehovah their God;
knowest thou not yet that Egypt is perishing? 8. And Moses and Aaron
were brought back unto Pharaoh; and he said unto them, Go ye, serve
Jehovah your God; who and who are going? 9. And Moses said, We will go
with our boys, and with our old men; with our sons and with our
daughters, with our flock and with our herd, will we go; because we have
a feast of Jehovah. 10. And he said unto them, So shall Jehovah be with
you, when I let you go, and your babe; see ye that evil is before your
faces. 11. Not so; go I pray, ye that are young men, and serve Jehovah;
because this ye seek. And he drove them out from the faces of Pharaoh.
12. And Jehovah said unto Moses, Stretch forth thy hand over the land of
Egypt for the locust, and it shall come up upon the land of Egypt, and
shall devour all the herb of the land, even all that the hail hath left.
13. And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and
Jehovah brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all the
night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locust. 14.
And the locust went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the
border of Egypt, very grievous; before it there was no such locust as
this, and after it there shall not be such. 15. And it covered the
surface of the whole land, and the land was darkened; and it devoured
all the herb of the land, and all the fruit of the tree which the hail
had left; and there was not left any green thing in the tree and in the
herb of the field, in the whole land of Egypt. 16. And Pharaoh hastened
to call Moses and Aaron; and he said, I have sinned to Jehovah your God,
and to you. 17. And now forgive I pray my sin only this once, and
supplicate ye to Jehovah your God that He remove from upon me this death
only. 18. And he went out from before Pharaoh, and supplicated unto
Jehovah. 19. And Jehovah turned an exceeding strong sea wind, and took
up the locust, and cast it into the sea Suph; there was not left one
locust in all the border of Egypt. 20. And Jehovah made firm Pharaoh's
heart, and he did not let the sons of Israel go. 21. And Jehovah said
unto Moses, Stretch out thy hand toward heaven, and there shall be thick
darkness upon the land of Egypt, and one shall grope in thick darkness.
22. And Moses stretched out his hand toward heaven; and there was a most
dense thick darkness in the whole land of Egypt three days. 23. They saw
not a man his brother, and there rose not up anyone from what was under
him for three days; and all the sons of Israel had light in their
dwellings. 24. And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve
Jehovah; only your flock and your herd shall stay; your babe also shall
go with you. 25. And Moses said, Thou shalt also give into our hand
sacrifices and burnt-offerings, that we may perform it unto Jehovah our
God. 26. And our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not a hoof be
left behind; for thereof we must take to serve Jehovah our God; and we
know not with what we must serve Jehovah until we come thither. 27. And
Jehovah made firm Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them go. 28. And
Pharaoh said to him, Go away from before me, take heed to thyself that
thou see my faces no more; for in the day thou seest my faces thou shalt
die. 29. And Moses said, Thou hast rightly spoken; I will see thy faces
again no more.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7628.">7628.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. In this chapter in the internal sense there is further
continued the subject of the vastation of those who infest those who are
of the spiritual church. The ninth and tenth states or degrees of
vastation, which are described by the "locust" and by the "thick
darkness," whereby is signified falsity from evil devastating all things
of the church with them, are now treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7629.">7629.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE. Verses 1-6. And Jehovah said unto Moses, Come unto
Pharaoh, because I have made heavy his heart, and the heart of his
servants, that I may put these My signs in the midst of him; and that
thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what
things I have wrought in Egypt, and My signs which I have set in them,
and that ye may know that I am Jehovah. And Moses and Aaron came unto
Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith Jehovah the God of the Hebrews,
How long dost thou refuse to be humbled before Me? let My people go,
that they may serve Me. For if thou refuse to let My people go, behold
tomorrow I bring the locust into thy border; and it shall cover the
surface of the land, that one shall not be able to see the land; and it
shall devour the residue of that which is escaped that is left to you
from the hail; and it shall devour every tree that sprouteth forth to
you out of the field; and thy houses shall be filled, and the houses of
all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians, which thy fathers
saw not, nor thy fathers' fathers, since the day that they were upon the
ground even unto this day. And he looked back, and went out from before
Pharaoh. "And Jehovah said unto Moses" signifies a command; "Come unto
Pharaoh" signifies the presence of truth from the Divine with those who
infest; "because I have made heavy his heart, and the heart of his
servants," signifies that they all in general were determined; "that I
may put these my signs in the midst of them," signifies that the evil
may know that they are in evil, and that the good may be enlightened as
to the state of those within the church who live evilly; "and that thou
mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I
have wrought in Egypt," signifies that they who are in truth and good
may know what befalls those who are of the church and infest the
upright; "and My signs which I have set in them," signifies that they
may be enlightened with respect to the state of those who are of the
church and live evilly; "and that ye may know that I am Jehovah,"
signifies that thus it may be known to them that the Lord is the only
God; "and Moses and Aaron came unto Pharaoh," signifies the presence of
truth Divine; "and said unto him," signifies discernment; "Thus saith
Jehovah the God of the Hebrews," signifies a command from the Lord, who
is the God of the church; "How long dost thou refuse to be humbled
before Me?" signifies disobedience; "let My people go, that they may
serve Me," signifies that they should leave those who are of the
spiritual church, that they may worship the Lord; "for if thou refuse to
let My people go," signifies if they would not leave them; "behold
tomorrow I bring the locust into thy border," signifies that falsity
will take possession of their extremes; "and it shall cover the surface
of the land," signifies the ultimates of the natural mind thence
derived; "that one shall not be able to see the land," signifies the
consequent darkening of the whole natural mind; "and it shall devour the
residue of that which is escaped that is left to you from the hail,"
signifies the consuming of all things that have anything from truths;
"and it shall devour every tree that sprouteth forth to you out of the
field," signifies thus the consuming of all the knowledges which they
have from the church; "and thy houses shall be filled, and the houses of
all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians," signifies that
falsity will reign in each and all things in the natural, from its
interior to its outermost; "which thy fathers saw not, nor thy father's
fathers, since the day that they were upon the ground even unto this
day," signifies that from ancient time such falsity has not been in the
church as there is there; "and he looked back, and went out from before
Pharaoh," signifies privation of discernment, and separation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7630.">7630.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses. That this signifies a command, namely, one
that was to be brought before Pharaoh, is evident from the signification
of "saying," when by Jehovah to those who infest, as being a command
(see n. 7036, 7107, 7310).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7631.">7631.</span></span>

Come unto Pharaoh. That this signifies the presence of truth from the
Divine with those who infest, is evident from the signification of
"coming" or "entering" to anyone as being presence (see n. 5934, 6003,
6089, 7498); from the representation of Moses, as being truth from the
Divine (see n. 6771, 6827); and from the representation of Pharaoh, as
being those who in the other life infest those who are of the spiritual
church (n. 6651, 6679, 6683, 7107, 7110, 7126, 7142, 7220, 7228).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7632.">7632.</span></span>

For I have made heavy his heart, and the heart of his servants. That
this signifies that they all in general were determined, is evident from
the signification of "making heavy," "making hard," and "making firm,
the heart," as being to be determined (see n. 7272, 7300, 7305); and
from the representation of Pharaoh, whose heart was made heavy, as being
those who infest; and when it is said "he and his servants," all in
general are signified, for the servants together with him constitute the
household. Its being said that Jehovah "made heavy the heart of
Pharaoh," in the internal sense signifies that Pharaoh made heavy his
own heart. In ancient times, for the sake of the simple, all evil was
attributed to Jehovah; and this because the simple could not know, and
most of them could not comprehend, how that which came to pass could
come from any other source than Jehovah; nor how it is to be understood
that Jehovah permits the diabolical crew to occasion evil, and why He
does not prevent it, when yet He has all power. As the simple could not
apprehend this, nor scarcely even the intelligent, it was therefore
said, as believed by many, that even evil had sprung from Jehovah. This
is a common thing in the Word, the sense of the letter of which is in
accordance with the faith of the simple. (That the evil which in the
Word is attributed to Jehovah, is from man, see n. 2447, 6071, 6991,
6997, 7533.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7633.">7633.</span></span>

That I may set these My signs in the midst of them. That this signifies
that the evil may know that they are in evil, and that the good may be
enlightened as to the state of those within the church who live evilly,
is evident from the signification of "signs," as being confirmations of
truths, and thus knowledges (see n. 6870), and also enlightenments (n.
7012); hence "to set signs in the midst of them" denotes that the evil
may know that they are in evil. That it also denotes that the good may
be enlightened as to the state of those within the church who live
evilly, is plain from what presently follows, where it is said, "and
that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what
things I have wrought in Egypt, and My signs which I have set in them,"
whereby is signified that they who are in truth and good may know what
befalls those of the church who infest the upright. (That they who in
the other life infest the upright are those who have been of the church
and have known the precepts of faith, and yet have lived contrary to
them, see n. 7317, 7502, 7545, 7554.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7634.">7634.</span></span>

And that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son,
what things I have wrought in Egypt. That this signifies that they who
are in truth and good may know what befalls those who are of the church
and infest the upright, is evident from the signification of "telling in
the ears," as being that they may know and take notice; and from the
signification of "son," and "son's son," as being those who are in truth
and good. (That "son" denotes truth, see n. 489-491, 1147, 2623, 3373;
also that the "sons of sons" denote the things derived, n. 6583.) Here
"sons" denote those who are in truth and also in good, because by them
are signified those who are of the church; and therefore "thy son's son"
is said to Moses, by whom is represented the law Divine, which is the
Divine truth proceeding from the Lord's Divine good; thus it is the
Divine truth to which is united the Divine good (n. 7623, 7624), from
which is the church: and from the signification of "what things I have
wrought in Egypt," as being that which befalls those who in the other
life infest the upright. That by "signs" is signified that which
befalls, and by "Pharaoh and the Egyptians" those who in the other life
infest, is evident from what has been said before. (That they who infest
have been of the church may be seen above, n. 7633.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7635.">7635.</span></span>

And My signs which I have set in them. That this signifies that they may
be enlightened with respect to the state of those who are of the church
and live evilly, is evident from what was said above (n. 7633), where
are like words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7636.">7636.</span></span>

That ye may know that I am Jehovah. That this signifies that thus it may
be known to them that the Lord is the only God, is evident from the
signification of "that ye may know," as being that it may be known to
them. That by "I am Jehovah" is signified that the Lord is the only God,
is because the name "Jehovah" signifies Is, thus Him from whom is the
being and coming-forth of all things, who cannot but be the sole and
only one. (That "Jehovah" denotes the Lord, see n. 1343, 1736, 2921,
3023, 3035, 5663, 6303, 6905, 6945, 6956; and that by these words is
meant that He is the only God, n. 7401, 7444, 7544, 7598.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7637.">7637.</span></span>

And Moses and Aaron came unto Pharaoh. That this signifies the presence
of truth Divine, is evident from the signification of "coming" or
"entering," as being presence (as above, n. 7631); and from the
representation of Moses and Aaron, as being truth Divine-Moses the
internal, Aaron the external (n. 7089, 7382).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7638.">7638.</span></span>

And said unto him. That this signifies discernment, is evident from the
signification of "saving," as being to notice (see n. 1791, 1815, 1819,
1822, 1898, 1919, 2080, 2619, 2862, 3395, 3509, 5743, 5877); that by
"they said" is here meant to discern, is because by Moses and Aaron is
represented truth Divine, and by "to come," the presence thereof; and
discernment is from the presence of truth Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7639.">7639.</span></span>

Thus said Jehovah the God of the Hebrews. That this signifies a command
from the Lord, who is the God of the church, is evident from the
signification of "saying," when by Jehovah to those who infest, as being
a command (as above, n. 7630); and from the signification of "the
Hebrews," as being those who are of the church (n. 5136, 6675, 6684,
6738). (That "Jehovah God" denotes the Lord, see above, n. 7636.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7640.">7640.</span></span>

How long dost thou refuse to be humbled before Me? That this signifies
no obedience, is evident from the signification of "refusing to be
humbled," as being not to obey. This is signified because it is said to
those who are in evil, who cannot be humbled before the Divine; for
there are two things in humiliation, namely, the acknowledgment of self,
that it is nothing but evil, and that relatively to the Divine it is as
nothing; and the acknowledgment of the Divine, that it is nothing but
good, and is infinite. These two things are not possible with the evil,
because they are in the love of self. If they humble themselves it is
either from fear, or that they may be honored or enriched; thus they
humble themselves only as to the body, and not as to the mind, which
sometimes then jeers. Such is the humiliation of fear, and also that for
the sake of gain and honor. Such it is before the Divine, although they
do not know this; for the internal with those who are in evil from the
love of self is solely to regard and magnify themselves, and to turn
away from all who do not favor. As humiliation is not possible with the
evil, therefore in the internal sense by "to be humbled" is signified
obedience, and thus by "refusing to be humbled" is signified no
obedience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7641.">7641.</span></span>

Let My people go, that they may serve Me. That this signifies that they
should leave those who are of the spiritual church in order that they
may worship the Lord, is evident from what was said above (n. 7500),
where are the same words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7642.">7642.</span></span>

For if thou refuse to let my people go. That this signifies if they did
not leave them, is evident from the signification of "to let go," as
being to leave (as frequently above); thus "refusing to let go" denotes
not to be willing to leave.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7643.">7643.</span></span>

Behold tomorrow I bring the locust into thy border. That this signifies
that falsity will take possession of their extremes, <span
id="fr_158"></span>[7643-1](#fn_158.md) is evident from the signification
of "the locust," as being falsities in the extremes (of which below);
from the signification of "border," as being the extremes; and from the
signification of "bringing," because predicated of falsity, as being to
take possession of. It is said that "Jehovah will bring," but thereby is
meant that it will be brought, that is, by evil. The case is the same
here as when it is attributed to Jehovah (that is, to the Lord) that He
made heavy Pharaoh's heart, when yet this is from man, from his evil in
him, as shown above (n. 7632). That evil is not from the Lord, but that
it arises from man, is because man turns to himself that good which
flows in from the Lord, and instead of regarding the Lord and what is of
the Lord in all things, he regards himself. Hence comes the
concupiscence of reigning over all, and of possessing all that belongs
to others; and hence come contempt for others, and hatred, revenge, and
cruelty toward those who do not favor and be friendly to one's self;
hence also comes contempt for all things that are of faith and charity,
because when these flow in from the Lord they are turned to self, thus
away from the Lord. \[2\] From all this it can be seen that man turns
into evil the very good which flows in from the Lord. From this also it
is that the evil in the other life remove as far as possible from
heaven; for when heaven comes near them, that is, when good and truth
flow in more strongly, they then rush the more strongly into the
opposite, that is, into evil and falsity; and in the degree that evil
and falsity increase, they expel truth from themselves, and devastate
themselves; and then also in the same degree they rush into the evils of
penalty, for in the other life evils and their penalties are joined
together. \[3\] The Lord is continually bringing the heavens into order,
and is constantly receiving new residents of heaven, to whom He gives
dwelling places and inheritances; and when He does this, heaven
approaches, that is, flows in more strongly, causing the infernal
spirits to rush more strongly into evils and falsities, and into the
penalties of these; and in consequence of this rushing into evils and
falsities, they as before said vastate themselves; and this does not
cease with them until they have completely devastated themselves, and
cast themselves deeply into the hells. From all this it can be seen that
nothing else than good proceeds from the Lord, and that the evil is from
those themselves who are in evil. All this shows how is to be understood
what is said of Jehovah (that is, of the Lord), that "He made heavy
Pharaoh's heart," and here that "He brings the locust," by which is
signified falsity from evil in the extremes. \[4\] In the Word, where
the vastation of the evil is treated of, mention is sometimes made of
the "locust" and of the "caterpillar," and by the "locust" in the
internal sense is there meant the falsity which vastates the extremes.
For as before shown, the natural with man is interior and exterior; the
falsity which is in the extremes of the natural, being meant by the
"locust," and the evil therein by the "caterpillar." As by the "locust"
is meant the falsity which is in the extremes of the natural, therefore
it is said that the locust would be brought "into the border," and would
"cover the surface of the earth;" and afterward (verse 14), "the locust
went up upon the land of Egypt, and rested in all the border of Egypt,
and it covered the surface of the whole land." By the "border" and by
the "surface" are signified the extremes and ultimates in which the
interiors rest, that is, terminate. \[5\] The same is meant by the
"locust" and the "caterpillar" in David: He sent among them swarms,
which consumed them; and the frog, which destroyed them; and He gave
their produce to the caterpillar, and their labor to the locust (Ps.
78:45-46). He said that the locust should come, and the caterpillar, so
that there was no number (Ps. 105:34). These things are said of Egypt,
and the "caterpillar" is mentioned, although there is no mention made of
it in Moses, but only of the "locust." The reason why the "caterpillar"
also is mentioned, is that by it is signified evil; and by the "locust"
falsity; each in the extremes of the natural. But when the "locust"
alone is mentioned, it signifies both falsity and evil together, for the
"locust" denotes falsity from evil. \[6\] In Nahum: There shall the fire
devour thee, the sword shall cut thee off, it shall devour thee like the
caterpillar; multiply thyself like the caterpillar, multiply thyself
like the locust. Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of
the heavens; the caterpillar hath spread himself, and hath flown away.
Thy crowned ones are as the locust, thy commanders are as the locust of
the locusts (Nah. 3:15-17); the subject here treated of is the "city of
bloods," by which is signified the doctrine of falsity; and because
falsity and evil are especially multiplied in the extremes of the
natural, for therein are the fallacies of the senses that originate from
the objects of the world, and of the earth, and also pleasures from
various kinds of appetites, therefore the multiplication of evil and
falsity is also described by "the caterpillar and the locust," as also
in the book of Judges (6:5; 7:12), and in Jeremiah (46:23). (That the
sensuous, which is the lowest of the natural, is very full of fallacies
and the derivative falsities, see n. 5084, 5089, 5094, 6310, 6311, 6313,
6318, 6598, 6612, 6614, 6622, 6624, 6948, 6949.) \[7\] In Joel: That
which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust devoured; and that which
the locust hath left hath the cankerworm devoured; and that which the
cankerworm hath left hath the caterpillar devoured. Awake, ye drunkards,
and weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine, in
that it is cut off. For a nation will come up upon My land, strong, and
without number, and will reduce My vine into a waste, and My fig-tree
into froth (Joel 1:4-7). The threshing floors are full of pure grain,
and the vats overflow with new wine and oil; and I will compensate to
you the years that the locust hath consumed, the cankerworm, the
caterpillar, and the palmerworm (Joel 2:24-25); where the "locust"
denotes falsity in the extremes vastating truths and goods. In Moses:
Thou shalt bring out much seed into the field, but shalt gather little,
because the locust shall consume it. Thou shalt plant vineyards, but
thou shalt neither drink the wine, nor gather; for the worm shall devour
it (Deut. 28:38-39); where the "locust" denotes falsity from evil. \[8\]
In John: Out of the smoke of the opened abyss there went forth locusts
on the earth; and power was given them, as the scorpions of the earth
have power; and it was said unto them that they should not hurt the
grass of the earth, nor any tree, but only such men as had not the seal
of God upon their foreheads; and it was given them that they should not
kill them, but should torment them five months; and the shapes of the
locusts were like unto horses prepared for war; and upon their heads
were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as it were the
faces of men; and they had hair as the hair of women; and their teeth
were as the teeth of lions; and they had breastplates, as it were of
iron; and the voice of their wings was as the voice of the chariots of
many horses running to war; and they had tails like scorpions; and
stings were in their tails, that they might hurt men five months. They
have over them a king, the angel of the abyss, whose name in Hebrew is
Abaddon, but in the Greek he hath the name Apollyon (Rev. 9:3-11); what
is signified by all these things no one can see except from the internal
sense. From the details clearly seen therein according to the internal
sense, it is evident that by "locusts" are there signified reasonings
from fallacies and the falsities thence derived, also confirmed by
philosophical things. Thus also by the "locusts" are signified the
falsities which are in the extremes with man, and which are more earthly
and corporeal than all other falsities; and by which man may be easily
deceived and seduced, for he apprehends what is obvious to the senses,
and with difficulty what is opposed to the senses. \[9\] That it may be
known that such is the signification of "locusts," the contents of this
passage may be set forth in detail. The "abyss out of which the locusts
came up" denotes hell; the "grass of the earth which they were not to
hurt" denotes memory-knowledge; the "tree" denotes the knowledges of
good and truth; the "men" denote the affections of good; their "hurting
these, and not the grass of the earth and the tree," denotes that truth
and good can be understood although the life is not in accordance
therewith; "they who have the seal upon their foreheads" denotes those
who have been regenerated; their "tormenting five months those who had
not the seal of God upon their foreheads" denotes that they should
vastate them; that "the locusts were like horses prepared for war,"
denotes reasonings from falsities, whereby there is combat against the
truths of the church; "crowns upon their heads like gold, and their
faces as men's faces," denotes that the reasonings appear like truth,
and as it were from good; "hair as of women, and teeth as the teeth of
lions," denotes the external things of the natural, that is, sensuous
things, or the fallacies therein, which make an appearance of good;
"breastplates of iron" denote external things which make an appearance
of truth; "the voice of the wings like that of the chariots of many
horses running to war," denotes the falsities of doctrine from which and
for which they fight; "tails like scorpions and stings in their tails"
denote the harm which such things bring; the "king of the abyss" denotes
infernal falsity; "Abaddon" denotes perdition; "Apollyon" denotes
reasoning from falsities appearing as from truth, especially if by those
who are believed wise it is confirmed by philosophical things wrongly
applied, for the blind admiration of their wisdom leads to faith in
them. \[10\] By the "locust" in a good sense is signified ultimate and
most general truth, and also its pleasantness; hence John's food was
"locusts and wild honey" (Matt. 3:4; Mark 1:6). These were his food for
the reason that John represented the Word, and by his food, as also by
his clothing which was of camel's hair with a leathern girdle, he
represented the Word in the external sense, for external pleasantness is
signified by the "locust and wild honey" (see n. 5620); and external
truth by the "garment of camel's hair" and by the "leathern girdle" (n.
3301). Hence it is that by John is meant Elias, who was to come and
announce the advent of the Lord. (That "Elias" denotes the Word, see the
preface to the eighteenth chapter of Genesis, and n. 2762, 5247.) That
locusts are among the small animals to be eaten, see Lev. 11:22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7644.">7644.</span></span>

And it shall cover the surface of the land. That this signifies the
ultimates of the natural mind, is evident from the signification of "the
surface," as being things external, thus ultimate; and from the
signification of "the land," here the land of Egypt, as being the
natural mind (see n. 5276, 5278, 5280, 5288, 5301).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7645.">7645.</span></span>

That one shall not be able to see the land. That this signifies the
consequent darkening of the whole natural mind, is evident from the
signification of "not being able to see," as being a darkening, that is,
no perception of truth; and from the signification of the "land of
Egypt," as being the natural mind (as above, n. 7644). How the case
herein is, that from the vastation of the extremes or outermost things
in the natural the whole natural mind is darkened, shall be briefly
told. The interiors in man terminate in his ultimates, that is, in his
outermost things, and there the successive things in him are together.
When there is nothing but falsity and evil in the ultimates, then the
truths and goods which flow in from the interiors into the ultimates,
flow there into evils and falsities, and consequently are there turned
into such things, and for this reason there appears nothing but what is
false and evil in the whole natural. This is meant by the darkening of
the whole natural mind which is signified by "not being able to see the
land." From this also it is that when infernal spirits have been
devastated they are in the outermost things of the natural; nor is their
light, which is called intellectual light, unlike that of this world,
which in the other life becomes thick darkness in the presence of the
light of heaven. As the outermost of the natural, which is called the
sensuous, is replete with fallacies and the falsities thence derived,
and with pleasures and the evils thence derived (see n. 6844, 6845), and
as the hells are in this light, therefore when a man is being
regenerated he is endowed by the Lord with the capacity of being
elevated from this sensuous toward more interior things (n. 6183, 6313,
7442).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7646.">7646.</span></span>

And it shall devour the residue of that which is escaped that is left to
you from the hail. That this signifies the consuming of all things that
have anything from truth, is evident from the signification of "to
devour," as being to be consumed; and from the signification of "the
residue of that which is escaped that is left from the hail," as being
the truth not consumed by the former falsity which is signified by the
"hail." (That "hail" denotes falsity, see n. 7553, 7574.) The falsities
which the "hail" signifies are falsities in the exterior natural; but
the falsities which the "locust" signifies are falsities in its
extremes, and these falsities are what consume the most general truths
and goods; for what is exterior is also more general, and what is
external is most general. When the generals have been destroyed, the
particulars are dispersed; for it is generals that contain, and
particulars that are contained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7647.">7647.</span></span>

And it shall devour every tree that sprouteth forth to you out of the
field. That this signifies thus the consuming of all the knowledges
which they have from the church, is evident from the signification of
"to devour," as being to consume (as just above, n. 7646); from the
signification of "tree," as being perception, also knowledges of truth
and good (n. 2722, 2972); and from the signification of "field," as
being the church (n. 2971, 3317, 3766, 4440, 7502, 7571).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7648.">7648.</span></span>

And thy houses shall be filled, and the houses of all thy servants, and
the houses of all the Egyptians. That this signifies that falsity will
reign in each and all things in the natural, from its interior to its
outermost, is evident from the signification of "to be filled," as being
to reign (of which presently); and from the signification of the "houses
of Pharaoh, the houses of all his servants, and the houses of all the
Egyptians," as being each and all things in the natural (see n. 7353,
7355), here from its interior to its outermost (according to the things
unfolded above, n. 7645). That "to be filled" denotes to reign, is
because when the mind of man is filled with falsities from evils,
insomuch that he has a delight in seducing by means of falsities and in
doing evils, then it is said that "falsity reigns with him," and the
affection itself is said to be "reigning." That is said "to reign
universally" which fills the whole mind of man, that is, both his
thought and his will; that which a man loves above all things and
regards as the ultimate end, thus reigns with him; and this is in the
veriest singulars of his will and of his thought. Of what nature is that
which universally reigns, can be known from the delight when it
succeeds, and from the pain when it does not succeed. That which
universally reigns with a man, makes the visible presentation of his
spirit, his face being wholly in accordance with it. If evil and falsity
are that which reigns, the form of his spirit is diabolical; but if good
and truth are that which reigns, the form is angelic; for regarded in
itself the spirit is the affection in form, and the ruling affection is
its veriest form, and the rest of its affections apply themselves to it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7649.">7649.</span></span>

Which thy fathers saw not, nor thy fathers' fathers, since the day that
they were upon the ground even unto this day. That this signifies that
from ancient time such falsity has not been in the church as there is
there, is evident from the signification of "which they saw not" (that
is, the locust), as being that there had not been such falsity (that the
"locust" denotes falsity in the extremes, see above, n. 7643); from the
signification of "fathers," and of "father's fathers," as being from
ancient time; and from the signification of "the ground," as being the
church (n. 566, 1068). "Since the day that they were upon the ground
even unto this day" signifies the state in which the church was from
that time to this. (That "day" denotes state, see n. 23, 487, 488, 493,
2788, 3462, 4850; and how this is, n. 7686.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7650.">7650.</span></span>

And he looked back, and went out from before Pharaoh. That this
signifies privation of discernment, and separation is evident from the
representation of Moses, of whom it is said that he "looked back and
went out," as being truth from the Divine; from the representation of
Pharaoh, as being those who infest (of whom above, n. 7631); from the
signification of "looking back," as being the privation of discernment,
for a man is deprived of discernment when truth from the Divine looks
back, that is, averts itself, that is to say, when the man averts
himself from it; and from the signification of "going out," as being
separation (see n. 6100, 7404).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[7643-1](ac153.htm#fr_158.md) These "extremes"
(Latin, extrema) are defined in n. 7693e as being sensuale hominis--"the
sensuous of man," which is the lowest part of his mind, and therefore is
the extreme or extremity of it.--Reviser.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7651-7700](ac154.md)
