[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac157)  [Next](ac159.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="7851.">7851.</span></span>

In that night. That this signifies along with the damnation of the evil,
is evident from the signification of "night," as being a state of the
devastation of truth and good (see n. 221, 709, 2353, 7776), thus
damnation; for when there is no longer truth and good, but falsity and
evil, there is damnation; here the damnation of those who had infested
those who were of the spiritual church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7852.">7852.</span></span>

Roast with fire. That this signifies the good which is of love, is
evident from the signification of "roast with fire," as being the good
of love, for "fire" signifies love (see n. 934, 4906, 5215, 6314, 6832,
6834, 6849, 7324), and "roasted" signifies that which is imbued with
love, consequently good. In the Word a distinction is made between what
is roasted and what is boiled; and by "roasted" is signified good,
because it is done by means of fire, and by "boiled" is meant truth
because it is done by means of water; and such is the case here, for it
is said, "eat ye not of it raw, nor by boiling boiled in water, but
roast with fire" (verse 9). The reason is that by the paschal lamb is
signified the good of innocence, which good is the good of love to the
Lord. \[2\] From all this it is evident what is meant in the spiritual
sense by the "roasted fish" in Luke 24:42, 43; also what by the "fish
laid upon the fire," when the Lord also appeared to the disciples,
concerning which it is thus written in John: When the disciples got down
on the land, they see a hearth laid, and a little fish lying thereon,
and bread. Jesus cometh and taketh the bread, and giveth them, and the
little fish likewise (John 21:9, 13); by the "fish" is signified the
truth of the natural (n. 991); and by the "hearth" good; thus by the
"little fish lying thereon," the truth of spiritual good in the natural.
He who does not believe that there is an internal sense of the Word must
needs believe that nothing of a secret nature is involved in the
circumstance that when the Lord appeared to the disciples, there was a
fish upon a hearth, and that it was given to them by the Lord to eat.
\[3\] As by "roast with fire" is signified the good which is of
celestial and spiritual love, therefore in the opposite sense by "roast
with fire" is signified the evil which is of the love of self and of the
world, as in Isaiah: He hath burned part thereof in the fire; upon part
of it he hath eaten flesh; he hath roasted roast that he might be
satisfied; yea, he hath been warmed, and said, Brother, I am warm, I
have seen the fire; I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, I have
also baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh and am
eating it (Isa. 44:16, 19); describing the worshipers of a graven image.
By a "graven image" is signified the falsity of evil, which is so
described; "roasting roast" and "roasting flesh" denote to work evil
from filthy love. (That "fire" in the opposite sense denotes the evil of
the love of self and of the world, or of the cupidities which belong to
these loves, see n. 1297, 1861, 2446, 5071, 5215, 6314, 6832, 7324,
7575.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7853.">7853.</span></span>

And things unleavened. That this signifies what is purified from all
falsity, is evident from the signification of "unleavened" or
"unfermented," as being what is purified from falsity (see n. 2342). The
reason why "unleavened" has this signification, is that "leaven"
signifies falsity (of which in what follows).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7854.">7854.</span></span>

Upon things bitter. That this signifies by means of the undelightful
things of temptations, is evident from the signification of "bitter
things" or "bitternesses" as being things undelightful, here those which
belong to temptations. For the good of innocence, which is represented
by the paschal lamb, cannot be appropriated to anyone except through
temptations. By "unleavened bread" such good is signified, and because
this is appropriated through temptations, the bread was ordered to be
eaten upon bitter things; and moreover, that bread was to them bread of
affliction, like the manna (Deut. 8:15, 16; 16:3), because it was devoid
of leaven, that is, of any falsity from evil, for man cannot endure pure
truth and pure good. That things undelightful are signified by "bitter
things," is plain in Isaiah: Woe to them that call evil good, and good
evil; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! (Isa. 5:20). They
shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be bitter to them
that drink it (Isa. 24:9). That the undelightful things of temptations
are signified by "bitter things" is evident from these words in Exodus:
At last they came unto Marah, but they could not drink of the waters, on
account of their bitterness, because they were bitter. And the people
murmured against Moses, who, when he cried unto Jehovah, Jehovah showed
him wood which he cast into the waters, and the waters were made sweet.
There He set for him a statute and a judgment, because there He tried
him (Exod. 15:23-25). And also in John: There fell from heaven a great
star, burning as a torch. The name of the star is called Wormwood, and
many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter (Rev.
8:10-11). In these passages "bitter waters" denote the undelightful
things of temptations; the "men who died of the waters" denote those who
succumbed in temptations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7855.">7855.</span></span>

They shall eat it. That this signifies enjoyment, is evident from what
was said above (n. 7849).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7856.">7856.</span></span>

Eat ye not of it raw. That this signifies that it shall not be without
love, is evident from the signification of "to eat," as being enjoyment
(as above, n. 7849); and from the signification of "raw," as being
without the good of love. That "raw" has this signification, is clear
from the signification of "roasted with fire," as being the good of love
(see n. 7852); consequently "raw" denotes that which is not roasted with
fire, thus that which is without love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7857.">7857.</span></span>

And by boiling boiled in waters. That this signifies that it shall not
go forth from the truth which is of faith, is evident from the
signification of "waters," as being the truths which are of faith (see
n. 2702, 3058, 3424, 4976, 5668); hence "boiled in waters" denotes that
which comes forth therefrom, that is, the good which is from the truth
of faith; this good is distinguished from the good which is from love,
which is signified by "roasted with fire" (n. 7852). All spiritual good
proceeds either from faith (that is, through faith), or from love. When
man is being regenerated, the good with him proceeds from the truth of
faith; for he then acts in accordance with truth; not from the affection
of truth, but from obedience, because it has been so commanded.
Afterward, however, when he has been regenerated, he does what is good
from affection, thus from love. These two states with man are precisely
distinguished in the Word, for the reason that man cannot be at the same
time in both states. He who is in the first state cannot enter into the
other until he has been regenerated; and he who is in the second state
must not betake himself to the former. If anyone so betakes himself, he
loses the affection of doing what is good from love, and relapses into
the state of faith, which had been of service to him to introduce him to
good, and he also relapses beyond this state. This is meant in the
internal sense by the Lord's words about the Last Judgment in Matthew:
Then let him that is upon the house not go down to take anything out of
his house; and let him that is in the field not return backward to take
his garments (Matt. 24:17-18); and also by Lot's wife, in that she
looked back behind her (Luke 17:31, 32); whence it can be understood
what is meant by enjoying the good which goes forth from love, but not
that which goes forth from the truth of faith, which things are
signified by the command that they should eat the flesh roasted with
fire, but not boiled in waters. \[2\] As by the sacrifices and
burnt-offerings was signified the worship of the Lord from faith and
love-by sacrifices from faith, and by burnt-offerings from love--and
because the glorification of the Lord, and gladness on account of the
enjoyment of goods from the Lord, was signified by the repasts made of
the sanctified things, therefore it was allowed them then to boil their
flesh; for the glorification of the Lord, and gladness on account of the
enjoyment of goods, proceed from the affection of truth which is of
faith, as does also all confession. That the flesh of the sacrifice was
to be boiled, see Exod. 29:31, 32; 1 Sam. 2:13-15; 1 Kings 19:21. Such
is the signification of " boiling" in Zechariah: In that day every pot
in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto Jehovah Zebaoth; and
all they that sacrifice shall come, and shall take of them, and shall
boil in them (Zech. 14:21).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7858.">7858.</span></span>

But roast with fire. That this signifies that it shall go forth from
love, is evident from the signification of "roast with fire," as being
the good which is from love (of which above, n. 7852).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7859.">7859.</span></span>

Its head upon its legs and upon its midst. That this signifies from the
inmost to the external, is evident from the signification of the "head,"
when it is said "upon the legs and the midst," as being the inmost; for
the head is the highest, and in the spiritual sense the highest is the
inmost (n. 2148, 3084, 4599, 5146; that by the "head" is signified
things interior, and by the "body" things exterior, see n. 6436); from
the signification of the "legs," as being things exterior; for
relatively to the head the legs are lower things; and as higher things
signify interior ones, so lower things signify exterior ones-and from
the signification of "the midst," as being things still lower, as are
the things of the belly and the intestines. The command to roast the
head upon the legs and upon the midst, represented that things interior
and exterior must be conjoined, that is, must act as a one; for interior
things are those which are of the internal man, and exterior things are
those which are of the external man; or interior things are those which
are of the spiritual man, but exterior things are those which are of the
natural man. These things must be conjoined, that is must act as a one,
in order that man may be a kingdom of the Lord; they have been separated
when the natural or external man does otherwise than the spiritual or
internal man wills. From all this it can be seen what was signified by
the command that the paschal lamb should be roast with fire, the head
upon the legs and the midst. By the "midst" is meant the natural still
more external, that is, the sensuous. Everyone can see that there is a
Divine secret in these commands; for the paschal lamb was the most holy
thing in that church. This holy secret is not manifest except through
the spiritual understanding of the things and words, which is here such
as has been described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7860.">7860.</span></span>

And ye shall not leave of it until the morning. That this signifies the
duration of this state before a state of enlightenment in heaven, is
evident from the signification of "morning," as being heaven, and a
state of enlightenment there (see n. 2405, 3458, 3723, 5740, 5962); that
"to leave nothing of it until this time" denotes the duration of this
state, is manifest, for then the former state will cease. In the
internal sense, as before shown, the subject treated of is the
liberation from infestations of those who are of the spiritual church.
The state of their liberation is represented by the passover, and the
state of their elevation into heaven by their introduction into the land
of Canaan; this latter state is what is meant by "morning." These two
states are quite contrary, as are the state of means to the end, and the
state of the end. When the state of the end is at hand, then the things
which are in the state of the means must be done with. From all this it
is evident why it was commanded that they should "leave nothing of it
until the morning."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7861.">7861.</span></span>

And that which is left of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.
That this signifies a state intermediate to the end through temptations,
is evident from the signification of "that which is left until the
morning," as being a state intermediate to the last, which is the state
of elevation into heaven, for by "morning" is signified elevation into
heaven and enlightenment there (see just above, n. 7860), and therefore
by the time before morning is signified an intermediate state, in which
it was allowed to enjoy that which was left, or to eat it, but not
afterward; and from the signification of "burning with fire" as being to
undergo temptations. That temptations are signified by "burning with
fire" is because purifications are effected by fire; also because when
man is in temptations, he is let down into his cupidities, which are
fires.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7862.">7862.</span></span>

And thus shall ye eat it. That this signifies enjoyment in a state of
separation from the evil who had infested, and preservation then, is
evident from the signification of "to eat," as being enjoyment (of which
above, n. 7849). As the departure out of Egypt is now treated of, and by
this departure is signified separation from those who had infested,
therefore it is this state which is meant by "thus shall ye eat it."
That it means also preservation, is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7863.">7863.</span></span>

Your loins girded. That this signifies in respect to the interiors, is
evident from the signification of the "loins," as being the things that
belong to conjugial love (see n. 3021, 4277, 4280, 5050-5062), thus the
things that belong to the love of good and truth, for conjugial love
descends from this (n. 686, 2618, 2727-2759, 4434, 5053). For this
reason, and because the loins are above the feet, which denote the
exteriors (of which just below), by the "loins" are signified the
interiors. By "the loins being girded" is signified readiness to receive
the influx of good and truth from the Lord, and also to act according to
the influx. All girding and investiture signifies a state prepared to
receive and to act, for then all things and each are kept in their
order. It is otherwise when they have not been girded.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7864.">7864.</span></span>

Your shoes on your feet. That this signifies in respect to the
exteriors, is evident from the signification of "shoes," as being the
externals or ultimates of the natural, which in general cover the
interiors of the natural; and from the signification of "feet," as being
the natural (see n. 2162, 3147, 3761, 3986, 4280, 4938-4952).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7865.">7865.</span></span>

And your staff in your hand. That this signifies in respect to the
intermediates, is evident from the signification of a "staff in the
hand," as being things intermediate, when journeying or sojourning is
treated of, and when the "loins" are mentioned, and also "shoes on the
feet," which denote the interiors and the exteriors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7866.">7866.</span></span>

And ye shall eat it in haste. That this signifies the affection of
separation, is evident from the signification of "haste," as being
affection, because haste is of the affection (see n. 7695); here the
affection of separation, because it means separation from the infesters,
who are signified by the "Egyptians."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7867.">7867.</span></span>

This is the passover of Jehovah. That this signifies the presence of the
Lord and liberation by Him, is evident from what has been said
heretofore, especially from what has been said concerning the liberation
of those who are of the spiritual church by the Lord's coming (n. 6854,
6914, 7035, 7091, 7828); (that "Jehovah" in the Word denotes the Lord
see n. 1343, 1736, 2921, 3023, 3035, 5041, 5663, 6281, 6303, 6905).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7868.">7868.</span></span>

Verses 12-16. And I will pass through the land of Egypt in that night,
and I will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from man and
even unto beast; and on all the gods of Egypt I will do judgments; I am
Jehovah. And the blood shall be to you for a sign upon the houses where
ye are; and I shall see the blood, and I will pass over you, and there
shall not be in you a plague for a destroyer, when I smite the land of
Egypt. And this day shall be unto you for a memorial, and ye shall keep
it a feast to Jehovah in your generations, ye shall keep it by an
eternal statute. Seven days shall ye eat unleavened things; even on the
first day ye shall cause leaven to cease from your houses; for everyone
that eateth what is leavened, from the first day until the seventh day,
even that soul shall be cut off from Israel. And there shall be for you
in the first day a holy convocation, and in the seventh day a holy
convocation; no work shall be done in them, save that which every soul
must eat, this only shall be done by you. "And I will pass through the
land of Egypt," signifies presence with those who had infested; "in that
night," signifies the state of their evil; "and I will smite all the
firstborn in the land of Egypt," signifies the damnation of those who
are in faith separate from charity; "from man and even unto beast,"
signifies their evil cupidities interior and exterior; "and on all the
gods of Egypt I will do judgments," signifies their falsities which are
to be damned; "I am Jehovah," signifies the Lord, that He is the only
God; "and the blood," signifies the truth of the good of innocence;
"shall be to you for a sign upon the houses where ye are," signifies
that it is a testifying of the will of good; "and I shall see the
blood," signifies the noticing of this truth by those who inflict the
damnation; "I will pass over you," signifies that it will flee from
thence; "and there shall not be in you a plague for a destroyer,"
signifies that damnation from the hells shall not flow in; "when I smite
the land of Egypt," signifies when they are damned who are in faith
separate from charity; "and this day shall be unto you for a memorial,"
signifies the quality of this state in worship; "and ye shall keep it a
feast to Jehovah," signifies the worship of the Lord on account of
liberation from damnation; "in your generations," signifies in those
things which are of faith and charity; "ye shall keep it by an eternal
statute," signifies the worship of the Lord according to the order of
heaven on the part of those who are of the spiritual church; "seven
days," signifies what is holy; "shall ye eat things unleavened,"
signifies purification from falsities; "even on the first day ye shall
cause leaven to cease from your houses," signifies that no falsity
whatever must be in the good; "for everyone that eateth what is
leavened," signifies who appropriates to himself falsity; "even that
soul shall be cut off from Israel," signifies that he shall be separated
from those who are of the spiritual church, and that he shall be damned;
"from the first day until the seventh day," signifies a full holy state;
"and there shall be for you in the first day a holy convocation,"
signifies that in the beginning all shall be together; "and in the
seventh day a holy convocation," signifies so at the end of the state;
"no work shall be done in them," signifies a keeping back then from
earthly and worldly things; "save that which every soul must eat,"
signifies when spiritual and celestial good is appropriated; "this only
shall be done by you," signifies that to these only they shall then pay
attention.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7869.">7869.</span></span>

And I will pass through the land of Egypt. That this signifies presence
among those who had infested, is evident from the signification of "to
pass through," when through a land and by Jehovah, as being presence;
and from the signification of "the Egyptians," as being those who had
infested those who were of the spiritual church (n. 6692, 7097), here
denoted by "the land of Egypt."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7870.">7870.</span></span>

In that night. That this signifies the state of their evil, is evident
from the signification of "night," as being a state when there is
nothing but evil and falsity; for "night" is opposed to "day," and
"thick darkness" to "light," and by "day" and "light" is signified when
there is truth and good; consequently by "night" is also signified the
last time of the church, for then, because there is no faith and
charity, falsities and evils reign (see n. 2353, 6000); by "night" is
also signified total devastation (n. 7776), and likewise damnation (n.
7851). From all this it is evident that the state of those who are in
hell is called "night"-not that the darkness of night prevails with
them, for they see one another; but because the state of truth and good
which is in the heavens is called "day," consequently the state of
falsity and evil is called "night." Moreover, there is thick darkness
there when anything of light from heaven flows in; for then their light
from which they see is dissipated and becomes thick darkness. \[2\] The
light from which they see is indeed derived from the light from the Lord
through heaven, for in the other life there is no light from any other
source; but this light with those in hell is received by the capacity
they have of understanding truth. This capacity of being able to
understand remains with them, as it does with every man, however much
they are in evil and falsity; but when that heavenly light passes from
this capacity into the will, so that they do not wish to understand, and
from this passes into evil and falsity, then the heavenly light with
them is turned into a light which is like the light from a coal fire;
and this light, as already said, is turned into dense thick darkness by
the light of heaven when it flows in. (That in the hells there is such a
light as is that from a coal fire, see n. 1528, 3340, 4418, 4531; and
that this light is turned into thick darkness at the presence of the
light of heaven, n. 1783, 3412, 4533, 5057, 5058, 6000.) From all this
it can be seen that in the other life everyone has light according as
his capacity of understanding is instructed in truths from good, or in
falsities from evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7871.">7871.</span></span>

And I will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt. That this
signifies the damnation of those who are in faith separate from charity,
is evident from the signification of "smiting," as being damnation; for
to smite is to kill or put to death, and by "death," in the spiritual
sense, is signified damnation (see n. 6119); and from the signification
of "the firstborn," when predicated of the Egyptians, by whom are
represented those who are in falsities from evil, as being faith
separated from charity (n. 3325, 7039, 7766, 7778, 7779). That
"firstborn," in the genuine sense, when said of the spiritual church,
denotes the faith which is of charity (see n. 367, 2435, 3325, 3494,
6344, 7035); consequently in the opposite sense the "firstborn" denotes
faith without charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7872.">7872.</span></span>

From man and even unto beast. That this signifies their evil cupidities
interior and exterior, is evident from the signification of "from man
and even unto beast," as being the affection of good interior and
exterior (see n. 7424, 7523); for by "man" is signified the affection of
interior good, and by "beast" the affection of exterior good. Hence in
the opposite sense, as here, where the firstborn of the Egyptians are
treated of, evil affections are signified, that is, cupidities interior
and exterior. (That "beasts" denote good affections, and in the opposite
sense, evil affections or cupidities, see n. 45, 46, 142, 143, 246, 714,
715, 719, 776, 1823, 2179, 2180, 2781, 3218, 3519, 5198.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7873.">7873.</span></span>

And on all the gods of Egypt I will do judgments. That this signifies
their falsities, which are to be damned, is evident from the
signification of "gods," as being falsities (of which presently); and
from the signification of "doing judgments," as being to be damned; for
to judge, or do judgments, is either for life or for death; for life it
denotes salvation, for death it denotes damnation. In the Word "gods"
are often mentioned. When the angels are so called, truths are signified
(see n. 4295, 4402, 7268); hence in the opposite sense by "the gods of
the nations," are signified falsities (n. 4402, 4544). That truths are
called "gods" is because truth proceeds from the Divine Itself, and in
itself is Divine; consequently they who receive it are called "gods"-not
that they are gods, but that the truth which is with them is Divine.
Hence it is that in the original tongue God is called "Elohim," in the
plural. The Divine Itself is the Divine good, but that which proceeds
from it is the Divine truth, which fills the universal heaven. As then
"god" denotes truth, therefore in the opposite sense it denotes falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7874.">7874.</span></span>

I am Jehovah. That this signifies the Lord, that He is the only God, can
be seen from what was shown above (n. 7401, 7444, 7544, 7598, 7636).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7875.">7875.</span></span>

And the blood. That this signifies the truth of the good of innocence,
is evident from the signification of "the blood of the lamb," as being
the truth of the good of innocence (as above, n. 7846).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7876.">7876.</span></span>

Shall be to you for a sign upon the houses where ye are. That this
signifies that it is a testifying of the will of good, is evident from
the signification of "being for a sign," as being a testifying; and from
the signification of "houses," as being that which is of the will of
good (see n. 7848).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7877.">7877.</span></span>

And I shall see the blood. That this signifies the noticing of this
truth by those who inflict the damnation, is evident from the
signification of "to see," as being to understand and to notice (see n.
2150, 2325, 2807, 3764, 4403-4421, 4567, 4723, 5400), that it denotes a
noticing by those who inflict the damnation, follows below; and from the
signification of "blood," as being the truth of the good of innocence
(as above, n. 7846). \[2\] What the truth of the good of innocence is,
must be told. The good of innocence is the good of love to the Lord; for
they who are in this love are in innocence. Therefore they who are in
the inmost or third heaven are in innocence in advance of the rest,
because they are in love to the Lord. From innocence they who are there
appear to others like little children, and yet they are the wisest of
all who are in heaven (see n. 2306); for innocence dwells in wisdom (see
n. 2305, 3494, 4797). The truth of the good of innocence which is with
them is not the truth of faith, but is the good of charity. For they who
are in the third heaven do not know what faith is; thus neither do they
know what its truth is; for they are in the perception of the truth that
is of faith, from which they instantly know that a thing is so; nor do
they ever reason about it, whether it be so, still less dispute about
it. That they are in perception in this manner, does not fall within the
scope of memory-knowledge. It is otherwise with the spiritual, who are
in the second heaven. These are led to the good which is of charity
through the truth which is of faith; and therefore they reason whether a
thing is true, or not, because they do not perceive whether it is;
consequently with them truths become memory-knowledge, and are called
doctrinal things of faith. \[3\] (That they who are in the inmost or
third heaven are in such a state that they perceive what is the truth of
faith, and therefore do not refer it to memory-knowledge, see n. 202,
337, 2715, 2718, 3246, 4448.) How it is that by Jehovah's saying, "I
shall see," thus saying it concerning Himself, is signified a noticing
by those who inflict damnation, that is, by the infernals, can be seen
from what has been shown above, namely, that evil is attributed to
Jehovah, or the Lord, although nothing of evil comes forth from Him, but
from hell (n. 2447, 6071, 6991, 6997, 7533, 7632, 7643). That evil is
permitted, has the appearance as if it were from him who permits, seeing
that he has the power to take it away. Thus in the present case, that
the firstborn of the Egyptians were given to death, is attributed to
Jehovah, for it is said, "I will pass through the land of Egypt in that
night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt; and it
came to pass at midnight that Jehovah smote all the firstborn in the
land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh about to sit upon his
throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the house of the
pit" (verses 12, 29); and yet in this verse he is called "a destroyer"
who does this: "the blood shall be to you for a sign upon the houses
where ye are; and I shall see the blood, and I will pass over you, and
there shall not be in you a plague for a destroyer." \[4\] The case is
similar with respect to the devastation of the evil in the other life,
and the damnation and casting down into hell, which in the internal
sense are meant by the "plagues," and by the death of the firstborn, and
by the immersion in the sea Suph. Jehovah, or the Lord, vastates no one,
still less damns and casts down into hell; but it is the evil spirit
himself who does this to himself: it is the evil that is in him. From
this then it is that by "I shall see the blood" is signified a noticing
by those who inflict damnation. \[5\] How the case is with permission
cannot be told in a few words, because it involves very many arcana.
That the wicked are damned and are tormented, is not a permission from
the Lord as of one who wills it, but as of one who does not will, but
cannot bring a remedy in view of the urgency and resistance of the end,
which is the salvation of the whole human race; for if He were to bring
a remedy, it would be doing evil, which is quite contrary to the Divine.
But on this subject, of the Lord's Divine mercy more will be said
elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7878.">7878.</span></span>

And I will pass over you. That this signifies that it will flee from
thence, namely, the damnation which is from the hells will do so, is
evident from the signification of "passing over," when this is said of
damnation, as being to flee from thence. Moreover, the sphere of
damnation which flows forth from the hells, flees past those who are in
truth and good from the Lord; for damnation flows in with those who are
in evil and falsity, because there is a state of reception there; but
not with those who are in truth and good, for these are opposites, one
of which flees from the other. All things which have been thus far
ordained with respect to the paschal lamb, with respect to the roasting
and eating of it, also with respect to the blood upon the posts and
lintel, bear relation to these; namely, that the destroyer will pass by
their houses; in the internal sense, that they shall be free from all
damnation. For the sake of this end, namely, that damnation should flee
from them, they had been prepared. The process of preparation is what in
the internal sense is described by the statutes concerning the paschal
lamb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7879.">7879.</span></span>

And there shall not be in you a plague for a destroyer. That this
signifies that damnation from hell shall not flow in, is evident from
the signification of "plague," as here being damnation, for this plague
was the death of all the firstborn in Egypt, and that this denotes
damnation, see n. 7778; and from the signification of "a destroyer," as
being hell, which inflicts damnation. In regard to this, that hell
inflicts damnation, the case is this. The devastation of the evil in the
other life, and also their damnation, and likewise their being cast down
into hell, does not come immediately from the spirit who is in evil, but
from the hells. For the evils which are there all arise through an
influx from the hells, and none without influx thence, and they arise
according to the state of evil in which the spirits are who are being
vastated and damned; and the state of evil arises in accordance with the
privation of good and truth. In accordance with this state is effected
communication with the hells; and the hells are most ready to inflict
evil, for to inflict evil is the very delight of their life. Being of
this character, the hells are kept shut by the Lord; for if they were
opened, the whole human race would perish, because the hells continually
breathe the destruction of all. That seventy thousand men perished by
the pestilence on account of the numbering of the people by David (2
Sam. 24) and that a hundred and eighty and five thousand were slain in
one night in the camp of the Assyrians (2 Kings 19:35) was wrought by
the hells, because they were then opened. Similar effects would be
produced at this day if they were to be opened; and therefore they are
kept closely shut by the Lord. (That damnation from the hells cannot
flow in with those who are kept by the Lord in good and truth, and that
this is signified by "there shall not be in you a plague for a
destroyer," see just above, n. 7878.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7880.">7880.</span></span>

When I smite the land of Egypt. That this signifies when they are damned
who are in faith separate from charity, is evident from what was said
above (see n. 7871).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7881.">7881.</span></span>

And this day shall be unto you for a memorial. That this signifies the
quality of this state in worship, is evident from the signification of
"day," as being state (see n. 23, 487, 488, 493, 2788, 3462, 3785, 4850,
5672, 5962, 6110); and from the signification of "memorial," as being
the quality in the worship (n. 6888).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7882.">7882.</span></span>

And ye shall keep it a feast to Jehovah. That this signifies the worship
of the Lord on account of liberation from damnation, is evident from the
signification of "keeping a feast to Jehovah," as being the worship of
the Lord, and indeed on account of liberation from damnation, because
this day was a feast on that account. (That the passover was instituted
on account of the liberation by the Lord of those who were of the
spiritual church, see n. 7867.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7883.">7883.</span></span>

In your generations. That this signifies in those things which are of
faith and charity, is evident from the signification of "generations,"
as being the things of faith and charity (see n. 613, 2020, 2584, 6239).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7884.">7884.</span></span>

Ye shall keep it by an eternal statute. That this signifies the worship
of the Lord according to the order of heaven on the part of those who
are of the spiritual church, is evident from the signification of "an
eternal statute," as being the order of heaven (of which below); and
from the signification of "keeping a feast," as being the worship of the
Lord (as just above, n. 7882); and because it is said to the sons of
Israel that they should "keep it," they are meant who are of the
spiritual church. That "an eternal statute" denotes the order of heaven,
is because all the statutes that were commanded to the sons of Israel
were such as flowed from the order of heaven; consequently they also
represented the things that are of heaven. By worship according to the
order of heaven is meant all practicing of good according to the Lord's
precepts. By the worship of God at this day is chiefly meant the oral
worship in a temple, both morning and evening. But the worship of God
does not consist essentially in this, but in a life of uses; this latter
worship is according to the order of heaven. Oral worship is also
worship, but it is of no avail whatever unless there is the worship that
belongs to the life; for this worship is of the heart; and oral worship,
that it may be worship, must proceed from this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7885.">7885.</span></span>

Seven days. That this signifies what is holy, is evident from the
signification of "seven," as involving what is holy; and of "seven
days," as being what is holy (that "seven" involves what is holy, see n.
395, 433, 716, 881, 5265, 5268).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7886.">7886.</span></span>

Shall ye eat things unleavened. That this signifies purification from
falsities, is evident from the signification of "unleavened things," as
being purification from falsities (see n. 2342).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7887.">7887.</span></span>

Even on the first day ye shall cause leaven to cease from your houses.
That this signifies that no falsity whatever must be in the good, is
evident from the signification of "the first day," as being the
beginning of that state (that "day" denotes state, see just above, n.
7881); from the signification of "leaven," as being falsity (of which
below); and from the signification of "house," as being good (see n.
2233, 2234, 2559, 3652, 3720, 7833-7835, 7848). From this it is plain
that by "even on the first day ye shall cause leaven to cease from your
houses," is signified that from the very beginning of that state there
shall be no falsity in the good. With respect to good the case is this.
Goods are infinite in variety, and they have their quality from truths;
consequently the good becomes such as are the truths which enter. The
truths which enter are seldom genuine, but are appearances of truth, and
also are falsities, but still not opposite to truths. Nevertheless when
these falsities flow into good, which is the case when the man lives
according to them, from ignorance, in which ignorance there is
innocence, and when the end is to do what is good, then they are
regarded by the Lord and in heaven, not as falsities, but as semblances
of truth, and according to the quality of the innocence are accepted as
truths; from this, good receives its quality. From all this it can be
seen what is meant by its being said that there must be nothing false in
the good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7888.">7888.</span></span>

For everyone that eateth what is leavened. That this signifies who
appropriates to himself falsity, is evident from the signification of
"to eat," as being to appropriate to oneself (see n. 2187, 2343, 3168,
3513, 3596, 4745); and from the signification of "what is leavened," as
being falsity (see above, n. 7887).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7889.">7889.</span></span>

Even that soul shall be cut off from Israel. That this signifies that he
shall be separated from those who are of the spiritual church and that
he shall be damned, is evident from the signification of "to be cut
off," as being to be separated and also damned; and from the
representation of the sons of Israel, as being those who are of the
spiritual church (of which frequently above). The reason why he must be
separated and damned who has falsity in good, is that falsity (which is
signified by "what is leavened") in the good, makes it of such a quality
that it cannot but receive evil from the hells which inflict damnation.
(When those of the spiritual church are to be liberated from those who
have infested, that then damnation will flow in from all sides, and that
they who are in genuine good, that is, in good without falsity, will
pass safe through the midst of damnation, see above, n. 7878.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7890.">7890.</span></span>

From the first day even unto the seventh day. That this signifies a full
holy state, is evident from the signification of "seven days," as being
a holy state (of which above, n. 7885), and also as being a full state
(n. 6508), which is also signified by a "week." (That a "week" denotes
an entire period greater or less, from beginning to end, see n. 2044,
3845.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7891.">7891.</span></span>

And there shall be to you in the first day a holy convocation. That this
signifies that in the beginning all shall be together, is evident from
the signification of "the first day," as being the beginning, namely, of
liberation from those who have infested, and thus from damnation; and
from the signification of "a holy convocation," as being that all shall
be together. Convocations took place in order that the whole assemblage
of Israel might be together, and might thus represent heaven; for they
were then all distinguished into tribes, and the tribes into families,
and the families into houses. (That heaven along with the societies
there was represented by the tribes, the families, and the houses of the
sons of Israel, see n. 7836.) Therefore those convocations were called
holy, and took place at every feast (Lev. 23:27, 36; Num. 28:26; 29:1,
7, 12). From this the feasts themselves were called "holy convocations,"
for it was commanded that all the males should be present at them. That
the feasts were called "holy convocations" is evident in Moses: These
are the set feasts of Jehovah, which ye shall call holy convocations, to
offer a fire-offering unto Jehovah (Lev. 23:37). That at such times all
males were to be present, in the same: Three times in a year shall every
male of thine appear together before Jehovah thy God, in the place which
He shall choose; in the feast of unleavened things, and in the feast of
weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles (Deut. 16:16).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7892.">7892.</span></span>

And in the seventh day a holy convocation. That this signifies so at the
end of the state, is evident from the signification of "the seventh
day," which was the last of the feast, as being its end. (What is
signified by "a holy convocation," see just above, n. 7891.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7893.">7893.</span></span>

No work shall be done in them. That this signifies a keeping back then
from earthly and worldly things, is evident from the signification of
"work," as being labors and occupations which have for their end the
things of the world and of the earth; consequently by "no manner of work
shall be done in them" is signified a keeping back from such things.
That it was so severely forbidden to do any work on the feasts and
sabbaths, was in order that they might then be in a full representative
state, that is, in such things as represented heavenly and spiritual
things, which state would have been disturbed if they had done works
that looked to the world and the earth as their end. For the
representatives of a church were instituted among the posterity of Jacob
to the intent that by means of them there might be communication of
heaven with man, which is the end for which the church exists. This
communication would not have been maintained, unless under the penalty
of death it had been forbidden them to do any work on the days of the
feasts and sabbaths; for their minds were occupied with things worldly
and earthly, in which they immersed themselves with the whole heart,
such being their nature; and therefore if they had been free to busy
themselves in these things at the same time, the communication by
representatives would have been altogether interrupted and destroyed.
But afterward the same feasts were retained for the sake of heavenly
life at the time, and for the sake of the teaching, that they might then
learn what faith and charity are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7894.">7894.</span></span>

Save that which every soul must eat. That this signifies when spiritual
and celestial good is appropriated, is evident from the signification of
"to eat," as being appropriation (see n. 2187, 2343, 3168, 3513, 3596,
4745). That what is spiritual and celestial should be appropriated, is
meant by those things which were instituted with respect to the paschal
lamb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7895.">7895.</span></span>

This only may be done by you. That this signifies that to these only
they shall then pay attention, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7896.">7896.</span></span>

Verses 17-20. And ye shall observe the unleavened things, because in
this same day I have brought your armies out of the land of Egypt; and
ye shall keep this day in your generations by an eternal statute. In the
first \[month\], on the fourteenth day of the month, in the evening, ye
shall eat unleavened things, until the one and twentieth day of the
month, in the evening. Seven days leaven shall not be found in your
houses; for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul
shall be cut off from the assemblage of Israel, in the sojourner, and in
the native of the land. Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your
dwellings ye shall eat things unleavened. "And ye shall observe the
unleavened things," signifies that there must be no falsity; "because in
this same day I have brought your armies out of the land of Egypt,"
signifies because then there is a state of charity and faith, through
which there is separation from those who are in evils and falsities;
"and ye shall keep this day in your generations by an eternal statute,"
signifies worship from faith and charity according to the order of
heaven; "in the first \[month\], on the fourteenth day of the month,"
signifies in the beginning of a holy state; "in the evening," signifies
the end of the former state and the beginning of a new one; "ye shall
eat things unleavened," signifies the appropriation by good, of truth
purified from falsity; "until the one and twentieth day of the month,"
signifies the end of this holy state; "in the evening," signifies the
end of the former state and the beginning of a new one; "seven days,"
signifies the entire period of this state; "leaven shall not be found in
your houses," signifies that nothing whatever of falsity shall come near
good; "for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall
be cut off from the assemblage of Israel," signifies that he who adjoins
falsity to his good is damned; "in the sojourner and in the native of
the land," signifies who is of the church, whether not born in it, or
born in it; "ye shall eat nothing leavened," signifies that every
caution is to be used to prevent falsity from being appropriated; "in
all your dwellings ye shall eat things unleavened," signifies that in
the interiors, where good is, truth shall be appropriated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7897.">7897.</span></span>

And ye shall observe the unleavened things. That this signifies that
there must be no falsity, is evident from the signification of
"unleavened things," as being what is purified from all falsity (see n.
2342).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7898.">7898.</span></span>

For in this same day I have brought your armies out of the land of
Egypt. That this signifies because then there is a state of charity and
faith, through which there is separation from those who are in evils and
falsities, is evident from the signification of "day," as being state
(of which above, n. 7881); from the signification of "armies," as being
the things that belong to charity and faith (see n. 3448, 7236); from
the signification of "bringing out," as being to be separated; and from
the signification of "the Egyptians," as being those who are in evils
and falsities (of which frequently above).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7899.">7899.</span></span>

And ye shall keep this day in your generations by an eternal statute.
That this signifies worship from faith and charity according to Divine
order, is evident from the signification of "to keep," as being worship,
for that day was kept when the passover was revered on it; from the
signification of "generations," as being those things which are of faith
and charity (of which above, n. 7883); and from the signification of "an
eternal statute," as being according to Divine order (of which also
above, n. 7884).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7900.">7900.</span></span>

In the first \[month\], on the fourteenth day of the month. That this
signifies in the beginning of a holy state, is evident from the
signification of "in the first" as being a beginning (as above, n. 7887,
7891); and from the signification of "the fourteenth day," as being a
holy state. (That the number "fourteen" denotes what is holy, see above,
n. 7842; and that "day" denotes state, n. 7881.) The number "fourteen"
denotes what is holy, because it arises from seven; and "seven," where
mentioned in the Word, signifies what is holy; for the simple and the
compound numbers involve what is similar (n. 5291, 5335, 5708). As the
passover was the most holy of the feast days, it was therefore commanded
that it should be celebrated on the fourteenth day of the month, should
continue seven days, and should be ended on the twenty-first day, by
which is also signified what is holy. For the same reason it was also
ordained that those who could not celebrate the passover in the first
month should celebrate it in the following month, also on the fourteenth
day, of which we read in Moses: When any man shall be unclean by reason
of a soul, <span id="fr_167"></span>[7900-1](#fn_167.md) or in a way afar
off, in you or in your generations, he shall nevertheless perform the
passover to Jehovah; in the second month, on the fourteenth day, between
the two evenings they shall perform it (Num. 9:10-11).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_167"></span>[7900-1](ac158.htm#fr_167.md) That is, absence of
soul, a dead body. \[REVISER\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7901-7950](ac159.md)
