[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac163)  [Next](ac165) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="8151.">8151.</span></span>

And Jehovah hardened the heart of Pharaoh. That this signifies obstinacy
from the falsity which is from evil, is evident from the signification
of "hardening the heart," as being to be determined (see n. 7272, 7300,
7305, 7616). Its being said that "Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart"
signifies, in the internal sense, that they who are in evil and falsity
hardened themselves, thus that the evils and falsities themselves did
this (see n. 2447, 6071, 6991, 6997, 7533, 7643, 7877, 7926).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8152.">8152.</span></span>

And he pursued after the sons of Israel. That this signifies an attempt
to subjugate those who were in faith conjoined with charity, is evident
from the signification of "pursuing," as being an attempt to subjugate
(n. 8136); and from the representation of the sons of Israel, as being
those who are of the spiritual church (as frequently above), thus who
are in faith conjoined with charity, for they who are of this church are
in this faith both as to doctrine and as to life. The good of faith, or
charity, is the essential, thus is in the first place, with those who
are of the genuine spiritual church; whereas with those with whom faith
is separate from its good, both as to doctrine and as to life, the truth
of faith, or faith itself, is the essential, or in the first place.
These do not belong to this church, for the life makes the church; but
not doctrine, except insofar as it becomes of the life. For this reason
it is plain that the church of the Lord is not here, nor there, but that
it is everywhere, both within those kingdoms where the church is, and
out of them, where men live according to the precepts of charity. Hence
it is that the church of the Lord is scattered through the whole world,
and yet that it is a one; for when the life makes the church, and not
doctrine separate from life, then the church is a one; but when doctrine
makes the church, then there are many.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8153.">8153.</span></span>

And the sons of Israel went out with a lofty hand. That this signifies
when nevertheless they had been released by the Divine power from the
endeavor to subjugate them, is evident from the representation of the
sons of Israel, as being those who are of the spiritual church, or in
faith conjoined with charity (as just above, n. 8152); from the
signification of "to go out," as being to be liberated, that is, to be
released from the endeavor to subjugate them, which endeavor is
signified by "to pursue" (n. 8152); and from the signification of "a
lofty hand," as being the Divine power, for by "hand" is signified power
(see n. 878, 3387, 4931-4837, 5327, 5328, 5544, 6292, 6947, 7011, 7188,
7189, 7518, 7673, 8050, 8069); and by "lofty" is signified what is
Divine. "Lofty" denotes what is Divine, because by it is meant heaven
where the Divine is. Therefore in the Word it is said of Jehovah or the
Lord that He "dwells on high," and He Himself is called "the Most High,"
as in these passages: Jehovah is exalted; for He dwelleth on high (Isa.
33:5). Thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, and
whose name is Holy: I dwell in the holy and high place (Isa. 57:15).
Jehovah sent from on high, and He rescued me (Ps. 18:16). Therefore
Jehovah is called "the Most High" (Deut. 32:8; Dan. 4:17, 32, 34; 7:18,
22, 25; Ps. 7:17; 9:2; 18:13; 46:4; 50:14; 57:2; 82:6). Because "high"
signified heaven and the Divine therein, Divine worship was instituted
on mountains and on high places by those who were of the representative
church; and for this reason also it was performed in lofty places which
they built for themselves, as frequently mentioned in the historical and
prophetical portions of the Word, as in Ezekiel: Thou hast built unto
thee a lofty place, and hast made thee a high place in every street.
Thou hast built thy lofty place on every head of the way (Ezek. 16:24,
25, 31). That the Divine was signified by what is high, is because by
the starry heaven was signified the angelic heaven, and it was also
believed that it was there; although the wiser among them knew that
heaven is not on high, but is where the good of love is, and this within
man, wherever he may be. (That high things denote interior things, or
the goods which are there, see n. 450, 1735, 2148, 4210, 4599.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8154.">8154.</span></span>

And the Egyptians pursued after them. That this signifies the effect
from the endeavor to subjugate on the part of those who were in
falsities from evil, is evident from the signification of "pursuing," as
being an endeavor to subjugate (n. 8152), here the effect resulting from
this endeavor, because it is said twice; and from the signification of
"the Egyptians," as being those who are in falsities from evil (as
frequently above).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8155.">8155.</span></span>

And they overtook them encamping by the sea. That this signifies
communication around the region of hell where are falsities from evils,
is evident from the signification of "overtaking," as being
communication, for in the spiritual sense "to overtake" or come in
contact with denotes influx, by which there is communication, here of
the falsities from evil of those who are signified by "the Egyptians"
with those who are signified by "Israel"-that there was communication
there is evident from the temptation which they first underwent there,
of which in what follows, for all temptation arises through influx from
the hells, thus by communication (n. 8131)-from the signification of
"encamping," as being the setting in order of truth and good by the Lord
for the undergoing of temptations (n. 8103, 8130, 8131) and from the
signification of "the sea," here the sea Suph, as being the hell where
are the falsities from evil of those who are in faith separate from
charity and in a life of evil (n. 8099, 8137, 8148).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8156.">8156.</span></span>

All the horses of the chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his
army. That this signifies all things which are of falsity from a
perverted understanding, is evident from the signification of "horses,"
as being the understanding (see n. 2761, 2762, 3217, 5321, 7024, 8029),
here a perverted understanding, such as is that of those who are in evil
and in the derivative falsity; from the signification of "chariots," as
being doctrinal things (n. 2761, 5321, 5945, 8146); from the
signification of "horsemen," as being those things which are of the
understanding (n. 6534), here false reasonings from a perverted
understanding; and from the signification of "army," as being falsities
(n. 8138). From all this it is evident that by "the horses of the
chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army," are signified
memory-knowledges, reasonings, and falsities, from a perverted
understanding, thus all things which are of falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8157.">8157.</span></span>

Beside Pi-hahiroth, before Baal-zephon. That this signifies whence there
was communication and therefore the beginning of the state of undergoing
temptations, is evident from what was said above (n. 8130).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8158.">8158.</span></span>

Verses 10-14. And Pharaoh drew nigh, and the sons of Israel lifted up
their eyes, and behold the Egyptian marching after them, and they were
sore afraid; and the sons of Israel cried unto Jehovah. And they said
unto Moses, Were there no graves in Egypt, that thou hast taken us to
die in the wilderness? Why hast thou done this to us, to lead us forth
out of Egypt? Is not this the word that we spake unto thee in Egypt,
saying, Cease from us, and let us serve the Egyptians? because it is
good for us to serve the Egyptians, rather than that we should die in
the wilderness. And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand
still, and see the salvation of Jehovah, which He will do for you today;
for the Egyptians whom ye have seen today, ye shall see them again no
more forever. Jehovah shall wage war for you, and ye shall keep silence.
"And Pharaoh drew nigh," signifies the influx of falsity from evil being
thence grievous; "and the sons of Israel lifted up their eyes,"
signifies the mind's intellectual part and its thought; "and behold the
Egyptian marching after them," signifies the grievousness of falsity
continually increasing; "and they were sore afraid," signifies a
horrible dread; "and the sons of Israel cried unto Jehovah," signifies
supplication for aid; "and they said unto Moses," signifies the height
of temptation when there is despair; "Were there no graves in Egypt,
that thou hast taken us to die in the wilderness?" signifies that if
there is damnation it would be all the same whether it came through the
falsities of the infested, or through a state of temptations in which
they would yield; "why hast thou done this to us, to lead us forth out
of Egypt?" signifies that it was in vain that they had been liberated
from infestations by falsities; "is not this the word that we spake unto
thee in Egypt, saying," signifies that some such thing was thought of
when they were infested by falsities; "Cease from us, and let us serve
the Egyptians," signifies that they would not be withheld from
surrendering; "because it is good for us to serve the Egyptians, rather
than that we should die in the wilderness," signifies that damnation by
the violence of falsity in a state of infestations was to be preferred
to the damnation which comes by yielding in a state of temptations; "and
Moses said unto the people," signifies elevation from a state of despair
by means of truth Divine; "Fear ye not," signifies that they must not
despair; "stand still and see the salvation of Jehovah," signifies
salvation from the Lord alone and not at all from them; "which He will
do for you today," signifies which is to eternity; "for the Egyptians
whom ye have seen today, ye shall see them again no more forever,"
signifies that the falsities which are once removed will be removed to
eternity; "Jehovah shall wage war for you," signifies that the Lord
alone sustains the combats of temptations "and ye shall keep silence,"
signifies that from their own strength they will effect nothing at all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8159.">8159.</span></span>

And Pharaoh drew nigh. That this signifies the influx of falsity from
evil being thence grievous, is evident from the representation of
Pharaoh, as being those who are in falsities from evil (see n. 8132,
8135, 8146, 8148); and from the signification of "drawing nigh," as
being influx. In the internal sense, the subject treated of is the first
temptation of those who had been liberated. All temptation is effected
by means of an influx from the hells, for the spirits who are thence
excite and draw forth all things in a man that have been evilly done and
evilly thought, and thereby accuse and condemn him. Thereupon the
conscience is troubled, and the mind comes into anxiety. This is done by
influx from the hells, especially from this hell which is represented by
the sea Suph. From all this it can be seen that by "drawing nigh," in
the spiritual sense, in which temptations are treated of, is signified
influx. \[2\] As in the verses that now follow, the subject treated of
is the first temptation of those who had been of the spiritual church,
be it known that they could not undergo temptations until after the Lord
had glorified His Human, that is, made it Divine, and in this was
present with them. If they had been tempted before, they would have
yielded, for they who were of the spiritual church were saved solely
through the Divine Human of the Lord. The temptations of those who were
of the spiritual church, which they were to undergo after the Lord came
into the world, and could then from the Divine Human fight for them
against the hells, are meant by these words in Malachi: The Lord whom ye
seek shall suddenly come to His temple, even the angel of the covenant
whom ye desire, behold He cometh, saith Jehovah Zebaoth: who may abide
the day of His coming? and who shall stand when He appeareth? for He is
like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap; and He shall sit as a
refiner and purifier of silver, and He shall purify the sons of Levi,
and refine them as gold and as silver; and they shall bring unto Jehovah
a meat-offering in righteousness. Then shall the meat-offering of Judah
and Jerusalem be sweet to Jehovah, according to the days of eternity,
and according to the former years (3:1-4); clearly speaking of the
Lord's coming; "the sons of Levi" here denote those who are of the
spiritual church, for by "Levi" is signified charity or spiritual good
(n. 3875, 4497, 4502, 4503); "the refiner's fire" is temptation, whereby
is effected purification, which is here meant by "purifying and refining
them as gold and silver;" "the meat-offering which they shall bring to
Jehovah" is faith and charity; "the days of eternity" and "the former
years" denote the ancient churches, and the states of worship of the
Lord at that time. \[3\] As regards temptations, the case with them is
as was said above (n. 8131), that the hells fight against man, and the
Lord for man; to every falsity the hells inject, there is an answer from
the Divine. The falsities which are from the hells are injected and flow
into the external or natural man; but the answer from the Divine flows
into the internal or spiritual man. This latter influx, which is from
the Divine, does not come to the man's perception so much as do the
falsities; neither does it move the singulars of his thought, but its
generals, and in such a manner that it scarcely comes to the perception
otherwise than as hope and the consequent consolation, in which there
are nevertheless innumerable things of which the man is ignorant, being
such things as are in agreement with his affection or love, especially
his affection or love of truth and good, from which he has conscience.
\[4\] These things have been said in order that it may be known that by
the life of the sons of Israel in the wilderness are described in their
series the temptations which those underwent who had been of the Lord's
spiritual church and had been liberated. They underwent temptations in
order that they might be further prepared for heaven; for by means of
temptations, and by these as the only means, goods and truths are
confirmed and are conjoined; and by means of temptations charity becomes
the charity of faith, and faith becomes the faith of charity. That they
who are of the church must undergo temptations, is meant by what the
Lord has said in these passages: He that does not take up his cross, and
follow after Me, is not worthy of Me (Matt. 10:38, 39; Mark 8:31 to the
end). Jesus said to His disciples, If anyone wishes to come after Me,
let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow Me (Matt. 16:24, 25;
Luke 9:23, 24). Whosoever does not bear his cross, and come after Me,
cannot be My disciple (Luke 14:27). Jesus said to the rich man, Come,
follow Me, taking up the cross (Mark 10:21). Think not that I am come to
send peace on the earth; I came not to send peace, but a sword (Matt.
10:34). \[5\] But be it known that in temptations the man does not
fight; but the Lord alone fights for the man, although it appears as if
it were done by the man; and when the Lord fights for a man the man
conquers in all things. At this day few are admitted into temptations,
for the reason that they are not in the life of faith, and therefore not
in the conscience of truth; and he who is not in the conscience of truth
from the good of life, yields; whereby his subsequent state becomes
worse than the former.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8160.">8160.</span></span>

The sons of Israel lifted up their eyes. That this signifies the mind's
intellectual part and its thought, is evident from the signification of
"eyes," as being the intellectual part of the mind (see n. 2701, 3820,
4403-4421, 4523-4534); therefore "to lift up the eyes" denotes mental
view, perception, and thought (n. 2789, 2829, 3198, 3202, 4083, 4086,
4339).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8161.">8161.</span></span>

And behold the Egyptian marching after them. That this signifies the
grievousness of falsity continually increasing, is evident from the
signification of "the Egyptian," as being those who are in falsities
from evil, thus also the falsity itself from evil (see n. 8132, 8135,
8146, 8148); and from the signification of "marching after them," as
being a nearer influx and communication. By "Pharaoh drew nigh" was
signified the influx of falsity from evil (n. 8159), therefore by
"marching after them" is signified influx still nearer, thus more
grievous; hence it is that there is signified the grievousness of
falsity continually increasing. In what presently follows is described
temptation, and as this arises through an influx of falsity from evil
from the hells, its approach is now described, that is, its increasing
grievousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8162.">8162.</span></span>

And they were sore afraid. That this signifies a horrible dread, is
evident from the signification of "being afraid," when predicated of
temptation, as being horror, or horrible dread. That "fear" denotes a
horrible dread, is because when temptation assails, the conscience-thus
the internal man, for conscience is of the internal man is disheartened
by reason of falsities and evils; whence comes horror, which is aversion
conjoined with the fear of spiritual death. Horror arises from the mere
influx of falsity and evil with those who have conscience, for
conscience is from the truth and good of faith, thus from those things
which make the spiritual life. Falsities and evils are destructive of
that life, and thus endeavor to inflict death, that is, damnation; and
from this comes the horrible dread.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8163.">8163.</span></span>

And the sons of Israel cried unto Jehovah. That this signifies
supplication for aid, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8164.">8164.</span></span>

And they said unto Moses. That this signifies the height of temptation
when there is despair, is evident from the words that follow, for they
are involved in "they said;" that the following words are words of
temptation, when this comes to its height, and when there is despair, is
evident. It is said "despair," because for the most part this is the
end, or is at the end, of spiritual temptations (see n. 1787, 2694,
5279, 5280, 7147, 7155, 7166). Inasmuch as at this day few undergo
spiritual temptations, and consequently it is not known how the case is
with temptations, I may say something further on the subject. There are
spiritual temptations, and there are natural temptations. Spiritual
temptations belong to the internal man, but natural ones to the external
man. Spiritual temptations sometimes arise without natural temptations,
sometimes with them. Natural temptations exist when a man suffers as to
the body, as to honors, as to wealth, in a word, as to the natural life,
as is the case in diseases, misfortunes, persecutions, punishments, and
the like. The anxieties which then arise, are what are meant by "natural
temptations." But these temptations effect nothing whatever toward man's
spiritual life, neither can they be called temptations, but griefs; for
they arise from the wounding of the natural life, which is that of the
love of self and of the world. The wicked are sometimes in these griefs,
and they grieve and are tormented in proportion to the extent of their
love of self and of the world, and the life they have from this source.
\[2\] But spiritual temptations belong to the internal man, and assault
his spiritual life. In this case the anxieties are not on account of any
loss of natural life, but on account of the loss of faith and charity,
and consequently of salvation. These temptations are frequently induced
by means of natural temptations, for if when a man is in these-that is,
in disease, grief, the loss of wealth or honor, and the like-he begins
to think about the Lord's aid, His providence, the state of the evil in
that they glory and exult when the good suffer and undergo various
griefs and various losses, then spiritual temptation is conjoined with
natural temptation. Such was the last temptation of the Lord in
Gethsemane, and when He suffered the cross, which was the most frightful
of all. From all this it is evident what natural temptation is, and what
spiritual. There is also a third kind, namely, melancholy anxiety, the
cause of which is for the most part to be found in an infirm state of
the body or of the lower mind. In this anxiety there may be something of
spiritual temptation, or there may be nothing of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8165.">8165.</span></span>

Were there no graves in Egypt, that thou hast taken us to die in the
wilderness? That this signifies that if there is damnation it would be
all the same whether it came through the falsities of the infesters, or
through a state of temptations in which they would yield, is evident
from the signification of "graves," as being damnation (see n. 2916,
4564); from the signification of "Egypt," as being infestations (n.
7278), for by the Egyptians and Pharaoh are represented those who in the
other life infest by means of falsities (n. 7097, 7107, 7110, 7126,
7142, 7317); from the signification of "dying," as also being damnation
(n. 5407, 6119, 7494); and from the signification of "the wilderness,"
as being a state of undergoing temptations (n. 8098); whence "to die in
the wilderness" denotes to yield in temptation, and consequently to be
damned. From all this it is evident that by "Were there no graves in
Egypt, that thou hast taken us to die in the wilderness?" is signified
that if there is damnation it would be all the same whether it came
through the falsities of the infesters (thus in the state in which they
were before), or through temptations in which they would yield (thus in
the state into which they come afterward). \[2\] That these words are
words of despair is evident. Moreover those who are in despair, which is
the last of temptation, think such things, and then they are as it were
on the slope, or are as it were sinking down toward hell. But at this
time such thought does no harm whatever, nor do the angels pay any
attention to it, for every man's power is limited, and when the
temptation arrives at the furthest limit of his power, the man cannot
sustain anything more, but sinks down. But then, when he is on the
downhill course, he is raised by the Lord and thus liberated from
despair; and is then for the most part brought into a clear state of
hope and of the consequent consolation, and also into good fortune. It
is said "damnation through a state of temptations in which they would
yield," because they who yield in temptations come into a state of
damnation; for temptations are to the end that truths and goods may be
confirmed, and may be conjoined together, in order that faith and
charity may ensue; but this end is attained only when the man conquers
in temptations; whereas when he yields, in this case truths and goods
are rejected, and falsities and evils are confirmed, whereby such come
into a state of damnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8166.">8166.</span></span>

Why hast thou done this to us, in leading us forth out of Egypt? That
this signifies that it was in vain that they had been liberated from
infestations by falsities, is evident from the signification of "why
hast thou done this to us?" as being that it was all in vain; from the
signification of "to be led forth," as being to be liberated and from
the signification of "Egypt," as being infestations (of which just
above, n. 8165).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8167.">8167.</span></span>

Is not this the word that we spake unto thee in Egypt, saying? That this
signifies that some such thing was thought of when they were infested by
falsities, is evident from the signification of "is not this the word
that we spake?" as being that such a thing was thought of, for by "this
word" is signified this thing, thus some such thing, and by "speaking"
is signified thinking (that "to speak" denotes influx and the consequent
reception, see n. 5797, 7270, 8128; therefore also thought, n. 2271,
2287, 2619); and from the signification of "Egypt," as being infestation
by falsities (n. 8165).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8168.">8168.</span></span>

Cease from us, and let us serve the Egyptians. That this signifies that
they would not be withheld from surrendering, is evident from the
signification of "to cease from us," when said of infestations, as being
not to hinder, and not to withhold; and from the signification of
"serving the Egyptians," as being to surrender to those who infest by
means of falsities. That "to cease from us," when said in a state of
infestations, and also in a state of temptations, of the influx of truth
Divine represented by Moses, denotes not to hinder, and not to withhold,
is because in these states two forces or powers are acting, one of which
is from the falsities that are injected from the hells into the external
man, and the other of which is from truths that are insinuated by the
Lord into the internal man (n. 8164). These two forces act reciprocally
against each other. The falsities injected from the hells have their
force and power from the love of self and of the world, which are in the
man; but the truths insinuated by the Lord have their force and power
from love toward the neighbor and love to the Lord. When the man
conquers, the internal force or power always prevails, because this is
Divine; and it does not admit the force or power from falsities to be
increased further than it can be repelled. Therefore when these two
forces act, the internal force which is from the Lord continually as it
were withholds the man and hinders him, lest the falsities drag him
down, thus causing him to yield; for it is a general rule that when two
forces act in opposition to each other, one draws and the other draws
back. In the spiritual world, forces are the affections which are of the
loves; and the instrumentalities by which they act are truths, and in
the opposite sense, falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8169.">8169.</span></span>

Because it is good for us to serve the Egyptians, rather than that we
should die in the wilderness. That this signifies that damnation by the
violence of falsity in a state of infestations was to be preferred to
the damnation which comes by yielding in a state of temptations, is
evident from the signification of "to be good rather than that," as
being that it was to be preferred; from the signification of "serving
the Egyptians," as being a yielding to the falsities of the infesters;
for "to serve" signifies subjugation (see n. 6666, 6670, 6671), thus a
yielding, here to the falsities of the infesters; from the signification
of "dying," as being damnation (n. 8165); and from the signification of
"the wilderness," as being a state of undergoing temptations (n. 8098).
From all this it is evident that by "it is good for us to serve the
Egyptians, rather than that we should die in the wilderness," is
signified that to yield to falsities when they were infested would be
preferable to yielding in temptations. Moreover it is true that to yield
in the former state is preferable to yielding in the latter; for to
yield in temptations is to be confirmed in falsities and evils against
the truths and goods of faith; whereas to yield in a state of
infestations is to be confirmed in falsities and evils, yet not
manifestly against the truths and goods of faith. Hence it is evident
that in yielding in temptations there is a blaspheming of truth and
good, and sometimes profanation; and the greatest and most direful
damnation of all is that which comes from profanation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8170.">8170.</span></span>

And Moses said unto the people. That this signifies elevation from a
state of despair by means of truth Divine, is evident from what now
follows, which Moses "said," and which involves elevation from a state
of despair. It is said "by truth Divine," because all elevation in a
state of temptations is effected by means of truth Divine. (That in the
internal representative sense truth Divine is meant by "Moses," see n.
6752, 7010, 7014, 7089.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8171.">8171.</span></span>

Fear ye not. That this signifies that they must not despair, is evident
from the signification of "fearing," as being to feel horror (see n.
8162), here to despair; for spiritual fear in temptations is first a
horrible dread, and finally is despair. Spiritual fear is fear on
account of damnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8172.">8172.</span></span>

Stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah. That this signifies
salvation from the Lord alone, and not at all from them, is evident from
the signification of "standing still and seeing," as being to have faith
(that "to see" denotes to understand, acknowledge, and have faith, see
n. 897, 2150, 2325, 2807, 3863, 3869, 4403-4421, 5400); and from the
signification of "the salvation of Jehovah," as being salvation from the
Lord. Here, where the subject treated of is liberation from temptations,
the meaning is salvation from the Lord alone, and not at all from them.
(That "Jehovah" in the Word denotes the Lord, see above, n. 1343, 1736,
2921, 3023, 3035, 5041, 5663, 6281, 6303, 6905, 6945, 6957.) It is here
said that they must have faith that salvation is from the Lord alone,
and not at all from them, because this is the main thing of faith in
temptations. He who when he is tempted believes that he can resist from
his own strength, yields; the reason is that he is in what is false, and
that he therefore attributes merit to himself, and thus demands to be
saved of himself, and thus shuts out the influx from the Divine. But he
who believes that the Lord alone resists in temptations, conquers; for
he is in the truth, and attributes the merit to the Lord, and perceives
that he is saved by the Lord alone. He who is in the faith of charity
ascribes everything of salvation to the Lord, and nothing to himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8173.">8173.</span></span>

Which He will do for you today. That this signifies which is to
eternity, is evident from the signification of "today," as being what is
eternal (see n. 2838, 3998, 4304, 6165, 6984).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8174.">8174.</span></span>

For the Egyptians whom ye have seen today, ye shall see them again no
more forever. That this signifies that the falsities which are once
removed will be removed to eternity, is evident from the signification
of "the Egyptians," as being those who are in falsities from evil (see
n. 8132, 8135, 8146, 8148), thus also the falsities themselves from
evil; and from the signification of "seeing no more," when said of
falsities, as being to be removed, for the falsities in man are not cast
out, but are removed, man being withheld from evils and the falsities
therefrom, and being held in good, by the Lord (n. 1581, 2256, 2269,
2406, 4564); and from the signification of "forever," as being to
eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8175.">8175.</span></span>

Jehovah shall wage war for you. That this signifies that the Lord alone
sustains the combats of temptations, is evident from the signification
of "to wage war for you," when said about Jehovah in temptations, as
being that He sustains alone the combats of temptations. (That "Jehovah"
denotes the Lord, see just above, n. 8172.) That the Lord alone sustains
the combats of temptations, and conquers, is because the Divine alone
can conquer the hells. Unless the Divine acted against them, they would
rush in like a vast ocean, one hell after another, for the resisting of
which man is of not the slightest avail; and the less so because in
respect to what is his own, man is nothing but evil, thus is hell, from
which the Lord then withdraws him, and afterward withholds him (see
above, n. 1581, 1661, 1692, 6574).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8176.">8176.</span></span>

And ye shall keep silence. That this signifies that from their own
strength they will effect nothing at all, is evident from the
signification of "to be silent," as being to acquiesce, and as
temptations are treated of, as being not to think or believe that they
effect anything by their own strength. (On this subject see what was
said and shown above, n. 8172, 8175.) That nevertheless they ought not
to slack their hands, and await immediate influx; but ought to fight as
from themselves, and yet acknowledge and believe that it is from the
Lord, see n. 1712, 1937, 1947, 2882, 2883, 2891.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8177.">8177.</span></span>

Verses 15-18. And Jehovah said unto Moses, Why criest thou unto Me?
speak unto the sons of Israel, that they set forward. And thou, lift up
thy rod, and stretch out thy hand over the sea, and cleave it asunder;
and the sons of Israel shall come into the midst of the sea on the dry.
And I, behold I harden the heart of the Egyptians, and they shall come
after them; and I will be glorified in Pharaoh, and in all his army, in
his chariots, and in his horsemen. And the Egyptians shall know that I
am Jehovah, when I am glorified in Pharaoh, in his chariots, and in his
horsemen. "And Jehovah said unto Moses," signifies exhortation; "Why
criest thou unto Me?" signifies that there is no need of intercession;
"speak unto the sons of Israel," signifies influx and perception; "that
they set forward," signifies what follows on continuously until they are
prepared; "And thou, lift up thy rod," signifies the power of Divine
truth; "and stretch out thy hand over the sea," signifies the rule of
power where the hell of falsity from evil is; "and cleave it asunder,"
signifies the consequent dissipation of falsity; "and the sons of Israel
shall come into the midst of the sea on the dry," signifies that they
who are of the spiritual church may pass safely and without the influx
of falsity; "and I, behold I harden the heart of the Egyptians,"
signifies the obstinacy of falsity from evil; "and they shall come after
them," signifies an endeavor to offer violence by means of the influx of
falsity from evil; "and I will be glorified in Pharaoh, and in all his
army, in his chariots, and in his horsemen," signifies that they will
see the effect of the dissipation of falsity and of reasonings by virtue
of the Divine good of the Lord's Divine Human; "and the Egyptians shall
know that I am Jehovah," signifies that it may be known that the Lord is
the only God, and besides Him there is none else; "when I am glorified
in Pharaoh, in his chariots, and in his horsemen," signifies, as above,
from their seeing the effect of the dissipation of falsity and of its
teachings and reasonings, by the Lord alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8178.">8178.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses. That this signifies exhortation, is evident
from the signification of "Jehovah said," when the subject treated of is
elevation and liberation from temptation, as being exhortation (see n.
7033, 7090).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8179.">8179.</span></span>

Why criest thou unto Me? That this signifies that there was no need of
intercession, is evident from the signification of "crying unto
Jehovah," as being to intercede, namely, for liberation from temptation.
Hence "Why criest thou unto Me?" denotes why dost thou intercede when
there is no need of intercession? and therefore it follows, "speak unto
the sons of Israel, that they go forward," by which is signified that
they shall have aid, but that still the temptation will be continued,
even until they are prepared. \[2\] As to there being no need of
intercession, the case is this. They who are in temptations are wont to
slack their hands and betake themselves solely to prayers, which they
then ardently pour forth, not knowing that prayers will not avail, but
that they must fight against the falsities and evils which are being
injected by the hells. This fight is performed by means of the truths of
faith, which help because they confirm goods and truths against
falsities and evils. Moreover in the combats of temptations, the man
ought to fight as of himself, but yet acknowledge and believe that it is
of the Lord (see above n. 8176). If man does not fight as of himself,
the good and truth which flow in through heaven from the Lord are not
appropriated to him; but when he fights as of himself, and still
believes that it is of the Lord, then they are appropriated to him. From
this he has an own \[proprium\] that is new, which is called the
heavenly own, and which is a new will. \[3\] Moreover they who are in
temptations, and not in some other active life than that of prayers, do
not know that if the temptations were intermitted before they had been
fully carried through, they would not be prepared for heaven, and thus
could not be saved. For this reason, moreover, the prayers of those who
are in temptations are but little heard; for the Lord wills the end,
which is the salvation of the man, which end He knows, but not the man;
and the Lord does not heed prayers that are contrary to the end, which
is salvation. He who conquers in temptations is also confirmed in the
truth stated above; whereas he who does not conquer entertains a doubt
with respect to the Divine aid and power, because he is not heard; and
then sometimes, because he slacks his hand, he partly yields. From all
this it can be seen what is meant by there being no need of
intercession, namely, that prayer is not to be relied upon. For in
prayer from the Divine it is always thought and believed that the Lord
alone knows whether it is profitable or not; and therefore the suppliant
submits the hearing to the Lord, and immediately after prays that the
will of the Lord, and not his own, may be done, according to the Lord's
words in His own most grievous temptation at Gethsemane (Matt. 26:39,
42, 44).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8180.">8180.</span></span>

Speak unto the sons of Israel. That this signifies influx and
perception, is evident from the signification of "speaking," when said
of truth Divine, which is represented by Moses, to those who are of the
spiritual church, who are "the sons of Israel," as being influx and the
consequent perception (see also n. 2951, 5481, 5797, 7270, 8128).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8181.">8181.</span></span>

That they set forward. That this signifies what follows on continuously
even until they are prepared, is evident from the signification of
"setting forward," as being what is successive and continuous (see n.
4375, 4554, 4585, 5996); for thereby is signified that they were not to
cry out, that is, to supplicate, but that the journey was to be
continued to the sea Suph, and afterward through it to the wilderness,
thus through hell, which they should pass through safely, to temptations
in successive continuation, even until they should be prepared. (That by
the "sea Suph" is signified hell, see n. 8099, 8137, 8148, and by the
"wilderness" a state of undergoing temptations, n. 8098.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8182.">8182.</span></span>

And thou, lift up thy rod. That this signifies the power of Divine
truth, is evident from the signification of "rod," as being power (see
n. 4013, 4015, 4876, 4936, 6947, 7011, 7026); and from the
representation of Moses, to whom it is said that he should "lift up his
rod," as being Divine truth (of which frequently above).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8183.">8183.</span></span>

And stretch out thy hand over the sea. That this signifies the rule of
power where the hell of falsity from evil is, is evident from the
signification of "stretching out the hand," as being the rule of power
(see n. 7673); and from the signification of "the sea," here the sea
Suph, as being the hell in which are the falsities from evil of those
who have been of the church (n. 8099, 8137, 8148). Concerning this hell,
of the Lord's Divine mercy something further shall be said at the end of
the last chapters of Exodus, where the hells will be told about from
experience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8184.">8184.</span></span>

And cleave it asunder. That this signifies the consequent dissipation of
falsity, is evident from the signification of "cleaving this sea
asunder," as being to dissipate the falsities from evil which are in
that hell; for the falsities there appear like waters, according to what
was shown above (n. 8099, 8137, 8148). For when the angelic pillar in
which the Lord is present passes through that sea, then the falsities
recede, consequently the waters there-which are falsities-disappear;
from which it is evident that "to cleave the sea asunder" signifies the
dissipation of the falsities that belong to the hell which is
represented by the "sea Suph."

<span class="margnote"><span id="8185.">8185.</span></span>

And the sons of Israel shall come into the midst of the sea on the dry.
That this signifies that they who are of the spiritual church may pass
safely and without the influx of falsity, is evident from the
signification of "coming" or entering "into the midst," as being to pass
through; and from the representation of the sons of Israel, as being
those who are of the spiritual church (of which frequently); and from
the signification of "on the dry," as being safely, and without the
influx of falsity; for by the waters of this sea are signified falsities
derived from evil (see n. 8137, 8138); consequently by "the dry" is
signified without falsity. The like is signified by "dry," and "making
dry," in David: Thou hast broken the heads of leviathan in pieces. Thou
didst cleave the fountain and the river; Thou hast made dry the rivers
of strength (Ps. 74:14, 15); "to make dry the rivers of strength"
denotes to dissipate the more powerful falsities. \[2\] In Zechariah: I
will gather them, because I will redeem them; I will bring them back out
of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria; and I will bring
them unto the land of Gilead and to Lebanon. He shall pass through the
sea of distress; but he will smite the waves in the sea, and will make
dry all the depths of the stream; and the pride of Assyria shall be cast
down, and the staff of Egypt shall depart. And I will render them mighty
in Jehovah (Zech. 10:8-12); this passage treats of those who trust in
themselves and in their own wisdom in spiritual things, and also of the
dissipation of falsities by means of temptations: "the land of Egypt"
denotes memory-knowledges; "Assyria," the reasonings therefrom; "to pass
through the sea of distress," denotes temptations; "to smite the waves
in the sea and dry up the depths of the stream," denotes to dissipate
the falsities thence derived; "the pride of Assyria shall be cast down,
and the staff of Egypt shall depart," denotes that they shall not trust
any longer in their own wisdom, but in wisdom from the Lord, which is
signified by "I will render them mighty in Jehovah." \[3\] In like
manner in Isaiah: That saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and
to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the waste
places thereof; that saith to the abyss, Be dry, and I will dry up thy
rivers (Isa. 44:26, 27); "to say to the abyss, be dry," and "to dry up
the rivers thereof," denotes to dissipate evils and falsities. But where
"waters" signify truths, there "to make dry" signifies a state of no
truth, or one without truth, as in Isaiah: I will pour waters upon him
that is thirsty, and streams upon the dry (Isa. 44:3); "waters" and
"streams" denote truths; "the dry" denotes where there is no truth.
\[4\] In Jeremiah: O sword against the Chaldeans, and against the
inhabitants of Babel, O sword against the horses thereof, and against
the chariots thereof; a drought upon the waters, that they may be dried
up (Jer. 50:35-38); "the Chaldeans" denote those who profane truths; and
"the inhabitants of Babel," denote those who profane goods (n. 1182,
1283, 1295, 1304, 1306-1308, 1321, 1322, 1326); a "sword" denotes truth
fighting against falsity, and falsity fighting against truth,
consequently vastation (n. 2799, 4499, 6353, 7102); "horses" denote the
intellectual faculty (n. 2761, 2762, 3217, 5321, 6125, 6534);
"chariots," doctrinal things (n. 5321, 8148); "a drought upon the waters
that they may be dried up," denotes that by reason of falsification
there is no life in the truths. But where "dry," or "making dry," in the
Word, is said of other things, as of trees, of herbs, of harvest, of
bones, the contrary to the above is signified. The earth itself is also
called "the dry" relatively to the sea, and then "dry" is predicated of
good, and "the sea" of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8186.">8186.</span></span>

And I, behold, I harden the heart of the Egyptians. That this signifies
the obstinacy of falsity from evil, is evident from the signification of
"hardening the heart," as being obstinacy (n. 7272, 7300, 7305, 7616);
and from the representation of the Egyptians, as being those who are in
falsities from evil (n. 8132, 8135, 8148). When it is said in the Word
that "Jehovah hardens the heart" and also "leads into evil," in the
internal sense, where the truth itself is in its nakedness, it is meant
that they who are in falsity and in evil harden their own heart and lead
themselves into evil (n. 2447, 6071, 6991, 6997, 7533, 7632, 7877,
7926).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8187.">8187.</span></span>

And they shall come after them. That this signifies an endeavor to offer
violence by means of the influx of falsity from evil, is evident from
the signification of "coming after them," as being the influx of falsity
from evil, and also an endeavor to subjugate, thus to offer violence;
for by "drawing nigh" is signified influx (n. 8159); by "marching after
them," a closer influx and communication (n. 8161); and by "pursuing
after them," an endeavor to subjugate (n. 8136, 8152, 8154);
consequently by "coming after them" is signified an endeavor to offer
violence by means of the influx of falsity from evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8188.">8188.</span></span>

And I will be glorified in Pharaoh, and in all his army, in his
chariots, and in his horsemen. That this signifies that they will see
the effect of the dissipation of falsity and of reasonings by virtue of
the Divine good of the Lord's Divine Human, is evident from the
signification of "being glorified in Pharaoh and his army," as being the
immersion in hell of those who are in falsity from evil, and the
encompassing of them there by falsities as by waters, by reason of the
mere presence of the Divine Human of the Lord (see above, n. 8137); from
the representation of Pharaoh, as being those who are in falsities from
evil; from the signification of "army," as being falsities; from the
signification of "his chariots," as being doctrinal things of falsity;
and from the signification of "his horsemen," as being false reasonings
(of which above, n. 8146, 8156).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8189.">8189.</span></span>

And the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah. That this signifies that
it may be known that the Lord is the only God, and besides Him there is
none else, is evident from what has been unfolded above (n. 7401, 7444,
7544, 7598, 7636), where like words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8190.">8190.</span></span>

When I am glorified in Pharaoh, in his chariots, and in his horsemen,
signifies that they will see the effect of the dissipation of falsity,
and of the doctrinal things and reasonings of falsity, by the Lord alone
(as just above, n. 8188).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8191.">8191.</span></span>

Verses 19-22. And the angel of God set out, marching before the camp of
Israel, and he went behind them; and the pillar of cloud set out from
before them and stood behind them; and it came between the camp of the
Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness, and
it lighted up the night; and the one came not near the other all the
night. And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and Jehovah made
the sea go away by a strong east wind all night, and made the sea dry,
and the waters were cleft asunder. And the sons of Israel came into the
midst of the sea in the dry; and the waters were a wall to them on their
right hand, and on their left. "And the angel of God set out," signifies
a setting in order by Divine truth; "marching before the camp of
Israel," signifies that was around the truths and goods of the church;
"and he went behind them," signifies protection lest the falsity of evil
should flow into the will; "and the pillar of cloud set out from before
them and stood behind them," signifies the presence of the Lord
protecting the things of the will, as it had previously protected those
of the understanding; "and it came between the camp of the Egyptians and
the camp of Israel," signifies between the falsities of evil on the one
side, and the truths of good on the other; "and it was a cloud and
darkness," signifies the condensation of falsity from evil on the one
side; "and it lighted up the night," signifies the enlightenment of
truth from good on the other; "and the one came not near the other,"
signifies consequently no communication; "all the night," signifies in
the obscure state; "and Moses stretched out his hand over the sea,"
signifies the rule of the power of truth Divine over hell; "and Jehovah
made the sea go away by a strong east wind," signifies the means of the
dissipation of falsity; "all the night," signifies in the obscure state;
"and made the sea dry," signifies the dissipation of falsity; "and the
waters were cleft asunder," signifies separation from truths, and
removal; "and the sons of Israel came into the midst of the sea in the
dry," signifies the entrance and passage of those who were of the
spiritual church through hell in safety, and without any influx of
falsity; "and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand, and on
their left," signifies that they were withheld from falsities on every
side.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8192.">8192.</span></span>

And the angel of God set out. That this signifies a setting in order by
Divine truth, is evident from the signification of "setting out," as
being a setting in order. That "to set out" denotes a setting in order
is because the pillar of cloud-which was an angelic choir-that had
previously advanced before the sons of Israel, now betook itself between
the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel, and thus brought
darkness upon the Egyptians, and gave light to the sons of Israel; and
because these things were thus set in order by the Lord, by means of the
setting out of the angel of God, or the pillar, and by means of its
interposition, therefore by "to set out" is here signified a setting in
order. From the signification of "the angel of God," as being Divine
truth, in like manner "God;" for in the Word, where truth is treated of,
the term "God" is used, but where good is treated of, the term "Jehovah"
(n. 2586, 2769, 2807, 2822, 3921, 4402, 7010, 7268, 7873). \[2\] As
regards the angels, be it known that by "angels" in the Word is meant
the Lord (n. 1925, 3039, 4085); and therefore the Lord Himself is called
an "angel" (n. 6280, 6831). Hence "angels" signify Divine truth, for the
Divine truth proceeding from the Lord makes heaven, consequently also
the angels who constitute heaven; for insofar as they receive the Divine
truth which is from the Lord, so far they are angels. This can also be
seen from the fact that the angels are quite unwilling, and are even
averse, to have anything of truth and good attributed to them, because
it is of the Lord with them. Hence also it is said that the Lord is the
all in all of heaven, and that they who are in heaven are in the Lord;
and moreover by virtue of the Divine truth which they receive from the
Lord, the angels are called in the Word "gods" (n. 4295, 7268), and
therefore "God" in the original tongue is in the plural number. \[3\] Be
it known further, that in the Word "an angel" is spoken of, when yet
many are meant; as in the present case, where it is said "the angel of
God," and there is meant the pillar which advanced before the sons of
Israel, and which was constituted of many angels. Moreover in the Word
angels are mentioned by name, as "Michael," "Raphael," and others. They
who do not know the internal sense of the Word believe that "Michael" or
"Raphael" is some one angel who is supreme among his associates; but by
these names in the Word is not signified some one angel, but the angelic
function itself, thus also the Divine of the Lord in respect to that
which belongs to the function.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8193.">8193.</span></span>

Marching before the camp of Israel. That this signifies that was around
the truths and goods of the church, is evident from the signification of
"the camp," as being truths and goods; for by "the camp" is signified
the whole assemblage of Israel, and by the "assemblage of Israel" are
signified all goods and truths in the complex (see n. 7830, 7843); hence
also "encampment" denotes a setting in order according to truths and
goods (n. 8103, 8130, 8131, 8155). That "Israel" denotes the spiritual
church has been frequently shown.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8194.">8194.</span></span>

And he went behind them. That this signifies protection lest the falsity
of evil should flow into the will, is evident from the signification of
"going behind" the sons of Israel, as being protection lest the
Egyptians should attack; in the internal sense, lest the falsities from
evil which are signified by "the Egyptians" should flow in (n. 8132,
8135, 8148). That it denotes lest they should flow into the will, is
because in the Grand Man, or in the spiritual world, the things of the
will are presented at the back, or behind, and those of the
understanding in front, or before. As regards influx into the will and
into the understanding of man, be it known that the Lord takes the
utmost care lest the infernals flow into a man's will; for if they were
to flow into his will after he had been regenerated or made a church, it
would be all over with him, because his will is nothing but evil. Hence
it is that the man of the spiritual church is regenerated by the Lord in
respect to the intellectual part, and that a new will is formed in this
part, which is completely separated from the will that the man has by
heredity (n. 863, 875, 927, 1023, 1043, 1044, 2256, 4328, 4493, 5113).
From all this it can now be seen whence it is that by "he went behind
them" is signified protection lest the falsity of evil should flow into
the will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8195.">8195.</span></span>

And the pillar of cloud set out from before them, and stood behind them.
That this signifies the presence of the Lord protecting the things of
the will, as it had previously protected those of the understanding, is
evident from the signification of "the pillar of cloud," as being the
presence of the Lord (see n. 8110), it being an angelic choir in which
the Lord was; and from the signification of "from before them," as being
the understanding, and of "behind them," as being the will (of which
just above, n. 8194); that protection is meant is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8196.">8196.</span></span>

And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel.
That this signifies between the falsities of evil on the one side and
the truths of good on the other, is evident from the signification of
"camp," as being goods and truths in the complex (of which just above,
n. 8193); thus, in the opposite sense, evils and falsities also in the
complex. Consequently "the camp of the Egyptians" denotes falsities of
evil, because by "the Egyptians" are signified falsities from evil (see
n. 8132, 8135, 8148); and "the camp of Israel" denotes the goods of
truth, because by "Israel" are signified the truths which are from good
(see n. 7957). That "to come between them" denotes to prevent the
falsities from evil from flowing in, is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8197.">8197.</span></span>

And it was a cloud and darkness. That this signifies the condensation of
falsity from evil on the one side, and that it lighted up the night,
signifies the enlightenment of truth from good on the other, is evident
from the signification of a "cloud and darkness," as being the
condensation of falsity from evil (that a "cloud" denotes falsity see n.
1043, 1047, 8137, 8138; also "darkness," n. 1839, 1860, 4418, 4531,
7688, 7711); and from the signification of "to light up the night," as
being the enlightenment of truth by good. (That the "pillar of fire by
night" denotes a state of obscurity tempered by enlightenment by good,
see n. 8108.) \[2\] In regard to this circumstance, that the pillar
brought darkness upon the Egyptians, and gave light to the sons of
Israel, the case is as follows. The presence of the Lord, here signified
by "the pillar," is heavenly light itself, from which heaven has its
light, and this light is a thousand times brighter than the noonday
light of the world. But the same light becomes thick darkness with the
evil: even if they are in the light itself, and it becomes thicker
darkness in proportion as the falsity from evil is denser with them. The
reason is that the truth Divine proceeding from the Lord appears before
the eyes of the angels as light, but to those who are in falsities from
evil it cannot appear as light, but as thick darkness, for falsity is
opposite to truth and extinguishes truth. Hence it is that the pillar,
which was the presence of the Lord, brought cloud and darkness on the
Egyptians, because by "the Egyptians" are signified those who are in
falsities from evil, and that it lighted up the night with the sons of
Israel, because by "the sons of Israel" are signified those who are in
truth from good. That the Lord appears to everyone according to his
quality, see n. 1861, 6832.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8198.">8198.</span></span>

And the one came not near the other. That this signifies consequently no
communication, is evident from the signification of "coming near," as
being influx and communication (see n. 8159).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8199.">8199.</span></span>

All the night. That this signifies in the obscure state, is evident from
the signification of "the night," as being a state of obscurity in
respect to the truth and good of faith (see n. 1712, 6000). By "the
night" is here meant that obscurity which follows immediately after
temptations; for they who are liberated from temptations first come into
obscurity before they come into clearness, because the falsities and
evils that are injected by the hells adhere to them awhile, and are not
dissipated except successively.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8200.">8200.</span></span>

And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea. That this signifies the
rule of the power of truth Divine over hell, is evident from the
signification of "stretching out the hand," as being the rule of power
(see n. 7673, 8183); from the representation of Moses, as being truth
Divine (of which frequently); and from the signification of "the sea,"
here the sea Suph, as being hell (n. 8099, 8137, 8138). It is said "the
rule of the power of truth Divine," because all Divine power is through
the truth which proceeds from the Lord. This created all things,
according to this in John: All things were made by means of the Word,
and without Him was not anything made that was made (John 1:3); "the
Word" denotes the Lord as to Divine truth; by means of this truth all
things in heaven and in hell are set in order; from this also is all
order on the earth; all the miracles were brought by means of it; in
short, Divine truth has in it all power, insomuch that it is power
itself. There are some in the other life who are in truth in advance of
others, and they are in such power therefrom that they can pass through
the hells without any danger. They who are in the hells flee in every
direction at their presence. There are some also who by means of truth
from the Divine exercise power magically. Of the Lord's Divine mercy
more shall be said of both of these at the end of the chapters, when the
hells will be spoken of. They who pay attention to the causes of things
from things external and earthly, cannot perceive otherwise than that
truth from the Divine is a mere affair of thought, of no real essence;
but on the contrary it is the veriest essentiality from which are all
the essences of things in both worlds, the spiritual and the natural.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8201-8250](ac165)
