[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac159)  [Next](ac161.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="7951.">7951.</span></span>

And all the firstborn of beast, signifies the adulterated good of faith
(as before, n. 7781).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7952.">7952.</span></span>

And Pharaoh rose up in that night, and all his servants, and all the
Egyptians. That this signifies that all and each of the damned, when
they were let into mere falsity derived from evil, felt aversion and
fear for those who were of the spiritual church, is evident from the
signification of "night," as being a state of mere falsity from evil (as
above, n. 7947), and hence damnation; for whether you say a state of
mere falsity from evil, or damnation, it is the same, because they who
are in this state are damned; and from the signification of "Pharaoh,"
of "his servants," and of "all the Egyptians," as being all and each
one. That it is also signified that they felt aversion and fear for
those who were of the spiritual church, is plain from what follows; for
Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said that they should "go away from
the midst of his people;" and the Egyptians drove them out (verse 39).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7953.">7953.</span></span>

And there was a great cry in Egypt, signifies interior lamentation, as
above, n. 7782, where the same words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7954.">7954.</span></span>

Because there was not a house where there was not one dead. That this
signifies because there was no one who was not damned, is evident from
the signification of "there was not a house," as being that there was no
one there; and from the signification of "dead," as being damned (see n.
5407, 6119, 7494, 7871).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7955.">7955.</span></span>

And he called Moses and Aaron in the night. That this signifies the
afflux of truth from the Divine in that state, is evident from the
signification of "he called," as being presence and influx (see n. 6177,
6840, 7390, 7451, 7721), here afflux, because it is said of those who
were in a state of damnation, that is, who were in a state of mere
falsity from evil, and who cannot receive any influx of truth and good
interiorly, but only exteriorly, and this is afflux; and from the
representation of Moses and Aaron, as being truth from the Divine (n.
6771, 6827); it is said "truth from the Divine," not "truth Divine,"
because it is spoken of with respect to those who are in damnation; and
from the signification of "in the night," as being a state of damnation
(of which above, n. 7851, 7870).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7956.">7956.</span></span>

And said, Rise up, go ye out from the midst of my people. That this
signifies that they should depart, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7957.">7957.</span></span>

Both ye and the sons of Israel. That this signifies with that truth from
the Divine, and with the truth through which is good, and with the truth
which is from good, is evident from the representation of Moses, as
being truth from the Divine (of which just above, n. 7955); and from the
representation of the sons of Israel, as being those who are of the
spiritual church (of which frequently above), thus those who are in
truth through which is good, and in truth which is from good. For the
spiritual church is distinguished from the celestial church in this,
that through truth which is of faith it is introduced into the good
which is of charity, thus that it has truth for its essential. The
initiation is effected through truth, for through truth they are
instructed what must be done, and when they do this truth, it is called
good. From this good, when they have been initiated, they afterward see
truths, according to which they again act. From this it is evident that
whether you say "those who are of the spiritual church," or "those who
are in truth through which is good, and in truth which is from good," it
is the same.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7958.">7958.</span></span>

And go, serve Jehovah. That this signifies that they should worship the
Lord, is evident from the signification of "serving," as being to
worship. (That by "Jehovah," where mentioned in the Word, is meant the
Lord, see n. 1343, 1736, 2921, 3023, 3035, 5041, 5663, 6281, 6303,
6905.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7959.">7959.</span></span>

According to your speaking. That this signifies according to the will,
is evident from the signification of "to say," as being the will (see n.
2626).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7960.">7960.</span></span>

Also your flocks, also your herds, take ye. That this signifies the
goods of charity, interior and exterior, is evident from the
signification of "flocks," as being the interior goods of charity; and
from the signification of "herds," as being the exterior goods of
charity (see n. 2566, 5913, 6048).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7961.">7961.</span></span>

As ye spoke, signifies according to the will (as just above, n. 7959).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7962.">7962.</span></span>

And go. That this signifies that they should depart altogether, is
evident from the signification of "going," or "going away," as being to
depart; and because it is said a second time, it signifies that they
should depart altogether.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7963.">7963.</span></span>

And also bless me. That this signifies that they should intercede, is
evident from the signification of "to bless," as being to intercede, for
"to bless" here signifies that they should supplicate for him; that to
supplicate for Pharaoh denotes to intercede, see n. 7396, 7462.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7964.">7964.</span></span>

And Egypt was strong upon the people, hastening to send them out of the
land. That this signifies that from aversion and fear they were urgent
that they should depart, is evident from the signification of "to be
strong upon the people, hastening to send them away," as being to be
urgent that they should depart. That this was from aversion and fear, is
evident; for they who are in mere falsity from evil are so averse to
those who are in truth from good that they cannot endure even their
presence. From this it is that they who are in evil cast themselves deep
down into hell according to the nature and degree of their evil, in
order that they may be far from good; and this not only from aversion,
but also from fear, because in the presence of good they are tormented

<span class="margnote"><span id="7965.">7965.</span></span>

For they said, We be all dead. That this signifies thus hell for them,
is evident from the signification of "to die," as being hell. (That
"death" in the spiritual sense denotes hell, see n. 5407, 6119.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="7966.">7966.</span></span>

And the people carried their dough before it was leavened. That this
signifies the first state of truth from good, in which there is nothing
of falsity, is evident from the signification of "dough," as being truth
from good. For by "meal" and "fine flour" is signified truth; by the
"dough" which is made therefrom, the good of truth; and by the "bread"
which is made from the dough is signified the good of love; and when by
"bread" is signified the good of love, by the other things, namely, by
the "dough" and the "flour," are signified in their order goods and
truths (that "bread" denotes the good of love, see n. 276, 680, 2165,
2177, 3464, 3478, 3735, 3813, 4211, 4217, 4735, 4976, 5915); and from
the signification of "before it was leavened," as being in which there
was nothing of falsity (that "leaven" denotes falsity see n. 7906).
\[2\] That this is the first state, namely, when they are liberated, is
plain, because it is said that "the people carried their dough," that
is, when they departed. But the second state is described in the
following verse (39), by "they baked the dough which they brought forth
out of Egypt into unleavened cakes, for it was not leavened," by which
is signified that from the truth of good was again produced good in
which there was nothing of falsity. These are the two states in which
they who are of the spiritual church, when in good, are kept by the
Lord-the first, that from the good which is of the will they see and
think truth; the second, that from this marriage of good and truth they
produce truths, which by willing them and doing them, again become
goods, and so on continually. Such are the productions and derivations
of truth with those who are of the spiritual church. In the spiritual
world this is presented representatively as a tree with leaves and
fruits; the leaves there are truths; the fruits are the goods of truth;
the seeds are the goods themselves, from which are the rest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7967.">7967.</span></span>

Their kneading troughs bound up in their clothes. That this signifies
the delights of the affections, which delights adhere to the truths, is
evident from the signification of "kneading troughs" as being the
delights of the affections (n. 7356); from the signification of "to be
bound up," as being to adhere; and from the signification of "clothes,"
as being truths (n. 1073, 2576, 4545, 4763, 5248, 5319, 5954, 6914,
6918). What the delights of the affections that adhere to truths are,
must be told. All the truths that enter with man have been conjoined
with some delight, for truths without delight are not of anyone's life.
From the delights that are conjoined with truths it is known how the
case is in respect to the truths with a man; if they are delights of
evil affections, then it is ill; but if they are delights of good
affections, it is well. For the angels who are with man flow in
continually with good affections, and then call forth the truths which
have been conjoined with them; in like manner on the other hand, if the
truths have not been conjoined with good affections, then the angels
labor in vain to call forth what is of faith and charity. From all this
it can be seen what is meant by the delights of the affections that
adhere to truths, which is signified by the "kneading troughs being
bound up in their clothes."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7968.">7968.</span></span>

Upon their shoulder. That this signifies according to all ability, is
evident from the signification of the "shoulder," as being all power
(see n. 1085, 4931-4937).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7969.">7969.</span></span>

Verses 35, 36. And the sons of Israel did according to the word of
Moses; and they asked of the Egyptians vessels of silver, and vessels of
gold, and garments. And Jehovah gave the people favor in the eyes of the
Egyptians, and they lent to them; and they spoiled the Egyptians. "And
the sons of Israel did according to the word of Moses," signifies that
they obeyed truth Divine; "and they asked of the Egyptians vessels of
silver, and vessels of gold, and garments," signifies that the
memory-knowledges of truth and good taken from the evil who had been of
the church were to be bestowed upon the good who were from thence; "and
Jehovah gave the people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians," signifies
the fear of those who are damned on account of those who are of the
spiritual church; "and they lent to them," signifies that they were
transferred; "and they spoiled the Egyptians," signifies that they who
were in damnation were altogether devastated of such things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7970.">7970.</span></span>

It is needless to unfold these things in detail, because they have
already been unfolded twice, namely, in Exod. 3:21-22 (n. 6914-6920),
and in Exod. 11:2-3 (n. 7768-7773).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7971.">7971.</span></span>

Verses 37-39. And the sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth,
about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, besides babe. And a
great mixed multitude also went up with them; and flock, and herd, a
very great acquisition. And they baked the dough which they brought
forth out of Egypt into unleavened cakes, for it had not been leavened,
because they were driven out of Egypt, and could not tarry, and
moreover, they had not prepared for themselves any provision for the
journey. "And the sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth,"
signifies the first state of departure and its quality; "about six
hundred thousand on foot that were men," signifies all things of the
truth and good of faith in one complex; "besides babe," signifies the
good of innocence; "and a great mixed multitude also," signifies goods
and truths which are not genuine; "went up with them," signifies which
are adjoined; "and flock, and herd, a very great acquisition," signifies
the good acquired by means of truth, interior and exterior, in great
abundance; "and they baked the dough which they brought forth out of
Egypt into unleavened cakes," signifies that from the truth of good
there was again produced good in which was nothing of falsity; "for it
had not been leavened," signifies because in the truth from good there
was nothing of falsity; "because they were driven out of Egypt, and
could not tarry," signifies because they were removed from those who
were in falsity from evil; "and moreover, they had not prepared for
themselves any provision for the journey," signifies that they had with
them no other sustenance from truth and good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7972.">7972.</span></span>

And the sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth. That this
signifies the first state of departure and its quality, is evident from
the signification of "journeying," as being the order and rules of life
(see n. 1293, 3335, 4882, 5493, 5605), consequently the journeyings of
the sons of Israel as described in Exodus, denote states of life and
their changes from first to last. Here therefore by the "journeying from
Rameses to Succoth" is signified the first state and its quality; for
the names of places, as also of persons, all signify real things and
their quality (n. 768, 1224, 1264, 1876, 1888, 3422, 4298, 4310, 4442,
5095, 6516).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7973.">7973.</span></span>

About six hundred thousand on foot that were men. That this signifies
all things of the truth and good of faith in one complex, is evident
from the signification of the number "six hundred thousand," as being
all things of faith in one complex; for this number arises from six and
also from twelve, and "twelve" signifies all things of faith and charity
(see n. 577, 2089, 2129, 2130, 3272, 3858, 3913). It is for this reason
that the sons of Jacob were twelve, and that their posterity were
distinguished into twelve tribes, and also that twelve disciples were
adopted by the Lord, namely, to represent all things of faith and
charity. (Concerning the tribes see n. 3858, 3862, 3913, 3926, 4060,
6335, 6337, 6640, 7836, 7891; concerning the disciples, n. 3354, 3488,
3858, 6397.) \[2\] That here "six hundred thousand" has a similar
signification, is because a number greater or less, or multiplied, or
divided, involves the like as the simple numbers from which it is
derived (n. 5291, 5335, 5708). This is very clear from the number
"twelve," which has a like signification whether divided into six, or
multiplied to seventy-two, or to one hundred and forty-four-that is,
twelve times twelve,-or to twelve thousand, or to one hundred and
forty-four thousand, as the "one hundred and forty-four thousand" spoken
of in John: I heard the number of the sealed, a hundred and forty and
four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of the sons of Israel, out of
each tribe twelve thousand (Rev. 7:4-5); here by the "sons of Israel"
are not meant the sons of Israel, nor by "tribes" tribes, nor by
"number" number, but such things as are in the internal sense, namely,
all things of faith and charity, and thus by each tribe specifically one
genus or one class, according to what has been unfolded in regard to the
contents of the twenty-ninth and thirtieth chapters of Genesis. \[3\] In
like manner in the same: Behold the Lamb standing upon the Mount Zion,
and with Him a hundred and forty and four thousand, having the name of
His Father written upon their foreheads. They sang a new song before the
throne, and no one could learn the song save the hundred and forty and
four thousand bought from the earth. These are they who follow the Lamb
whithersoever He goeth. These were bought from men, the firstfruits to
God and the Lamb (Rev. 14:1, 3-4). From this description it is clear
that they who are in charity are meant by "the hundred and forty and
four thousand," and it is also clear that this number merely designates
state and quality. \[4\] For this number designates the like as
"twelve," because it arises from "twelve thousand" and "twelve"
multiplied together; in like manner as the lesser number "one hundred
and forty-four" which is twelve times twelve, in the same: He measured
the wall of the holy Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, a
hundred and forty and four cubits, which is the measure of a man, that
is, of an angel (Rev. 21:2, 17); that in the spiritual sense the "wall
of the holy Jerusalem" does not mean a wall, but the truth of faith
defending the things of the church, see n. 6419; for which reason also
it is said that it was "a hundred and forty and four cubits." That such
is the meaning is very clear, for it is said that this measure is "the
measure of a man, that is, of an angel," and by "man" and by "angel" is
signified everything of the truth and good of faith. \[5\] And the same
is evident from the twelve precious stones of which was the foundation
of the wall, and from the twelve gates, each of which was a pearl
(verses 19-21), for by "precious stones" are signified the truths of
faith which are from the good of charity (n. 643, 3720, 6426), as
likewise by a "gate" and also by a "pearl." From this then it is evident
that a lesser and a greater number involve the like as the simple number
from which they come. (That all numbers mentioned in the Word signify
real things, see n. 482, 487, 575, 647, 648, 755, 813, 1963, 1988, 2075,
2252, 3252, 4264, 4495, 4670, 5265, 6175.) \[6\] From all this it can
now be seen that the number "six hundred thousand men" going forth out
of Egypt has also such a signification. That this number signifies such
things scarcely anyone can believe, for the reason that it is a matter
of history, and everything historical keeps the mind continually in the
external sense, and withdraws it from the internal sense. Nevertheless
this number has such a signification, for there is not even a syllable,
nor yet one jot or one point in the Word, which is not in itself holy,
because it infolds in itself what is holy. Everyone sees that there is
nothing holy in the mere historical fact.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7974.">7974.</span></span>

Besides babe. That this signifies the good of innocence, is evident from
the signification of an "infant," as being the good of innocence (see n.
430, 1616, 2126, 2305, 3183, 3494, 4797, 5608).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7975.">7975.</span></span>

And a great mixed multitude also. That this signifies goods and truths
which are not genuine, is evident from the signification of "a mixed
multitude," as being goods and truths not genuine; for when by the sons
of Israel are represented genuine goods and truths which are of the
spiritual church (n. 7957), by "a mixed multitude" accompanying them are
signified truths and goods not genuine. For with those who are of the
spiritual church the case is this. They have genuine goods and truths,
and they have goods and truths not genuine; for the man of the spiritual
church has no perception of good and truth, but acknowledges and
believes as good and truth that which the doctrinal things of his church
teach. For this reason he is in very many truths not genuine,
consequently also in like goods, for goods have their quality from
truths. That the spiritual are in very many truths not genuine, see n.
2708, 2715, 2718, 2831, 2849, 2935, 2937, 3240, 3241, 3246, 3833, 4402,
4788, 5113, 6289, 6500, 6639, 6865, 6945, 7233; and that consequently
they have truths not pure (n. 6427). But still they are kept by the Lord
in goods in the highest degree genuine, which is effected by means of an
influx through the interiors (n. 6499), and then the truths and goods
not genuine are separated thence and rejected to the sides. These are
the things which are signified by "a very great mixed multitude." \[2\]
In like manner by this "multitude" are signified they who are of the
church, but not within it, as is the case with the Gentiles who live
together in obedience and mutual charity and have not genuine truths,
because they have not the Word. These likewise, and also the truths
themselves not genuine, are signified by the "great multitude" in John:
I heard the number of the sealed, a hundred and forty and four thousand,
sealed out of every tribe of Israel; after these things I saw, and
behold a great multitude, which no one could number, out of every
nation, and tribes, and peoples, and tongues, standing before the throne
and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes and palms in their hands
(Rev. 7:4, 9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7976.">7976.</span></span>

Went up with them. That this signifies which was adjoined, is evident
from the signification of "going up with them," when said of goods and
truths, as being that they were adjoined; for truths and goods not
genuine are indeed separated from the genuine goods and truths with the
spiritual man, but are not taken away, remaining adjoined at the side
whither they are rejected (see n. 7975). The case is similar with the
Lord's church among the Gentiles, who have not genuine truths; these
also in heaven are adjoined to those who are in genuine truths and
goods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7977.">7977.</span></span>

And flock, and herd, a very great acquisition. That this signifies the
good acquired by means of truth, interior and exterior, in great
abundance, is evident from the signification of "flock," as being
interior good, and from the signification of "herd," as being exterior
good (see n. 2566, 5913, 6048, 7960). That it was acquired is signified
by "acquisition," for with those who are of the spiritual church all
good is acquired by means of truth, because without the truth which is
of faith they do not know what spiritual truth is, nor what spiritual
good is. They are indeed capable of knowing civil truth, also moral
truth, and their goods, because they are concordant with things which
are in the world, whence also they have a perception of these truths and
goods. But spiritual truth and its good are not concordant with those
things which are in the world, and in many cases are even quite at
variance with them, and therefore those of the spiritual church have to
be instructed about them. These things have been said to show that with
those who are of the spiritual church all good must be acquired by means
of truth. That "very great" denotes great abundance, is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7978.">7978.</span></span>

And they baked the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt into
unleavened cakes. That this signifies that from the truth of good there
was again produced good in which was nothing of falsity, is evident from
the signification of "baking," when said of the truth of good which is
signified by "dough," as being to produce; from the signification of
"dough," as being the truth of good (of which above, n. 7966); and from
the signification of "unleavened cakes," as being goods in which there
is nothing of falsity (that "unleavened things" denote what is free from
falsity, see n. 2342, 7906). This is the second state of truth from
good, in which they were when liberated (see n. 7966, 7972). "Cakes"
denote goods because they are bread, and in the internal sense "bread"
denotes the good of love (n. 276, 680, 2165, 2177, 3464, 3478, 3735,
3813, 4211, 4217, 4735, 4976, 5915). But the bread of cakes is
distinguished from common bread in the fact that by the bread of cakes
is signified the good of love toward the neighbor, thus spiritual good,
and by common bread is signified the good of love to the Lord, thus
celestial good. This spiritual good was signified by the meat-offering
which was offered and burned with the sacrifice on the altar, for the
meat-offering was baked into cakes and into wafers, as can be seen in
Exod. 29:2, 3, 23, 24, 41; Lev. 2:2 seq.; 6:14, 15; Num. 6:15, 19;
15:18-21. \[2\] The like was signified by the "twelve loaves of setting
forth," which also were baked into cakes, concerning which in Moses:
Thou shalt take fine flour, and bake it into twelve cakes; of two tenth
parts shall one cake be. And thou shalt set them in two rows, six in a
row, upon the clean table before Jehovah. And thou shalt put pure
frankincense upon each row, and it shall be for the loaves as a
memorial, a fire-offering to Jehovah (Lev. 24:5-7). From all this it can
be seen that the loaves signified what is holy, for otherwise such a
thing would never have been commanded; and as they signified what is
holy, they are also called "holiness of holinesses" (verse 9). But by
these loaves was signified the good of celestial love; and by their
being baked into cakes were signified the goods of spiritual love. From
all this, and from what has been adduced in the passages above quoted,
it can be seen that the like is meant by the "bread" in the Holy Supper.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7979.">7979.</span></span>

For it had not been leavened. That this signifies because in truth from
good there was nothing of falsity, is evident from the signification of
the "dough," of which it is said that it "had not been leavened," as
being the truth of good (see above n. 7966); and from the signification
of "not leavened," as being without falsity (n. 2342, 7906).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7980.">7980.</span></span>

Because they were driven out of the land of Egypt, and could not tarry.
That this signifies because they were removed from those who were in
falsity from evil, is evident from the signification of "to be driven
out," as being to be removed, for he who is driven out is removed (see
n. 7964); from the signification of "Egypt," as being those who are in
falsity from evil (of which above); and from the signification of "could
not tarry," as being necessity for removal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7981.">7981.</span></span>

And moreover, they had not prepared for themselves any provision for the
journey. That this signifies that they had with them no other sustenance
from truth and good, namely, than that signified by the "dough not
leavened" (and that this denotes truth of good in which is nothing of
falsity, see n. 7966), is evident from the signification of "provisions
for the journey," as being sustenance from truth and good (n. 5490,
5953).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7982.">7982.</span></span>

Verses 40-42. And the dwelling of the sons of Israel which they dwelt in
Egypt, was thirty years and four hundred years. And it was at the end of
thirty years and four hundred years, it was even in this same day, all
the armies of Jehovah went forth from the land of Egypt. A night of
watches is this to Jehovah, for leading them forth from the land of
Egypt; this is that night of watches to Jehovah for all the sons of
Israel unto their generations. "And the dwelling of the sons of Israel
which they dwelt in Egypt," signifies the duration of the infestations;
"was thirty years and four hundred years," signifies the quality and
state of these; "and it was at the end of thirty years and four hundred
years," signifies the time of the Lord's coming, when they were
liberated; "it was in this same day," signifies that it was then; "all
the armies of Jehovah went forth from the land of Egypt," signifies that
those who were in truth and good and were still detained there, were
taken out; "a night of watches is this to Jehovah," signifies the Lord's
presence with those who were in truth and good, and with those who were
in evil and thence in mere falsity; "for leading them forth from the
land of Egypt," signifies liberation from spiritual captivity; "this is
that night of watches to Jehovah," signifies that now they were withheld
from all falsity and evil; "for all the sons of Israel unto their
generations," signifies those of the spiritual church with whom there is
good from truth, and truth from good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7983.">7983.</span></span>

And the dwelling of the sons of Israel which they dwelt in Egypt. That
this signifies the duration of the infestations, is evident from the
signification of "dwelling," as being a state of life (see n. 1293,
3384, 3613, 4451, 6051); here a state of infestations, for this is the
state of life now treated of, and which is signified by the number
"thirty and four hundred years," to which the words have reference.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7984.">7984.</span></span>

Was thirty years and four hundred years. That this signifies the quality
and state of these, is evident from the signification of "thirty," as
being a full state of remains, for this number is the product of three
and ten multiplied together, and by "three" is signified a full state
(n. 2788, 4495, 7715), and by "ten," remains (n. 576, 1906, 2284); what
a full state is shall be told presently; and from the signification of
"four hundred," as being the duration of vastation (n. 2959, 2966), and
the consequent conjunction of good and truth (n. 4341). (That all
numbers signify things and states, and that a compound number has a
similar signification to that of the simple numbers of which it is
compounded, see above, n. 7973.) \[2\] As regards the vastation which is
signified by "four hundred years," it is twofold, namely, the vastation
of evil and falsity, and the vastation of good and truth. With those who
are being damned it is the vastation of good and truth; but with those
who are saved, it is the vastation of evil and falsity. Vastation is
deprivation. That the evil who had been of the church were vastated as
to all good and truth, has already been shown; for the successive
degrees of vastation were signified by the plagues in Egypt. But the
good are vastated as to evil and falsity; with them these are
successively separated, that is, rejected to the sides, and goods and
truth are brought together toward the midst. This collecting together of
good and truth is meant by "remains;" and when they have a full state of
remains, they are then raised into heaven. This state is that which is
signified by "thirty," and the vastation by "four hundred." The
vastation of evil and falsity, and the instilling of good and truth,
with the good, are effected by means of infestations, and by means of
temptations. By the one, falsities and evils are removed; and by the
other, goods and truths, are put on; and this even until the state
becomes full. \[3\] It must also be told briefly what a full state is.
Everyone, whether damned or saved, has a certain measure which is
capable of being filled. The evil, or they who are damned, have a
certain measure of evil and falsity; and the good, or they who are
saved, have a certain measure of good and truth. In the other life this
measure is filled with everyone; but some have a greater measure, some a
less. This measure is acquired in the world by means of the affections
which are of the love. The more anyone has loved evil and the derivative
falsity, the greater is the measure he has gained for himself; and the
more anyone has loved good and the derivative truth, the greater is his
measure. The limits and degrees of the extensions of this measure are
clearly seen in the other life, and cannot there be surmounted, but they
can be filled, and also actually are filled, namely, with goods and
truths in the case of those who have been in the affection of good and
truth, and with evils and falsities in the case of those who have been
in the affection of evil and falsity. Hence it is evident that this
measure is the faculty gained in the world for receiving either evil and
falsity, or good and truth. \[4\] This state is what is meant by a "full
state," and is signified by "thirty." It is described by the Lord in the
parables of the talents in Matt. 25:14-30, and of the pounds in Luke
19:12-27, and finally in these words: To everyone that hath shall be
given, and he shall have abundance, but from him that hath not, even
that which he hath shall be taken away from him (Matt. 25:29). He said
unto them that stood by, Take away from him the pound, and give it to
him who hath the ten pounds: they said to him, Lord, he hath ten pounds.
I say to you, that unto everyone that hath shall be given; but from him
that hath not even that which he hath shall be taken from him (Luke
19:24-26). That everyone's measure is filled, the Lord also teaches in
another place in Luke: Give, and it shall be given unto you; good
measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, shall they
give into your bosom (Luke 6:38). From all this it is now evident what
is meant by a full state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7985.">7985.</span></span>

It is said that "the dwelling of the sons of Israel which they dwelt in
Egypt was thirty years and four hundred years," and further that "at the
end of the thirty years and four hundred years, in this same day, all
the armies of Jehovah went out from the land of Egypt," when yet the
dwelling of the sons of Israel, from the going down of Jacob into Egypt,
to the going out of his descendants at this time, was not more than half
the time, namely, two hundred and fifteen years, as is very manifest
from the chronology of the Holy Scripture. For Moses was born of Amram,
Amram of Kohath, and Kohath of Levi; and Kohath together with his father
Levi came into Egypt (Gen. 46:11). The age of the life of Kohath was 133
years (Exod. 6:18), and the age of the life of Amram, from whom were
Aaron and Moses, was 137 years (Exod. 6:20), and Moses was a man of 80
years when he stood before Pharaoh (Exod. 7:7). It is not mentioned in
what year of the age of Kohath Amram was born, nor in what year of the
age of Amram Moses was born; but it can be seen that there were not 430
years, for even the years of their ages do not amount to 430, but only
to 350, as appears from adding the years of the age of Kohath, 133, to
the years of the age of Amram, 137, and these to the 80 years of Moses
when he stood before Pharaoh; still less if the years from their births
be added together. That they were 215 years can be seen from the
chronology. But from the going down of Abraham into Egypt to the going
out of the sons of Israel, there were 430 years, as can also be seen
from the chronology. From this then it is evident that by "four hundred
and thirty years" is here meant the entire period of time from Abraham,
and not from Jacob. That these years were designated, and were called
"the years of the dwelling of the sons of Israel in Egypt," is on
account of the internal sense, in which by these years is signified a
full state, and the duration of the vastation of those who had been of
the spiritual church, and were detained in the lower earth until the
coming of the Lord, and were then liberated (n. 6854, 6914, 7035, 7091,
7828, 7932a).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7986.">7986.</span></span>

And it came to pass at the end of thirty years and four hundred years.
That this signifies the time of the Lord's coming, when they were saved,
is evident from the signification of "thirty and four hundred years," as
being a full state, and the duration of the vastation or infestation of
those who were of the spiritual church and were detained in the lower
earth until the coming of the Lord, and were then liberated (of which
just above, n. 7985, and n. 6854, 6914, 7035, 7091, 7828, 7932a).
Consequently "at the end of these years" signifies the time of the
Lord's coming, when they were saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7987.">7987.</span></span>

And it was in this same day. That this signifies that it was then, is
evident from the signification of "day," as being state (see n. 23, 487,
488, 493, 2788, 3462, 3785, 4850, 5672, 5962, 7680); consequently "in
this same day" denotes in that state, thus then, namely, when was the
coming of the Lord, which is signified by "at the end of thirty and four
hundred years," and the liberation of those who were of the spiritual
church, which is signified by "all the armies of Jehovah went forth from
the land of Egypt."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7988.">7988.</span></span>

That all the armies of Jehovah went forth from the land of Egypt. That
this signifies that they who were in truth and good and were still
detained there, were taken out, is evident from the signification of
"going forth from the land of Egypt," as being to be taken out and
liberated from infestations (that "to go forth" denotes to be taken out,
is evident; and also that "the land of Egypt" denotes infestations, see
n. 7278); and from the signification of "the armies of Jehovah," as
being the truths and goods of the spiritual church, thus those who are
in truth and good (n. 3448, 7236). That truths and goods are "the armies
of Jehovah," is evident in Daniel: There went out one little horn of the
he-goat, and it grew exceedingly toward the south, and toward the east,
and toward comeliness; and it grew even to the army of the heavens; and
some of the army and of the stars it cast down to the earth, and
trampled upon them. Yea, it exalted itself even to the Prince of the
army. And the army was delivered upon the continual sacrifice unto
transgression, because it cast forth truth into the earth. Then I heard
a holy one speaking, How long shall the holy thing and the army be given
to be trampled on? He said unto me, Until the evening and the morning,
two thousand three hundred; then shall the holy thing be justified (Dan.
8:9-14); it is here clearly evident that "armies" denote truths and
goods; for it is said that it "cast down to the earth some of the army
and of the stars," and afterward that it "cast forth truth into the
earth," and that "the army was to be trampled on until the evening and
the morning," that is, until the coming of the Lord. \[2\] As truths and
goods are the "armies of Jehovah," therefore the angels are called His
"armies" in these passages: Micaiah the prophet said, I saw Jehovah
sitting on His throne, and the whole army of the heavens standing by Him
(1 Kings 22:19). Bless Jehovah, ye His angels, mighty in strength. Bless
Jehovah, all ye His armies, ye ministers of His (Ps. 103:20-21); where
the angels are called "armies" from the truths and goods in which they
are. Nor were the angels only called "the armies of Jehovah," but also
the luminaries of heaven, as the sun, moon, and stars, and this because
by the "sun" was signified the good of love, by the "moon" the good of
faith, and by the "stars" the knowledges of good and truth. That these
luminaries are called "armies" is manifest in the book of Genesis: And
the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the army of them (Gen.
2:1); where by "army" are meant all the luminaries of heaven; but in the
internal sense, in which is here described the new creation of man, are
meant truths and goods. \[3\] In like manner in David: Praise ye
Jehovah, all His angels; praise ye Him, all His armies. Praise ye Him,
sun and moon; praise Him, all ye stars of light (Ps. 148:2-3). That the
"sun" denotes the good of love; the "moon" the good of faith, see n.
1529, 1530, 2441, 2495, 4060, 4696, 5377, 7083; and that the "stars"
denote the knowledges of good and truth, n. 1808, 2120, 2495, 2849,
4697. \[4\] That the "sun, moon, and stars" signify goods and truths, is
because in heaven the Lord is a sun to the celestial angels, and a moon
to the spiritual angels (n. 1521, 1529-1531, 3636, 3643, 4300, 4321,
5097, 7078, 7083, 7171, 7173), and because the angelic abodes shine like
the stars, according to these words in Daniel: Then shall the
intelligent shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that make
many righteous, as the stars forever and to eternity (Dan. 12:3). \[5\]
As from truths and goods the angels are called "the armies of Jehovah,"
and so also the sun, moon, and stars; and as all truth and good proceed
from the Lord; therefore in the Word the Lord is called "Jehovah
Zebaoth" that is, "of armies" (n. 3448). He is so called also from the
fact that He fights for man against the hells. From all this it can now
be seen what is meant in the internal sense by "the armies of Jehovah."
That the sons of Jacob, who went forth out of Egypt, were not these
armies, but that they represented them, is evident from their life in
Egypt, in that they did not know Jehovah, not even His name, until this
was told to Moses out of the bramble (Exod. 3:13-16); and also that
they, equally with the Egyptians, were worshipers of a calf, as may be
concluded from the thirty-second chapter of Exodus; and also from their
life in the wilderness, in that they were of such a character that they
could not be introduced into the land of Canaan; thus were as far as
possible from being the armies of Jehovah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7989.">7989.</span></span>

A night of watches is this to Jehovah. That this signifies the presence
of the Lord with those who are in truth and good, and with those who are
in evil and thence in mere falsity, is evident from the signification of
"night," as being a state of damnation (see n. 7851); and from the
signification of the "watches to Jehovah," as being the presence of the
Lord and thence protection; for by the presence of the Lord those are
enlightened who are in good and thence in truth, and those are made
blind who are in evil and thence in falsity; and also by the presence of
the Lord those are brought out from damnation who are to be raised into
heaven, for they are withheld from evil and are kept in good, and this
by a strong force from the Lord; and by the presence of the Lord those
also who are to be cast down into hell are brought into damnation, for
according to the degree of the Lord's presence they are in evil (n.
7643, 7926). Hence then it is that this state and this time are called
"a night of watches to Jehovah." The presence of the Lord is described
in what follows by the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by
night, to lead them (Exod. 13:21); and His presence both with those who
were in good and truth, and with those who were in evil and falsity, is
described by that pillar interposing itself between the camp of Israel
and the camp of the Egyptians, and that when Jehovah looked forth from
it to the camp of the Egyptians, the Egyptians were immersed in the sea
Suph (Exod. 14:19, 20, 24-27).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7990.">7990.</span></span>

For leading them forth from the land of Egypt. That this signifies
liberation from spiritual captivity, is evident from the signification
of "leading forth," as being to liberate; and from the signification of
"the land of Egypt," as being where they were infested by the evil, thus
where they were in spiritual captivity, according to what has been
adduced (n. 6854, 6914, 7035, 7091, 7828, 7932a, 7985). They are said to
be in spiritual captivity who as to their interiors are kept by the Lord
in good and truth, but as to their exteriors are kept by hell in evil
and falsity, whence there is a combat of the external man with the
internal. In this state are those kept who are being infested; and then
the Lord by influx through the interiors fights for them against the
afflux of evil and falsity from the hells. They are then kept as it were
captive, for through influx from the Lord they desire to be in good and
truth, but through the afflux from the hells they seem to themselves not
to be able. This combat takes place to the end that the external man may
be reduced to obedience to the internal, and thus natural things be made
subordinate to spiritual things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7991.">7991.</span></span>

This is that night of watches to Jehovah. That this signifies that they
were then withheld from all falsity and evil, is evident from what was
said just above (n. 7989) concerning the "night of watches to Jehovah."

<span class="margnote"><span id="7992.">7992.</span></span>

For all the sons of Israel unto their generations. That this signifies
those of the spiritual church with whom there is good from truth, and
truth from good, is evident from the representation of the sons of
Israel, as being those who are of the spiritual church (of which
frequently above); and from the signification of "generations," as being
those things which are of faith and charity (see n. 2020, 2584, 6239),
thus those with whom there is good from truth and truth from good; for
they who are of the spiritual church are introduced to the good which is
of charity by means of the truth which is of faith, and when they have
been introduced, they are led by good to truths. They who are led by
good to truths are they who constitute the internal church; but they who
are introduced to good by means of truth are they who constitute the
external church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7993.">7993.</span></span>

Verses 43-49. And Jehovah said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the statute
of the passover; no son of an alien shall eat of it. And every man's
servant that is bought with silver, when thou hast circumcised him, then
shall he eat of it. A lodger and a hireling shall not eat of it. In one
house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not bring out of the flesh abroad
from the house; and ye shall not break a bone thereof. All the
assemblage of Israel shall perform it. And when a sojourner shall
sojourn with thee, and performeth the passover to Jehovah, every male of
his shall be circumcised, and then let him come near to perform it; and
he shall be as a native of the land; and no uncircumcised person shall
eat of it. One law shall there be for the native, and for the sojourner
that sojourneth in the midst of you. "And Jehovah said unto Moses and
Aaron," signifies information by means of truth Divine; "This is the
statute of the passover," signifies the laws of order for those who are
liberated from damnation and infestations; "no son of an alien shall eat
of it," signifies that those who are not in truth and good are to be
separated from them; "and every man's servant," signifies a man who is
still natural; "that is bought with silver," signifies who has any
spiritual truth; "when thou hast circumcised him," signifies
purification from unclean loves; "then he shall eat of it," signifies
that he shall be with them; "a lodger and a hireling shall not eat of
it," signifies that they who do what is good from mere natural
disposition, and those who do it for the sake of their own advantage,
are not to be with them; "in one house shall it be eaten," signifies
consociations of accordant goods, that they may together make one good;
"thou shalt not bring out of the flesh abroad from the house," signifies
that this good shall not be mixed together with the good of another;
"and ye shall not break a bone in it," signifies the truth of
memory-knowledge, that this also must be sound; "all the assemblage of
Israel shall perform it," signifies that this law of order is for all
who are in the good of truth and in the truth of good; "and when a
sojourner shall sojourn with thee," signifies those who have been
instructed in the truth and good of the church, and have received them;
"and performeth the passover to Jehovah," signifies if he desires to be
together with them; "every male of his shall be circumcised," signifies
that his truth must be cleansed from impure loves; "and then let him
come near to perform it," signifies that then he shall be with them;
"and he shall be as a native of the land," signifies that he shall be
received as he who is in that truth and good, and has been purified from
unclean loves; "and no uncircumcised person shall eat of it," signifies
that he who is in the loves of self and of the world cannot be together
with them; "one law shall there be for the native, and for the sojourner
that sojourneth in the midst of you," signifies that he who on being
instructed receives the truth and good of the church, and lives
according to them, shall be as he who, being already instructed, is
within the church, and lives a life in agreement with the precepts of
faith and of charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7994.">7994.</span></span>

And Jehovah said unto Moses and Aaron. That this signifies information
by means of truth Divine, is evident from the signification of "Jehovah
said," when the statutes of the church are treated of, as being
information or instruction (see n. 7186, 7267, 7304, 7380, 7517, 7769,
7793, 7825); and from the representation of Moses and Aaron, as being
truth Divine; Moses internal, and Aaron external (n. 7009, 7010, 7089,
7382).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7995.">7995.</span></span>

This is the statute of the passover. That this signifies the laws of
order for those who are liberated from damnation and infestations, is
evident from the signification of a "statute," as being that which is
from order (of which below); and from the signification of "the
passover," as being the presence of the Lord and liberation from
damnation (see n. 7093e, 7867). As regards that which is of order, which
is signified by "statute," be it known that all the statutes commanded
to the sons of Israel were laws of order in the external form, but those
things which they represented and signified were laws of order in the
internal form. Laws of order are truths which are from good; the complex
of all the laws of order is the Divine truth proceeding from the Divine
good of the Lord. From this it is evident that the Divine Itself of the
Lord in heaven is order, the Divine good the essential of order, and the
Divine truth its formal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7996.">7996.</span></span>

No son of an alien shall eat of it. That this signifies that those who
are not in truth and good are to be separated from them, is evident from
the signification of "an alien," as being those out of the church who do
not acknowledge anything of the truth and good of faith, as was the case
with the nations in the land of Canaan (see n. 2049, 2115), thus who are
not in truth and good; and from the signification of "not eating of it,"
as being to communicate and be conjoined with them, thus to be separated
from them. In what now follows those are treated of who should eat the
passover together, and those who should not. The supper of the passover
represented the consociations of the good in heaven; and in the statutes
which follow, it is declared who could be consociated and who could not.
In general, feasts, both dinners and suppers, in ancient times were made
within the church in order that they might be consociated and conjoined
as to love, and that they might instruct one another in those things
which are of love and faith, thus in the things of heaven (see n. 3596,
3832, 5161). Such at that time were the delights attending their
banquets, and such was the end for the sake of which were their dinners
and suppers. Thus the mind and the body also were nourished unanimously
and correspondently; and from this they had health and long life, and
from it they had intelligence and wisdom; and also from this they had
communication with heaven, and some had open communication with angels.
But as in course of time all internal things vanish away and pass into
external ones, so also did the purposes of the feasts and banquets,
which at this day are not for the sake of any spiritual conjunction, but
for the sake of worldly conjunctions, namely, for the sake of gain, for
the sake of the pursuit of honors, and for the sake of pleasures, from
which there is nourishment of the body, but none of the mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7997.">7997.</span></span>

That the paschal supper represented the consociations of angels in the
heavens in respect to goods and truths, see above (n. 7836, 7996); and
because it represented these, it was ordained that not only every house
by itself should then be together and eat, but also that no others
should be consociated except those who represent the conjunction of love
such as is that of the heavenly societies, and thus that the rest were
to be separated. They who are to be separated were the aliens, for by
them were signified those who are not in the good and truth of the
church; also the lodgers and hirelings, because by these were
represented those who from mere natural disposition, and those who for
the sake of gain, did good and truth, and made a boast of them. Neither
the latter nor the former can be consociated with the angels in the
heavens; but when they are allowed to wander about, as is the case when
they first come into the other life, before they undergo vastations of
good and truth, then when they come toward any angelic society and feel
the sphere of sanctity from the truth of the good of innocence which is
signified by the blood of the paschal lamb (n. 7846, 7877), they cannot
approach, but forthwith flee away because of fear and aversion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7998.">7998.</span></span>

And every man's servant. That this signifies a man who is still natural,
is evident from the signification of "servant," as being what is natural
(see n. 3019, 3020, 3191, 3192, 3204, 3206, 3209, 5305), thus the
natural man. The natural man is called a "servant" because it was made
to minister to the spiritual man, and also to obey it, as a servant his
lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7999.">7999.</span></span>

That is bought with silver. That this signifies who has any spiritual
truth, is evident from the signification of "buying," as being
acquisition and appropriation (see n. 4397, 4487, 5374, 5397, 5406,
5410, 5426); and from the signification of "silver," as being truth (n.
1551, 2954, 5658), here spiritual truth, because the servant that is
bought is in the internal sense the natural man, and therefore the lord
who buys is the spiritual man. How this is cannot be known unless it is
known how the spiritual buys for itself-that is, acquires and
appropriates-the natural. When man is being regenerated, his internal
and external, that is, the spiritual and the natural, at first are at
variance, for the spiritual wills what is of heaven, but the natural
what is of the world. But the spiritual then continually inflows into
the natural and brings it into agreement; this is effected by means of
truth; and what the spiritual brings to itself in the natural is called
"bought with silver," that is, acquired and appropriated by means of
truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8000.">8000.</span></span>

When thou hast circumcised him. That this signifies purification from
unclean loves, is evident from the signification of "to be circumcised,"
as being purification from the loves of self and of the world, thus from
unclean loves (see n. 2039, 2056, 2632, 3412, 3413, 3462, 7045).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8001-8050](ac161.md)
