[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac173)  [Next](ac175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="8651.">8651.</span></span>

And the name of the other was Eliezer. That this signifies the quality
of the good of truth of those who are within the church, is evident from
the signification of "name" and of "calling the name," as being the
quality (see above, n. 8650). That it denotes the quality of the good of
truth, is because by the "two sons" are signified the goods of truth
(see n. 8649). That the quality of this good of truth is that of those
who are within the church, is plain from the words which Moses spoke
concerning this son when he was born, namely, "because the God of my
father was my help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh;" and
from the fact that the quality of the good of truth, which was signified
by "the name of the first son, Gershom," is that of those who are out of
the church (n. 8650).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8652.">8652.</span></span>

Because the God of my father was my help. That this signifies the Lord's
mercy and presence in the church, is evident from the signification of
"father," as being the church as to good (see n. 5581), and as being the
Ancient Church (n. 6050, 6075, 6846); from the signification of "the God
of my father," as being the Divine of the Ancient Church, which was the
Lord (n. 6846, 6876, 6884); and from the signification of "help," when
predicated of the Lord, as being mercy; for help from Him is of mercy,
and is also of presence, because where the reception of mercy is, there
is presence; and this is especially in the church, because there is the
Word, and through the Word the Lord's presence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8653.">8653.</span></span>

And liberated me from the sword of Pharaoh. That this signifies the
liberation from the falsity of those who infested, is evident from the
signification of "a sword," as being truth, and in the opposite sense,
falsity, fighting and vastating (see n. 2799, 4499, 6353, 7102, 8294);
and from the representation of Pharaoh, as being those who infest the
upright in the other life by means of falsities (n. 7107, 7110, 7126,
7142, 7220, 7228, 7317).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8654.">8654.</span></span>

And Jethro Moses' father-in-law came. That this signifies the Divine
good, is evident from the representation of Jethro and Moses, as being
the Divine good and the Divine truth; and from the signification of
"father-in-law" (of which above, n. 8643, 8644).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8655.">8655.</span></span>

And his sons, signifies the goods of truth (see above, n. 8649).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8656.">8656.</span></span>

And his wife. That this signifies good conjoined with truth Divine, is
evident from the representation of Moses' wife, as being good from the
Divine conjoined with truth Divine (of which also above, n. 8647).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8657.">8657.</span></span>

Unto Moses unto the wilderness. That this signifies conjunction in the
state before regeneration when there are temptations, is evident from
the signification of "coming unto Moses," as being conjunction, namely,
of the Divine good which is represented by Jethro with the Divine truth
which is represented by Moses; and from the signification of "the
wilderness," as being a state of undergoing temptations (see n. 6828,
8098), thus the state before regeneration. That there are two states
which those enter into who are being regenerated and are becoming a
spiritual church, and that when they are in the former state they
undergo temptations, see above (n. 8643). The former state is described
by the state of the sons of Israel in the wilderness, and the latter
state by their state in the land of Canaan under Joshua.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8658.">8658.</span></span>

Where he was encamped at the mount of God. That this signifies near to
the good of truth, is evident from the signification of "being
encamped," as being the setting in order of the truth and good which are
of the church with man (see n. 8103, 8130, 8131, 8155); and from the
signification of "the mount of God," as being the good of love (see n.
795, 796, 2722, 4210, 6435, 8327), here the good of truth, because the
subject treated of is the good of those who are of the spiritual church,
who are represented by the sons of Israel. The good they have is the
good of truth (this good is also the good of charity), and therefore it
is called "the mount of God," because "God" is said where truth is
treated of, and "Jehovah" where good is treated of (n. 2586, 2769, 2807,
2822, 3921, 4295, 4402, 7268, 7873). From all this it is evident that by
"he was encamped at the mount of God," is signified the setting in order
of the good and truth of the church near to the good of truth. What is
meant by this shall be briefly told. When man is in the former state,
namely, when he acts from truth and not yet from good, that is, when he
acts from faith and not yet from charity, he is in a state of undergoing
temptations. By these he is progressively carried to the second state,
namely, that he acts from good, that is, from charity and the affection
of it. When therefore he comes near to this state, he is said to be
"encamped at the mount of God," that is, at the good from which he will
afterward act. This is said because in what now follows the subject
treated of is the new disposition or setting in order of the truths for
entering into this state, to which the man of the church comes after he
has undergone temptations, and before the law Divine is inscribed on his
heart. In what precedes the subject treated of was temptations, and in
what now follows it is the law promulgated from Mount Sinai. "Mount
Sinai" denotes the good in which is truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8659.">8659.</span></span>

Verses 6, 7. And he said unto Moses, I thy father-in-law Jethro am come
unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her. And Moses went out
to meet his father-in-law, and bowed himself down, and kissed him; and
they asked a man his companion as to peace; and they came into the tent.
"And he said unto Moses," signifies influx and the derivative
perception; "I thy father-in-law Jethro am come unto thee, and thy wife,
and her two sons with her," signifies Divine goods in their order; "and
Moses went out to meet his father-in-law," signifies the application of
truth Divine to Divine good; "and bowed himself down," signifies
immission; <span id="fr_172"></span>[8659-1](#fn_172) "and kissed him,"
signifies conjunction; "and they asked a man his companion as to peace,"
signifies a natural Divine celestial state; "and they came into the
tent," signifies the holiness of the union.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8660.">8660.</span></span>

And he said unto Moses. That this signifies influx and the derivative
perception, is evident from the signification of "saying," when by
Divine good to Divine truth concerning the setting in order of truths,
as being influx; and because it denotes influx it also denotes
perception, for perception is from influx (that relatively to the agent
"to say" denotes influx, and relatively to the recipient, perception,
see n. 5743).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8661.">8661.</span></span>

I thy father-in-law Jethro am come unto thee, and thy wife, and her two
sons with her. That this signifies Divine goods in their order, is
evident from the representation of Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, as
being Divine good (see n. 8643, 8644); from the representation of
Zipporah, Moses' wife, as being good therefrom conjoined with truth
Divine (n. 8647); and from the representation of her sons, as being the
goods of truth (n. 8649- 8651), thus goods in their order. Goods in
their order are goods interior and exterior in order successively
according to degrees (n. 3691, 4154, 5114, 5145, 5146, 8603).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8662.">8662.</span></span>

And Moses went out to meet his father-in-law. That this signifies the
application of truth Divine to Divine good, is evident from the
signification of "going out to meet," as being application; that "to go
out to meet" denotes application is because it presently follows that
"he kissed him," by which is signified conjunction, and application
precedes conjunction; from the representation of Moses, as being truth
Divine (of which above, n. 8644); and from the representation of Jethro,
who is his father-in-law, as being Divine good (of which also above, n.
8643, 8644).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8663.">8663.</span></span>

And bowed himself down. That this signifies immission, is evident from
the signification of "bowing down," as being humiliation and submission
(n. 2153, 5682, 7068), but in this case immission, <span
id="fr_173"></span>[8663-1](#fn_173) because it is predicted of truth
Divine relatively to Divine good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8664.">8664.</span></span>

And kissed him. That this signifies conjunction, is evident from the
signification of "kissing," as being conjunction from affection (see n.
3573, 3574, 4215, 4353, 5929, 6260).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8665.">8665.</span></span>

And they asked a man his companion as to peace. That this signifies a
mutual Divine celestial state, is evident from the signification of
"asking as to peace," as being consociation in respect to a Divine
celestial state (of which below); and from the signification of "a man
to his companion," as being mutually. That "asking as to peace" denotes
consociation in respect to a Divine celestial state, is because in the
internal sense "to ask as to peace" is to ask about the life, its
prosperity and happiness; but in the supreme sense, where Divine good
and truth Divine are the subject treated of, "to ask as to peace"
denotes consociation in respect to a Divine celestial state. For in the
supreme sense "peace" signifies the Lord, and from this the state of the
inmost heaven, where they are who are in love to the Lord, and from this
in innocence. These moreover are above all others in peace, because in
the Lord; and their state is called "Divine celestial." Hence it is that
by "peace" is here meant such a state. (What "peace" denotes in the
supreme sense, and what in the internal sense, see n. 3780, 4681, 5662,
8455.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8666.">8666.</span></span>

And they came into the tent. That this signifies the holiness of the
union, is evident from the signification of "a tent," as being the holy
of love (see n. 414, 1102, 2145, 2152, 4128), thus the holiness of the
union, because love is union. Hence "to come into the tent" denotes to
be united from holy love. In this verse the subject treated of is the
union of the Divine good with truth Divine. And because all union is
first effected by means of an influx of the one into the other and the
consequent perception, next by application, then by immission, afterward
by conjunction, therefore there is first described the influx and the
consequent perception (n. 8660), next the application (n. 8662), then
the immission (n. 8663), after this the conjunction (n. 8664), finally
the union by love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8667.">8667.</span></span>

Verses 8-11. And Moses told his father-in-law all that Jehovah had done
to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, all the trouble that
followed them in the way, and Jehovah rescued them. And Jethro rejoiced
over all the good that Jehovah had done to Israel, who rescued them out
of the hand of the Egyptians. And Jethro said, Blessed be Jehovah, who
hath rescued you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand
of Pharaoh; who rescued His people from under the hand of the Egyptians.
Now I know that Jehovah is great above all the gods; for the reason that
they dealt proudly over them. "And Moses told his father-in-law all that
Jehovah had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians," signifies perception
then from truth Divine concerning the power of the Lord's Divine Human
against those who were in falsities and infested; "for Israel's sake,"
signifies in behalf of those who are of the spiritual church; "all the
trouble that found them in the way," signifies labor in temptations;
"and Jehovah rescued them," signifies liberation by virtue of the Lord's
Divine aid; "and Jethro rejoiced over all the good that Jehovah had done
to Israel," signifies a state of Divine good when all things succeed;
"who rescued them out of the hand of the Egyptians," signifies on
account of liberation from the reviling of those who infested; "and
Jethro said, Blessed be Jehovah," signifies the Divine good; <span
id="fr_174"></span>[8667-1](#fn_174) "who hath rescued you out of the
hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh," signifies
liberation from the reviling of those who infested; "who hath rescued
His people from under the hand of the Egyptians," signifies mercy toward
those who were in the good of truth and truth of good; "now I know that
Jehovah is great above all the gods," signifies the Lord, that there is
no God besides Him; "for the reason that they dealt proudly over them,"
signifies by reason of the endeavor to rule over those who are of the
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8668.">8668.</span></span>

And Moses told his father-in-law all that Jehovah had done to Pharaoh
and to the Egyptians. That this signifies perception then from truth
Divine concerning the power of the Lord's Divine Human against those who
were in falsities and infested, is evident from the signification of
"Moses told," as being perception from truth Divine (that "to tell"
denotes to perceive, see n. 3209; and that "Moses" denotes truth Divine,
n. 6752, 6771, 7010, 7014, 7382); from the representation of Moses'
father-in-law, as being the Divine good from which is good conjoined
with truth Divine (see n. 8643, 8644); from the signification of "all
that Jehovah had done," as being those things which were done for the
sons of Israel in Egypt and afterward in the wilderness. And as these
things in the internal sense involve the things which were done for
those who were of the Lord's spiritual church, and who were detained in
the lower earth until the Lord glorified the Human in Himself, therefore
by these words is signified perception concerning the power of the
Lord's Divine Human. (That they who were of the Lord's spiritual church
were detained in the lower earth and were saved by the power of the
Lord's Divine Human, see n. 6854, 7035, 7091, 7828, 8018, 8054, 8099,
8321.) And from the representation of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, as
being those who were in falsities and infested (n. 7097, 7107, 7110,
7126, 7142, 7220, 7228, 7317).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8669.">8669.</span></span>

For Israel's sake. That this signifies in behalf of those who were of
the spiritual church, is evident from the representation of Israel, as
being those who are of the spiritual church (see n. 6426, 6637, 6862,
6868, 7035, 7062, 7198, 7201, 7215, 7223).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8670.">8670.</span></span>

All the trouble that had found them in the way. That this signifies
labor in temptations, is evident from the signification of "trouble," as
being labor-that "trouble" denotes labor is because it is predicated of
temptations, for in these they who are tempted have labor against
falsities and evils, and the angels also have labor with them to keep
them in the faith, and thus in the power of conquering; and from the
signification of "that had found them in the way," as being in respect
to temptations (namely, labor), because "in the way," means in the
wilderness, where they underwent temptations (of which above).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8671.">8671.</span></span>

And Jehovah rescued them. That this signifies liberation by virtue of
the Lord's Divine aid, is evident from the signification of "rescuing,"
as being liberation. (That "Jehovah" in the Word denotes the Lord, see
n. 1343, 1736, 1815, 2447, 2921, 3035, 5041, 5663, 6280, 6303, 6905.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8672.">8672.</span></span>

And Jethro rejoiced over all the good that Jehovah had done to Israel.
That this signifies the state of Divine good when all things succeed, is
evident from the representation of Jethro, as being Divine good (see
above n. 8643); from the signification of "rejoicing over all the good,"
when predicated of the Divine good which is represented by Jethro, as
being the state of this good; for the state of the Divine when good is
done to heaven and the angels there, and also to the church and the man
there, is expressed in the Word by "joy," but the quality of this joy is
beyond comprehension, because it belongs to the Infinite. That there is
also infinite joy on account of the reception of good by those who are
in heaven and the church, can be seen from the Divine love, which is
infinite toward the human race (n. 8644), for all joy is of love. From
all this it is evident that by "Jethro rejoiced over all the good that
Jehovah had done to Israel," is signified the state of the Divine good
when all things succeed; for by "Israel" are meant those who were of the
Lord's spiritual kingdom and spiritual church (n. 8669), with whom all
things had succeeded, because they had been liberated from infestations,
and afterward had conquered in temptations, as has been above described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8673.">8673.</span></span>

And rescued them out of the hand of the Egyptians. That this signifies
on account of liberation from the reviling of those who infested, is
evident from the signification of "rescuing," as being liberation (see
above, n. 8671); and from the representation of the Egyptians, as being
those who infested by falsities (n. 8668).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8674.">8674.</span></span>

And Jethro said, Blessed be Jehovah. That this signifies that from the
Lord is all good, is evident from the signification of "blessed be
Jehovah," as being that all good is from the Lord (see n. 1096, 1422,
3140). (That "Jehovah" denotes the Lord, see above, n. 8671.) That
"blessed be Jehovah" denotes that from the Lord is all good, is because
in the case of man, "blessing" involves all the good of eternal life,
that is, the good of love to the Lord and toward the neighbor (n. 3406,
4981); and these goods make eternal life with man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8675.">8675.</span></span>

Who hath rescued you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the
hand of Pharaoh. That this signifies liberation from the reviling of
those who infested, is evident from what has been unfolded above (n.
8671, 8673).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8676.">8676.</span></span>

Who hath rescued His people from under the hand of the Egyptians. That
this signifies mercy toward those who were in the good of truth and
truth of good, is evident from the signification of "rescuing," as being
liberation (as just above, n. 8675); from the signification of "the
Egyptians," as being those who infested by falsities (n. 8668); and from
the representation of Israel, who are here "the people of Jehovah," as
being those who are of the spiritual church (n. 8645), thus who are in
the good of truth and truth of good (n. 7957, 8234). That it is of the
Lord's mercy is because it is said, "blessed be Jehovah who hath
rescued," and by "blessed be Jehovah" is signified that from Him is all
good from His Divine love (n. 8674). The Divine love from which good
comes to man who is in a state of misery, because of himself he is
wholly in evil and in hell, is mercy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8677.">8677.</span></span>

Now I know that Jehovah is great above all gods. That this signifies the
Lord, that there is no God besides Him, is evident from what has been
said and shown above (n. 7401, 7444, 7544, 7598, 7636, 8274).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8678.">8678.</span></span>

For the reason that they dealt proudly over them. That this signifies by
reason of the endeavor and the force used to rule over those who are of
the church, is evident from the signification of "dealing proudly," as
being the endeavor and the force used to rule (of which below); and from
the representation of the sons of Israel, who are they over whom they
dealt proudly, as being those who are of the spiritual church (see
above, n. 8645). That "to deal proudly" denotes the endeavor and the
force used to rule, is because this endeavor and the consequent force
are in all pride, for pride is to love self more than others, and to set
self above them, and to wish to exercise command over others; and they
who wish this also despise others in comparison with self, and also
persecute from hatred and revenge those who set themselves above them,
or do not pay them respect. The love of self, which is pride, is of such
a quality that so far as the rein is given it, it rushes on, growing
step by step to the utmost of the ability that is granted to it, until
at last it lifts itself to the very throne of God with the desire to be
in His stead. Such are all who are in hell. That they are such is
perceived from their endeavor from there, and also from their dangerous
hatreds and direful revenges one against another for the sake of rule.
This endeavor is what is restrained by the Lord, and is meant by "the
head of the serpent which the seed of the woman shall trample on" (n.
257). Such are also meant by "Lucifer" in Isaiah: How hast thou fallen
from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the dawn! thou hast been cut off to the
earth, thou hath been weakened beneath the nations; yet thou hast said
in thine heart, I will ascend into the heavens, I will exalt my throne
above the stars of God; and I will sit on the mount of the congregation,
in the sides of the north; I will ascend above the heights of the cloud;
I will become like the Most High. Yet verily thou hast been let down to
hell, to the sides of the pit, thou hast been cast forth out of thy
sepulcher like an abominable shoot, the raiment of the slain, thrust
through with the sword, that go down to the stones of the pit, like a
carcass that is trampled on (Isa. 14:2-15, 19). \[2\] That pride of
heart, which is the love of self, repels from itself the Divine, and
removes heaven from itself, can be plainly seen from the state of
reception of the Divine and of heaven, which is a state of love toward
the neighbor, and a state of humiliation toward God. So far as a man can
humble himself before the Lord, and so far as he can love his neighbor
as himself, and, as in heaven, above himself, so far he receives the
Divine, and consequently is so far in heaven. From all this it is
evident in what state are those who love themselves more than the
neighbor, and who "deal proudly over him," that is, who are in the love
of self; namely, that they are in a state opposite to heaven and to the
Divine, consequently in the state in which the infernals are. (See what
has been already said and shown about the love of self, n. 2041, 2045,
2051, 2057, 2219, 2363, 2364, 2444, 3413, 3610, 4225, 4750, 4776, 4947,
5721, 6667, 7178, 7255, 7364, 7366-7377, 7488-7492, 7494, 7643, 7819,
7820, 8318, 8487.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8679.">8679.</span></span>

Verse 12. And Jethro Moses' father-in-law took a burnt-offering and
sacrifices for God; and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat
bread with Moses' father-in-law before God. "And Jethro Moses'
father-in-law took a burnt-offering and sacrifices for God," signifies
worship from the good of love and truths of faith; "and Aaron came, and
all the elders of Israel," signifies the things of the church which are
primary; "to eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God," signifies
the appropriation of these things by virtue of the Divine good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8680.">8680.</span></span>

And Jethro Moses' father-in-law took a burnt-offering and sacrifices for
God. That this signifies worship from the good of love and truths of
faith, is evident from the signification of "a burnt-offering" and of
"sacrifices," as being representatives of the celestial and spiritual
things which are of internal worship; burnt-offerings being
representative of celestial things, that is, of the good of love; and
sacrifices being representative of spiritual things, that is, of the
truth of faith (see n. 922, 923, 1823, 2180, 2805, 2807, 2830, 3519,
6905). That burnt-offerings represented those things which are of the
good of love, and sacrifices those things which are of the truth of
faith, is evident from their institution; namely, that in the
burnt-offerings all was consumed, both the flesh and the blood; but in
the sacrifices the flesh was eaten, as can be seen from what is said in
Leviticus 1 to 5; Numbers 28, and in Deuteronomy, where are these words:
That thou mayest make thy burnt-offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon
the altar of Jehovah thy God; the blood of the sacrifices shall be
poured out upon the altar of Jehovah thy God, and thou shalt eat the
flesh (Deut. 12:27). The reason why these two things were represented by
the burnt-offerings and the sacrifices, was that the burnt-offerings and
the sacrifices represented all the worship of God in general (n. 923,
6905); and the worship of God in general is founded upon love and faith,
for without these there is no worship, but only a rite, such as is of
the external man without the internal, thus devoid of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8681.">8681.</span></span>

And Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel. That this signifies the
things of the church which are primary, is evident from the
representation of Aaron, as being the truth of doctrine (see n. 6998,
7009, 7089, 7382); and from the representation of the elders of Israel,
as being the chief truths of the church that are in agreement with good
(n. 6524, 8578, 8585); for by "Israel" is signified the church (n.
8645).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8682.">8682.</span></span>

To eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God. That this signifies
the appropriation of these things by virtue of the Divine good, is
evident from the signification of "eating," as being appropriation (see
n. 3168, 3513, 3596, 3832, 4745); and from the signification of "bread,"
as being the good of love (n. 2165, 2177, 3464, 3735, 4211, 4217, 4735,
5915); that it denotes from the Divine good, is signified by their
"eating the bread before God." By "bread" is here meant all the food
that was used at that time, especially the flesh of the sacrifices; for
when sacrifices were offered, the flesh of them was eaten beside the
altar. (That by "bread" is signified all worship in general, see n.
2165.) \[2\] The reason why the flesh of the sacrifices was eaten, was
that there might be represented the appropriation of celestial good, and
also consociation by love, for the flesh of the sacrifice which they
then ate, signified the good of love; wherefore this was to them a holy
feast. (That "flesh" denotes the good of love, see n. 7850.) From all
this it can be seen what was meant by the Lord when He said that they
should "eat His flesh" (John 6:53- 56); and also when He instituted the
Holy Supper, that the bread was "His body" (Matt. 26:26). No one can
ever know the meaning of these things unless he knows that there is an
internal sense, and that in this sense are understood celestial and
spiritual things in place of the natural things; and that the natural
things correspond to them, and have a signification according to the
correspondences. Otherwise no one could ever know why the Holy Supper
was instituted, and what holiness there is in the bread; and why the
bread is the body and the flesh, besides countless other things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8683.">8683.</span></span>

Verses 13-16. And it was on the morrow, and Moses sat to judge the
people, and the people stood over Moses from the morning until the
evening. And Moses' father-in-law saw all that he did to the people, and
he said, What is this word that thou doest to the people? why sittest
thou alone, and all the people standing over thee from the morning until
the evening? And Moses said to his father-in-law, Because the people
cometh unto me to inquire of God; when they have a word, it cometh unto
me; and I judge between a man and his companion, and I make known the
judgments of God, and His laws. "And it was on the morrow," signifies
what is eternal; "and Moses sat to judge the people," signifies the
disposing of truth Divine with those who were of the spiritual church in
the state before it was from good; "and the people stood over Moses,"
signifies obedience then in conformity with truth Divine; "from the
morning until the evening," signifies in every state then interiorly and
exteriorly; "and Moses' father-in-law saw all that he did to the
people," signifies the omniscience of Divine good; "and he said, Why
sittest thou alone?" signifies that there was no influx of truth from
good from any other source; "and all the people standing over thee from
the morning until the evening," signifies that at that time this was the
source of everything of will with those who were of the spiritual
church, in every state; "and Moses said to his father-in-law," signifies
the reciprocity that is in the answer; "Because the people cometh unto
me to inquire of God," signifies that they do not will and act from any
other source than from the fact that the Word has so said; "when they
have a word," signifies in everything that befalls; "it cometh unto me,
and I judge between a man and his companion," signifies that at this
time they are disposed in conformity with revealed truth; "and I make
known the judgments of God, and His laws," signifies that from this
source they are taught what is true and what is good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8684.">8684.</span></span>

And it was on the morrow. That this signifies what is eternal, is
evident from the signification of "tomorrow," or "the morrow," as being
what is eternal (n. 3998).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8685.">8685.</span></span>

And Moses sat to judge the people. That this signifies the disposing of
truth Divine with those who were of the spiritual church in the state
before it was from good, is evident from the representation of Moses, as
being the truth Divine that proceeds immediately from the Lord (see n.
7010, 7382); from the signification of "judging," as being a disposing.
That "judging" here denotes a disposing, is because truth Divine does
not judge anyone, but flows in and disposes that it may be received, and
according to the reception judgment then takes place in accordance with
the laws of order, which is meant by the judgment of the Lord (Matt.
25:31 to end, John 5:22, 26, 27, 30; 9:39), as is evident from the
Lord's words where He says that He "judges no man" (John 3:17-21; 8:15;
12:47, 48). And from the representation of Israel, who is here "the
people," as being those who are of the spiritual church (see above n.
8645). From all this it is evident that by "Moses sat to judge the
people," is signified the disposing of the truth Divine that proceeds
immediately from the Lord with those who are of the spiritual church.
\[2\] That it denotes in a state before it is from good, is evident from
what follows. For the man who is being regenerated and becoming a church
has two states; in the first state he acts from truth, in the second
from good (on which see n. 8516, 8539, 8643, 8648, 8658). In both states
the man is led by the Lord; but in the first by immediate influx, and in
the second by influx both immediate and mediate. (Concerning the influx
of good and truth from the Lord, immediate and mediate, see n.
6472-6478, 6982, 6985, 6996, 7054-7058, 7270.) Immediate influx is
represented by Moses judging the people alone; but influx both immediate
and mediate, by the princes of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and
of tens, being chosen, to judge small affairs, and to refer great
affairs to Moses (of which below). But these are arcana which scarcely
anyone can understand, except one who is in enlightenment from the Lord,
and through enlightenment in perception. These two kinds of influx, and
also the consequent effects, can indeed be described, but still they do
not fall rightly into the thought unless there is perception from
heaven; and perception from heaven is not given except with those who
are in the love of truth from good; and not even then unless they are in
the love of truth from genuine good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8686.">8686.</span></span>

And the people stood over Moses. That this signifies obedience then in
conformity with truth Divine, is evident from the representation of
Moses, as being truth Divine (as just above, n. 8685), consequently "to
stand over him" signifies to consult truth Divine, to await an answer
from it, and to do according to this, that is, to obey. By these words
in the internal sense is described the first state, wherein the man who
is being regenerated is led by means of truth from the Lord; the truth
by means of which he is led is the Word, for this is truth Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8687.">8687.</span></span>

From the morning until the evening. That this signifies in every state
interiorly and exteriorly, is evident from the signification of
"morning" and of "evening," as being spiritual states, which succeed
each other like the states of times in the world, namely, morning,
midday, evening, night, and again morning (that these times correspond
to changes of states in the other life, see n. 5672, 5962, 6110, 8426).
That they are interiorly and exteriorly, is because in the other life
the angels are interiorly in good and truth when in a state of morning
there, that is, in a state corresponding to the time of morning, but
exteriorly in good and truth when in a state of evening there; for when
they are in a state of evening they are in natural delight; but when
they are in a state of morning they are in spiritual delight (see n.
8431, 8452).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8688.">8688.</span></span>

And Moses' father-in-law saw all that he did to the people. That this
signifies the omniscience of Divine good, is evident from the
signification of "seeing all that he did," when said of the Divine good
which is represented by Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, as being
omniscience; for in the internal sense "to see" denotes to understand
and perceive (see n. 2150, 2325, 2807, 3764, 4403-4421, 5400) but in the
supreme sense, where the Lord is treated of, it denotes foresight and
providence (n. 2837, 2839, 3686, 3854, 3863), consequently "to see all
that he did" denotes omniscience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8689.">8689.</span></span>

And he said, Why sittest thou alone? That this signifies that there was
no influx of truth from good from any other source, is evident from the
signification of "sitting alone," when said of truth Divine proceeding
immediately from the Lord, which is represented by Moses, as being
influx from Him alone, and not at the same time from any other source.
(How this is can be seen from what was said above, n. 8685.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8690.">8690.</span></span>

And all the people standing over thee from the morning until the
evening. That this signifies that at that time this was the source of
everything of will with those who were of the spiritual church, in every
state, is evident from the representation of Israel, who is here "the
people," as being those who are of the spiritual church (see above, n.
8645); from the signification of "standing over" Moses, as being
obedience in conformity with truth Divine (as also above, n. 8686), and
because it denotes obedience, it is of the will, for obedience is of the
will, but it is the will to do truth by reason of command, not by reason
of affection, and this will is obedience; and from the signification of
"from the morning until the evening," as being in every state, interior
and exterior (of which above, n. 8687). The first state, in which man is
before regeneration, is here treated of, which is that he does good from
obedience, and not yet from affection; but this good is the truth which
he does, because it is done only from command, thus as yet from
compulsion, but not from freedom. He does good from freedom when he does
it from affection; for everything that flows from the affection which is
of love is free. When man is in the former state, then the Lord flows in
and leads immediately; but the immediate influx of the Lord does not
come to perception, because it is into the inmosts of the man; whereas
the influx of the Lord which is immediate and at the same time mediate,
does come to perception, and gives affection, for it is not only into
man's inmosts, but also into his mediates and outmosts. This latter
state is treated of in what follows in this chapter; the former is
described in these verses, where it is said of Moses that he judged
alone (see what has been said above, n. 8685).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8691.">8691.</span></span>

And Moses said to his father-in-law. That this signifies the reciprocity
that is in the answer, is evident from the signification of "saying," as
here being the answer, for Moses makes answer to his father-in-law.
Reciprocity is meant because by Moses is represented Divine truth
conjoined and united to Divine good (n. 8664, 8666); and when there is
conjunction and union, then there is reciprocity, for good acts and
truth reacts; the reaction is the reciprocity that is in the answer. So
also it is in general with good and truth in the man in whom they have
been conjoined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8692.">8692.</span></span>

Because the people cometh unto me to inquire of God. That this signifies
that they do not will and act from any other source than from the fact
that the Word has so said, is evident from the representation of Moses,
as being truth Divine, thus the Word (n. 5922, 6723, 6752); and from the
signification of "the people coming to him to inquire of God," as being
to consult what the Divine dictates, thus what they should will and do.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8693.">8693.</span></span>

When they have a word. That this signifies in everything that befalls,
is evident from the signification of "a word," as being a thing that
befalls. That "in everything" is meant, is because the people came to
him alone, and thereby is signified that truth Divine was to be
consulted in everything.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8694.">8694.</span></span>

It cometh unto me, and I judge between a man and his companion. That
this signifies that at this time they are disposed in conformity with
revealed truth, is evident from the signification of "coming unto him,"
when said of the truth Divine which is represented by Moses, as being to
consult what must be willed and done (see above n. 8692); and from the
signification of "judging between a man and his companion," as being a
disposing among truths. (That "to judge," denotes to dispose, see above,
n. 8685.) That it is in conformity with revealed truth, follows; for it
is said just above, that "the people came unto him to inquire of God,"
and just below, that he "makes known to them the judgments and laws of
God." God." \[2\] By "revelation" is meant enlightenment when the Word
is read, and perception then; for they who are in good and long for
truth are taught in this way from the Word; but they who are not in good
cannot be taught from the Word, but can only be confirmed in such things
as they have been instructed in from infancy, whether true or false. The
reason why those who are in good have revelation, and those who are in
evil have no revelation, is that in the internal sense each and all
things in the Word treat of the Lord and of His kingdom, and the angels
who are with man perceive the Word according to the internal sense. This
is communicated to the man who is in good, and reads the Word, and from
affection longs for truth, and consequently has enlightenment and
perception. For with those who are in good and from this in the
affection of truth, the intellectual part of the mind is open into
heaven, and their soul, that is, their internal man, is in fellowship
with angels; but it is otherwise with those who are not in good, thus
who do not from the affection of good long for truth; to these heaven is
closed. \[3\] But what is the nature of the revelation with those who
are in good and from this in the affection of truth, cannot be
described. It is not manifest, neither is it altogether hidden; but it
is a certain consent and favoring from within that a thing is true, and
a non-favoring if it is not true. When there is a favoring, the mind is
at rest and is serene, and in this state there is the acknowledgment
which is of faith. The cause of its being so is from the influx of
heaven from the Lord; for through heaven from the Lord there is light,
that surrounds and enlightens the intellect, which is the eye of the
internal sight. The things which are then seen in that light are truths,
for this very light is the Divine truth which proceeds from the Lord.
That this Divine truth is light in heaven, has been frequently shown.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8695.">8695.</span></span>

And I make known the judgments of God, and His laws. That this signifies
that from this source they are taught what is true and what is good, is
evident from the signification of "making known," as being to teach;
from the signification of "judgments," as being truths (n. 2235, 6397);
and from the signification of "laws," as being the truths of good. That
"laws" denote the truths of good, is because in a wide sense "the law"
signifies the whole Word, in a less wide sense the historic Word, in a
close sense the Word which was written by Moses, and in the closest
sense the ten commandments of the Decalogue (n. 6752). Consequently as
the Word is the Divine truth which proceeds from the Divine good of the
Lord, "laws" denote the truths of good. The truths of good are truths
which are from good, and in themselves are goods, because they derive
their spring from good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8696.">8696.</span></span>

Verses 17-23. And Moses' father-in-law said unto him, The word that thou
doest is not good. Wearing thou wilt wear away, both thou, and this
people that is with thee, because the word is too heavy for thee; thou
art not able to do it, thou alone. Now hear my voice, I will counsel
thee, and God shall be with thee. Be thou for the people with God, and
bring thou the words unto God; and do thou teach them the statutes and
the laws, and make known to them the way wherein they must walk, and the
work that they must do. And do thou see out of all the people men of
strenuousness, fearing God, men of truth, hating gain; and do thou set
them for princes of thousands, princes of hundreds, princes fifties, and
princes of tens; and let them judge the people in every time; and it
shall be, every great word let them bring unto thee, and every small
word let them judge; and devolve from upon thee, and let them bear with
thee. If thou do this word, and God have commanded thee, then thou shalt
be able to stand, and also all this people shall come upon its place in
peace. "And Moses' father-in-law said unto him," signifies foresight;
"The word that thou doest is not good," signifies that a change must be
made; "wearing thou wilt wear way, both thou, and this people that is
with thee," signifies that thus the truth which has been implanted would
perish; "because the word is too heavy for thee," signifies that it is
not possible because not in conformity with order; "thou art not able to
do it, thou alone," signifies without the influx of truth from the
Divine from some other source; "now hear my voice," signifies agreement
from the union; "I will counsel thee, and God shall be with thee,"
signifies that it is from the Divine; "be thou for the people with God,"
signifies the truth proceeding immediately from the Lord; "and bring
thou the words unto God," signifies mediation and intercession; "and do
thou teach them the statutes and the laws," signifies that from truth
immediately from the Lord come the external and internal goods and
truths of the church; "and make known to them the way wherein they must
walk," signifies the light of intelligence and the consequent life; "and
the work that they must do," signifies faith in act; "and do thou see
out of all the people," signifies the choosing of ministering truths;
"men of strenuousness, fearing God," signifies with which good from the
Divine could be conjoined; "men of truth, hating gain," signifies with
which the truths are pure without a worldly end; "and do thou set them
for princes of thousands," signifies primary truths which are in the
first degree under the truth immediately from the Divine; "princes of
hundreds," signifies primary truths in the second degree; "princes of
fifties," signifies intermediate primary truths; "and princes of tens,"
signifies primary truths in the third place; "and let them judge the
people in every time," signifies a disposing In this manner perpetually;
"and it shall be, every great word let them bring unto thee," signifies
that everything is from the truth that is immediately from the Divine;
"and every small word let them judge," signifies the appearance of some
singular and particular things as from another source; "and devolve from
upon thee, and let them bear with thee," signifies thus functions and
offices for them; "if thou do this word, and God have commanded thee,"
signifies that thus it is from the Divine; "then thou shalt be able to
stand," signifies thus an abode with them; "and also all this people
shall come upon its place in peace," signifies that they who are of the
spiritual church shall thus be in good, and shall be led by means of
good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8697.">8697.</span></span>

And Moses' father-in-law said unto him. That this signifies foresight,
is evident from the signification of "saying," when it is predicated of
the Divine good that is represented by Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, as
being foresight (see also n. 5361, 6496).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8698.">8698.</span></span>

The word that thou doest is not good. That this signifies that a change
must be made, is evident from what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8699.">8699.</span></span>

Wearing thou wilt wear away, both thou, and this people that is with
thee. That this signifies that thus the truth which has been implanted
would perish, is evident from the signification of "wearing away," as
being to be gradually consumed, thus to perish. That it denotes the
truth which has been implanted, is because by "Moses" is meant truth
from the Divine, and by "the people" those who receive. How the case is
with these things shall be told in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8700.">8700.</span></span>

For the word is too heavy for thee. That this signifies that it is not
possible because not in conformity with order, is evident from the
signification of "a heavy word," as being that it is not possible. That
"a heavy word" here denotes that it is not possible, is evident from
what precedes, namely, that "wearing he would wear away, and the people
that were with him," by which is signified that the truth which has been
implanted would perish; and also from what follows, namely, "Thou art
not able to do it, thou alone;" and afterward, "If thou do this word,
thou shalt be able to stand;" by which is meant impossibility unless a
change is made. \[2\] That it is not possible because not in conformity
with order, is because in the other life everything is possible that is
in conformity with order. The Divine truth which proceeds from the Lord
is what makes order, and is order itself. Consequently as everything
that is according to Divine truth is according to order, it is possible;
and as everything that is contrary to Divine truth is contrary to order,
it is impossible. That this is the case may appear more evident from
examples. It is according to order that they who have lived well shall
be saved, and that they who have lived ill shall be condemned. Hence it
is impossible that they who have lived well should be sent into hell,
and that they who have lived ill should be raised into heaven.
Consequently it is impossible that they who are in hell can of the
Lord's pure mercy be brought out therefrom into heaven and be saved; for
it is the reception of the Lord's mercy while they lived in the world
through which everyone is saved. They who receive it then are in the
other life in the Lord's mercy, for they are then in the capacity of
receiving it there. To give it to others, and in general to everyone at
pleasure, provided they have faith, and thus believe that they are
cleansed from sins, is impossible, because it is contrary to order, that
is, contrary to the Divine which is order. \[3\] It is according to
order that faith and charity be implanted in freedom and not under
compulsion, and that the faith and charity which have been implanted in
freedom, endure; but not if they have been implanted under compulsion.
The reason is that what is done in freedom is insinuated into the
affection, and thus into the will of man, and is therefore appropriated;
but not what is done under compulsion. Consequently it is impossible for
man to be saved unless, seeing that he has been born in evil, he is
allowed to do evil, and to desist from evil. When in this freedom he
desists from evil of himself, the affection of truth and good is
insinuated by the Lord, whereby he has freedom to receive the things
which are of faith and charity, for freedom belongs to the affection.
From this it is plain that it is impossible to compel man to salvation.
If this could be done, all men in the world would be saved. \[4\] It is
according to order for all in the other life to be associated together
according to the life which they have acquired to themselves in the
world; the evil with the evil, and the good with the good. Consequently
it is not possible for the evil and the good to be together; neither is
it possible for those to be in good who are evil, because good and evil
are opposites, and the one destroys the other. For this reason also it
is plain that it is not possible for those to be saved who are in hell;
thus that it is not possible for salvation to be from mercy alone
however a man has lived. They who are in hell and are there tormented,
impute the torments there to the Divine, saying that the Divine can take
away their torment if He will, because He is omnipotent; but that He
will not, and that therefore He is the cause of their torment; for he
who can and will not, they say, is the cause. But to take away such
torments is impossible, because it is contrary to order; for if they
were taken away, the evil would rise up against the good, and would
subjugate the angels themselves, and destroy heaven. But the Divine
wills nothing but good, namely, the happiness of the good, and for the
sake of this, the bridling, and at the same time, the amendment, of the
wicked. This being the end-the end of the Divine love and of mercy
itself-it is not possible that torments should be taken away from him
who is in hell. From these examples it can be seen that everything is
impossible which is contrary to order, howsoever it may appear as
possible to those who do not know the arcana of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_172"></span>[8659-1](ac174.htm#fr_172) "Immission" is the
correlative of "emission," and is found in Heaven and Hell n. 551e, and
Apocalypse Explained n. 503:4. The verb immittere, in the sense of "to
let into," is rather frequently used by Swedenborg. \[REVISER.\]

<span id="fn_173"></span>[8663-1](ac174.htm#fr_173) "Immission" is the
correlative of "emission," and is found in Heaven and Hell n. 551e, and
Apocalypse Explained n. 503:4. The verb immittere, in the sense of "to
let into," is rather frequently used by Swedenborg. \[REVISER.\]

<span id="fn_174"></span>[8667-1](ac174.htm#fr_174) Compare n. 8674.
\[REVISER\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8701-8750](ac175)
