[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac185)  [Next](ac187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="9251.">9251.</span></span>

Thou shalt not be after many to do evils. This signifies no association
with such things as those mentioned above, namely, listening to
falsities, obedience to malignities, and affirmation of such things as
are contrary to the good of charity. These are the evils which are
meant. By "being after many" is signified being with many, thus
associating; for in the original tongue it is said "to be after," "to go
after," and "to walk after;" and the meaning is to be with and to
follow; thus also to be associated with (as in Jer. 7:9; 11:10; 1 Sam.
17:13; 1 Kings 14:8; Deut. 4:3; 8:19; and elsewhere).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9252.">9252.</span></span>

And thou shalt not answer upon a cause to turn aside after many to
pervert it. That this signifies no association with those who turn goods
and truths into evils and falsities, and conversely, is evident from the
signification of "answering upon a cause," as being to do so about what
is just and equitable, and what is good and true, concerning which there
is contention (see n. 9024); to answer is to declare one's opinion, and
to judge; and from the signification of "turning aside after many," as
being to conform to, and thus associate with many; and from the
signification of "perverting," as being to turn truth into falsity, and
good into evil; and conversely.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9253.">9253.</span></span>

And thou shalt not reverence a poor man in his cause. That this
signifies that no favor is to be shown to the falsities in which are
those who are in ignorance of truth, is evident from the signification
of "a poor man," as being those who are in few truths, and are also in
falsities from ignorance. But those among them who are in good, wish to
be instructed in truths; whereas those who are in evil, do not wish to
be instructed. For with those who are in good, falsities can be bent to
truths, and finally can be dissipated; whereas with those who are in
evil, falsities cannot be bent to truths, thus cannot be dissipated. Of
these "poor men" it is said "thou shalt not reverence them in their
cause," that is, thou shalt not favor their falsities; for by
"reverencing" is signified favoring, and by "a cause" is signified a
controversy of truth against falsity, and of falsity against truth.
(That the "poor" denote those who are in few truths, and are in
falsities from ignorance, see n. 9209; and that the falsities with those
who are in good are gentle and flexible, while the falsities with those
who are in evil are hard and inflexible, n. 4736, 6359, 8051, 8149,
8298, 8311, 8318.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9254.">9254.</span></span>

Verses 4-9. When thou shalt meet thine enemy's ox, or his ass, going
astray, bringing back thou shall bring it back to him. When thou shalt
see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest
forbear to remove it for him, removing thou shalt remove it with him.
Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy needy in his cause. Keep thee
far from the word of a lie; and the innocent and the righteous slay thou
not; for I will not justify the wicked. And thou shalt not take a
present, because a present blindeth those who have their eyes open, and
perverteth the words of the righteous. And a sojourner shalt thou not
oppress; for ye know the soul of a sojourner, seeing that ye were
sojourners in the land of Egypt. "When thou shalt meet thine enemy's ox,
or his ass, going astray," signifies good not genuine and truth not
genuine, with those who are outside the church; "bringing back thou
shalt bring it back to him," signifies instruction and amendment; "when
thou shalt see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden,"
signifies falsity not agreeing with the good of the church, by reason of
which they are about to perish; "and wouldest forbear to remove it for
him," signifies no reception of truth; "removing thou shalt remove it
with him," signifies nevertheless encouragement, and effort toward
amendment; "thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy needy in his
cause," signifies no destruction of the scanty truth with those who are
in ignorance; "keep thee far from the word of a lie," signifies an
aversion for the falsity of evil; "and the innocent and the righteous
slay thou not," signifies an aversion for destroying interior and
exterior good; "for I will not justify the wicked," signifies that such
malignity is contrary to the Divine righteousness; "and thou shalt not
take a present," signifies an aversion for any self-advantage whatever;
"because a present blindeth those who have their eyes open," signifies
that matters of self-advantage cause truths not to appear; "and
perverteth the words of the righteous," signifies so that \[matters of
self-advantage\] appear like truths of good; "and a sojourner shalt thou
not oppress," signifies that those who long to be instructed in the
truths of the church must not be infested with evils of life; "for ye
know the soul of a sojourner," signifies their longing and their life;
"seeing that ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt," signifies that
they were protected from falsities and evils when infested by the
infernals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9255.">9255.</span></span>

When thou shalt meet thine enemy's ox, or his ass, going astray. That
hereby is signified good not genuine, and truth not genuine, with those
who are outside the church, is evident from the signification of "an
enemy," as being those who are outside the church (of whom below); from
the signification of "an ox," as being the good of the external man; and
from the signification of "an ass," as being the truth of the external
man (see n. 2781, 9134); but good and truth not genuine, such as are
with those who are outside the church, who are signified by "an enemy."
That those who are outside the church are meant by "an enemy" is because
they are at variance in respect to the good and truth of faith; for they
have not the Word, and therefore they do not know anything about the
Lord, nor about Christian faith and charity, which are from the Lord
alone. Hence it is that neither their truth of faith, nor their good of
charity, is genuine. Therefore in the other life also they do not live
together with those who are of the church, but separate from them; for
in the other life all are associated together in accordance with their
good and the truth thence derived; for these are what make spiritual
life and conjunction. \[2\] Nevertheless those who are in heaven do not
regard as enemies those who are outside the church, but they instruct
them, and lead them to Christian good, which moreover is received by
those who while in the world have lived together, from their religion,
in subordination, in obedience, and in some kind of mutual charity. But
in the sense of the letter they are called "enemies" from their
spiritual variance, which, as before said, is a variance in respect to
the truth of faith and the good of charity. (See what has already been
shown from experience concerning the state of the nations outside the
church, and their lot in the other life, n. 2589-2604, 2861, 2863, 4190,
4197.) That the same are to be regarded as friends, and are to be
instructed and amended, is meant in the internal sense by "bringing back
thou shalt bring it back to him," of which in what follows. \[3\] It
only remains to say that in the Word by beasts of various kinds are
signified affections and inclinations such as man has in common with
beasts; and in the spiritual sense the affections of good and truth
internal and external (n. 45, 46, 142, 143, 246, 714, 715, 776, 2179,
2180, 2781, 3218, 3519, 5198, 9090); and that for this reason beasts
were employed in the sacrifices in accordance with their signification
(n. 1823, 2180, 2805, 2807, 2830, 3519). From this it is that by this
moral law concerning the bringing back of the stray oxen and asses of an
enemy, are signified in the spiritual sense such things as are of the
church, thus such things as are of mutual love or charity toward those
who are at variance with the truths of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9256.">9256.</span></span>

Bringing back thou shalt bring it back to him. That this signifies
instruction and amendment, is evident from the signification of
"bringing back," when said of those outside the church who are in good
and truth not genuine, as being to instruct and amend; for in this way
they are brought back. That benefits ought to be imparted to those who
are outside the church, is also meant by the Lord's words in Matthew: Ye
have heard that it was said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor; but I say
unto you, Love your enemies, bless those who curse you, and benefit
those who hate you. For if ye love those who love you, what reward have
ye? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more? (Matt.
5:43-47); here also by "enemies" and by "those who hate" are meant in
the spiritual sense those who are at variance in respect to the goods
and truths of faith, and in general those who are outside the church;
because the Jewish nation considered these as enemies, whom they were
permitted to utterly destroy, and to kill with impunity. That these are
meant in the spiritual sense by "enemies," is plain, because it is said,
"if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more?" for all were called
"brethren" who were born of Jacob, thus who were within the church.
\[2\] As further regards those who are outside the church, and are
called "Gentiles," they are indeed in falsities of doctrine, but from
ignorance, because they have not the Word; and yet when they are
instructed they are in a clearer and consequently more inward perception
about the heavenly life with man than are Christians. The reason is that
they have not confirmed themselves against the truths of faith, as have
very many Christians; and therefore their internal man is not closed,
but, as with little children, is readily opened and receptive of truth.
For those who have confirmed themselves against the truths and goods of
faith, as do all who live an evil life, close in themselves the internal
man above, and open it beneath. The result is that their internal man
looks only at those things which are beneath, that is, into the external
or natural man, and through this at the things in the world, and at
those around their body and upon the earth; and when this is the case,
they look downward, which is to look toward hell. \[3\] With such
persons the internal man cannot be opened toward heaven unless the
things which deny truth, or affirm falsity, which have closed it, are
dispersed; which must be done in this world. This cannot be effected
except by a complete inversion of the life, thus the course of many
years. For falsities arrange themselves in series, establishing a
continuous connection among one another; and they form the natural mind
itself, and its mode of viewing those things which are of the church and
of heaven. From this it is that all things which are of faith and
charity, that is, of the doctrine of the church, or of the Word, and in
general all heavenly and Divine things, are thick darkness with such
persons; and that on the other hand worldly and earthly things are light
to them. From this it is plain that to destroy the falsities with such
persons is to destroy their very life; and that if they are to have any
new life, the falsities must be uprooted gradually, and truths and goods
be implanted in their place, which will in like manner form a continuous
connection with one another, and be arranged in series. This is meant by
the "complete inversion of the life," which is possible only in the
course of many years. Therefore he who believes that a man can be made
new in a moment, is very much mistaken. \[4\] But those who have not
confirmed themselves against the goods and truths of faith-as is the
case with those who are outside the church, and yet have lived in some
kind of faith and charity according to their religion-have not been able
to close the internal man in themselves by negations of truth, and by
confirmations of falsity against the truth of faith from the Word; and
therefore the internal of these persons is opened upward (that is, into
heaven and toward the Lord), if not in this world, yet in the other
life; and then all the earthly and worldly things they have brought with
them from their life in the world, are at the same time uplifted so as
together to look upward; whereby they are in a state to receive the
truths of faith and the goods of charity from the Lord, and to become
imbued with intelligence and wisdom, and thus to be endowed with eternal
happiness. Such is the lot of all who have lived in good in accordance
with their religion; and therefore the Lord's church is spread
throughout the whole world. But the Lord's church itself on earth is
like the Grand Man in the heavens, whose heart and lungs are where the
Word is, and the rest of whose members and viscera, which live from the
heart and the lungs, are where the Word is not. \[5\] From all this also
it can be seen why a new church is always set up among the Gentiles who
are outside the church (n. 2986, 4747), which as before said takes place
when the old church has closed heaven against itself. For this reason
the church was transferred from the Jewish people to the Gentiles, and
the present church is also now being transferred to the Gentiles. \[6\]
That the church is transferred to the Gentiles who acknowledge the Lord,
is evident from many passages in the Word, as from these which follow.
In Isaiah: The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light;
they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the
light shined. Thou hast multiplied the nation, Thou hast made great
their joy (Isa. 9:2, 3). It shall come to pass in that day, that the
root of Jesse, which standeth for an ensign of the peoples, shall the
Gentiles seek; and His rest shall be glory (Isa. 11:10). I Jehovah have
called Thee in righteousness, and I will take hold of Thy hand, for I
will keep Thee, and will give Thee for a covenant to the people, for a
light of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the bound
from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house
(Isa. 42:6, 7). Behold I have given Him for a witness to the peoples, a
prince and lawgiver to the Gentiles. Behold thou shalt call a nation
that thou hast not known, and a nation that knew not thee shall run unto
thee, because of Jehovah thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel (Isa.
55:4-5). The Gentiles shall walk to thy light, and kings to the
brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, they all
gather themselves together, they come to thee; thy sons come from afar,
and thy daughters are carried by nurses at thy side. Then thou shalt
see, and flow together, and thine heart shall be amazed and be enlarged;
because the multitude of the sea is converted unto thee, the armies of
the Gentiles shall come (Isa. 60:3-5). And in the prophecy of Simeon
concerning the Lord when a child: Mine eyes have seen the salvation of
God, which Thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples; a light
for the revelation of the Gentiles (Luke 2:30-32). \[7\] In all these
passages the subject treated of is the Lord, in that the Gentiles shall
come unto Him; and they come unto Him when they acknowledge Him as their
God. And wonderful to say, the Gentiles worship the one only God under a
human form; and therefore when they hear about the Lord, they receive
and acknowledge Him; nor can a new church be set up with others. That
the church is set up again with such, is further evident from the Lord's
words in Matthew: Have ye not read in the Scriptures, The stone which
the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner.
Therefore I say unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken away from
you, and shall be given to a nation that doeth the fruits (Matt.
21:42-43); "the stone" denotes the Lord (n. 6426); "the builders" denote
those who are of the church. That these would be last, and the Gentiles
first, is thus said in Luke: They shall come from the east, and west,
and from the north, and south, and shall recline at table in the kingdom
of God. And behold there are last who shall be first, and there are
first who shall be last (Luke 13:29-30).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9257.">9257.</span></span>

When thou shalt see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his
burden. That this signifies falsity not agreeing with the good of the
church, by reason of which they are about to perish, is evident from the
signification of "an ass," as being memory-truth, and therefore in the
opposite sense, memory-falsity (see n. 2781, 5492, 5741, 8078); from the
signification of "him that hateth thee," when said of falsity, as being
what is contrary to the good of the church, thus what does not agree
with it; for in the spiritual sense "hatred" denotes the aversion and
variance that exist between truths and falsities, and also between goods
and evils (n. 3605, 4681, 4684); and from the signification of "lying
under a burden," as being to perish. From this it is evident that by
"the ass of him that hateth thee" is signified falsity not agreeing with
the good of the church, by reason of which they are about to perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9258.">9258.</span></span>

And wouldest forbear to remove it for him. That this signifies no
reception of truth, is evident from the signification of "to forbear
from removing," as being not to instruct and amend, here not to be
capable of receiving instruction, thus not to receive truth, because it
is said of the falsity which does not agree with the good of the church,
and this falsity is of this nature. That in the spiritual sense "to
remove" denotes this, is evident from the fact that words apply
themselves to the subject; thus in the sense of the letter "to remove"
applies to the burden under which the ass is lying; and in the internal
sense to the falsity which does not agree with the good of the church;
and therefore in this sense there is signified no removal from falsity
by means of amendment, thus also no reception of truth whereby there may
be amendment or removal. There are falsities which agree with the good
of the church, and there are falsities which do not agree with it. The
falsities which agree are those in which good lies hidden, and which,
therefore, by means of good, can be bent toward truths. But the
falsities which do not agree with the good of the church are those in
which evil lies hidden, and which therefore cannot be bent toward
truths. \[2\] The good which lies hidden within genuine truths, or
within truths not genuine, which just above were called falsities, and
the evil which lies hidden in falsities, and also in truths, are like
the prolific germ in the seed of fruit. When the fruit is being formed,
all its fibers look toward the prolific germ of the seed, and by means
of the permeating sap they nourish it and form it; but when it has been
formed, the fibers retire, and convey the sap away from the seed, thus
causing the pulp of the fruit to shrivel and decay, and afterward serve
the prolific germ as soil. The case is the same with the seed itself,
when its prolific germ begins to put itself forth anew in the earth. The
prolific germ in plants corresponds to the good in man. The seed itself
corresponds to internal things, and the pulp of the fruit encompassing
the seed corresponds to external things. When the internal of man is
being formed anew, or is being regenerated, the memory-knowledges and
truths of the external man are like the fibers of fruit, through which
the sap is carried over to the internal; and afterward, when the man has
been regenerated, the memory-knowledges and truths of the external man
are also separated, and serve as soil. The case is the same with the
internal of man, to which the seed corresponds. In this case the good
which has been formed in this manner produces a new man, just as the
prolific germ in the seed produces a new tree, or a new plant. Thus all
things are made new, and afterward multiply and bear fruit to eternity;
consequently the new man becomes like a garden and a paradise, to which
he is also compared in the Word. \[3\] This is meant by the Lord's words
in Matthew: The kingdom of the heavens is like a grain of mustard seed,
which a man took and sowed in his field; which is less than all seeds;
but when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becometh a tree,
so that the birds of the heaven come and make their nests in its
branches (Matt. 13:31-32). From all this it can be seen how the case is
with truths, both genuine and not genuine, that have good within them,
namely, that after good has been formed, it produces such truths as
agree with the good; and even if these are not genuine truths, they are
nevertheless accepted as genuine, because they savor of good, for from
this they derive their essence and life. For good prolificates and
brings itself forth by means of truths, and in this bringing of itself
forth it is in the continual endeavor to produce a new good, in which
there shall be a like prolific germ; just as the prolific germ of a seed
acts in the case of a plant or tree, when it pushes itself forth from
the earth for the sake of new fruits, and new seeds. But the varieties
are endless, and are according to the goods that are formed by a life of
charity in accordance with the precepts of faith. \[4\] From the
opposite it can be seen how the case is with falsities in which is evil,
namely, that they are like trees which bear evil fruits, and which are
to be rooted up and cast into the fire, according to the Lord's words in
these passages: Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt
tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree
that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them (Matt. 7:17-20; 12:33).
Jesus said, As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide
in the vine; so neither can ye, except ye abide in Me. I am the vine, ye
are the branches. He that abideth in Me, and I in him, the same beareth
much fruit; for without Me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in Me,
he shall be cast forth as a branch, and shall wither; and they gather
him, and cast him into the fire, and he is burned (John 15:4-6). From
this it is evident that all good which shall bear any fruit is from the
Lord, and that unless it is from Him it is not good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9259.">9259.</span></span>

Removing thou shall remove it with him. That this signifies
encouragement, and effort toward amendment, is evident from the
signification of "removing," when said of the falsity which does not
agree with the good of the church, as being amendment (see above, n.
9258), and here effort toward amendment, and encouragement, because such
falsity is amended with difficulty. The falsities which do not agree
with the good of the church are all those which are opposed to the Lord,
to the good of love to Him, and to the good of charity toward the
neighbor. That such things as have just been unfolded lie hidden within
these two laws, or judgments, is evident from this additional
consideration, that the things contained in the letter seldom happen,
namely, meeting an enemy's ox or ass going astray, and seeing the ass of
one who hates us lying under a burden. Consequently these ordinances are
not of sufficient importance to have been included among the laws and
judgments that were promulgated from Mount Sinai. But the things they
contain within them cause them to rank among the chief judgments; for
they contain the injunction that the Gentiles too must be loved and be
instructed in the truths of faith, and be amended in respect to the
life. But these internal contents of the laws in question could not be
set forth before the Israelitish and Jewish people, because these were
in external things without internal; and because they had received from
their fathers that they should hate, and therefore regard as enemies,
all who were not of their brethren, that is, who were not born of Jacob.
(Concerning the Jews and their character, see n. 4307, 4314, 4316, 4317,
4429, 4433, 4444, 4825, 4903, 6304, 8588, 8788, 8806, 8871.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9260.">9260.</span></span>

Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy needy in his cause. That this
signifies no destruction of the scanty truth with those who are in
ignorance, is evident from the signification of "wresting," as being to
pervert, and so to destroy; from the signification of "judgment," as
being that which is right and true (see n. 2235, 2335, 5068, 6397, 7206,
8685, 8695, 8972); from the signification of "the needy," as being one
who is in scanty truth from ignorance, and yet longs to be instructed
(see n. 9209); and from the signification of "a cause," as being
contention (n. 5963, 9024). In the present case "in his cause" denotes
in his dispute concerning the scanty truth for which he is contending.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9261.">9261.</span></span>

Keep thee far from the word of a lie. That this signifies an aversion
for the falsity of evil, is evident from the signification of "a lie,"
as being falsity from evil (see n. 8908, 9248). The reason why there is
signified falsity from evil is that this falsity must be kept far away,
because it derives its essence from evil; and evil and good are
opposites; for evil is from hell, and good is from heaven, and there it
is from the Lord. But falsity not derived from evil, which is the
falsity of ignorance, is not of such a nature (see n. 1679, 2863, 4551,
4552, 4729, 4736, 6359, 7272, 7574, 8149, 8311, 8318, 9258). And from
the signification of "keeping far away," as being to feel aversion for.
That "removal far away" denotes aversion, originates from the removals
of this kind which appear in the spiritual world, in that they are
according to dissimilarities, differences, and aversions, in respect to
the things of spiritual life. For those who appear there in one place
are in a like state of the affections and of the derivative thoughts;
but as soon as they are at variance, they are separated and go far away
from one another; and this according to the degree of their variance.
This comes to pass because in the spiritual world both spaces and times
are states, and therefore distances are differences of states.
Nevertheless, before the external sight, states appear there as spaces,
and their differences as distances. (That spaces and distances, and also
times, are states, see n. 1273-1277, 1376-1382, 2625, 3356, 3387, 3404,
3638-3641, 4321, 4882, 7381, 9104; but that nevertheless there are
appearances of spaces and distances, which originate from changes of
state in the interiors, n. 5605.) From this it is now evident that in
the internal sense "removal far away" denotes aversion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9262.">9262.</span></span>

And the innocent and the righteous slay thou not. That this signifies an
aversion for destroying interior and exterior good, is evident from the
signification of "the innocent," as being one who is in interior good,
thus in the abstract sense, interior good (of which below); from the
signification of "the righteous," as being one in exterior good, and in
the abstract sense, exterior good, for "righteous" is predicated of the
good of love toward the neighbor, and "innocent" of the good of love to
the Lord. The good of love toward the neighbor is exterior good, and the
good of love to the Lord is interior good. And from the signification of
"slaying," as being to destroy. That "righteous" denotes the good of
love toward the neighbor, will also be seen below. But that "innocent"
denotes the good of love to the Lord, is because those are in innocence
who love the Lord. For innocence is to acknowledge in the heart that of
ourselves we desire nothing but evil, and perceive nothing but falsity,
and also that all the good which is of love, and all the truth which is
of faith, are from the Lord alone. None can at heart acknowledge these
things except those who are conjoined with the Lord by love. Such are
they who are in the inmost heaven, which from this is called the "heaven
of innocence." Wherefore the good they have is interior good; for it is
the Divine good of love that proceeds from the Lord which is received by
those who are in the heaven of innocence. Hence also they appear naked,
and likewise as little children, from which it is that innocence is
represented by nakedness, and also by infancy. (That it is represented
by nakedness, see n. 165, 213, 214, 8375; and by infancy, n. 430, 1616,
2280, 2305, 2306, 3183, 3494, 4563, 4797, 5608.) \[2\] From what has
just been said about innocence it can be seen that the Lord's Divine
cannot be received except in innocence, from which it follows that good
is not good, unless innocence is within it (n. 2526, 2780, 3994, 6765,
7840, 7887), that is, the acknowledgment that from one's own proceeds
nothing but what is evil and false, and that from the Lord is everything
that is good and true. To believe the former, and to believe and also to
will the latter, is innocence. Therefore the good of innocence is good
Divine itself from the Lord with man. Consequently "the innocent"
signifies one who is in interior good, and in the abstract sense,
interior good. \[3\] As Divine good which is from the Lord is signified
by "the innocent," or by "innocence," it was a most heinous crime to
shed innocent blood; and when it was committed, the whole land was under
condemnation until it was expiated, as can be seen from the procedure of
inquiry and purgation that took place if anyone was found stabbed in the
land; of which it is thus written in Moses: When one who has been
stabbed is found in the land, lying in the field, and it is not known
who hath smitten him; then the elders of the city shall come forth unto
the cities which are round about him that is stabbed; and it shall be,
that the city which is nearest unto him that is stabbed, the elders of
that city shall take a female calf of an ox by which labor hath not been
done, and which hath not drawn in the yoke; and the elders of that city
shall bring down the calf unto a barren valley, which is neither
cultivated nor sown, and shall cut off the calf's neck there in the
valley; and the priests, the sons of Levi, shall come near; and all the
elders of that city, standing near him that is stabbed, shall wash their
hands over the calf whose neck was cut off in the valley; and they shall
answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, and our eyes have
not seen it; expiate Thy people Israel whom Thou hast redeemed, O
Jehovah, and put not innocent blood in the midst of Thy people Israel.
So shall the blood be expiated for them. And thou shalt put away the
innocent blood from the midst of thee, if thou shalt do that which is
right in the eyes of Jehovah (Deut. 21:1-9); everyone can see that this
procedure of inquiry and of purgation in respect to innocent blood shed
in the land, involves arcana of heaven, which cannot possibly be known
unless it is known what is signified by "one stabbed in the field," by
"a female calf of an ox by which labor hath not been done and which hath
not drawn in the yoke," by "a barren valley which is neither cultivated
nor sown," by "cutting off the calf's neck there in the valley," by
"washing the hands over the calf," and by all the other particulars.
That these things should have been commanded unless they signified
secret things, would by no means be consistent with a Word that has been
dictated by the Divine, and inspired in respect to every word and jot;
for without some deeper meaning such a procedure would have been a
ceremonial of no sanctity, and scarcely of any account. \[4\]
Nevertheless it is evident from the internal sense what arcana are
hidden within it. Thus if it is known that by "one stabbed in the land
lying in the field" is signified truth and good extinguished in a church
where there is good, that by "the city which is nearest unto him that is
stabbed" is signified the truth of doctrine of the church whose good has
been extinguished; that by "a female calf of an ox by which work hath
not been done and which hath not drawn in the yoke" is signified the
good of the external or natural man, that has not as yet, through
subjection to cupidities, drawn to itself any falsities of faith and
evils of love; that by "a barren valley which is neither cultivated nor
sown" is signified the natural mind which through ignorance is not
improved with the truths and goods of faith; that by "cutting off the
calf's neck there in the valley" is signified expiation on account of
the absence of guilt, because it was the result of ignorance; and that
by "washing the hands" is signified purification from this heinous
crime; then from the knowledge of all these things it is evident that by
the "shedding of innocent blood" is signified the extinction with the
man of the church of the Divine truth and good which are from the Lord,
and thus of the Lord Himself. \[5\] Be it known that by this whole
procedure there was represented in heaven a crime of this nature done
without guilt, because done from ignorance in which there is innocence,
consequently as not evil. Every detail of this procedure, even the
smallest, represented some essential thing in this matter; and what it
represented is evident from the internal sense. (That "one who has been
stabbed" denotes truth and good extinguished, see n. 4503; that "the
land" denotes the church, n. 662, 1066, 1067, 1262, 1413, 1607, 1733,
1850, 2117, 2118, 2928, 3355, 4447, 4535, 5577, 8011, 8732; that "a
field" denotes the church as to good, thus the good of the church, n.
2971, 3310, 3766, 4982, 7502, 7571, 9139; that "a city" denotes the
doctrine of truth, thus the truth of the doctrine of the church, n. 402,
2268, 2449, 2712, 2943, 3216, 4492, 4493; that "an ox" denotes the good
of the external or natural man, n. 2180, 2566, 2781, 9134; consequently
that "a calf" denotes infantile good, n. 1824, 1825.) \[6\] That it
"hath not done labor, and hath not drawn in the yoke" denotes that this
good has not yet, through ignorance, been enslaved to falsities and
evils, is evident, for "laboring and drawing in a yoke" denotes to
serve. That "a valley" denotes the lower mind, which is called the
natural mind, see n. 3417, 4715; that "barren" denotes a mind devoid of
truths and goods, n. 3908; thus that "a valley which is neither
cultivated nor sown" denotes the natural mind not as yet improved with
truths and goods, thus which is as yet in ignorance; that the "seed"
with which it is sown denotes the truth of faith, n. 1025, 1447, 1610,
1940, 2848, 3038, 3373, 3671, 6158. That "cutting off the neck" denotes
expiation, is because by the slaying of various beasts, as well as by
sacrifices, were signified expiations. That "washing the hand" denotes
purification from falsities and evils, see n. 3147; here therefore it
denotes purification from that heinous crime; for "to shed blood"
signifies in general to do violence to good and truth (n. 9127); thus to
"shed innocent blood" signifies to extinguish in a man what is Divine
from the Lord, thus the Lord Himself in him; for the truth and good in a
man are the Lord Himself, because they are from Him. \[7\] The like is
signified by "the shedding of innocent blood" in Deut. 19:10; 27:25;
Isa. 59:3, 7; Jer. 2:34; 7:6; 19:4; 22:3, 17; Joel 3:19; Ps. 94:21. In
the proximate sense "the innocent" signifies one who is without guilt
and without evil, which in olden times was attested by the washing of
the hands (Ps. 26:6; 73:13; Matt. 27:24; John 18:38; 19:4). The reason
of this was that the good which is from the Lord with man is devoid of
guilt and of evil. This good, as has been shown, is in the internal
sense the good of innocence. But the good in the external man, that is,
exterior good which is devoid of guilt and of evil, is called "the
righteous," as also in David: The throne of perditions shall not have
fellowship with Thee; who gather themselves together against the soul of
the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood (Ps. 94:20, 21).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9263.">9263.</span></span>

Mention is often made in the Word of "the righteous," of
"righteousness," and of "to be made righteous;" but what is specifically
signified by these expressions is not yet known. The reason why it is
not known is that hitherto it has been unknown that every expression in
the Word signifies such things as belong to the internal church and to
heaven, thus to the internal man (for the internal of the church, and
heaven, are in the internal man), and also that these interior things in
the Word differ from the exterior things which are of the letter, as
spiritual things differ from natural, or as heavenly things differ from
earthly, the difference of which is so great that to the natural man
there scarcely appears any likeness, although there is full agreement.
As this has been unknown, it could not be known what is signified in the
Word, in its spiritual and celestial senses, by "the righteous," by
"righteousness," and by "to be made righteous." It is believed by the
heads of the church that he is righteous, and has been made righteous,
who is acquainted with the truths of faith from the doctrine of the
church and from the Word, and consequently is in the trust and
confidence that he is saved through the Lord's righteousness, and that
the Lord has acquired righteousness by fulfilling all things of the Law,
and that He acquired merit because He endured the cross, and thereby
made atonement for and redeemed man. Through this faith alone a man is
believed to be made righteous; and it is believed further that such are
they who are called in the Word "the righteous." \[2\] Yet it is not
these who are called "righteous" in the Word; but those who from the
Lord are in the good of charity toward the neighbor; for the Lord alone
is righteous, because He alone is righteousness. Therefore a man is
righteous, and has been made righteous, insofar as he receives good from
the Lord, that is, insofar, and according to the way, in which he has in
him what belongs to the Lord. The Lord was made righteousness through
His having by His own power made His Human Divine. This Divine, with the
man who receives it, is the Lord's righteousness with him, and is the
very good of charity toward the neighbor; for the Lord is in the good of
love, and through it in the truth of faith, because the Lord is Divine
love itself. \[3\] The good of charity toward the neighbor is exterior
good, which is signified by "the righteous;" and the good of love to the
Lord is interior good, which is signified by "the innocent," as shown in
the foregoing section. That the good of love toward the neighbor from
the Lord is "the righteous" in the proper sense, can be seen from the
passages in the Word where mention is made of "the righteous," of
"righteousness," and of "to be made righteous;" as in Matthew: Then
shall the righteous answer Him, saying, When saw we Thee a hungered, and
fed Thee? or thirsty, and gave Thee drink? When saw we Thee a stranger,
and took Thee in? or naked, and clothed Thee? When saw we Thee sick, or
in prison, and came unto Thee? But the King shall answer and say unto
them, Verily, I say unto you, Insomuch as ye did it unto one of the
least of these My brethren, ye did it unto Me. And the righteous shall
go into eternal life (Matt. 25:37-40, 46); \[4\] those are here called
"the righteous" who have performed the goods of charity toward the
neighbor, which are here recounted. And that the goods of charity are
the Lord with them is said openly: "insomuch as ye have done it unto one
of the least of these My brethren, ye have done it unto Me" (n.
4807-4810, 4954-4959, 5063-5071). These are also called "the sheep," for
by "sheep" are signified those who from the Lord are in the good of
charity (n. 4169); whereas by "the goats" which are on the left hand,
and are condemned, are signified those who are in faith separate from
charity (n. 4169, 4769). The same are signified by "the righteous" in
another passage in Matthew: The angels shall go forth, and shall sever
the evil from the midst of the righteous (Matt. 13:49); and in Luke:
Thou shalt be recompensed in the resurrection of the righteous (Luke
14:14). \[5\] From this it is evident what is signified by, The
righteous shall shine forth as the sun in heaven (Matt. 13:43); namely,
that they are in the good of love from the Lord; for the Lord is the sun
in the other life, and that which is from the Lord as the sun there is
the good of love (n. 1053, 1521, 1529-1531, 2441, 2495, 3636, 3643,
4060, 4321, 4696, 5097, 7078, 7083, 7171, 7173, 7270, 8487, 8812). Hence
the Lord is called "the Sun of Righteousness" (Mal. 4:2). In Daniel: The
intelligent shall shine as the brightness of the expanse, and they that
make many righteous as the stars for ever and ever (Dan. 12:3); "the
intelligent" denote those who are in the truth and good of faith; and
"they that make many righteous" denote those who lead to the good of
charity through the truth and the good of faith; "to shine forth as the
stars" denotes to be in the intelligence of truth and the wisdom of
good, consequently in eternal happiness; for the "stars" denote the
knowledges of truth and good, from which are intelligence and wisdom (n.
2495, 2849, 4697). \[6\] "The righteous" is thus described in David:
Jehovah upholdeth the righteous; the righteous showeth mercy, and
giveth. Every day the righteous showeth mercy, and lendeth. The
righteous shall possess the land. The mouth of the righteous meditateth
wisdom, and his tongue speaketh judgment; the law of his God is in his
heart (Ps. 37:17, 21, 26, 29-31); these things are goods of charity,
which belong to "the righteous." The church knows that these goods of
charity are from the Lord, insomuch that they are the Lord's in the man.
"The righteous" is also described in Ezekiel 18:5-9, 21; 33:15-20. \[7\]
From all this it can be seen what is signified by "the righteous," and
by "righteousness," in the following passages of Matthew: Blessed are
those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled (Matt. 5:6). He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet
shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man
in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward
(Matt. 10:41). Many prophets and righteous men have desired to see the
things which ye see, but have not seen them (Matt. 13:17). Woe unto you,
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye build the sepulchers of the
prophets, and garnish the tombs of the righteous; upon you shall come
all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous
Abel (Matt. 23:29, 35); "the prophets" denote those who teach the truths
and goods of faith, and in the abstract sense, the doctrines of faith
(n. 2534, 7269); and "the righteous" denote those who live a life of
charity, and in the abstract sense the good of charity. (That Abel, who
is called "righteous," represented the good of charity, see n. 342,
374.) \[8\] In Isaiah: The righteous hath perished, and no man layeth it
to heart; and men of holiness are gathered, none understanding; for
because of evil the righteous is gathered (Isa. 57:1). Thy people shall
be all righteous; they shall possess the land eternally (Isa. 60:21).
Drip down, ye heavens, from above, and let the clouds flow down with
righteousness; let the earth open, that they may bring forth the fruit
of salvation, and let righteousness spring up together. I, Jehovah,
speak righteousness, I declare things that are right (Isa. 45:8, 19);
"righteousness" denotes that which is from the good of love; and "things
that are right," that which is from the truths of faith. Again: Thus
said Jehovah: Keep ye judgment, and do righteousness; for My salvation
is near, and My righteousness, that it may be revealed (Isa. 56:1); by
"judgment" is signified the truth which is of faith; and by
"righteousness," the good which is of charity; wherefore it is said,
"and do righteousness." That "righteousness" denotes the good of charity
from the Lord, is meant by "My righteousness is near that it may be
revealed." \[9\] In many other passages also mention is made of
"judgment and righteousness;" and by "judgment" is signified truth, and
by "righteousness" good; as in Jeremiah: Thus said Jehovah, Do ye
judgment and righteousness; and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of
the oppressor. Woe unto him that buildeth his house not in
righteousness, and his upper chambers not in judgment. Did not thy
father eat and drink, and do judgment and righteousness? Then it was
well with him (Jer. 22:3, 13, 15); "judgment" denotes those things which
are of truth; and "righteousness" those things which are of good. In
Ezekiel: If the wicked turn from his sin, and do judgment and
righteousness, none of his sins that he hath sinned shall be remembered
against him; he hath done judgment and righteousness; living he shall
live. When the wicked turneth from his wickedness, and doeth judgment
and righteousness, for these he shall live (Ezek. 33:14, 16, 19). And in
other places also (Isa. 56:1; 9:7; 16:5; 26:7, 9; 33:5, 15; 58:2; Jer.
9:24; 23:5; 33:15; Hosea 2:19, 20; Amos 5:24; 6:12; Ps. 36:5, 6;
119:164, 172). It is said "judgment and righteousness," because in the
Word whenever truth is treated of, good also is treated of, because of
the heavenly marriage, which is the marriage of good and truth, in every
detail of it (n. 683, 793, 801, 2173, 2516, 2712, 4137, 5138, 5502,
6343, 7945, 8339). As "righteousness" belongs to good, and "judgment" to
truth, in other passages it is said "righteousness and truth," as in
Zech. 8:8; Ps. 15:2; 36:5-6; 85:10-11.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9264.">9264.</span></span>

For I will not justify the wicked. That this signifies that such
malignity is contrary to the Divine righteousness, is evident from the
signification of "justifying," as being to declare guiltless and to
absolve; but here not to absolve, because it is said, "I will not
justify;" that "to justify" means also to declare guiltless and to
absolve, is evident from the judicial meaning of this expression; as
also in the following: By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy
words thou shalt be condemned (Matt. 12:37). Ye are they that justify
yourselves in the sight of men; but God knoweth your hearts (Luke
16:15). And from the signification of "the wicked," as being malignity
(see n. 9249). Malignity, of which it is here said that it is contrary
to the Divine righteousness, consists in destroying the interior and
exterior good which is signified by "slaying the innocent and the
righteous" (of which just above, n. 9262, 9263); and this good is
destroyed when the Divine truth and good which are from the Lord are
denied, in which case this is extinguished in the man, and consequently
so is the Lord Himself, from whom proceed all good which is good and all
truth which is truth. When this takes place, the man no longer has any
spiritual life, thus no salvation. This same truth and good are
extinguished when the Lord's Divinity is denied, and also when the Word
is denied, for this is Divine truth from the Lord and about the Lord. To
deny this, when it has previously been acknowledged and received with
faith, and thus to extinguish it, is the sin against the Holy Spirit,
which is not forgiven (Matt. 12:31). For the Holy Spirit is the Divine
truth and good, because it is the holy proceeding from the Lord (n.
9229). This same is also signified by the "shedding of innocent blood,"
spoken of just above. That this malignity is not forgiven, because it is
contrary to the Divine righteousness, is signified by the words, "I will
not justify the wicked."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9265.">9265.</span></span>

And thou shalt not take a present. That this signifies an aversion for
any self-advantage whatever, is evident from the signification of "a
present," as being everything worldly that is loved, whether it be
wealth, dignity, reputation, or anything else which flatters the natural
man, which things, speaking generally, are called "self-advantage," and
in the internal sense are meant by "a present" which "blinds" and
"perverts;" and from the signification of "not to take," as being to be
held in aversion, for unless this is the case they are still looked for
and taken. But they are held in aversion when what is heavenly and
Divine is loved more than what is worldly and earthly; for so far as the
one is loved, so far the other is hated, according to the Lord's words
in Luke: No servant can serve two masters; for either he will hate the
one, and love the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon (Luke 16:13);
"to hate" denotes to hold in aversion, for aversion is of hatred, and
hatred is opposite to love; wherefore it is said "or he will love the
other." From all this it is evident that by "thou shalt not take a
present" is signified an aversion for any self-advantage whatever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9266.">9266.</span></span>

Because a present blindeth those who have their eyes open. That this
signifies that matters of self-advantage cause truths not to appear, is
evident from the signification of "a present," as being any kind of
self-advantage (of which just above, n. 9265); from the signification of
"blinding" when said with respect to truths, as being to cause them not
to appear; and from the signification of "those who have their eyes
open," that is, who see, as being those who know truths and discern what
is true; for "to see" signifies to know, understand, and acknowledge
truths, and also to have faith (n. 897, 2150, 2325, 2807, 3764, 3863,
3869, 4403-4421, 5114, 5286, 5400, 6805, 8688, 9128). Wherefore "those
who have their eyes open" are called "the wise" in another passage: "a
present blindeth the eyes of the wise" (Deut. 16:19).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9267.">9267.</span></span>

And perverteth the words of the righteous. That this signifies so that
\[these matters of self-advantage\] appear like truths of good, is
evident from the signification of "perverting the words of the
righteous," as being that they appear like truths of good; for "words"
denote the things themselves, thus truths, and "the righteous" denote
those who are in good (see n. 9263). That "words" denote truths, is
because in the original tongue "a word" signifies that which is
something, and which really exists; consequently it also signifies
truth, for everything which really exists from esse \[being\] bears
relation to truth. From this also it is that Divine truth is called "the
Word."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9268.">9268.</span></span>

And a sojourner shalt thou not oppress. That this signifies that those
who long to be instructed in the truths of the church must not be
infested with evils of life, is evident from the signification of "a
sojourner," as being one who longs to be instructed in the truths of the
church (see n. 8007, 8013, 9196); and from the signification of
"oppressing," as being to infest with evils of life (n. 9196).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9269.">9269.</span></span>

For ye know the soul of a sojourner. That this signifies their longing
and their life, is evident from the signification of "the soul," when
said of those who long to be instructed in the truths of faith, who are
signified by "sojourners," as being longing and life. For "the soul"
denotes life from faith (see n. 9050); and longing is the very activity
of life, because it is from the affection of good; and the truth of
faith lives from the affection of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9270.">9270.</span></span>

Seeing that ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt. That this signifies
that they were protected from falsities and evils when infested by the
infernals, is evident from what was shown above (n. 9197), where the
same words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9271.">9271.</span></span>

Verses 10-13. And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather
the produce thereof; and in the seventh thou shalt let it lie fallow,
and shalt release it; and the needy of thy people shall eat; and what
they leave the wild animal of the field shall eat. So shalt thou do to
thy vineyard, and to thine oliveyard. Six days thou shalt do thy works,
and on the seventh day thou shalt cease; that thine ox and thine ass may
rest; and the son of thy handmaid, and the sojourner, may take breath.
And all that I have said unto you ye shall keep; and ye shall not
mention the name of other gods; it shall not be heard upon thy mouth.
"And six years thou shalt sow thy land," signifies the first state, when
the man of the church is being instructed in the truths and goods of
faith; "and shalt gather the produce thereof," signifies the goods of
truth therefrom; "and in the seventh year thou shalt let it lie fallow,
and shalt release it," signifies the second state, when the man of the
church is in good, and thus in the tranquility of peace; "and the needy
of thy people shall eat," signifies conjunction through the good of
charity with those who are in few truths and yet long to be instructed;
"and what they leave the wild animal of the field shall eat," signifies
conjunction through these with those who are in the delights of external
truth; "so shalt thou do to thy vineyard, and to thine oliveyard,"
signifies that so it is with spiritual good and with celestial good;
"six days thou shalt do thy works," signifies the state of labor and of
combat when the man is in external things, which are to be conjoined
with internal; "and on the seventh day thou shalt cease," signifies the
state of good when the man is in internal things, and his tranquility of
peace then; "that thine ox and thine ass may rest," signifies
tranquility at the same time for external goods and truths; "and the son
of thy handmaid, and the sojourner, may take breath," signifies the
state of life of those outside the church who are in truths and goods;
"and all that I have said unto you ye shall keep," signifies that the
commandments, the judgments, and the statutes are to be done; "and ye
shall not mention the name of other gods," signifies that they must not
think from the doctrine of falsity; "it shall not be heard upon thy
mouth," signifies that obedience is not to be paid with any affirmation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9272.">9272.</span></span>

Six years thou shalt sow thy land. That this signifies the first state,
when the man of the church is being instructed in the truths and goods
of faith, is evident from the signification of "six years," as being the
first state of the man who is being regenerated (of which below, n.
9274); and from the signification of "sowing the land," as being when
the truths and goods of faith are being implanted. That this is
signified by "sowing the land" is because all things of the field, of
seeding, and of its produce, signify such things as are of the church in
general, and as are of the man of the church in particular, who is a man
that has been regenerated through the truth of faith and the good of
charity from the Lord. Hence it is that "field" and "ground" in the Word
signify those in the church who receive the truths and goods of faith,
as a field receives seeds. Wherefore also in the Word mention is often
made of a "field," of "seed," of "sowing," of "harvest," of "produce,"
of "grain" and "wheat," and of "bread" from these, as well as of all
other things that belong to a field. \[2\] He who does not know how the
case is with the state of heaven, believes no otherwise than that these
expressions in the Word are mere metaphors and comparisons. But they are
real correspondences. For when the angels discourse about the
regeneration of man by the Lord through the truths of faith and the
goods of charity, then below in the world of spirits there appear
fields, crops, fallow lands, and also harvests; and this by reason of
their correspondence. He who knows this can also know that such things
in the world have been created according to correspondences; for
universal nature (that is, the sky with the sun, moon, and stars, and
the earth with the objects of its three kingdoms) corresponds to such
things as are in the spiritual world (n. 2993, 5116, 5377). (That in
this way nature is a theater representative of the Lord's kingdom, see
n. 3483; and that from this all things in the natural world have their
subsistence, n. 2987, 2989-2991, 3002, 8211.) From all this it is
evident why the things belonging to a field, that is, which are sown in
a field, and are reaped from a field, signify such things as are of the
church in general and in particular. (That even the comparisons used in
the Word are from things which correspond, see n. 3579, 8989.) \[3\]
That "sowing the land," that is, a "field," denotes to teach and learn
the truths and goods of faith which are of the church; and that the
"produce" denotes the goods of truth therefrom, may be seen from many
passages in the Word; as in Isaiah: Because thou hast forgotten the God
of thy salvation, therefore shall thou plant plants of delights; but
with the shoot of a strange one thou shalt set it: in the day thou shalt
cause thy plant to grow, and in the morning thy seed to blossom: the
harvest shall be a heap in the day of possession; but the grief is
desperate (Isa. 17:10, 11); here such things are mentioned as grow on
the earth; yet it is evident that holy things of the church are meant by
them; namely, by "planting plants of delights," such things as are
favorable to the affections; and by "setting the land with a shoot of a
strange one," to teach truths not genuine. \[4\] In Jeremiah: Thus said
Jehovah to the man of Judah and to Jerusalem, Break up your fallow
ground, and sow not among thorns. Circumcise yourselves to Jehovah, and
take away the foreskins of your heart (Jer. 4:3-4). That "to sow among
thorns" denotes to teach and learn truths, but which are choked and
rendered unfruitful by the cares of the world, the deceitfulness of
riches, and concupiscence, the Lord teaches in Mark 4:7, 18, 19.
Wherefore it is said, that they should "circumcise themselves to
Jehovah, and take away the foreskins of their heart," that is, that they
should purify themselves from such things as choke the truths and goods
of faith, and render them unfruitful (that this is the meaning of
"circumcising" see n. 2039, 2056, 2632, 3412, 3413, 4462, 7045). The
like is signified in Jeremiah by "sowing wheat and reaping thorns" (Jer.
12:13). \[5\] In Micah: I have been wearied with smiting thee, with
laying thee waste because of thy sins. Thou shalt sow, but shalt not
reap; thou shalt tread the olive, but shalt not anoint thee with oil;
and the must, but shalt not drink the wine (Micah 6:13, 15); "sowing and
not reaping" denotes to be instructed in the truths of faith, but
without profit; "treading the olive, but not anointing oneself" denotes
to be instructed about the good of life, but still not to live in it;
"treading the must, but not drinking the wine" denotes to be instructed
about the truths which are from good, but still not to appropriate them
to oneself. That such things of the church or of heaven are signified by
these words is plain from those which precede, namely, that they were to
be laid waste in this manner "because of their sins;" for the wicked and
sinful man receives instruction, but merely stores it up among
memory-knowledges, which he brings forth from his memory in order to get
reputation, fame, honors, and wealth, thus to serve an evil use and end.
From this the truths and the goods in which he has been instructed lose
the life of heaven, and become dead, and finally deadly. \[6\] In
Isaiah: Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth the
foot of the ox and the ass (Isa. 32:20); "to sow beside all waters"
denotes to be instructed in all kinds of truths which are for use; "to
send forth the foot of the ox and the ass" denotes to be instructed in
external goods and truths. Again: Jacob shall cause those who are to
come to take root; Israel shall blossom and bloom, so that the faces of
the world shall be filled with produce; thy teachers shall not any more
be forced to flee away, and thine eyes shall look unto thy teachers; and
thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, go ye
in it. Then shall Jehovah give the rain of thy seed, wherewith thou
shalt sow the land; and bread of the produce of the earth, and it shall
be fat and rich; in that day shall thy cattle feed in a broad meadow;
and the oxen and the asses that till the land shall eat clean provender.
The light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of
the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that
Jehovah shall bind up the breach of His people, and shall heal the wound
of their stroke (Isa. 27:6; 30:20-26). \[7\] To everyone who reflects it
is plainly evident that by its being said that Jehovah should "give the
rain of the seed wherewith they should sow the land, and bread of the
produce of the earth;" that "their cattle should feed in a broad
meadow;" that "the oxen and the asses that till the land should eat
clean provender;" that "the light of the moon should be as the light of
the sun, and the light of sun should be sevenfold," there are signified
such things as are of the church, and also that they signify instruction
in the truths and goods of faith; because it is said, "thine eyes shall
look unto thy teachers, and thine ears shall hear a word, saying, This
is the way, go ye in it." For "teachers" denote those who instruct, and
"the way in which they should go" denotes the truth of doctrine and the
good of life. But the specific signification of each expression is clear
from the signification of "rain," of "seed," of "produce," of "land," of
"cattle," of a "broad meadow," of "oxen and asses tilling the land," and
of "clean provender which they should eat;" also from the signification
of "the light of the moon and of the sun," likewise of "sevenfold," and
of "seven days." And as by these expressions are signified such things
as are of the church, that is, such as are of doctrine and of life, it
follows that this will come to pass in the day that Jehovah shall "bind
up the breach of His people, and heal the wound of their stroke;" for
"the breach of the people" denotes the falsity of doctrine which
gradually creeps in from the badness of the teachers, from
concupiscences, and from other causes; "the wound of the stroke"
denoting the consequent evil of life. \[8\] As with the Israelitish and
Jewish people all things were representative of things heavenly and
Divine, so also were the fields, and their produce; likewise the
vineyards, oliveyards, and all plantings; as also herds and oxen, and
the mountains, hills, valleys, rivers, and all other things that were
presented before their senses. From this also it was that they were
enriched with such things when they kept and did the statutes and
judgments, according to the promises in the Word throughout, as in these
passages: If ye shall walk in My statutes, and keep My commandments, and
do them, I will give your rains in their season, and the land shall
yield her produce, and the tree of the field shall yield its fruit (Lev.
26:3, 4). The vine shall give its fruit, and the earth shall give its
produce, and the heavens shall give their dew; whence it shall come to
pass, that as ye have been a curse among the nations, ye shall be a
blessing (Zech. 8:12, 13). \[9\] The contrary befell them when they
worshiped other gods, for then they no longer represented heavenly and
Divine things, but infernal and diabolical ones. Wherefore then there
was no longer fruitfulness nor produce; but consumption and wasting,
according to these words in Moses: If ye serve other gods, the anger of
Jehovah shall be kindled against you, and He shall shut up the heaven,
that there be no rain, and the land yield not her produce (Deut. 11:16,
17). When Jeshurun waxed fat, he kicked, and forsook God. They sacrifice
unto demons, to gods whom they knew not; wherefore a fire is kindled in
Mine anger, and it shall burn even to the lowest hell, and shall consume
the land and its produce (Deut. 32:15, 17, 22). \[10\] From all this it
is now evident what is signified by "sowing the land," and by its
"produce," and also whence these have their signification. It is also
evident what is signified by these things in the following passages:
Jehovah maketh a wilderness into a pool of waters, and a land of drought
into watersprings. There He maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may
sow fields, and plant vineyards, and get them fruit of produce (Ps.
107:35-37). Let all the peoples confess Thee. The earth shall yield its
produce; God shall bless us (Ps. 67:5-7). Jehovah maketh His people ride
on the high places of the earth, and feedeth them with the produce of
the fields; He maketh him to suck honey out of the cliff of the rock,
and oil out of the stone of the rock (Deut. 32:13).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9273.">9273.</span></span>

And shalt gather the produce thereof. That this signifies the goods of
truth therefrom, is evident from the signification of "gathering," as
being appropriation after instruction, for when "sowing" denotes
instruction and being instructed in the truths of faith (as just shown),
"gathering" denotes the appropriation of them. Appropriation is effected
when the truths that have been of doctrine become of the life. When they
become truths of life, they are called the "goods of truth." It is these
which are here signified by "produce."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9274.">9274.</span></span>

And in the seventh year thou shalt let it lie fallow, and shalt release
it. That this signifies the second state, when the man of the church is
in good, and thus in the tranquility of peace, is evident from the
signification of "the seventh year," or the Sabbath, as being when man
is in good, and is led of the Lord by means of good (see n. 8505, 8510,
8890, 8893); from the signification of "letting the land lie fallow,"
that is, not sowing it, as being not to be led by truths, as before; and
from the signification of "releasing it," as being to be in the
tranquility of peace. (That the Sabbath also was a representative of the
state of peace in which there is conjunction, see n. 8494.) For by the
lying fallow, and the release or rest of the land, was represented the
rest, tranquility, and peace possessed by those who are in good from the
Lord. (That there are two states with the man who is being regenerated
and becoming a church; namely, the first when he is led by means of the
truths of faith to the good of charity; and the second when he is in the
good of charity, see n. 7923, 7992, 8505, 8506, 8512, 8513, 8516, 8539,
8643, 8648, 8658, 8685, 8690, 8701, 8772, 9139, 9224, 9227, 9230.) \[2\]
That there are these two states with the man who is being regenerated
and becoming a church, has been heretofore unknown, chiefly for the
reason that the man of the church has not made any distinction between
truth and good, thus not between faith and charity; and also because he
has had no distinct perception of the two faculties of man, which are
the understanding and the will; and that the understanding sees truths
and goods, and the will is affected with them and loves them. For the
same reason he could not know that the first state of the man who is
being regenerated is learning truths and seeing them, and that the
second state is willing and loving them; and that the things which a man
has learned and seen are not appropriated to him until he wills and
loves them; for the will is the man himself, and the understanding is
his minister. If these things had been known, it might have been known
and perceived that the man who is being regenerated is endowed by the
Lord with both a new understanding and a new will, and that unless he
has been endowed with both, he is not a new man; for the understanding
is merely the seeing of the things which the man wills and loves, and
thus, as before said, is only a minister. Consequently the first state
of the man who is being regenerated is to be led through truths to good,
and the second state is to be led by means of good; and when he is in
this latter state, the order has been inverted, and he is then led by
the Lord; consequently he is then in heaven, and hence in the
tranquility of peace. \[3\] This state is what is meant by the "seventh
day," and by the "seventh year," and also by the "jubilee;" that is, by
the "Sabbath," and by the "Sabbath of Sabbaths," and by the resulting
rest of the land; according to these words in Moses: Six years thou
shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and
gather the produce thereof; but in the seventh year shall be a Sabbath
of Sabbaths for the land, a Sabbath unto Jehovah; thou shall neither sow
thy field, nor prune thy vineyard; that which groweth of itself of thy
harvest thou shalt not reap (Lev. 25:3-5). And concerning the jubilee:
In the year of the jubilee, ye shall not sow, nor reap that which
groweth of itself in it, nor vintage its undressed vines (Lev. 25:11).
He who knows nothing about these two states must needs be ignorant of
many things contained in the Word; for in the Word, especially the
prophetic Word, the two states are distinctly described. Nay, without
this knowledge, he cannot apprehend the internal sense of the Word, nor
even many things which are in its literal sense, as for example the
following which the Lord foretold concerning the last time of the
present church, which is there called the "consummation of the age" in
these passages: Then let them that are in Judea flee unto the mountains;
let him that is upon the house not go down to take anything out of his
house; and let him that is in the field not return back to take his
garments (Matt. 24:16-18). In that day, whosoever shall be upon the
house, and his vessels in the house, let him not go down to take them
away; and whosoever is in the field let him likewise not return to the
things that are behind him. Remember Lot's wife (Luke 17:31, 32). (That
the second state is here described, and that no one ought to return from
that state to the first, see n. 3650-3655, 5895, 5897, 8505, 8506, 8510,
8512, 8516.) \[4\] That these states are distinct from each other is
also involved in these words in Moses: When thou makest a new house,
thou shalt make a compass to thy roof. Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard
nor thy field with mixed seed. Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an
ass together. Thou shalt not put on a mixed garment of wool and linen
together (Deut. 22:8-11; Lev. 19:19); by these words is signified that
he who is in the state of truth, that is, in the first state, cannot be
in the state of good, that is, in the second state, nor the converse.
The reason is that the one state is the inverse of the other; for in the
first state the man looks from the world into heaven, but in the second
state he looks from heaven into the world; because in the first state
truths enter from the world through the intellect into the will, and
there become goods, because of love; but in the second state the goods
so formed go forth from heaven through the will into the intellect, and
there appear in the form of faith. It is this faith which is saving,
because it is from the good of love, that is, through the good of love
from the Lord; for this faith belongs to charity in form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9275.">9275.</span></span>

And the needy of thy people shall eat. That this signifies conjunction
through the good of charity with those who are in few truths and yet
long to be instructed, is evident from the signification of "eating," as
being communication and conjunction (see n. 2187, 3596, 5643, 8001);
from the signification of "the needy," as being those who by reason of
ignorance are in few truths and yet long to be instructed (see n. 9253);
and from the signification of "people," here the people of Israel, as
being those who are of the church (n. 4286, 6426, 6637, 8805). From all
this it is evident that by "the needy of thy people shall eat," is
signified the conjunction of the church with those who are in few truths
and yet long to be instructed. The reason why it is said "conjunction
through the good of charity," is that this good conjoins, as will be
shown in the following article.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9276.">9276.</span></span>

And what they leave the wild animal of the field shall eat. That this
signifies conjunction through these with those who are in the delights
of external truth, is evident from the signification of "what they
leave," namely, the needy of the people, as being what they have left
behind, thus that which is behind them, but here it denotes through
them, because the subject treated of is the conjunction of the church
with those who are in few truths, and here its conjunction with those
who are in the delights of external truth (that the conjunction of the
church with these latter is effected through the former, will be seen
below); from the signification of "eating," as being communication and
conjunction (as just above, n. 9275); and from the signification of "the
wild animal of the field," as being those who are in the delights of
external truth. For in the Word "beasts" signify the affections of truth
and good, beasts of the flock the affections of internal truth and good,
and beasts of the herd the affections of external truth and good; but
"wild animals" such affections as belong to the most external truth; for
relatively to internal affections these affections are wild animals, for
they are affections of the sensuous things which are called pleasures
and delights. The reason why they are delights of truth, and not so much
of good, is that the sensuous things which communicate immediately with
the world through the body, derive scarcely anything from spiritual
good, for it is bodily and worldly loves that chiefly reside therein.
(That in the Word "beasts" signify the affections of truth and good, see
n. 45, 46, 142, 143, 246, 714, 715, 719, 776, 1823, 2180, 2781, 3218,
3519, 5198, 9090; that beasts of the flock signify the affections of
internal truth and good, and those of the herd the affections of
external truth and good, n. 5913, 8937, 9135; and that sensuous things
communicate with the world and are the most external, n. 4009, 5077,
5089, 5094, 5125, 5128, 5767, 6183, 6201, 6310, 6311, 6313, 6315, 6318,
6564, 6598, 6612, 6614, 6622, 6624, 6844, 6845, 6948, 6949, 7442, 7693,
9212, 9216.) From what was shown in these places the nature of man's
sensuous mind relatively to his more interior things can be known,
namely, that it is like a wild animal. \[2\] The subject treated of in
this verse in the internal sense is those who are in the good of
charity, and also those who are in few truths and yet long to be
instructed, and afterward those who are in the delights of external
truth. These three kinds of men constitute the church. Those who are in
the good of charity constitute the internal of the church; those who are
in few truths and yet long to be instructed, thus who from good are in
the affection of truth, constitute the external of the church; but those
who are in the delights of external truth are the most external, and
constitute as it were the circumference, and conclude the church. \[3\]
The conjunction of heaven with the human race, that is, the conjunction
of the Lord through heaven with man, is effected by means of those who
are in the good of charity, thus by the good of charity; for in this
good the Lord is present, because the Lord is this good itself, because
it proceeds from Him. By means of this good the Lord conjoins Himself
with those who are in the affection of truth, because the affection of
truth is from good, and as before said good is from the Lord. Through
these again the Lord is with those who are in the delights of external
truth, for the delights with them are for the most part derived from the
loves of self and of the world, and very little from spiritual good.
Such is the communication of heaven with man, that is, such is the
communication of the Lord through heaven with him; consequently such is
the conjunction. \[4\] That the communication and conjunction of the
Lord with the human race is of this nature, can be seen from the fact
that such is the influx with every man of the church. By "a man of the
church" is meant one who from the Lord is in the good of charity, and
from this in the truths of faith; for charity from which is faith is the
very church itself with man, because charity and faith are from the
Lord; for the Lord flows into this good, which is the man's internal;
and through it into the affection of truth, which is his external; and
through this affection into the delights of external truth, which are in
his uttermost external. \[5\] As it is with the man of the church in
particular, so also it is with the church in general, that is, with all
who constitute the Lord's church. The reason of this is that before the
Lord the church universal is like a man, for before the Lord, His
heaven, with which the church acts as a one, is as one man, as can be
seen from what has been shown about heaven as a Grand Man at the end of
many chapters of Genesis. And because this is so, the case is the same
with a man of the church in particular; for a man of the church in
particular is a heaven, a church, and a kingdom of the Lord in the least
form. \[6\] Moreover, the case with the church is the same as with man
himself, in that there are in him two fountains of life, namely, the
Heart and the Lungs. It is known that the first of his life is the
heart, and that the second of his life is the lungs, and that from these
two fountains live all things in man both in general and in particular.
The heart of the Grand Man (that is, of heaven and the church) is
constituted of those who are in love to the Lord and in love toward the
neighbor, thus, abstractedly from persons, of the love of the Lord and
the love of the neighbor. And the lungs in the Grand Man (that is, in
heaven and the church) are constituted of those who from the Lord are in
charity toward the neighbor and from this in faith, and thus,
abstractedly from persons, of charity and faith from the Lord. But all
the other viscera and members in this Grand Man are constituted of those
who are in external goods and truths, thus, abstractedly from persons,
of the external goods and truths through which internal truths and goods
can be brought in. As then the heart first flows into the lungs and
through these into the viscera and members of the body, so likewise the
Lord flows through the good of love into internal truths, and through
these into external truths and goods. \[7\] From all this it can be seen
that there must by all means be a church on earth; and that without it
the human race would perish, because it would be like a dying man, when
the lungs and heart cease to be moved. Wherefore it is provided by the
Lord that there shall always be a church on the earth, in which the Lord
has been revealed by the Divine truth which is from Him; and on our
earth this Divine truth is the Word. At the present day scarcely anyone
believes this to be so, because scarcely anyone believes that everything
of man's life is from the Lord through heaven. For men suppose that life
is in themselves, and that this can subsist without any connection with
heaven, that is, through heaven from the Lord, although this opinion is
utterly false. \[8\] From all this it is now evident how it is to be
understood that conjunction is effected through the good of charity with
those who are in few truths and yet desire to be instructed, and through
these with those who are in the delights of external truth, which things
are signified by "letting the land lie fallow and releasing it in the
seventh year, and that then the needy of the people should eat, and what
they left the wild animal of the field should eat." But concerning the
things above related, see what has been already shown, namely, that
before the Lord heaven is like a man, and is therefore called the Grand
Man (n. 1276, 2996, 2998, 3624-3649, 3741-3750, 4218-4228). \[9\] (That
it is the same with the Lord's church, seeing that His kingdom on earth
is the church, which acts as a one with His kingdom in the heavens, see
n. 4060, 7396, 9216; also that a man of the church is a heaven and a
church in particular, n. 1900, 1902, 3624-3631, 3634, 3884, 4292, 4523,
4524, 4625, 6013, 6057; that those who are in love to the Lord and in
love toward the neighbor constitute the province of the heart in the
Grand Man, and those who are in charity and thereby in faith from the
Lord constitute the province of the lungs, n. 3635, 3883-3896; that
everything of man's life flows in from the Lord through heaven, n. 2536,
2706, 2886-2889, 2893, 3001, 3318, 3484, 3742, 3743, 4151, 5846, 5850,
5986, 6053-6058, 6189-6215, 6307-6327, 6466-6495, 6598-6626, 6982,
6985-6996, 7004, 7055, 7056, 7058, 7147, 7270, 7343, 8321, 8685, 8701,
8717, 8728, 9109, 9110, 9216; that there is a connection of heaven with
man, n. 9216; and that without a church on earth the human race would
perish, n. 468, 637, 2853, 4545.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9277.">9277.</span></span>

So shalt thou do to thy vineyard, and to thine olive-yard. That this
signifies that so it is with spiritual good and with celestial good, is
evident from the signification of a "vineyard," as being the spiritual
church (n. 1069, 9139), thus spiritual good, which is the good of
charity toward the neighbor, for this good makes the spiritual church;
and from the signification of an "olive-yard," as being the celestial
church, thus celestial good, that is, the good of love to the Lord, for
this good makes the celestial church. (What the spiritual church is, and
what is its good; and what the celestial church is, and what is its
good; and also what is the difference between them, see n. 2046, 2227,
2669, 2708, 2715, 2718, 2935, 2937, 2954, 3166, 3235, 3236, 3240, 3246,
3374, 3833, 3887, 3969, 4138, 4286, 4493, 4585, 4938, 5113, 5150, 5922,
6289, 6296, 6366, 6427, 6435, 6500, 6647, 6648, 7091, 7233, 7877, 7977,
7992, 8042, 8152, 8234, 8521.) \[2\] That an "olive-yard" signifies the
celestial church, and thus celestial good, is evident from the passages
in the Word where the "olive-tree" is mentioned; as in Moses: Thou shalt
plant vineyards and till them, but the wine thou shalt not drink, nor
gather; for the worm shall eat it. Thou shalt have olive-trees
throughout all thy border, but thou shall not anoint thyself with the
oil, for thine olive-tree shall be shaken (Deut. 28:39, 40); where the
subject treated of is the curse if other gods were worshiped, and if the
statutes and judgments were not kept. "Olive-trees in all thy border"
denote the goods of celestial love which are from the Lord through the
Word in the whole church; "not being anointed with the oil" denotes that
nevertheless they are not in this good; "thine olive-tree shall be
shaken" denotes that this good will perish. In like manner in Micah:
Thou shalt tread the olive, but shall not anoint thee with oil; and the
must, but shalt not drink the wine (Micah 6:15). \[3\] In Amos: I have
smitten you with blasting and mildew; your many gardens, and your
vineyards, and your fig-trees, and your olive-trees, shall the
caterpillar devour; yet have ye not returned unto Me (Amos 4:9);
"vineyards" denote the goods of faith; and "olive-trees" the goods of
love; the punishment for not receiving these goods is signified by "the
caterpillar devouring the olive-trees." In Habakkuk: The fig-tree shall
not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive
shall deceive, and the field shall yield no food (Hab. 3:17); where "the
fig-tree" denotes natural good; "the vine," spiritual good; "the olive,"
celestial good; and "the field," the church. In Zechariah: Two
olive-trees were beside the lampstand, one on the right side of the
bowl, and the other on the left side. These are the two sons of pure
oil, that stand beside the Lord of the whole earth (Zech. 4:3, 11, 14);
the "two olive-trees beside the lampstand" denote celestial and
spiritual good, which are at the Lord's right and left; "the lampstand"
signifies the Lord as to Divine truth. \[4\] In the book of Judges:
Jotham said to the citizens of Shechem who made Abimelech king, The
trees went to anoint a king over them; and they said unto the
olive-tree, Reign thou over us. But the olive-tree said unto them,
Should I leave my fatness, which God and men honor in me, and go to sway
myself over the trees? And the trees said to the fig-tree, Come thou,
and reign over us. But the fig-tree said unto them, Should I cause to
cease my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to sway myself over the
trees? Then the trees said unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.
But the vine said unto them, Should I cause to cease my must, which
cheereth God and men, and go to sway myself over the trees? Then said
all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou and reign over us. And the
bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you,
come ye, and put your trust in my shadow; but if not, let fire come out
of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon (Judg. 9:7-15); what
these things specifically involve cannot be known unless it is known
what is signified by "the olive-tree," "the fig-tree," "the vine," and
"the bramble." "The olive-tree" signifies the internal good of the
celestial church; "the fig-tree," the external good of that church (n.
4231, 5113); "the vine," the good of the spiritual church; but "the
bramble" signifies spurious good. These words therefore involve that the
people who are here meant by the trees, were not willing that either
celestial good or spiritual good should reign over them, but spurious
good, and that they chose this in preference to the other goods. "Fire
out of the bramble" denotes the evil of concupiscence; "the cedars of
Lebanon that it would consume" denote the truths of good. \[5\] As "the
olive-tree" signified the good of love from the Lord and to the Lord,
therefore the cherubs in the midst of the house or of the temple were
made of olive wood, and in like manner the doors leading to the
sanctuary (1 Kings 6:23-33); for the "cherubs" and also the "doors of
the sanctuary" signified the guard and providence of the Lord that there
should be no approach to Him except through the good of celestial love;
and therefore they were of olive wood. From all this it can be seen why
the tabernacle and the altar were anointed with oil; also the priests,
and afterward the kings; and why the oil of the olive was used for the
lamps; for this "oil" signified the good of love from the Lord (n. 886,
3728, 4582, 4638); and the "anointing" signified that so they might
represent the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9278.">9278.</span></span>

Six days thou shalt do thy works. That this signifies the state of labor
and of combat when the man is in external delights that are to be
conjoined with internal, is evident from the signification of the "six
days" which precede the seventh, as being a state of labor and of combat
(see n. 737, 900, 8510, 8888, 8975). The labor and combat then are
signified by the "works" which they were to do in the six days. By the
"works of the six days," and the "rest on the seventh day," are
signified those things which come forth in man in his first, and in his
second state, during regeneration, and also those which come forth in
him when he has been regenerated. (Concerning the first and second
states of man during regeneration, see above, n. 9274; and concerning
those things which come forth with him when he has been regenerated, n.
9213.) These things take place to the end that external things may be
conjoined with internal; for there is an external man, which is also
called natural; and there is an internal man, which is also called
spiritual. The external man communicates with the world, and the
internal man with heaven. \[2\] The Divine order is that heaven should
rule the world in man, and not the world rule heaven in him; for when
heaven rules man, then the Lord rules him. Man is born into loving the
world and himself more than heaven and the Lord. And because this is
opposite to Divine order, there must be an inversion by means of
regeneration; and this inversion is effected when the things of heaven
and the Lord are loved more than those of the world and of self. This is
the reason why the man who has been regenerated, as also he who is in
heaven, is alternately in external and in internal things; for external
things are thereby disposed so as to agree with internal things; and
finally to be subject to them. \[3\] When a man is in external things,
he is in labor and combat, for he is then in a life which savors of the
world, into which the hells flow from all sides, continually endeavoring
to infest, and even to subjugate in the man the things of heaven; but
the Lord continually protects and sets him free. From this arise the
labor and combat which are signified by the "six days of the week in
which works are to be done." But when the man is in internal things,
then, because he is in heaven with the Lord, the labor and combat cease,
and he is in the tranquility of peace, in which tranquility conjunction
also is effected. These are the things which are signified by the
"seventh day." That the interiors of man have been created according to
the image of heaven, and his exteriors according to the image of the
world; thus that man is a heaven and a world in a little form, and
according to the maxim of the ancients, is a microcosm, may be seen
above (n. 6057); and consequently that it is according to Divine order
that the Lord through heaven directs the world in man, and by no means
the reverse. \[4\] The nature of the labor and combat when a man is in
external things, can be seen from the fact that he is then in such a
state as to be in heat from the world and to be cold toward heaven,
unless heaven be to him as the world; and that he is consequently in
such a shade that he cannot conceive otherwise than that external things
flow into internal, and consequently that the eye sees and the ear hears
of itself, and that their objects bring forth thoughts, and produce the
intellect, and that thereupon he is able of himself to believe, and
likewise to love God; consequently from the world to see heaven. From
this fallacy he can scarcely be withdrawn until he has been raised from
external things into internal, and thus into the light of heaven. Then
for the first time he perceives that the things in him which are of the
world, thus which are of the body and its senses, see and act through
influx from heaven, that is, through heaven from the Lord, and not at
all from themselves. From this it is evident why a sensuous man believes
that everything of his life is from the world and from nature; that
there is no hell, nor heaven; and finally that there is no God;
consequently why he ridicules everything of the church insofar as he is
concerned; but is in favor of it insofar as it concerns the simple, so
that they may be in bonds, in addition to those of the laws. \[5\] From
this it can be known what it is to be in external things, and not at the
same time in internal things, and that when a man is in external things,
he is in cold and shade in respect to the things which are of heaven and
which are of the Lord. From this also it can be known who in this world
are intelligent and wise, namely, those who are in the truth and good of
the church, because these are wise from heaven; and also who are foolish
and insane, namely, those who are not in the good and truth of the
church, because their knowledge is derived solely from the world; and
that those among them who by means of the sciences of the world have
confirmed themselves against the truths and goods of the church, are
more insane and foolish that the rest, however much they may believe
themselves intelligent and wise in comparison with others, and may call
those simple who are in the good of life from the truths of doctrine;
when yet the simplicity of these latter is wisdom in the eyes of the
angels, and moreover after death they are raised by the Lord into
angelic wisdom. \[6\] That this is the case, the Lord also teaches in
Matthew: Therefore speak I by parables; because seeing they see not, and
hearing they hear not, neither do they understand (Matt. 13:13). And in
John: I will send the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive;
for it seeth Him not, neither knoweth Him. Yet a little while, and the
world shall see Me no more (John 14:17, 19); "the Spirit of truth whom
the world cannot receive, because it seeth Him not, neither knoweth
Him," signifies that the world will not acknowledge the Lord with faith
of the heart, because external things which are of the world will
obscure. Consequently who at the present day adores Him as the Lord of
the whole heaven and the whole earth (Matt. 18:18)? And yet all who are
in the heavens, thus all who are in internal things, regard the Lord as
their only God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9279.">9279.</span></span>

And on the seventh day thou shalt cease. That this signifies the state
of good when the man is in internal things, and his tranquility of peace
then, is evident from the signification of "the seventh day," or
"Sabbath," as being when the man is in good, and is led by the Lord by
means of good (see n. 8495, 8510, 8890, 8893); and from the
signification of "ceasing," or "resting from works," as being the
tranquility of peace then. (Concerning this state see what has been said
and shown above, n. 9274, 9278.) \[2\] But it shall be briefly stated
why, when a man is in good, he is in internal things. Man's External
Things have been formed according to the Image of the World, and his
Internal Things according to the Image of Heaven (see n. 6057);
wherefore also his external things receive those which are of the world,
but his internal things those which are of heaven. The external things
which are of the world are opened in man successively from infancy even
to manhood; in like manner the internal things. But the external things
are opened by means of those which are of the world, whereas the
internal things are opened by means of those which are of heaven. The
things thus opened are twofold, namely, those of the understanding, and
those of the will. The things of the understanding are opened by means
of those which bear relation to truth, and the things of the will by
means of those which bear relation to good; for all things in the
universe, both those in the world and those in heaven, bear relation to
truth and to good. Those which bear relation to truth are called
knowledges; and those which bear relation to good are called loves and
affections. From this it is clear what, and of what nature, are the
things which open the life of man. \[3\] As regards the internal man,
which as above said has been formed according to the image of heaven, it
is the knowledges of the truth and good of faith from the Lord, and
consequently of faith in the Lord, that open the things of its
understanding; and it is the affections of truth and good, which are of
love from the Lord, and consequently of love to the Lord, that open the
things of its will, and consequently form within him heaven, thus the
Lord in an image, for heaven is an image of the Lord. From this it is
that heaven is called the Grand Man (n. 1276, 2996, 2998, 3624-3649,
3741-3750, 4218-4228); that man has been formed according to the image
of heaven and the image of the world (n. 3628, 4523, 4524, 6013, 6057);
and that a regenerate man, and an angel, is a heaven and a church in the
least form (n. 1900, 3624, 3634, 3884, 4040, 4041, 4292, 4625, 6013,
6057, 6605, 6626, 8988). From all this it can be seen why, when a man is
in good, he is in internal things. But concerning the opening of man's
internal and external things, of the Lord's Divine mercy more in what
follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9280.">9280.</span></span>

That thine ox and thine ass may rest. That this signifies the
tranquility of peace at the same time for external goods and truths is
evident from the signification of "resting," when said of the seventh
day or Sabbath, as being the tranquility of peace (as just above, n.
9279); and from the signification of "an ox" as being external good, and
of "an ass" as being external truth (n. 2781, 9134, 9255). That beasts
signified affections and inclinations, such as man has in common with
them, see n. 45-46, 142, 143, 246, 714, 715, 776, 2179-2781, 3218, 3519,
5198, 5913, 8937, 9090, 9135. That beasts were employed in the
sacrifices in accordance with their signification, see n. 1823, 2180,
2805, 2807, 2830, 3519. That all things in the three kingdoms of nature
are representative of the spiritual and celestial things of the Lord's
kingdom, see n. 1632, 1881, 2758, 2987-3003, 3213-3227, 3483, 3624-3649,
4939, 5116, 5427, 5428, 5477, 8211. And that there are correspondences
of all things, see n. 2987-3003, 3213-3226, 3337-3352, 3472-3485,
3624-3649, 3745-3750, 3883-3896, 4039-4055, 4218-4228, 4318-4331,
4403-4420, 4523-4533, 4622-4634, 4652-4660, 4791-4806, 4931-4952,
5050-5062, 5171-5189, 5377-5396, 5552-5573, 5711-5727, 8615. \[2\] These
quotations have been brought together to show that not only all beasts,
but also all things in the world, correspond, and according to their
correspondences represent and signify spiritual and celestial things,
and in the supreme sense the Divine things of the Lord; and from this to
show the nature of the Ancient Churches, which were called
representative churches; namely, that all their holy rites represented
the things of the Lord and His kingdom, thus the things of love and
faith in Him; and that by means of such things heaven was then conjoined
with the man of the church; for the internal things were presented in
heaven. To the same end the Word of the Lord was given, for each and all
things therein, down to the smallest jot, correspond and have a
signification; consequently through the Word alone is there a connection
of heaven with man. \[3\] That this is the case no one at this day
knows; and therefore when a natural man reads the Word, and searches
where the Divine lies hidden in it; and when on account of its ordinary
style he does not find it in the letter, he first begins to hold it in
low esteem, and then to deny that it has been dictated by the Divine
Itself, and sent down through heaven to man; for he does not know that
the Word is Divine by virtue of its spiritual sense, which is not
apparent in the letter, but nevertheless is in the letter; and that this
sense is presented in heaven when a man reads the Word with reverence;
and that this sense treats of the Lord and His kingdom. It is these
Divine things from which the Word is Divine, and by means of which
holiness flows through heaven from the Lord down into the literal sense,
and into the very letter itself. But so long as a man does not know what
the spiritual is, he cannot know what the spiritual sense is, thus not
what correspondence is. And so long as a man loves the world more than
heaven, and himself more than the Lord, he does not wish to know or
apprehend these things; although all the intelligence of ancient times
was from this source, as is also the wisdom of the angels. The mystical
secrets which many diviners have in vain busied themselves to trace in
the Word, lie hidden solely in its spiritual sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9281.">9281.</span></span>

And the son of thy handmaid, and the sojourner, may take breath. That
this signifies the state of life of those outside the church who are in
truths and goods, is evident from the signification of "the son of a
handmaid," as being those who are in the affection of external truth;
for by "a son" is signified truth (see n. 489, 491, 533, 1147, 2623,
2813, 3373, 3704, 4257), and by "a handmaid" is signified external
affection (n. 1895, 2567, 3835, 3849, 7780, 8993); and from the
signification of "a sojourner," as being those who wish to be instructed
in the truths and goods of the church (n. 1463, 8007, 8013, 9196). That
by "the son of a handmaid," and "a sojourner," are here signified those
who are outside the church, is because in the preceding portion of this
verse those who are within the church were treated of; and for this
reason those who are without the church are meant by the "sons of a
handmaid," and those who have not been born within the church by
"sojourners;" because the former are of a lower descent, and the latter
are of a different lineage. And from the signification of "breathing,"
as being the state of life in respect to the truths and goods of faith.
The reason why "breathing" signifies this state of life, is that the
lungs, whose office it is to breathe, correspond to the life of faith
from charity, which is spiritual life (n. 97, 1119, 3351, 3635,
3883-3896, 9229). \[2\] Man has an outward and an inward breathing; the
outward breathing is from the world, but the inward is from heaven. When
a man dies, the outward breathing ceases; but the inward breathing,
which during his life in the world is tacit and imperceptible to him,
continues. This breathing is altogether according to the affection of
truth, thus according to the life of his faith. But those who are in no
faith, as is the case with those who are in hell, do not draw their
breathing from within, but from without, thus in a contrary manner; and
therefore when they approach an angelic society, where there is
breathing from within, they begin to be suffocated, and become like
images of death (n. 3894). Therefore they cast themselves down headlong
into their hell, where they resume their former breathing, which is
contrary to that of heaven. \[3\] As the breathing corresponds to the
life of faith, therefore the life of faith is also signified by the
"soul" \[anima\] (n. 9050), from "animation," which denotes the
breathing; and therefore also the breath is called the "spirit," as in
the expressions "drawing the breath" \[spiritus\], and "letting out the
breath" \[spiritus\]. From this also in the original tongue, "spirits"
are so called from the wind, and in the Word are compared to "the wind;"
as in John: The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the
voice thereof, but knowest not whence it cometh, or whither it goeth: so
is everyone that is born of the Spirit (John 3:8). From this also it is
evident what is signified by its being said that after His resurrection
the Lord, when speaking with His disciples, "breathed on them, and said
unto them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit" (John 20:22).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9282.">9282.</span></span>

And all that I have said unto you ye shall keep. That this signifies
that the commandments, the judgments, and the statutes are to be done is
evident from the signification of "all that Jehovah had said unto them,"
as being all things of the life, of worship, and of the civil state; for
the things of life were called "commandments," those of worship were
called "statutes," and those of the civil state were called "judgments"
(see n. 8972); and from the signification of "keeping" or observing, as
being to do, for by doing them they are observed. As the laws of life,
of worship, and of the civil state, are not anything with a man so long
as they are in his understanding only, but become something with him
when they are in the will, therefore it is said in the Word throughout
that they must be "done;" for doing is of the will; but knowing,
understanding, acknowledging, and believing are of the understanding.
These latter, however, have no being with man until they become of the
will, nor do they come forth with him until they become of the
understanding from the will; for the being of man is to will, and the
coming forth is to acknowledge and believe therefrom. The things which
have no such being and coming forth with a man are not appropriated to
him, but stand without, and are not as yet received into the house; and
therefore they do not contribute anything to the eternal life of the
man; for unless such things have been made of the life, they are
dissipated in the other life; those only remaining which are of the
heart, that is, of the will and from this of the understanding. This
being so, it is said in the Word throughout that the commandments and
the statutes must be "done;" as in Moses: Ye shall do My judgments, and
keep My statutes, to walk therein. Ye shall therefore keep My statutes,
and My judgments; which if a man do, he shall live by them (Lev. 18:4-5;
also Matt. 5:20; 7:24-27; 16:27; John 3:21); and in many other passages.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9283.">9283.</span></span>

And ye shall not mention the name of other gods. That this signifies
that they must not think from the doctrine of falsity, is evident from
the signification of "name," as being everything of faith and everything
of worship in the complex (see n. 2724, 3237, 6887, 8274, 8882), here
everything of the doctrine of falsity, because by "other gods" are
signified falsities (n. 4544, 7873, 8867); and from the signification of
"to mention," as being to think. That "to mention" denotes to think is
because mentioning is of the mouth; and by those things which are of the
mouth are signified those which are of the thought. The reason is that
man's speech flows from his thought; for man has thought which speaks,
and thought which does not speak. The thought which speaks is that with
which the speech makes a one; but the thought which does not speak is
that with which the speaking thought and the consequent speech make a
one with the sincere and the just, but not with the insincere and the
unjust. For the thought which does not speak is the man's higher or
interior intellectual proceeding from his very will; but the thought
which speaks is his lower or more external intellectual that is formed
from the higher or interior, to present, or to counterfeit, before the
world, the things of justice and equity, and of good and truth. \[2\]
This clearly shows the nature of the sincere and just man, and that of
the insincere and unjust man, namely, that with the sincere and just man
the internal man has been formed according to the image of heaven, and
the external man according to the image of the world as subordinate to
heaven (n. 9279); and that with the insincere and unjust man the
internal man has been formed according to the image of hell, and the
external man according to the image of heaven as subordinate to hell.
For by the external he counterfeits the things of heaven, and applies
the rational things which are from heaven to favor his concupiscences,
and also to deceive. From all this it is evident that the states of life
with the just and the unjust are inverted in respect to each other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9284.">9284.</span></span>

And it shall not be heard upon thy mouth. That this signifies that
obedience is not to be paid with any affirmation, is evident from the
signification of "hearing," as being to obey (see n. 2542, 3869,
4652-4660, 5017, 7216, 8361); and from the signification of "not being
upon the mouth," when said of the doctrine of falsity which is signified
by "the name of other gods," as being not to affirm. The reason why the
name of other gods was not to be mentioned, nor to be heard upon the
mouth, was that heavenly things, and the Divine things of the Lord,
might be represented by all the statutes, judgments, and commandments
that were commanded; and they were represented so long as Jehovah was
named and worshiped, for then the Divine of the Lord was present, and
heaven with Him. But when other gods were named and worshiped, infernal
things were represented, because spirits from the hells were then
present who wished to be worshiped as gods; for those who are in the
hells are continually seeking this, because the loves of self and of the
world reign there (n. 3881).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9285.">9285.</span></span>

Verses 14-19. Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto Me in the year.
The feast of unleavened things shalt thou keep; seven days thou shalt
eat unleavened things, as I commanded thee, at the time appointed of the
month Abib; because in it thou camest forth out of Egypt; and My faces
shall not be seen empty: and the feast of the harvest of the first
fruits of thy works, which thou sowedst in the field; and the feast of
ingathering, in the going out of the year, when thou gatherest in thy
works out of the field. Three times in the year shall every male of
thine appear before the faces of the Lord Jehovih. Thou shalt not
sacrifice the blood of My sacrifice upon what is fermented; and the fat
of My feast shall not remain overnight until the morning. The first of
the firstfruits of thy ground thou shalt bring into the house of Jehovah
thy God. Thou shalt not boil a kid in its mother's milk. "Three times
thou shalt keep a feast unto Me in the year," signifies the persistent
worship of the Lord and thanksgiving on account of liberation from
damnation; "the feast of unleavened things shalt thou keep," signifies
worship and thanksgiving on account of purification from falsities;
"seven days," signifies a holy state then; "thou shalt eat unleavened
things," signifies the appropriation of good purified from falsities;
"as I commanded thee," signifies in accordance with the laws of order;
"at the time appointed of the month Abib," signifies from the beginning
of a new state; "because in it thou camest forth out of Egypt,"
signifies liberation from infestation by falsities; "and My faces shall
not be seen empty," signifies the reception of good by virtue of mercy,
and thanksgiving; "and the feast of the harvest of the firstfruits of
thy works, which thou sowedst in the field," signifies the worship of
the Lord and thanksgiving on account of the implanting of truth in good;
"and the feast of ingathering, in the going out of the year, when thou
gatherest in thy works out of the field," signifies worship from a
grateful mind on account of the implantation of good therefrom, thus on
account of regeneration and complete liberation from damnation; "three
times in the year shall every male of thine appear before the faces of
the Lord Jehovih," signifies the continual appearance and presence of
the Lord, therefore also His appearance and presence in the truths of
faith; "thou shalt not sacrifice the blood of My sacrifice upon what is
fermented," signifies that the worship of the Lord from the truths of
the church must not be commingled with falsities from evil; "and the fat
of My feast shall not remain overnight until the morning," signifies the
good of worship, not from man's own, but from the Lord, always new; "the
first of the firstfruits of thy ground thou shalt bring into the house
of Jehovah thy God," signifies that all truths of good and goods of
truth are holy, because they are from the Lord alone; "thou shalt not
boil a kid in its mother's milk," signifies that the good of innocence
of the after state must not be conjoined with the truth of innocence of
the former state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9286.">9286.</span></span>

Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto Me in the year. That this
signifies the persistent worship of the Lord and thanksgiving on account
of liberation from damnation is evident from the signification of
"keeping a feast" as being the worship of the Lord from a glad mind on
account of liberation from damnation (see n. 7093); and from the
signification of "three times in the year" as being a full state even to
the end; for "three" signifies what is full from beginning to end (n.
2788, 4495, 7715, 9198), and a "year" signifies an entire period (n.
2906, 7839, 8070), here therefore a full and complete liberation. For by
"the feast of unleavened things" is signified purification from
falsities; by "the feast of harvest" the implanting of truth in good;
and by "the feast of ingathering" the implanting of good thence derived,
thus full liberation from damnation; for when a man has been purified
from falsities, and afterward brought into good by means of truths, and
finally when he is in good, he is then in heaven with the Lord, and
consequently is then fully liberated. \[2\] The successive steps of
liberation from damnation are circumstanced like the successive steps of
regeneration, because regeneration is liberation from hell and
introduction into heaven by the Lord; for the man who is being
regenerated is first purified from falsities, then the truths of faith
are implanted with him in the good of charity, and lastly this good
itself is implanted, and when this is done the man has been regenerated,
and is then in heaven with the Lord. Wherefore by "the three feasts in
the year" was also signified the worship of the Lord and thanksgiving on
account of regeneration. As these feasts were instituted for the
perpetual remembrance of these things, therefore it is said the
"persistent" worship and thanksgiving, for the chief things of worship
are to continually endure. The things which continually endure are those
which are not only inscribed on the memory, but also on the life itself,
and they are then said to reign universally with the man (n. 5949, 6159,
6571, 8853-8858, 8865).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9287.">9287.</span></span>

The feast of unleavened things shalt thou keep. That this signifies
worship and thanksgiving on account of purification from falsities, is
evident from the signification of a "feast," as being the worship of the
Lord and thanksgiving on account of liberation from damnation (of which
just above, n. 9286); and from the signification of "unleavened things,"
as being purification from falsities; for by what is fermented is
signified falsity, and therefore by what is unfermented or unleavened is
signified good purified from falsities (n. 2342, 8058). (Concerning this
feast, which was also called the "passover," see below, n. 9292, 9294.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9288.">9288.</span></span>

Seven days. That this signifies a holy state, is evident from the
signification of "seven," as being what is holy (see. n. 395, 433, 716,
881, 5265, 5268); and from the signification of "days," as being states
(n. 23, 487, 488, 493, 2788, 3462, 3785, 4850, 5672, 5962, 7680, 8426,
9213).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9289.">9289.</span></span>

Thou shalt eat unleavened things. That this signifies the appropriation
of good purified from falsities, is evident from the signification of
"eating," as being appropriation (see n. 3168, 3596, 4745); and from the
signification of "unleavened things," as being good purified from
falsities (of which just above, n. 9287).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9290.">9290.</span></span>

As I commanded thee. That this signifies in accordance with the laws of
order, is evident from the signification of "commanding," when by the
Lord, as being the Divine truth proceeding from Him, for this contains
and teaches the commandments of life and of worship. This Divine truth
is order itself in the heavens; and truths are the laws of this order
(see n. 1728, 1919, 2258, 2447, 5703, 7995, 8700, 8988). From this it is
evident that by "as I commanded thee" is signified in accordance with
the laws of order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9291.">9291.</span></span>

At the time appointed of the month Abib. That this signifies from the
beginning of a new state, is evident from the signification of "the
month Abib," as being the beginning of a new state (see n. 8053).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9292.">9292.</span></span>

Because in it thou camest forth out of Egypt. That this signifies
liberation from infestation by falsities, is evident from what has been
said and shown about the going forth of the sons of Israel out of Egypt,
in n. 7107, 7110, 7126, 7142, 7220, 7228, 7240, 7278, 7317, 8866, 9197,
where it may be seen that by the sojourning of the sons of Israel in
Egypt was signified the infestation by the infernals of the spiritual,
that is, of those who were of the Lord's spiritual church, and their
protection by the Lord; and that by their "going forth out of Egypt" was
signified their liberation from that infestation; in commemoration of
which was instituted the passover, which was the feast of unleavened
things (n. 7093, 7867, 7995).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9293.">9293.</span></span>

And My faces shall not be seen empty. That this signifies the reception
of good by virtue of mercy, and thanksgiving, is evident from the
signification of "the faces of Jehovah," as being good, mercy, peace
(see n. 222, 223, 5585, 7599); and from the signification of "not being
seen empty," or without a gift, as being a testification on account of
the reception of good, and, thanksgiving; for the gifts that were
offered to Jehovah signified such things as are offered by man from the
heart unto the Lord, and are accepted by the Lord. Gifts are like all
man's deeds, which in themselves are nothing but gestures, and regarded
apart from the will are merely movements that are fashioned in various
ways, and as it were jointed, not unlike the motions of a machine, and
thus devoid of life. But man's deeds regarded along with his will are
not such motions, but are forms of the will shown before the eyes; for
deeds are nothing else than testifications of such things as belong to
the will; and they also have their soul or life from the will. And
therefore the same can be said of deeds as of motions, namely, that
there is nothing living in deeds except will, just as there is nothing
living in motions except endeavor. That this is so, is also known to
man; for he who is intelligent does not attend to a man's deeds, but
only to the will from which, by which, and on account of which, the
deeds come forth. Nay, he who is wise scarcely sees the deeds, but only
the nature and amount of the will in them. The case is the same with
gifts, in that it is the will in these which the Lord looks at;
consequently by the gifts offered to Jehovah - that is, to the Lord -
are signified such things as are of the will, or of the heart. Man's
will is what is called in the Word his "heart." From all this it is also
evident how it is to be understood that everyone will receive judgment
in the other life according to his deeds or works (Matt. 16:27); namely,
that it will be according to those things which are of the heart, and
from this of the life. \[2\] That such things are signified by the gifts
offered to Jehovah, is plain from the Word, as in the following
passages: Sacrifice and gift Thou hast not desired, burnt-offering and
sacrifice for sin Thou hast not required. I have longed to do Thy will,
O my God (Ps. 40:6, 8). Jehovah your God, He is God of gods, and Lord of
lords, who accepteth not faces, and taketh not a gift (Deut. 10:17). If
thou offer thy gift upon the altar, and with this doth remember that thy
brother hath something against thee, leave there thy gift before the
altar, and go away; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come
and offer thy gift (Matt. 5:23, 24). From this it is evident that gifts
offered to the Lord were testifications of such things as are offered by
the heart, which are those of faith and of charity; being "reconciled to
a brother" denotes charity toward the neighbor. \[3\] Again: There came
wise men from the East, and they offered to the newborn Lord gifts,
gold, frankincense, and myrrh (Matt. 2:1, 11); by "gold, frankincense,
and myrrh" are signified all things of the good of love and of faith in
the Lord; by "gold" those of the good of love; by "frankincense" those
of the good of faith; and by "myrrh" those of both in things external.
The reason why the wise men from the East offered these things, was that
among some in the East there remained from ancient times the knowledge
and wisdom of the men of old, which consisted in understanding and
seeing heavenly and Divine things in those which are in the world and
upon the earth. For it was known to the ancients that all things
correspond and are representative, and consequently have a
signification; as is also evident from the most ancient books and
monuments of the Gentiles. Consequently they knew that gold,
frankincense, and myrrh signify the goods which are to be offered to
God. They also knew from their prophetic writings, which were of the
Ancient Church (n. 2686), that the Lord was to come into the world, and
that a star would then appear to them, of which star moreover Balaam,
who also was one of the sons of the East, prophesied (Num. 24:17; n.
3762); for a "star" signifies the knowledges of internal good and truth,
which are from the Lord (n. 2495, 2849, 4697). \[4\] In David: The kings
of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring a gift; the kings of Sheba and
Seba shall bring a present; and all kings shall bow themselves; and all
nations shall serve Him (Ps. 72:10, 11); these things were said of the
Lord; by "bringing a gift," and "bringing a present," is signified the
good of love and of faith; for "Tarshish" signifies the doctrinal things
of love and of faith (n. 1156); "Sheba and Seba" signify the knowledges
of good and truth (n. 1171, 3240); "kings," the truths of the church (n.
1672, 2015, 2069, 3009, 4581, 4966, 5044, 5068, 6148); and "nations,"
the goods of the church (n. 1159, 1258-1260, 1416, 1849, 4574, 6005,
8771). From this it is evident what is meant by "all kings bowing
themselves, and all nations serving Him." \[5\] In Isaiah: They shall
declare My glory among the nations; then shall they bring all your
brethren out of all nations for a gift to Jehovah, upon horses, upon
chariots, and upon litters, and upon mules, and upon dromedaries, to the
mountain of My holiness Jerusalem; as the sons of Israel bring a gift in
a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah (Isa. 66:19, 20); he who is
unacquainted with the internal sense of the Word may believe that these
things were said of the Jews, and that these would therefore be brought
to Jerusalem by the nations; but it is the goods of love and of faith in
the Lord that are thus prophetically described; and the things meant by
"a gift, horses, chariots, litters, mules, and dromedaries," upon which
they were to be brought, are the intellectual, doctrinal, and memory
things of truth and good, as is evident from their signification (of
horses, n. 2760-2762, 3217, 5321, 6125, 6401, 6534, 8029, 8146, 8248; of
chariots, n. 5321, 5945, 8146, 8148, 8215; and of mules, n. 2781). \[6\]
In Malachi: He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and He
shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that
they may bring to Jehovah a gift in righteousness. Then shall the gift
of Judah and of Jerusalem be sweet to Jehovah, as in the days of old,
and as in former years (Mal. 3:3, 4); as by "a gift offered to Jehovah"
is signified the good of love and of faith, therefore it is said that
"they may bring to Jehovah a gift in righteousness," and that "then it
will be sweet to Jehovah" "purifying the sons of Levi, and purging them
as gold and silver" signifies the purification of good and truth from
evils and falsities; "the sons of Levi" denote those who are in faith
and charity, thus who are of the spiritual church (n. 3875, 4497, 4502,
4503); "Judah" denotes the good of celestial love, thus those who are in
this good (n. 3654, 3881).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9294.">9294.</span></span>

And the feast of the harvest of the firstfruits of thy works, which thou
sowedst in the field. That this signifies the worship of the Lord and
thanksgiving on account of the implantation of truth in good, is evident
from the signification of "a feast," as being the worship of the Lord
and thanksgiving (of which above, n. 9286, 9287); from the signification
of "the harvest," as being the fruitification of truth, and thus the
implantation of it in good; from the signification of "the first
fruits," or the beginnings of the works, as being those things which are
the last of instruction and the first of life (of which below); from the
signification of "sowing," as being instructing (n. 9272); and from the
signification of "the field," as being the church as to good, thus the
good of the church (n. 2971, 3500, 3766, 7502, 9139, 9141). From all
which it is evident that by "the feast of the harvest of the firstfruits
of thy works which thou hast sown in the field," is signified the
worship of the Lord and thanksgiving on account of the implantation of
truth in good. \[2\] That these things are signified by this feast, is
evident from what was said above (n. 9286), namely, that three feasts
were instituted on account of the liberation of man from damnation, thus
on account of his regeneration; for by regeneration man is liberated
from hell and introduced into heaven. And therefore the first feast,
which was called "the feast of unleavened things," signifies
purification from falsities; consequently this second feast signifies
the implantation of truth in good; and the third feast, the implantation
of good. For during man's regeneration he is first purified from the
falsities which spring from the evil of the loves of self and of the
world, which is effected by his receiving instruction concerning evil,
hell, and damnation, and also concerning good, heaven, and eternal
happiness; and by his thus suffering himself to be withheld from doing,
willing, and thinking evils. When the soil has been thus prepared, then
the truths of faith are sown, for before this they are not received. But
the truths which are sown must be implanted in good, because they have
no soil anywhere else, nor can they strike root anywhere else. They are
implanted in good when the man wills the truth, loves it, and does it.
This state of regeneration, or of liberation from damnation, is
signified by this feast, which is called "the feast of the harvest of
the first fruits of thy works;" for "harvest" signifies truths producing
good. \[3\] When truths have been implanted in good, the man is no
longer led of the Lord by means of truths, but by means of good, which
is effected when he wills good and does good from the affection of love,
that is, from charity. This state of regeneration, or of liberation from
damnation, is signified by the third feast, which is called "the feast
of ingathering." \[4\] These three feasts were also called "the feast of
the passover," "the feast of weeks," and "the feast of tabernacles" (see
Exod. 34:18-23; Lev. 23; Deut. 16:1-17). Similar things to those
represented by these three feasts were represented by the bringing out
of the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, by their introduction into
the land of Canaan, and by their dwelling there. For by the bringing out
of the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt the like was represented as
by the first feast, which was called "the passover." That this is so may
be seen from what has been shown concerning the passover (n. 7093, 7867,
7995); for the bringing out of the sons of Israel, on account of which
this feast was instituted, signified the liberation of those who were of
the spiritual church from the falsities whereby they were infested (n.
7240, 7317, 9197). \[5\] And by the introduction of the sons of Israel
into the land of Canaan the like was represented as by this second
feast, which was called "the feast of the firstfruits of works," and
also "the feast of weeks," namely, the implantation of truth in good;
for "the land of Canaan" denotes the church in respect to good, thus the
good of the church (n. 1607, 3038, 3481, 3686, 3705, 4240, 4447, 4517,
5136, 6516); and abstractedly from persons "the sons of Israel" denote
spiritual truths (n. 5414, 5879, 5951). \[6\] The like was represented
by the dwelling of the sons of Israel in the land of Canaan as by the
third feast, which was called "the feast of the ingathering of the
fruits of the earth, and of the ingathering from the threshing-floor and
the wine-press," called also "the feast of tabernacles," namely, the
implantation of good, and therefore life in heaven. From all this it is
now evident why the three feasts were instituted, namely, that it was
for the sake of the bringing out from hell of the human race, that
wishes to receive new life from the Lord, and their introduction into
heaven. This was effected by the Lord through His coming into the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9295.">9295.</span></span>

That this second feast, which was called "the feast of the harvest of
the firstfruits of works," and also that "of the firstfruits of wheat,"
likewise "the feast of weeks," signifies the implantation of truth in
good, is evident from its institution, concerning which in Moses: Say
unto the sons of Israel, When ye shall come into the land which I give
unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, ye shall bring the first
sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the priest; and he shall
wave the sheaf before Jehovah, to be accepted for you; on the morrow
after the Sabbath the priest shall wave it. And in that day ye shall
offer a he-lamb for a burnt-offering; also the meat-offering and the
drink-offering. But ye shall not eat bread, or parched ear, or green,
until this selfsame day. Then ye shall count unto you from the morrow
after the Sabbath, from the day in which ye brought the sheaf of the
wave-offering, seven entire Sabbaths shall there be; even unto the
morrow after the seventh Sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye
shall offer a new gift to Jehovah. Ye shall offer out of your dwellings
the bread of the wave-offering, it shall be baked leavened, as
firstfruits to Jehovah. Ye shall offer besides the bread seven lambs,
one young bullock, and two rams, for a burnt-offering, with their
meat-offering, and their drink-offering (Lev. 23:10-18; Deut. 16:9-12).
\[2\] That each of these things has a signification cannot be known
except from their internal sense. In this sense the "seeds which are
sown in the field" denote the truths of faith which are implanted in
good; by "the harvest" is signified their coming to maturity when goods
are produced; for "wheat and barley," denote goods, and "the spike," or
"ear" in which they are denotes truths thus adjoined to goods; the
"sheaf" denotes a series and collection of such things, for truths are
arranged as it were into bundles; "waving" denotes vivification, for
truths are not living in man until they are in good; the priest who
waved the sheaf, that is, who vivified the goods of truth, represented
the Lord, because everything of life is from Him; this being done "on
the morrow after the Sabbath" signified the holiness of the conjunction
of good and truth; that before this they were not allowed to "eat bread,
or the parched ear, or the green ear," signified that the life of good
and its appropriation are no sooner; "bread" denotes the good of love;
the "parched ear," the good of charity; the "green ear," the good of
truth; and "eating," appropriation; that they were to "count seven
Sabbaths unto the feast," which was made on the "fiftieth day"
therefrom, signified the complete implantation of truth in good even to
the beginning of a new state; the "leavened bread" which was then
offered, signified good not yet fully purified; the "waving" of it
signified its vivification; the "burnt-offering of lambs, a young
bullock, and rams, with the meat-offering and the drink-offering,"
signified the worship of the Lord according to the quality of that good.
These are the things which are signified by this feast and by the
particulars of its celebration; from which it is evident that the second
state of liberation from damnation, which is the state of the
implantation of truth in good, was thereby signified. \[3\] As this
feast was called "the feast of the firstfruits of the harvest" it should
be known what is signified in the Word by "the harvest." The "field" in
which is the harvest, in a broad sense signifies the whole human race,
or the whole world; in a less broad sense it signifies the church; in a
sense more restricted, the man of the church; and in a sense still more
restricted, the good which is in the man of the church, for this
receives the truths of faith, as a field receives seeds. From the
signification of the "field" it is plain what is signified by the
"harvest," namely, that in the broadest sense it signifies the state of
the whole human race in respect to the reception of good by means of
truth; in a less broad sense, the state of the church in respect to the
reception of the truths of faith in good; in a more restricted sense,
the state of the man of the church in respect to this reception; and in
a still more restricted sense, the state of good in respect to the
reception of truth, thus the implantation of truth in good. \[4\] From
all this it can seen what is signified by "the harvest" in the following
passages; as in Matthew: He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man;
the field is the world; the seed are the sons of the kingdom; the tares
are the sons of the evil one; <span id="fr_195"></span>[9295-1](#fn_195)
the enemy that soweth them is the devil; but the harvest is the
consummation of the age; and the reapers are the angels (Matt.
13:37-39); "the good seed" denotes the truths of faith from the Lord;
"the Son of man" denotes the Lord in respect to the truths of the
church; "the world which is the field" denotes the whole human race;
"the sons of the kingdom who are the seed" denote the truths of faith of
the church; "the sons of the evil kingdom who are the tares" denote the
falsities of faith of the church; "the devil who is the enemy and soweth
them" denotes hell; "the consummation of the age which is the harvest"
denotes the last state of the church in respect to the reception of, the
truths of faith in good; "the angels who are the reapers" denote truths
from the Lord. That such things are signified by the above words of the
Lord, can be seen from their internal sense, as set forth in these
explications. From the above words it is also manifest in what manner
the Lord spoke when He was in the world, namely, by means of
significatives, to the end that the Word might be not only for the
world, but also for heaven. \[5\] In Revelation: An angel came out from
the temple, crying with a great voice to him that sat on the cloud, Put
forth thy sickle, and reap; because the hour is come for thee to reap;
for the harvest of the earth is dried up. And he that sat on the cloud
put forth his sickle into the earth; and the earth was reaped (Rev.
14:15, 16); here also "the harvest" denotes the last state of the church
in respect to the reception of the truths of faith in good. In Joel: The
priests, the ministers of Jehovah, have mourned; the field is laid
waste, the land hath mourned because the grain hath been laid waste, the
must is dried up, the oil languisheth. The husbandmen are ashamed, the
vine-dressers have howled over the wheat and over the barley; and
because the harvest of the field hath perished (Joel 1:9-11); the
vastation of the church in respect to the truths of faith and the goods
of charity is here described by such things as belong to the field, the
vineyard, and the oliveyard; the church itself is "the field;" and its
last state, which was called by the Lord "the consummation of the age,"
is "the harvest." \[6\] In the same: Put ye in the sickle, for the
harvest is ripe; come, get you down, for the winepress is full, the vats
overflow; for their wickedness is great (Joel 3:13); here also by "the
harvest" is signified the consummation of the age, or the last state of
the devastated church. In Jeremiah: Cut off the sower from Babylon, and
him that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest (Jer. 50:16). The
daughter of Babylon is like a threshing-floor; it is time to thresh her;
yet a little while, and the time of harvest cometh (Jer. 51:33); "the
time of harvest" denotes the last state of the church. \[7\] In Isaiah:
Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for Tyre is laid waste, so that there is no
house, nor doth anyone enter; the inhabitants of the isle are silent;
the merchants of Zidon that pass over the sea have replenished thee; and
through many waters the seed of Shihor, the harvest of the Nile, was her
increase; that she should be the mart of nations (Isa. 23:1-3); the holy
things of the church which are here described cannot be known to anyone
except from the internal sense. Everyone knows that the holy things of
heaven and of the church are everywhere in the Word, and that from this
the Word is holy. In the sense of the letter the subject here treated of
is the merchandise of Tyre and Zidon, which apart from the interior holy
sense are not holy. But what they signify in this sense is clear when
they are unfolded. "The ships of Tarshish" denote the doctrinal things
of truth and good; "Tyre and Zidon" denote the knowledges of good and
truth; there being "no house, nor anyone entering in," denotes that
there is no longer any good in which truth can be implanted; "the
inhabitants of the isle who are silent" denote more remote goods; "the
seed of Shihor" denotes memory-truth; "the harvest of the Nile her
increase" denotes the derivative good outside the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9296.">9296.</span></span>

And the feast of ingathering, in the going out of the year, when thou
gatherest in thy works out of the field. That this signifies worship
from a grateful mind on account of the implantation of good therefrom,
thus on account of regeneration and complete liberation from damnation,
is evident from the signification of "a feast," as being the worship of
the Lord and thanksgiving (of which above, n. 9286, 9287, 9294), thus
worship from a grateful mind; from the signification of "ingathering,"
when said of the implantation of truth in good, as being the
implantation of good itself; from the signification of "the going out of
the year," as being the end of the works; and from the signification of
"when thou gatherest in thy works out of the field," as being the
enjoyment and use of all things that have been implanted in good. For,
by "the works" are signified not only the things of the field, but also
those of the vineyard and the oliveyard, consequently those of the fruit
of the earth; as is evident from the description of this feast in Moses:
Thou shalt make for thee the feast of tabernacles seven days, after thou
hast gathered in from thy threshing-floor and from thy winepress. And
Jehovah thy God shall bless thee in all thy produce, and in every work
of thy hands (Deut. 16:13, 15). On the fifteenth day of the seventh
month, when ye have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep the
feast of Jehovah seven days (Lev. 23:39). \[2\] As by this feast is
signified the worship of the Lord from a grateful mind on account of the
implantation of good, and thus on account of complete liberation from
damnation, it shall first be explained what the implantation of good is.
It has already been everywhere shown that man has two faculties of life,
namely, the understanding and the will; and that the understanding is
allotted to the reception of truth, and the will to the reception of
good; for there are two things to which all things in the universe, both
in heaven and in the world, bear relation, namely, truth and good. From
this it is also evident that these two make the life of man, and that
the truth of faith and the good of charity make his new life, and that
unless both of these have been implanted in man he has no new life. In
what way the truth which is of faith is sown and implanted in man, is
known in the church; but it is not as yet so well known in what way the
good which is of charity is implanted. When he is a little child, man
receives good from the Lord, and this good is the good of innocence,
such as little children have. This good makes the beginning of the new
will in man, and in the succeeding age it grows in accordance with his
life of innocence with his companions and in accordance with his life of
goodness and obedience toward his parents and masters, but still more
with those who afterward suffer themselves to be regenerated. This the
Lord foresees, and provides according to the state of life that follows;
for in every present moment the Lord foresees evil, and provides good;
and this He does from the first thread of life even to eternity.
Afterward, when the man grows up and begins to think from himself, so
far as he is then carried away by the delights of the loves of self and
of the world, so far this new willing, or beginning of a new will, is
closed; and so far as he is not carried away by these delights, so far
it is opened, and is also perfected. \[3\] But how it is perfected by
the implantation of truth, shall now be told. This new will, which is
from the good of innocence, is the dwelling place through which the Lord
enters into man and excites him to will what is good, and from willing
to do it. This influx works in the man in proportion as he desists from
evils. From this he has the faculty of knowing, of perceiving,
reflecting upon, and understanding moral and civil truths and goods in
accordance with the delight of use. Afterward the Lord flows in through
this good into the truths of doctrine of the church with the man, and
calls forth from the memory such as are of service to the use of life,
and implants these in the good, and so perfects the good. It is from
this that the good with a man is wholly in accordance with the use of
life. If the use of life is for the neighbor (that is, for the good of
our fellow citizen, of our country, of the church, of heaven), and for
the Lord, then this good is the good of charity. But if the use of life
is only for self and the world, then this beginning of the new will is
closed, and beneath it is formed a will from the evils of the loves of
self and of the world, and from this an understanding is formed of
falsities. This latter will is closed above and open beneath, that is,
closed to heaven and open to the world. From all this it is evident how
truths are planted in good, and form it; and also that when a man is
good he is in heaven with the Lord; for as before said, the new will, in
which is the good of charity, is the dwelling place of the Lord, and
consequently is heaven in man; and the new understanding thence derived
is as it were the tabernacle through which He comes in and goes out.
\[4\] Such are the things in general and in particular that were
represented by the feast, which was called "the feast of the ingathering
of the fruits of the earth," and "the feast of tabernacles." That this
is the case, is evident from the institution of this feast, of which in
Moses: On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered
in the fruit of the earth, ye shall keep the feast of Jehovah seven
days; on the first day is a Sabbath, and on the eighth day a Sabbath.
And ye shall take you on the first day the fruit of the tree of honor,
branches of palm trees, and a bough of the dense tree, and willows of
the torrent; and ye shall be glad before Jehovah your God seven days.
All the homeborn of Israel shall dwell in tabernacles, that your
generations may know that I made the sons of Israel to dwell in
tabernacles when I led them forth out of the land of Egypt. (Lev.
23:39-43). Thou shalt make for thee the feast of tabernacles seven days,
after thou hast gathered in from thy threshing-floor and from thy
winepress; thou shalt be glad in that feast, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, and
the sojourner, and the orphan, and the widow, that are within thy gates.
Thou shalt be wholly glad (Deut. 16:13-15). \[5\] That a state of good
implanted by means of truth by the Lord, thus a state of heaven in man,
was represented by this feast, is plain from the internal sense of all
the things here mentioned. For in this sense by "the fifteenth day of
the seventh month" is signified the end of a former state and the
beginning of a new state (that "fifteenth" has this signification, see,
n. 8400; as also "seventh," n. 728, 6508, 8976, 9228); by "the fruit of
the earth which had been gathered in" is signified the good of charity
(n. 43, 55, 913, 983, 2846, 2847, 3146, 7690, 7692). The like is
signified by "the gathering in from the threshing-floor denotes the good
of truth (n. 5295, 5410); the wine of the winepress denotes truth from
good (n. 6377); and the oil which is also of the press denotes the good
from which is truth (n. 886, 3728, 4582, 4638). By "a Sabbath on the
first day, and a Sabbath on the eighth day" is signified the conjunction
of truth with good, and reciprocally of good with truth (that "the
Sabbath" denotes the conjunction of truth and good, see n. 8495, 8510,
8890, 8893, 9274); that the eighth day was also called "a Sabbath" is
because by "the eighth" was signified the beginning of a new state (n.
2044, 8400). \[6\] By "the fruit of the tree of honor," which they were
to take on the first day, was signified festivity and joy on account of
good implanted, wherefore the words follow, "that ye may be glad before
Jehovah;" by "the branches of palm-trees" are signified the internal
truths of this good (n. 8369); by "the bough of the dense (or
interwoven) tree" are signified the external truths of good, that is,
memory-knowledges (n. 2831, 8133); and by "the willows of the torrent,"
truths still more external, which are those of the bodily senses. By
"the tabernacles in which they were to dwell seven days" is signified
the holiness of love from the Lord and reciprocally to the Lord (see n.
414, 1102, 2145, 2152, 3312, 3391, 4391, 4599; and that it denotes the
holiness of union, n. 8666). By "the homeborn of Israel" are signified
those who are in the good of charity, thus abstractedly this good (n.
3654, 4598, 5801, 5803, 5806, 5812, 5817, 5819, 5826, 5833, 6426, 7957);
by the "gladness" of all then was signified joy such as those have who
are in good from the Lord, thus such as those have who are in heaven;
for he who is in the good of charity from the Lord is in heaven with the
Lord. These are the things for the sake of which this feast was
instituted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9297.">9297.</span></span>

Three times in the year shall every male of thine appear before the
faces of the Lord Jehovah. That this signifies the continual appearance
and presence of the Lord, therefore also His appearance and presence in
the truths of faith, is evident from the signification of "three times
in the year," as being what is complete and continual (see n. 4495,
9198); from the signification of "to be seen," as being appearance and
presence (n. 4198, 5975, 6893); from the signification of "a male," as
being the truth of faith (n. 2046, 7838); and from the signification of
"the faces," when said of Jehovah, that is, of the Lord, as being the
Divine good of the Divine love, or mercy (n. 222, 223, 5585, 7599); and
as the Divine good of the Divine love is Jehovah Himself, that is, the
Lord, therefore by "appearing before the faces of the Lord Jehovah" the
same is signified as by being seen by the Lord. Moreover, it is the Lord
who sees man, and makes Himself present with him, and gives to the man
to see Him. Thus man does not see the Lord from himself, but from the
Lord with himself. \[2\] How it is to be understood that there is also a
continual appearance and presence of the Lord in the truths of faith,
shall be briefly told. The presence of the Lord with a man is in the
good in him, because good makes his life; but not truth, except insofar
as it is from good. From this it is that (as before said, n. 9296) the
dwelling place of the Lord with a man is in the good of innocence; and
therefore when a man has been regenerated, the Lord is present with him
not only in good, but also in truths which are from good; for the truths
then have life from good, and are the good in a form, by means of which
the quality of the good can be perceived. These are the truths that make
the new understanding of the man, which makes a one with his new will.
For, as before said, all things bear relation to truth and to good, and
the understanding of man is allotted to truths, but the will to the good
from which are the truths. From this it is evident how it is to be
understood that the appearance and presence of the Lord are then also in
the truths of faith. These are the things which are signified by "three
times in the year shall every male appear before the faces of the Lord
Jehovah." It is said that "the male" shall appear, because by a "male"
is signified the truth of faith; and therefore it is said "before the
faces of the Lord Jehovah," for the reason that by "Jehovah" is
signified the Divine being, and by "Lord" the Divine coming-forth from
being; consequently the being in man is good, and the coming-forth from
this truth. \[3\] It is said in the church that faith is from the Lord;
but be it known that the faith which is from charity is from the Lord,
but not the faith which is separate from charity; for this latter faith
is from man's own, and is called "persuasive faith" (of which in the
Doctrine of Charity and Faith before the next chapter). A man is able to
know whether the faith in him is from the Lord or from himself; one who
is affected by truths merely for the sake of a reputation for learning,
in order that he may gain honors and wealth, and not for the sake of the
good use of life, is in persuasive faith, which is from himself, and not
from the Lord. \[4\] In the truth of faith there are theoretical matters
and practical ones; and he who regards the theoretical for the sake of
the practical, and who sees the former in the latter, and who thus from
both conjoined regards the good use of life, and is affected by both for
the sake of this end, is in faith from the Lord. The reason is that the
use of life, being the end, with him is good, and all things are formed
according to the use of life; and the truths of faith are that by which
the formation is effected. That this is so, is very manifest from those
who are in the other life. All there, without exception, are reduced to
the state of their good, or to the state of their evil, and thus to the
use of their life, which had been their end, that is, which they had
loved above all things, and which consequently had been the very delight
of their life. All are reduced to this. The truths or falsities which
had made a one with this use, remain, and more besides are adopted which
conjoin themselves with the former, and complete the use, and cause the
use to appear in its own real form. From this it is that spirits and
angels are forms of their use; evil spirits forms of evil use, and these
are in hell; good spirits or angels forms of good use, and these are in
heaven. From this also it is that the quality of spirits is known the
moment they are present; their truths of faith are known from their
faces and the beauty of these in respect to their form; and the good
itself, which is the use, from the fire of love therein which gives life
to the beauty; and also from the sphere which surges from them. From all
this it is again evident what is the presence of the Lord in the truths
of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9298.">9298.</span></span>

Thou shalt not sacrifice the blood of My sacrifice upon what is
fermented. That this signifies that the worship of the Lord from the
truths of the church must not be commingled with falsities from evil, is
evident from the signification of "sacrificing" and of "a sacrifice," as
being the worship of the Lord (see n. 922, 923, 2180, 2805, 2807, 2830,
3519, 6905, 8680, 8936); from the signification of "what is fermented,"
as being what is falsified, and falsity from evil (n. 2342, 7906, 8051,
8058); and from the signification of "blood," as being truth from good,
thus the truth of the church (n. 4735, 6978, 7317, 7326, 7846, 7850,
7877, 9127). From this it is evident that by "thou shalt not sacrifice
the blood of My sacrifice upon what is frequented," is signified that
the worship of the Lord from the truths of the church must not be
commingled with falsities from evil. (What falsity from evil is, and
what falsity not from evil, see n. 1679, 2408, 4729, 6359, 7272, 8298,
9258.) \[2\] That truths from good, which are the truths of the church,
must not be commingled with falsities from evil, is because they do not
at all agree together; for they are opposites, and cause a conflict,
whereby either the good will perish, or the evil will be dissipated; for
good is from heaven, that is, through heaven from the Lord; and evil is
from hell. There are indeed truths with the evil, and also falsities
with the good; but the truths with the evil are not commingled with
falsities from evil in them so long as they are merely in the memory and
serve as means for evil, for so long they are without life. But if the
truths are falsified so as to favor evil, which is done by a wrong
interpretation, they then are commingled, whence is profanation of
truth. (The nature of this profanation may be seen above, n. 1008, 1010,
1059, 1327, 1328, 2051, 2426, 3398, 3399, 3402, 4289, 4601, 6348, 6959,
6960, 6963, 6971, 8394, 8943, 9188.) \[3\] That it was forbidden to
sacrifice upon what was fermented is evident from the following law
concerning the meat-offering which was offered upon the altar together
with the sacrifice, of which in Moses: No meat-offering which ye shall
bring to Jehovah shall be made fermented; and there shall be no ferment,
nor any honey, of which ye shall burn an offering made by fire to
Jehovah (Lev. 2:2). From all this it is evident that the profanation of
truth is signified by this law, and therefore it is said, "the blood of
the sacrifice," and not "the sacrifice," because "blood" denotes truth
from good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9299.">9299.</span></span>

And the fat of My feast shalt not remain overnight until the morning.
That this signifies the good of worship not from the man's own, but from
the Lord, always new, is evident from the signification of "remaining
overnight," as being that which is from man's own, for by "night" in the
Word is signified what is evil and false (see n. 221, 709, 6000, 7776,
7851, 7870, 7947), thus also man's own, because this is nothing but evil
and falsity (n. 210, 215, 694, 874-876, 987, 1023, 1044, 4318, 5660,
5786, 8480); from the signification of "fat," or "fatness," as being the
good of love (n. 353, 5943), here the good of love in worship, because
it is said "the fat of the feast," and "a feast" denotes worship (n.
9286, 9287, 9294); and from the signification of "the morning," as being
the Lord and His coming, as can be seen from what has been shown above
concerning the morning (n. 2405, 2780, 5962, 8426, 8427, 8812);
consequently here, where the subject treated of is the good of worship
that is not from man's own, by "the morning" is signified such good from
the Lord always new.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9300.">9300.</span></span>

The first of the firstfruits of thy ground thou shalt bring into the
house of Jehovah thy God. That this signifies that all truths of good
and goods of truth are holy, because they are from the Lord alone, is
evident from the signification of "the firstfruits of the ground," as
being that the goods and truths of the church are to be ascribed to the
Lord alone (that "the firstfruits" denote these, see n. 9223; and that
"the ground" denotes the church, n. 566, 1068). It is said "the first of
the firstfruits," because this ascription must be the foremost thing;
for goods and truths have their life from the Lord, and they have life
from the Lord when they are ascribed to Him. And from the signification
of "bringing into the house of God," as being to ascribe to the Lord,
that they may be holy. (That "the house of God" denotes the Lord, seen.
3720; and that everything holy is from the Lord, n. 9229.) From all of
which it is evident that by "the first of the first fruits of thy ground
thou shalt bring into the house of Jehovah thy God" is signified that
all truths of good and goods of truth are holy, because they are from
the Lord alone. \[2\] They are called "truths of good" and "goods of
truth," because with the man who is being regenerated, and still more so
with him when he has been regenerated, truths are of good, and goods are
of truth; for truths make the life of the understanding, and good makes
the life of the will. Moreover, with the regenerate man the
understanding and the will make one mind, and communicate reciprocally,
the truths which are of the understanding with the good which is of the
will, and the good which is of the will with the truths which are of the
understanding. They flow into each other scarcely otherwise than as the
blood flows from the heart into the lungs, and thence back again into
the heart; and then from the left ventricle of the heart into the
arteries, and from these through the veins back again into the heart.
Such an idea may be formed about the reciprocal action of good and truth
in man from his understanding into his will, and from his will into his
understanding. That an idea about the reciprocal action of the truth of
faith and the good of charity in the understanding and the will, may be
obtained in especial from the lungs and the heart, is because the lungs
correspond to the truths which are of faith, and the heart to the good
which is of love (n. 3635, 3883-3896). Hence also it is that by the
"heart" in the Word is signified the life of the will, and by the "soul"
the life of faith (n. 9050). \[3\] That from these an idea can be formed
about the truths which are of the understanding and the good which is of
the will, is because all things that belong to faith and love carry with
them an idea from such things as the man knows, for without an idea from
what he knows and feels in himself a man cannot think; and a man thinks
rightly even about the things of faith and love, when he thinks of them
from correspondences, for correspondences are natural truths, in which
as in mirrors, spiritual truths are represented. Wherefore, so far as
the ideas of thought concerning things spiritual are formed
independently of correspondences, so far they are formed either from the
fallacies of the senses, or from what is inconsistent with such things.
The kind of ideas a man has about what belongs to faith and love, is
very manifest in the other life, for there ideas are clearly perceived.
\[4\] The statement that the truths of faith bear relation to man's
understanding, and the good of charity to his will, may seem not
consistent to those who say and confirm themselves in the idea that the
things of faith are simply to be believed, because the natural man and
his understanding do not apprehend anything of this kind, and because
faith is not from man, but from the Lord. Nevertheless the same persons
acknowledge and believe that a man is enlightened in truths and
enkindled with good when he reads the Word, and that when he is
enlightened he perceives what is true and what is not true; and they
also call those men enlightened who excel others in discovering truths
from the Word; which shows that those who are enlightened see and
perceive within themselves whether a thing is true, or is not true. That
which is then inwardly enlightened is their understanding, and that
which is then inwardly enkindled is their will. But if it is genuine
truth of faith in which they are enlightened, and if it is genuine good
of charity with which they are enkindled, then it is the understanding
of the internal man that is enlightened; and the will of the internal
man that is enkindled. The case is very different with those who have
not the genuine truth of faith, and the genuine good of charity. \[5\]
They who are in truth and good not genuine, and even they who are in
falsities and evils, can indeed confirm the truths of the church, but
they cannot see and perceive from within whether they are truths. Hence
it is that most persons remain in the doctrinal things of the church in
which they were born, and merely confirm these; and they would have
confirmed themselves in the greatest heresies, such as Socinianism and
Judaism, if they had been born of such parents. From all this it is
evident that the understanding is enlightened with those who are in the
affection of truth from good, but not with those who are in the
affection of truth from evil. With those who are in the affection of
truth from good the understanding of the internal man is enlightened,
and the will of the internal man is enkindled; but with those who in the
affection of truth from evil the understanding of the internal man is
not enlightened, neither is the will of the internal man enkindled, for
the reason that they are natural men, and therefore insist that the
natural man cannot apprehend the things of faith. \[6\] That with those
who are in the affection of truth from good, and who consequently are
interior and spiritual men, it is the understanding which is enlightened
in the truths of faith, and that it is the will which is enkindled with
the good of charity, is very manifest from the same persons in the other
life. There they are in the understanding of all things of faith, and in
the will of all things of charity, and this they also clearly perceive.
Consequently they possess intelligence and wisdom unspeakable, for after
putting off the body they are in that interior understanding which was
enlightened in the world, and in that interior will which was there
enkindled. But at that time they were not able to perceive in what
manner they were enlightened and enkindled, because they then thought in
the body, and from such things as belong to the world. From all this it
is now evident that the truths of faith make the life of the
understanding, and the good of charity the life of the will;
consequently that the understanding must needs be present in the things
of faith, and the will in those of charity; or what is the same, that it
is into these two faculties that the faith and charity from the Lord
flow, and that these are received according to the state of these
faculties, thus that the dwelling place of the Lord in man is nowhere
else. \[7\] From what has been said about the internal and the external
man (n. 6057, 9279), an idea can be formed further, that the internal
man is formed according to the image of heaven, and the external man
according to the image of the world; and that those in whom the internal
man has not been opened see nothing from heaven; and that what they see
from the world about heaven is thick darkness; and that therefore they
can have no spiritual idea about what belongs to faith and charity.
Hence also it is that they cannot even apprehend what Christian good or
charity is; insomuch that they quite think that the life of heaven
consists solely in the truths which they call matters of faith; and also
that the life of heaven is possible with all men whatever who have the
confidence of faith, even though they have not the life of faith. \[8\]
How blind such people are in respect to the life of faith, which is
charity, is very evident from the fact that they pay no attention
whatever to the thousands of things the Lord Himself taught about the
good of life; and that when they read the Word they at once cast these
things behind faith's back, and thus hide them from themselves and from
others. Hence also it is that they cast out from the doctrine of the
church everything that belongs to good-that is, to charity and its
works-into a lower doctrine, which they call moral theology, and which
they regard as natural and not spiritual; when yet after death the life
of charity remains, and only so much of faith as is in agreement with
this life; that is to say, there remains only so much of thought about
the truths of faith as there is of the will of good according to these
truths. (That those who are in faith from good are able to confirm
themselves therein by all knowledges of whatever kind, and thereby
strengthen their faith, see n. 2454, 2568, 2588, 4156, 4293, 4760, 5201,
6047, 8629.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_195"></span>[9295-1](ac186.htm#fr_195) That is, of the evil
kingdom. See below. \[REVISED.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9301-9350](ac187)
