[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac180)  [Next](ac182.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="9001.">9001.</span></span>

He shall do to her according to the judgment of daughters. That this
signifies that it shall be as is the genuine affection of truth, is
evident from the signification of "according to the judgment," as being
with the same right; for by the "judgment" is signified external truth
or right such as is in the civil state in which is the representative
church (n. 8972); and from the signification of "daughter," as being the
affection of truth (n. 2362, 3024, 3963), here the genuine affection of
truth, because by "the maidservant" is signified the affection of truth
from natural delight (n. 8993), thus not genuine until she has been
betrothed either to her master, or to his son. But when she has been
betrothed, that is, when this affection has been conjoined with the
spiritual truth which is signified by "master," and by "son," then it
becomes as it were genuine, for then the natural has been subordinated
to spiritual truth, and when it has been subordinated it is no longer in
its own right, but in that of the spiritual truth under which it has
been subordinated; consequently the natural becomes as the spiritual,
because it acts as a one with it. And then also the life of spiritual
truth is transferred into the natural, and vivifies it. But betrothal,
or conjunction, with a maidservant, differs from conjunction with a
daughter in the fact that the latter conjunction is effected in the
interior man, but the former in the external man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9002.">9002.</span></span>

If he shall take him another. That this signifies conjunction with the
affection of truth from another stock, is evident from the signification
of "taking" or "betrothing" another, as being to be conjoined (see n.
8996); for in the spiritual sense, matrimony, which is here meant by
"betrothing," denotes the conjunction of the life of the one with that
of the other. According to Divine order there is a conjunction of the
life from the truths of faith with the life from the good of charity.
From this comes all spiritual conjunction, from which as from its origin
comes forth natural conjunction. By "taking another" is signified
conjunction with the affection of truth from another stock, for the
"maidservant" before spoken of denotes the affection of truth from
natural delight (n. 8993); consequently "another" denotes the affection
of truth from another stock. \[2\] What is meant by "affection from
another stock" may be known from the fact that all affection which is of
love is of the widest extension, so wide indeed as to surpass all human
understanding. The human understanding does not even go so far as to
know the genera of the varieties of this affection, still less the
species of these genera, and less still the particulars, and singulars
of the particulars. For whatsoever is in man, especially that which is
of affection or love, is of infinite variety, as can plainly be seen
from the fact that the affection of good and truth, which is of love to
the Lord and of love toward the neighbor, constitutes the universal
heaven, and that nevertheless all who are in the heavens, where there
are myriads, differ from one another as to good, and will differ even if
they should be multiplied to countless myriads of myriads. For there
cannot be in the universe one thing that is exactly like another, and
that subsists in a distinct way; it must be various, that is, different
from all others, in order that it may be anything by itself (see n. 684,
690, 3241, 3744, 3745, 3986, 4005, 4149, 5598, 7236, 7833, 7836, 8003).
From all this it can in some measure be known what is meant by "an
affection from another stock," namely, an affection which differs from
the other, but which can nevertheless be conjoined with the same
spiritual truth. Such affections as are represented by maidservants
betrothed to other man, are of one genus; but there is a difference
among them as to species, which is called a "specific" difference. These
things might be illustrated by various examples; but the general idea
derived from what has been already said will suffice. \[3\] In order
that there might be represented the conjunctions and subordinations of
such affections under one spiritual truth, it was permitted the
Israelitish and Jewish nation to have a number of concubines-as to
Abraham (Gen. 25:6), also to David, Solomon, and others. For whatever
was permitted that nation was for the sake of the representation;
namely, that by things external they might represent the internal things
of the church (n. 3246). But when the internal things of the church had
been opened by the Lord, the representations of internal things by
external ceased, because it was then internal things, which are those of
faith and love, with which the man of the church was to be imbued, and
by means of which he was to worship the Lord; and therefore it was then
no longer permissible to have more wives than one, nor to have
concubines for wives (n. 865, 2727-2759, 3246, 4837).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9003.">9003.</span></span>

Her food, her raiment, and her conjugial due, he shall not diminish.
That this signifies no deprivation of the interior life which is "food,"
nor of the exterior life which is "clothing," thus no deprivation of
conjunction which is the "conjugial due," is evident from the
signification of "food," as being the sustenance of the interior life,
for in the spiritual sense "food," or meat and drink, denote the
knowledges of good and truth, "meat," the knowledges of good (n. 5147),
and "drink," the knowledges of truth (n. 3168, 3772); and therefore
"food" denotes the things which nourish the spiritual life of man (n.
5293, 5576, 5579, 5915, 8562); from the signification of "covering," or
"clothing," as being the sustenance of the exterior life, for in the
spiritual sense "covering," or "clothing," denotes lower
memory-knowledges, because these are what sustain the external life of
man (n. 5248, 6918); from the signification of the "conjugial due," as
being conjunction; and from the signification of "not to diminish," as
being not to deprive of. \[2\] The case herein is that natural affection
conjoined with spiritual truth, which is signified by "a maidservant
betrothed to a son," requires continual sustenance of life from the
spiritual truth with which it has been conjoined; for affection without
sustenance therefrom perishes. It is with the affection of man as it is
with man himself-unless it is sustained with food it dies. Moreover in
respect to his interiors man is nothing but affection; a good man the
affection of good and the truth thence derived; but an evil man the
affection of evil and the falsity thence derived. This is especially
evident from a man when he becomes a spirit, for the sphere of life
which then flows forth from him is a sphere either of the affection of
good, or of the affection of evil. His nourishment or sustenance then is
not from natural food and drink, but from spiritual food and drink,
which are falsity from evil to an evil spirit, and truth from good to a
good spirit. The nourishments of human minds during their life in the
body in the world, are no other, and from this it is that all things
which relate to food, such as bread, flesh, wine, water, and many other
things, in the spiritual sense in the Word signify such things as belong
to spiritual nourishment. \[3\] From this it is also plain what is meant
by these words of the Lord: Man doth not live by bread alone, but by
every word that goeth forth out of the mouth of God (Matt. 4:4). Ye
shall eat and drink upon My table in My kingdom (Luke 22:30). I say unto
you, I will not drink henceforth of this product of the vine, until that
day when I shall drink it new with you in My Father's kingdom (Matt.
26:29); saying these words after He had instituted the Holy Supper, in
which "the bread and the wine" denote those things which are of love and
faith; in like manner also "the flesh and the blood." From this it may
be clearly known what is meant by "the flesh and blood" of the Lord in
John 6:49-58; and also by these words in the same chapter: My flesh is
food indeed, and My blood is drink indeed (John 6:55). (That "flesh" in
the Word denotes the good of love, see n. 3813, 7850; also that "blood"
denotes the good of faith, n. 4735, 6978, 7317, 7326, 7846, 7850, 7877;
in like manner "bread and wine," n. 2165, 2177, 3464, 3478, 3735, 3813,
4211, 4217, 4735, 4976, 5915, 6118, 6377.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9004.">9004.</span></span>

If he shall not do these three to her. That this signifies the
deprivation of these things, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9005.">9005.</span></span>

Then she shall go out free with no silver. That this signifies
alienation therefrom without truth conjoined with it, is evident from
the signification of "going out," here from service and from coupling,
as being abandonment by her master-husband \[dominus vir\], thus
alienation; and from the signification of "free with no silver," as
being without truth conjoined therewith (that "silver" denotes truth,
see n. 1551, 2954, 5658, 6112, 6914, 6917, 8932). How the case herein
is, is evident from what was shown just above (n. 9003), namely, that
natural affection conjoined with spiritual truth, which is signified by
"a maidservant betrothed to a son," cannot possibly subsist without
sustenance from spiritual truth; and therefore if it is not sustained,
the conjunction is dissolved, consequently there is alienation. The
reason why this takes place without this truth being conjoined with it,
is that it is then associated with another truth, which cannot be
effected with the life derived from truth from another source. Such is
the signification of the above words, because such is the case with
consociations in the spiritual world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9006.">9006.</span></span>

Verses 12-15. He that smiteth a man, and he die, dying he shall die. And
he that hath not lain in wait, and God caused it to happen to his hand;
then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee. And when a man
shall act of set purpose against his companion, to kill him with deceit;
thou shalt take him from Mine altar, that he may die. And he that
smiteth his father and his mother, dying he shall die. "He that smiteth
a man, and he die," signifies the injuring of the truth of faith and the
consequent loss of spiritual life; "dying he shall die," signifies
damnation; "and he that hath not lain in wait," signifies when it was
not of foresight from the will; "but God caused it to happen to his
hand," signifies appearing as of chance; "then I will appoint thee a
place whither he shall flee," signifies a state of blamelessness, and
thus exempt from punishment; "and when a man shall act of set purpose
against his companion," signifies premeditation from a depraved will;
"to kill him with deceit," signifies the consequent malice and ardor of
depriving the neighbor of eternal life; "thou shalt take him from Mine
altar, that he may die," signifies damnation even although he flees to
the worship of the Lord, and supplicates for forgiveness, and promises
repentance; "and he that smiteth his father and his mother," signifies
the blaspheming of the Lord and of His kingdom; "dying he shall die,"
signifies damnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9007.">9007.</span></span>

He that smiteth a man, and he die. That this signifies the injuring of
the truth of faith and the consequent loss of spiritual life, is evident
from the signification of "smiting," as being to injure by falsity (see
n. 7136, 7146); from the signification of "a man" \[vir\] as being the
truth of faith (of which below); and from the signification of "dying,"
as being the loss of spiritual life (n. 5407, 6119, 7494); for in the
internal sense no other life is meant, but in the external sense natural
life is meant. The reason why spiritual life perishes by the injuring of
the truth of faith, is that good united to truth constitutes that life;
and therefore when truth is stolen away, good, and thus spiritual life,
falls to the ground. That "a man" denotes the truth of faith, is because
in heaven no attention is paid to person, or to anything of person; but
to things abstracted from person (n. 4380, 8343, 8985); consequently
where "a man" is mentioned in the Word, they do not perceive a man,
because a man is a person; but instead they perceive that faculty of his
by virtue of which he is a man, namely, the intellectual faculty; and
when they perceive this faculty, they perceive the truth of faith,
because the truth of faith belongs to it, and not only enlightens it,
but also forms it. And as by "a man" \[vir\] there is perceived in
heaven the intellectual of man, so by "a man" \[homo\] there is
perceived his will; because man is man \[homo\] from the will; but is
man \[vir\] from the understanding. And as the will is the man himself,
therefore the good of love is the man, for this belongs to the will, and
perfects, and makes it. (That "man" \[vir\] denotes the intellectual,
and therefore the truth of faith, see n. 158, 265, 749, 1007, 2517,
3134, 3309, 3459, 4823, 7716; and that "man" \[homo\] denotes the good
of love, n. 768, 4287, 7523, 8547, 8988.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9008.">9008.</span></span>

Dying he shall die. That this signifies damnation, is evident from the
signification of "dying to die," as being damnation (see n. 5407, 6119,
7494). That "death" denotes damnation, is because with those who are
damned the truths of faith and the goods of love have been extinguished,
for these are what constitute the veriest life of man, because they are
from the Lord who is the only source of life. When these have been
extinguished, falsities and evils succeed in their place, which being
opposite to the truths and goods that are of life, are therefore of
death, but of spiritual death, which is damnation, hell, eternal
unhappiness. That nevertheless those are alive who are in evils and
falsities, or who are in hell, is because they have been born men, and
therefore into the capacity of receiving life from the Lord; and also do
receive so much of life from the Lord as to be able to think, reason,
and speak, and thereby to cause the evil in themselves to appear as
good, and the falsity as truth; and thus to live as semblances of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9009.">9009.</span></span>

And he that hath not lain in wait. That this signifies when it was not
of foresight from the will, is evident from the signification of "lying
in wait," as being to act with deliberation, thus with foresight, for
the evil which one who lies in wait is about to do he foresees in his
mind; and because he does such evil with foresight, he therefore does it
also from the will, for it proceeds therefrom. There are evils which
proceed from the will of man, but are not of foresight; and there are
evils which proceed from the will, and are of foresight. Those which
proceed from the will, and from foresight, are much worse than those
which are not from foresight; because the man sees that they are evils,
and can therefore desist from them, but is not willing, and he thereby
confirms them in himself, and evils confirmed put on nature, so that
afterward they can scarcely be extirpated; for in such case he summons
spirits from hell who afterward do not easily retire. \[2\] Evils which
proceed from one part of the mind and not at the same time from the
other, such as those which come from the intellectual part, and not at
the same time from the will part, are not rooted in and appropriated to
the man. That alone is rooted in and appropriated to him which passes
from the intellectual part into the will part; or what is the same,
which passes from the thought which is of the understanding into the
affection which is of the will, and thence into act. Those things which
enter into the will are those which are said to enter into the heart.
\[3\] But evils which proceed solely from the will, thus not with
premeditation, are such as the man inclines to hereditarily, or from
some previous consequent actual doing of evil. These are not imputed to
the man unless he has confirmed them in his intellectual part (see n.
966, 2308, 8806); but when they have been confirmed in this part, they
have then been inscribed on the man, and become his own, and are imputed
to him. But these evils cannot be confirmed with a man in his
intellectual part except in his adult age, namely, when he begins to
think, and understand things, for himself; for before this he had no
faith from himself, but only from his teachers and parents. From all
this it is evident what is signified by, "if he has not lain in wait,"
namely, when it was not of foresight from the will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9010.">9010.</span></span>

But God caused it to happen to his hand. That this signifies appearing
as of chance, is evident from the idea concerning chance among the
ancients, which was that it happened from God; and therefore they
expressed the idea of chance by the phrase, "God caused it to happen to
the hand." For they who were of the ancient churches knew that the
Providence of the Lord is in each and all things, and that things which
happen, that is, which appear as of chance, were of Providence.
Wherefore the simple, who could not distinguish between the things which
were of permission, and those which were of good pleasure, attributed to
the Lord both good and evil; good because they knew that all good is
from Him; and evil by reason of the appearance. For when a man does
evils, and thereby turns himself away from the Lord, it appears as if
the Lord turns Himself away; for the Lord then appears to him behind,
and not in front. From this then it is that if anyone smote another by
chance, thus without will from foresight, it was expressed by the words,
"God caused it to happen to the hand." (That the Providence of the Lord
is in each and all things, has been already shown, see n. 1919, 4329,
5122, 5155, 5195, 5894, 6058, 6481-6487, 6489, 6491, 7004, 7007, 8478,
8717; also that things which happen, or are of chance, are of
Providence, n. 5508, 6493, 6494; and that evil is attributed to the
Lord, when yet it is from man, n. 2447, 5798, 6071, 6832, 6991, 6997,
7533, 7877, 7926, 8197, 8227, 8228, 8282, 8284, 8483, 8632.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9011.">9011.</span></span>

Then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee. That this
signifies a state of blamelessness, and that is exempt from punishment,
is evident from the signification of "place," as being state (see n.
2625, 2837, 3356, 3387, 3404, 4321, 4882, 5605, 7381); and from the
signification of "an asylum," or place whither he should flee who
unexpectedly, or by chance, had killed anyone, as being a state of
blamelessness, and thus exempt from punishment; for they who had smitten
anyone by chance, that is, without intent, thus not with premeditation,
nor from an evil affection which is of the will, were not in any fault
of their own; and therefore when such came to a place of asylum they
were exempt from punishment. By these persons were represented those who
not of set purpose injure anyone in respect to the truths and goods of
faith, and consequently extinguish his spiritual life; for such are in a
blameless state and one exempt from punishment; as for instance are
those who have complete faith in their religiosity, which is also in
what is false, and who from this reason against the truth and good of
faith, and thus persuade, as heretics will sometimes do who are
conscientious, and consequently are zealots. \[2\] That such persons
were represented by those who were to flee to asylums is evident in
Moses: Ye shall select suitable cities, which shall be cities of refuge
for you; that the manslayer may flee thither that smiteth a soul through
error; as if he hath struck him unexpectedly, without enmity, or hath
cast upon him any instrument without set purpose, or with any stone
wherewith he may die, seeing him not, so that he make it fall upon him,
and he die, when yet he was not his enemy, neither sought his evil (Num.
35:11, 22, 23). This is the word of the manslayer, who shall flee
thither that he may live; when he hath smitten his companion unawares,
when he was not his hater yesterday and the day before, when he come
into the forest with his companion to hew wood, but when his hand hath
struck with the axe, to cut the wood, and the iron hath been shaken off
from the wood, and hath found his companion that he die; he shall flee
unto one of these cities, that he may live (Deut. 19:4-5). \[3\] Here is
described the state of one who is blameless and exempt from punishment,
and who has injured someone by the falsities of faith which he had
believed to be truths, or by means of memory-knowledges derived from the
fallacies of the senses, and thus has done injury to the internal or
spiritual life of the other. In order that this might be signified, such
error or chance is described by an instrument of some kind, and by a
stone which he cast upon his companion, so that he died, and likewise by
an axe, or the iron thereof, falling from its wood while they were both
hewing wood in the forest. The reason why this is described by such
things, is that "an instrument" signifies memory-knowledge; "a stone"
the truth of faith, and in the opposite sense falsity; in like manner
"the iron of an axe;" and "to hew wood" signifies disputation concerning
good from one's religiosity. \[4\] Everyone can see that homicide
committed through error would not have been described without a secret
reason by the iron of an axe falling from its wood in a forest, because
such a mischance can rarely happen, in fact scarcely once in the course
of many years. But such a mischance is so described on account of the
internal sense, in which is described the injury to a soul by another
through the falsities of faith which from his religiosity he had
believed to be truths; for he who does an injury by means of falsities
which he believes to be truths, does it not of set purpose, or from a
better conscience, because he does it from the faith and consequent zeal
of his religiosity. That these things might be signified in the internal
sense, they are described, as before said, by those who kill their
companions by mistake, with a stone, by hewing wood in a forest and the
iron of the axe then falling from the wood upon a companion; for "a
stone" denotes the truth of faith in the natural man, and in the
opposite sense falsity (see n. 643, 1298, 3720, 6426, 8609, 8941), in
like manner "iron" (n. 425, 426); "the iron of an axe falling from its
wood" denotes truth separated from good, for "wood" denotes good (n.
643, 2812, 3720, 8354), "hewing wood," the placing of merit in works (n.
1110, 4943, 8740); but "hewing wood in a forest" denotes discussing
these and the like things, and also bringing them into question; for "a
forest" denotes a religiosity. \[5\] Such things are signified by
"hewing wood in a forest with axes" in Jeremiah: The hirelings of Egypt
will go in strength, and will come against her with axes, as hewers of
wood, they shall cut down her forest, said Jehovah (Jer. 66:22, 23).
Here "to cut down wood in a forest" denotes to act from a false,
religiosity, and to destroy such things as are of the church; for the
church is called a "forest," a "garden," and a "paradise;" a "forest"
from knowledge, a "garden" from intelligence, and a "paradise" from
wisdom (n. 3220), because "trees" denote the perceptions of good and of
truth, and also the knowledges thereof (n. 103, 2163, 2722, 2972, 4552,
7690, 7692); and as a "forest" denotes the church as to knowledge, thus
as to external things, it also denotes a religiosity. \[6\] The church
as to knowledge, or as to external things, is signified by a "forest" in
David: The field shall exalt, and all that is therein; then shall all
the trees of the forest sing (Ps. 96:12). Lo we heard of Him in
Ephratah, we found Him in the fields of the forest (Ps. 132:6); speaking
of the Lord. In Isaiah: The light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his
Holy One for flame. And it shall burn the glory of his forest, and his
Carmel; it shall consume from the soul even to the flesh; whence the
rest of the trees of his forest shall be a number that a child may
describe them. He shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron,
and Lebanon shall fall by a magnificent one (Isa. 10:17-19, 34). "The
forest" denotes the church as to the knowledges of truth; "Carmel," the
church as to the knowledges of good; in like manner "Lebanon" and
"Hermon;" the "trees of the forest" denote knowledges, as above; to be
"a number that a child may describe" means few; "the thickets of the
forest" denote memory-knowledges (n. 2831). \[7\] In the same: Thou hast
said, By the multitude of my chariots I will go up to the height of the
mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and I will cut down the tall cedars
thereof, the choice of the fir-trees thereof; then will I come unto the
height of his border, the forest of his Carmel (Isa. 37:24). I will
visit upon you according to the fruit of your works, and I will kindle a
fire in her forest (Jer. 21:14). Prophesy against the forest of the
field unto the south; and say to the forest of the south, Behold I will
kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every tree (Ezek. 20:46, 47).
Feed Thy people with Thy rod, the flock of Thine heritage who dwell
alone in the forest in the midst of Carmel (Mic. 7:14). Who does not see
that in these passages by "a forest" is not meant a forest, and that by
"Lebanon" and "Carmel" which are "forests" are not meant Lebanon and
Carmel, but something of the church? yet what of the church is meant has
been hitherto hidden, because the internal sense lies hidden. And it is
wonderful that in so learned a world as is Europe above all the rest,
where they have the Word, in every particular of which there is an
internal sense, the very knowledge of this sense is wanting; when yet
this knowledge existed among the ancients in Chaldea, in Assyria, in
Egypt, in Arabia, and thence in Greece, in whose books, emblems, and
hieroglyphics such things are still to be met with. But the reason why
such knowledge has perished, is that there is no faith that the
spiritual is anything.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9012.">9012.</span></span>

And when a man shall act of set purpose against his companion. That this
signifies premeditation from a depraved will, is evident from the
signification of "to act of set purpose," as being to act with
premeditation, for he who proposes to himself evil, does it with
premeditation; and as it is evil, and he does it, it is from the will;
for the doing of evil is originally from this source. But the falsity by
which evil is affirmed, defended, and thus promoted, is of the thought;
thus comes from a depraved or inverted understanding. (That man is
guilty when he does evil from both, namely, from the understanding and
from the will, may be seen above, n. 9009.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9013.">9013.</span></span>

To kill him with deceit. That this signifies the consequent malice of
depriving the neighbor of eternal life, is evident from the
signification of "to kill," as being to take away faith and charity from
the neighbor, and thus to deprive him of spiritual life, which is
eternal life (see n. 6767, 8902); and from the signification of
"deceit," as being malice from the will with forethought or
premeditation, thus from set purpose. Evils are done either from enmity,
or from hatred, or from revenge, and either with deceit or without it.
But evils done with deceit are the worst, because deceit is like a
poison which infects and destroys with infernal venom, for it goes
through the whole mind even to its interiors. The reason is that he who
is in deceit meditates evil, and feeds his understanding with it, and
takes delight in it, and thus destroys everything therein that belongs
to man, that is, which belongs to life from the good of faith and of
charity. \[2\] They who in the world have ensnared the neighbor with
deceit in respect to worldly and earthly things, in the other life
ensnare the neighbor with deceit in respect to spiritual and heavenly
things; and because they do this in secret, they are dispatched to the
hells behind the back, deep down according to the malignity and
hurtfulness of the deceit, and in this way are separated from those who
are in front; the latter being called "spirits," but the former, "genii"
(n. 5035, 5977, 8593, 8622, 8625). Genii are not admitted to men as
spirits are, because they flow into the affections of the will, by
acting against the good of love and charity so secretly that it cannot
possibly be perceived; and in this way they destroy the truth of faith.
In their own hell they render themselves invisible before their
companions; for they who have acted secretly in the world can render
themselves invisible in the other life; but when they appear, they
appear among themselves like men; whereas when they are looked at by the
angels they appear like serpents, for they have the nature of serpents,
and that which goes forth from them is like poison, and indeed is
spiritual poison. \[3\] Wherefore in the Word "poison" signifies deceit,
and poisonous serpents, such as "asps," "cockatrices," and "vipers,"
signify the deceitful; as in the following passages: In heart ye work
perversities, their poison is like the poison of a serpent; like that of
the deaf asp (Ps. 58:2, 4). They cogitate evils in the heart, they
sharpen their tongue like a serpent; the poison of the asp is under
their lips (Ps. 140:2, 3). They lay eggs of the asp, and weave the
spider's webs, he that eateth of their eggs dieth (Isa. 59:5). He shall
suck the poison of asps; the viper's tongue shall slay him (Job 20:16).
Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel gall of asps (Deut.
32:33). Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Ye serpents, ye
offspring of vipers, how shall ye escape the judgment of Gehenna (Matt.
22:29, 33). \[4\] Deceit is called "hypocrisy" when there is piety in
the mouth, and impiety in the heart; or when there is charity in the
mouth, but hatred in the heart; or when there is innocence in the face
and gesture, but cruelty in the soul and breast; consequently when they
deceive by a show of innocence, charity, and piety. Such are "serpents"
and "vipers" in the internal sense, because, as before said, when such
are looked at by the angels in the light of heaven, they appear like
serpents and like vipers, who hide evils under truths; that is, who
deceitfully bend truths to the doing of evils; for such hide poison as
it were under the teeth, and thus kill. \[5\] But they who are in the
faith of truth and in the life of good from the Lord, cannot be injured
by the poisons of such, for they are in light from the Lord, in which
the deceitful appear like serpents, and their deceits like poisons. That
these are kept in safety by the Lord is meant by His words to the
disciples: Behold I give unto you power to tread upon serpents and
scorpions (Luke 10:19). These signs shall follow them that believe; they
shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not
harm them (Mark 16:17, 18). The suckling shall play on the hole of the
viper (Isa. 11:8). \[6\] Those who have been interiorly infected with
spiritual deceit, that is, with hypocrisy, are they who are meant by
those who speak against the Holy Spirit, for whom there is no
forgiveness, in Matthew: I say unto you, All sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy of the spirit shall not be forgiven
unto men. Nay, if anyone shall say a word against the Son of man, it
shall be forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak against the Holy
Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age, nor in that
which is to come. Either make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make
the tree bad and its fruit bad. O offspring of vipers, how can ye, being
evil, speak what is good (Matt. 12:31-34). By "saying a word against the
Holy Spirit" is meant to speak well and think evil, and to do well and
will evil, respecting those things which are of the Lord, of His
kingdom, and of His church, also which are of the Word; for thus falsity
lies inwardly hidden in the truths which they speak; and evil, which is
hidden poison, in the goods which they do; consequently they are called
"an offspring of vipers." \[7\] In the other life an evil person is
allowed to speak evil and also falsity; but not good and truth, because
there all are compelled to speak from the heart, and are not allowed to
be of a divided mind. They who do otherwise are separated from the rest,
and are hidden in hells from which they cannot possibly go forth. That
such are they who are meant by "those who say a word against the Holy
Spirit" is evident from the above words of the Lord, "Either make the
tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad;
how can ye, being evil, speak what is good?" The "Holy Spirit" denotes
the Divine truth proceeding from the Lord, thus the Holy Divine Itself,
which is thereby interiorly blasphemed and profaned. \[8\] That it will
not be forgiven them is because hypocrisy or deceit in connection with
Holy Divine things infects the interiors of man, and destroys everything
of spiritual life in him, as was said above, insomuch that at last there
is nothing sound in any part of him. For the forgiveness of sins is the
separation of evil from good, and the rejection of evil to the sides (n.
8393), which cannot be done with him in whom all good has been
destroyed. Therefore it is said "It shall not be forgiven him, neither
in this age nor in that which is to come." Of this character also are
those who are meant by "him that had not on a wedding garment," who was
bound hand and foot and cast out into outer darkness (Matt. 22:11-13,
see n. 2132). \[9\] That "deceit" in the Word denotes hypocrisy is
evident from the following passages: Beware ye every man of his
companion, and put ye not your trust upon any brother; for every brother
supplanteth. They mock, a man with his companion, and speak not the
truth; they have taught their tongue to speak a lie. Thy dwelling is in
the midst of deceit; through deceit they have refused to know Me, said
Jehovah (Jer. 9:4-6). Thou shalt destroy them that speak a lie; Jehovah
abhorreth the man of bloods and deceit (Ps. 5:6). Blessed is the man
unto whom Jehovah imputeth not iniquity, provided in his spirit there is
no deceit (Ps. 32:2). Deliver my soul from the lip of a lie, from a
tongue of deceit (Ps. 120:2). In like manner Ps. 52:4; 109:2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9014.">9014.</span></span>

Thou shalt take him from Mine altar, that he may die. That this
signifies damnation even although he flees to the worship of the Lord,
and supplicates for forgiveness, and promises repentance, is evident
from the signification of "the altar of Jehovah," as being the chief
representative of the worship of the Lord (n. 921, 2777, 2811, 4541,
8935, 8940), and because it was a representative of worship, therefore
"to flee to the altar" denotes to flee to the Lord, and to supplicate
for forgiveness, and also to promise repentance, for the one follows the
other; and from the signification of "dying," as being damnation (n.
5407, 6119, 9008). \[2\] How it is in regard to this can be seen from
what was shown in the paragraph above (n. 9013), namely, that in
spiritual things, deceit, that is, hypocrisy, cannot be forgiven. The
reason is that deceit is like poison, for it penetrates even to the
interiors, and kills everything of faith and charity, and destroys the
remains, which are the truths and goods of faith and charity stored up
by the Lord in the interiors of man, which being destroyed nothing of
spiritual life any longer survives. (With respect to remains, see n.
468, 530, 560-563, 660, 661, 798, 1050, 1738, 1906, 2284, 5135, 5342,
5344, 5897, 5898, 6156, 7560, 7564.) Wherefore when such persons
supplicate the Lord for forgiveness, and promise repentance, which is
signified by "fleeing to the altar," they supplicate and promise nothing
whatever from the heart, but only from the mouth. Therefore they are not
heard, for the Lord looks at the heart, and not to words abstracted and
estranged from the heart. Consequently for such there is no forgiveness,
because no repentance is possible with them. \[3\] It is believed by
many within the church that the forgiveness of sins is the wiping out
and washing away thereof, as of filth by water; and that after
forgiveness they go on their way clean and pure. Such an opinion
prevails especially with those who ascribe everything of salvation to
faith alone. But be it known that the case with the forgiveness of sins
is quite different. The Lord forgives everyone his sins, because He is
mercy itself. Nevertheless they are not thereby forgiven unless the man
performs serious repentance, and desists from evils, and afterward lives
a life of faith and charity, and this even to the end of his life. When
this is done, the man receives from the Lord spiritual life, which is
called new life. When from this new life the man views the evils of his
former life, and turns away from them, and regards them with horror,
then for the first time are the evils forgiven, for then the man is held
in truths and goods by the Lord, and is withheld from evils. From this
it is plain what is the forgiveness of sins, and that it cannot be
granted within an hour, nor within a year. That this is so the church
knows, for it is said to those who come to the Holy Supper that their
sins are forgiven if they begin a new life by abstaining from evils and
abhorring them. \[4\] From all this then it is evident how the case is
with hypocrites, who through deceit are filled with evils as to the
interiors, namely, that they cannot do the work of repentance; for the
very remains of good and of truth in them have been consumed and
destroyed, and therewith everything of spiritual life; and because they
cannot do the work of repentance, they cannot be forgiven. This is
signified by the statute that those who kill the neighbor with deceit
should be taken from the altar that they may die. \[5\] The damnation of
such is described by the prophetic words of David with respect to Joab,
when he had slain Abner with deceit: There shall not fail from the house
of Joab one that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a
staff, or that falleth by the sword, or that lacketh bread (2 Sam. 3:27,
29). "One that hath an issue" signifies the profanation of the good of
love; "one that is a leper" signifies the profanation of the truth of
faith (n. 6963); "one that leaneth on a staff," or that is lame,
signifies those in whom all good has been destroyed (n. 4302, 4314);
"one that falleth by the sword" signifies those who are continually
dying through falsities (n. 4499, 6353, 7102, 8294); "one that lacketh
bread" signifies those who are destitute of all spiritual life, for
"bread" denotes the sustenance of spiritual life by good (n. 6118,
8410). As such were signified by "Joab," therefore by the command of
Solomon Joab was slain at the altar whither he had fled (1 Kings
2:28-32).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9015.">9015.</span></span>

And he that smiteth his father and his mother. That this signifies the
blaspheming of the Lord and of His kingdom, is evident from the
signification of "smiting," as being to injure by means of falsities
(see n. 7136, 7146, 9007), and when predicated of the Lord and of His
kingdom, as being to blaspheme; and from the signification of "father,"
as being the Lord; and of "mother," as being His kingdom. See n. 8897,
where the fourth commandment of the Decalogue was unfolded, and it was
shown what is meant in the internal sense by "honoring father and
mother," namely, to love the Lord and His Kingdom, and therefore in the
relative sense, to love good and truth. So also "to smite father and
mother," in the relative sense denotes to blaspheme the good and truth
of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9016.">9016.</span></span>

Dying he shall die. That this signifies damnation, is evident from the
signification of "dying" as being damnation (see n. 9008).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9017.">9017.</span></span>

Verses 16, 17. And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, and if he
shall be found in his hand, dying he shall die. And he that curseth his
father and his mother, dying he shall die. "And he that stealeth a man,
and selleth him," signifies the application of the truth of faith to
evil, and alienation; "and he shall be found in his hand," signifies
nevertheless the acknowledgment of it; "dying he shall die," signifies
damnation; "and he that curseth his father and his mother," signifies
the denial in every possible way of the Lord and of His kingdom by those
who are of the church, and thus profanation of the good and truth of the
church; "dying he shall die," signifies damnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9018.">9018.</span></span>

And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him. That this signifies the
application of the truth of faith to evil, and alienation, is evident
from the signification of "stealing a man," as being the application of
the truth of faith to evil (that "a man," here a man of the sons of
Israel, denotes the truth of faith, see n. 5414, 5879, 5951, 7957,
9007); and that "stealing" denotes its application to evil (n. 5135);
and from the signification of "selling," as being alienation (n. 4098,
4752, 4758, 5886).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9019.">9019.</span></span>

And if he shall be found in his hand. That this signifies nevertheless
the acknowledgment of it, namely, of the truth of faith, is evident from
the signification of "to be found in the hand," when said of the truth
of faith, as being acknowledgment; for when truth is acknowledged with
some faith, it is found with that person; "in his hand" denotes with
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9020.">9020.</span></span>

Dying he shall die. That this signifies damnation, see above (n. 9008).
That they are damned who apply the truths of faith to evils, and thus
alienate them from themselves, is because they had before acknowledged
them. For when the truth of faith which has once been acknowledged is
afterward applied to evil, it is commingled with falsity from evil,
consequently there is profanation (that this is profanation may be seen
from the passages cited below, n. 9021). In order that this may be
better understood, let it be illustrated by an example. When those who,
in order to rule over all and to gain the world, wish to dispense at
their own good will and pleasure the things that belong to the Lord,
especially those which belong to the heavenly life with a man, draw
confirmations from the Lord's words, they are "thieves" in the spiritual
sense, for they steal truths from the Word and apply them to evils. That
they are evils is because they have as their end dominion and gain, and
not the salvation of souls. If without any regard to dominion and gain
these same persons have previously acknowledged the truths from the Word
which they now apply to evils, they profane them, for by so doing they
commingle falsities from evils with the truths. Such persons cannot
possibly escape damnation, for by so doing they deprive themselves of
all spiritual life. That they deprive themselves of spiritual life is
plain from the fact that when they are by themselves, and think from
themselves, and talk among themselves, they have no faith in truths, and
do not believe in the Lord, in heaven, or in hell. Nevertheless above
all others they have these things in their mouths, because the ardor for
rule and gain incites them thereto, as means to their ends. This reigns
especially in Christian paganism, where the images of sanctified men are
exhibited for adoration, before which they bend their knees and fall
prostrate. Even they themselves do this, from deceit, in order to
mislead and persuade.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9021.">9021.</span></span>

And he that curseth his father and his mother. That this signifies the
denial in every possible way of the Lord and of His kingdom by those who
are of the church, and thus the profanation of the good and the truth of
the church, is evident from the signification of "cursing," as being
aversion and disjunction (see n. 245, 379, 1423, 3530, 3584, 5071),
consequently also denial in every possible way, for he who turns himself
away and disjoins himself from the Lord, at heart denies Him; and from
the signification of "father and mother," as being the Lord and His
kingdom, and in the relative sense the good and truth which are from the
Lord (n. 8897, 9015). The reason why it signifies "by those who are
within the church" is that the commandments, judgments, and statutes
which were promulgated by the Lord from Mount Sinai, were specifically
for the sons of Israel, among whom the representative of a church was at
that time being instituted, and by whom therefore the church was
signified (n. 6426, 6637, 6862, 6868, 7035, 7062, 7198, 7201, 7215,
7223, 7957, 8234, 8805). Therefore also by "cursing father and mother"
is signified profanation, for those within the church who wholly deny
the Lord and the things which are of His kingdom and church, profane
them. (That those who are within the church can profane holy things, but
not those who are outside of the church, see n. 1008, 1010, 1059, 2051,
3398, 3399, 3898, 4289, 4601, 6348, 6959, 6963, 6971, 8882.) For this
reason denial of the Lord is not profanation with those who are outside
of the church, as for instance with the Gentiles, Mohammedans, and Jews.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9022.">9022.</span></span>

Dying he shall die, signifies damnation (as above, n. 9008, 9016, 9020).
How the particulars in the internal sense cohere together, is evident
from what has been said and shown. For the internal sense treats in a
series of the denial, blaspheming, and profanation of the truth and good
which are from the Lord. But in the external sense no such series
appears, for in this sense various things are treated of; as those who
smite a man so that he dies; those who kill a companion with deceit;
those who smite father and mother; those who steal a man and sell him;
and those who curse father and mother. Such is the Word in its
particulars, namely, that in the internal sense things follow in order
and as it were in a chain; although in the external sense, that is, in
the sense of the letter, they are scattered, and in many places
disconnected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9023.">9023.</span></span>

Verses 18-21. And when men shall dispute, and a man shall smite his
companion with a stone or with his fist, and he dieth not, and lieth
down in bed; if he rise and walk abroad upon his staff, the smiter shall
be guiltless; only he shall give his cessation, and healing he shall
heal him. And when a man shall smite his manservant, or his maidservant,
with a rod, and he die under his hand; in being avenged he shall be
avenged. Nevertheless if he shall stand for a day or two, he shall not
be avenged, because he is his silver. "And when men shall dispute,"
signifies contention among themselves about truths; "and a man shall
smite his companion with a stone, or with his fist," signifies the
invalidating of some one \[truth of the church\] by reason of some
memory or general truth; "and he dieth not," signifies and it is not
extinguished; "and he lieth down in bed," signifies what is separate in
the natural; "if he rise and walk abroad upon his staff," signifies the
strength of life therein; "the smiter shall be guiltless," signifies not
to be guilty of evil; "only he shall give his cessation," signifies
indemnification; and "healing he shall heal him," signifies restoration;
"and when a man shall smite his manservant, or his maidservant, with a
rod," signifies if anyone within the church ill-treats the truth of
memory or its affection from his own power; "and he die under his hand,"
signifies so that it is extinguished under his view; "in being avenged
he shall be avenged," signifies the punishment of death; "nevertheless
if he shall stand for a day or two," signifies a state of life abiding
even to fullness; "he shall not be avenged," signifies no punishment of
death; "because he is his silver," signifies what is acquired from one's
own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9024.">9024.</span></span>

And when men shall dispute. That this signifies contention among
themselves about truths, is evident from the signification of
"disputing," as being to contend (of which below) and from the
signification of "men" \[viri\], as being those who are intelligent and
who are in truths, and in the abstract sense things intellectual and
truths (see n. 3134, 9007); consequently "the disputing of men"
signifies contention about truths among those who are of the church, and
in the abstract sense about truths among themselves. For in the
spiritual sense "to dispute" denotes to contend about such things as are
of the church, consequently such as are of faith. Nothing else is meant
in the Word by "disputing," for the Word is spiritual and treats of
spiritual things, that is, of those things which belong to the Lord, His
kingdom in heaven, and His kingdom on the earth, that is, the church.
That in the Word "to dispute" signifies contention about truths, and in
general in favor of truths against falsities, likewise also defense and
liberation from falsities, is plain from the following passages. \[2\]
In Jeremiah: A tumult is come even to the end of the earth; for Jehovah
hath a dispute against the nations, He will enter into judgment with all
flesh; He will deliver the wicked to the sword. Behold evil shall go
forth from nation to nation, and a great tempest shall be raised up from
the sides of the earth (Jer. 25:31, 32). Thus is prophetically described
the perverted state of the church; "a tumult" denotes contention in
favor of falsities against truths, and in favor of evils against goods;
"the earth" denotes the church; "the dispute of Jehovah against the
nations" denotes the contention of the Lord in favor of truths against
falsities, and in favor of goods against evils, thus also defense; "the
nations" denote falsities and evils; "a sword" denotes falsity fighting
and conquering; "a great tempest" denotes falsity ruling; "the sides of
the earth" denotes where falsities burst forth from evil. \[3\] In the
same: Jehovah shall dispute their dispute; that He may give rest to the
earth (Jer. 50:34) "To dispute the dispute" denotes to defend truths
against falsities and to liberate; "the earth" denotes the church, which
has "rest" when it is in good, and consequently in truths. In the same:
O Lord, Thou hast disputed the disputes of my soul; Thou hast liberated
my life (Lam. 3:58). "To dispute the disputes of the soul" denotes to
defend and liberate from falsities. In David: Dispute Thou my dispute,
and redeem me; vivify me according to Thy word (Ps. 119:154). "To
dispute the dispute" here also denotes to liberate from falsities. In
Micah: Dispute Thou with the mountains, and let the hills hear Thy voice
(Mic. 6:1). "To dispute with the mountains" denotes to contend and
defend against the exalted ones, and also against the evils of the love
of self; "the hills which are to hear His voice" denote the humble, and
those who are in charity. In Isaiah: I will not eternally dispute, and I
will not be wroth forever (Isa. 57:16). "To dispute" denotes to contend
against falsities. In Hosea: Jehovah hath a dispute with Judah (Hos.
12:2); where the meaning is similar. Besides other passages.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9025.">9025.</span></span>

And a man shall smite his companion with a stone, or with his fist. That
this signifies the invalidating of some one \[truth of the church\] by
reason of some memory or general truth, is evident from the
signification of "smiting," as being to injure (see n. 7136, 7146,
9007), here to invalidate, because it is said of truths from
memory-knowledges; from the signification of "a stone," as being truth
(n. 643, 1298, 3720, 3769, 3771, 3773, 3789, 3798, 6426, 8940), namely,
truth in the ultimate of order, that is, in the natural, thus
memory-knowledge (n. 8609); and from the signification of "a fist," as
being general truth; for by "the hand" is signified the power which
belongs to truth (n. 3091, 4931, 7188, 7189), consequently by "the fist"
is signified full power from general truth. That is called general truth
which has been received, and everywhere prevails; consequently "to smite
with the fist" denotes with full force and power; in the spiritual
sense, by means of truths which are from good; and in the opposite
sense, by means of falsities which are from evil. In the latter sense it
is used in Isaiah: Behold ye fast for dispute and contention, to smite
with the fist of wickedness (Isa. 58:4). "To smite with the fist of
wickedness" denotes with full force by means of falsities from evil.
\[2\] What is meant by invalidating any truth of the church by means of
memory or general truth, shall be explained. By memory-truths are meant
truths which are from the literal sense of the Word. General truths
therefrom are such as are received among people generally, and
consequently are in general discourse. There are very many such truths,
and they prevail with much force. But the literal sense of the Word is
for the simple, for those who are being initiated into the interior
truths of faith, and for those who do not apprehend interior things; for
this sense is according to the appearance before the sensuous man, thus
is according to his apprehension. Hence it is that in this sense things
frequently appear dissimilar, and as it were contradictory, to each
other-as for example, that the Lord leads into temptation, and elsewhere
that He does not lead into temptation; that the Lord repents, and
elsewhere that He does not repent; that the Lord acts from anger and
wrath, and elsewhere that He acts from pure clemency and mercy; that
souls come to judgment immediately after death, and elsewhere that this
is at the time of the Last Judgment; and so on. As such truths are from
the literal sense of the Word, they are called memory-truths, and differ
from the truths of faith which are of the doctrine of the church. For
the latter arise from the former by an unfolding; for when they are
unfolded, the man of the church is instructed that such things have been
said in the Word for the sake of apprehension, and according to the
appearance. Hence also it is that in very many cases the doctrines of
the church depart from the literal sense of the Word. Be it known that
the true doctrine of the church is that which is here called "the
internal sense;" for in the internal sense are truths such as the angels
have in heaven. \[3\] Among priests, and among the men of the church,
there are those who teach and who learn the truths of the church from
the literal sense of the Word; and there are those who teach and those
who learn from doctrine drawn from the Word, which is called the
doctrine of faith of the church. The latter differ very much from the
former in perception, but they cannot be distinguished by the common
people, because they both speak from the Word nearly alike. But those
who teach and who learn only the literal sense of the Word without the
doctrine of the church as a guide, apprehend only those things which
belong to the natural or external man; whereas those who teach and who
learn from true doctrine drawn from the Word, understand also things
which are of the spiritual or internal man. The reason is that the Word
in the external or literal sense is natural, but in the internal sense
it is spiritual. The former sense is called in the Word a "cloud," but
the latter sense is called the "glory" in the cloud (n. 5922, 6343,
6752, 8106, 8781). \[4\] From all this it can now be seen what is meant
by "contention among themselves about truths," and by the "invalidating
of some one \[truth of the church\] by means of some memory or general
truth." As before said, memory or general truth is truth from the
literal sense of the Word. And as this varies, and as it were
contradicts itself, according to the appearance, it must needs sometimes
invalidate the spiritual truths which are of the doctrine of the church.
These are invalidated when the thought comes into doubt from passages in
the Word which are in conflict with each other. This state in connection
with the truths of faith with man is here treated of in the internal
sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9026.">9026.</span></span>

And he dieth not. That this signifies "and it is not extinguished" is
evident from the signification of "dying," as being to cease to be such
as before (see n. 494, 6587, 6593), consequently to be extinguished,
here not to be extinguished. As the internal sense here treats of the
agreement of the truths of faith with the truths of the literal sense of
the Word, and as the truths of the literal sense of the Word cannot be
extinguished, because they are truths in the ultimate of order,
therefore the smiting of a man from which he dies is not here treated
of, but only the smiting of a man from which he does not die; for the
truths of the literal sense of the Word can indeed be invalidated, but
cannot be extinguished. Moreover after they have been invalidated, they
can be set aside, but again by an unfolding of their meaning they can be
restored. These things are signified by what was decreed about a man
smitten by his companion, but rising again and walking upon his staff.
\[2\] He who investigates the interior things of the Word can see that
for some secret reason which does not fall under the understanding
unless this is enlightened by the light of heaven, it was decreed by the
Lord that the smiter should be guiltless, if the person smitten rose
again from his bed and walked abroad upon his staff; and especially that
it was decreed by the Lord that he who smiteth his servant, and the
servant die not for a day or two, should not be punished, because he is
his silver; when yet this is the taking away of a man's life, for the
servant is a man, although a servant. But the secret reason why it was
so decreed by the Lord does not appear except by means of the internal
sense, in which the subject treated of is the truths of the church
derived from the Word, the case with which is similar, when by "a man
disputing and smiting his neighbor," and also by "a man smiting his
manservant and his maidservant," are meant such things as in the
spiritual sense correspond, and which are now unfolded. With the
Israelitish nation there was instituted a representative church, that
is, a church in which the internal things which are of heaven and the
church were represented by external things. Therefore such things were
decreed, and indeed commanded, as have no validity as laws since the
internal things of the church were opened and revealed by the Lord; for
since that time man is to live an internal life, which is a life of
faith and charity, and such an external life as internal things make it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9027.">9027.</span></span>

And he lieth down in bed. That this signifies what is separate in the
natural, is evident from the signification of "lying down," as being to
be separated; and from the signification of "a bed," as being the
natural (see n. 6188, 6226, 6463). How the case herein is will appear
from what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9028.">9028.</span></span>

If he rise and walk abroad upon his staff. That this signifies the
strength of life therein, is evident from the signification of "rising,"
which involves something of elevation, here of spiritual truth to
agreement with memory-truth; from the signification of "walking," as
being to live (see n. 519, 1794, 8417, 8420); and from the signification
of "a staff," as being strength, for "a rod" signifies the power which
belongs to truth, thus strength (n. 4876, 4936, 6947, 7011, 7026), and
in like manner "a staff," but as applied to those who are not in good
health. In this sense it is used also in David: They preceded me in the
day of my calamity; but Jehovah was my staff, and He brought me forth
into breadth (Ps. 18:18, 19). "The day of calamity" denotes a weak state
in respect to the faith of truth; "Jehovah being a staff" denotes power
then; "to bring forth into breadth" denotes into the truths which are of
faith. (That this is meant by "bringing forth into breadth," see n.
4482.) So also in Isaiah: The Lord Jehovah Zebaoth doth take away from
Jerusalem and from Judah the rod and the staff, the whole rod of bread,
and the whole rod of water (Isa. 3:1). "To take away the rod and the
staff" denotes to take away the power and strength of life derived from
truth and good; "the rod of bread" denotes power from good; and "the rod
of water," power from truth. In the original tongue "staff" is a term
implying to lean upon and be supported, which in the spiritual world is
effected by means of truth and good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9029.">9029.</span></span>

The smiter shall be guiltless. That this signifies not to be guilty of
evil, is evident from the signification of "to be guiltless," as being
not to be guilty of evil; for those are treated of who from some
spiritual truth, which is the truth of the doctrine of faith of the
church from the Word, look at some memory-truth, which is truth from the
sense of the letter of the Word; and because there appears to be no
agreement, the spiritual truth is invalidated and for some time set
aside, but is not denied, or exterminated. Of these persons it is said
that they "are not guilty of evil." And from the signification of "to
smite," as being to invalidate (see above, n. 9025).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9030.">9030.</span></span>

Only he shall give his cessation. <span
id="fr_188"></span>[9030-1](#fn_188.md) That this signifies
indemnification, is evident from the signification of the "cessation,"
as being indemnification, here that of spiritual truth, which was
invalidated through memory-truth. That is called "spiritual truth" which
together with good makes the life of the internal man, but that is
called "memory-truth" which makes the life of the external man. This
truth is from the literal sense of the Word, but spiritual truth is from
the internal sense of the Word, thus also from the genuine doctrine of
faith of the church, for this doctrine is the doctrine of the internal
sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9031.">9031.</span></span>

And healing he shall heal him. That this signifies restoration, namely,
by means of interpretation, is evident. For if the things which are in
the literal sense of the Word are looked at interiorly, they all agree
together. This is circumstanced like that which is said in the Word
about the sun, that it rises and sets, when yet it does not rise or set;
but such an appearance is presented to the inhabitants of the earth,
because the earth rotates every day around its axis. This natural truth
lies hidden in the former, which is according to the appearance to the
external sight. If it had been said in the Word contrary to this
appearance, the common people would not apprehend it, and what the
common people do not apprehend they do not believe. The case is similar
with the Sun of heaven, which is the Lord, concerning which it is also
said that it "rises," but in hearts, when man is being regenerated; and
also when he is in the good of love and faith; and that it "sets" when
man is in evil and in the consequent falsity. And yet the Lord is
continually in His rising, from which also He is called the "Sunrise,"
or "East," and He is never in any setting; nor does He turn Himself away
from man, but man turns himself away from Him. From this arises the
appearance that the Lord turns away His face and also brings evil; and
therefore it is also so said in the Word. This likewise is the truth,
but apparent truth, thus it is not in conflict with the former. From all
this it can now be seen what is meant in the internal sense by "healing
he shall heal," namely, the restoration of spiritual truth, which is
effected by means of a right interpretation of the memory-truth, or that
of the literal sense of the Word. \[2\] The case is similar with every
truth of the literal sense, for in the natural light, which is that of
the sensuous man, this appears just as it is expressed in the Word,
because the literal sense is natural, and is for the sensuous man. But
when the same is presented in the light of heaven, it then appears
according to the internal sense; for this sense is spiritual, and is for
the heavenly man, because those things which are of natural light vanish
away in the light of heaven; for natural light is like shade or cloud,
and heavenly light is like the glory and the brightness when the cloud
is taken away. And therefore also the literal sense of the Word is
called "a cloud," and the internal sense "glory" (see the preface to
Genesis 18, and n. 4391, 5922, 6343, 8106, 8443, 8781). \[3\] By
"healing he shall heal" is signified in the spiritual sense to restore,
because disease and sickness signify the infirmity of the internal man,
which infirmity exists when he is sick in respect to his life, which is
the spiritual life; thus when he turns aside from truth to falsity, and
from good to evil. When this is the case, the spiritual life sickens;
and when he wholly turns himself away from truth and good, it dies; but
this death is called "spiritual death," which is damnation. As this is
the case with the life of the internal man, therefore such things as
relate to diseases and death in the natural world are said in the Word
of the diseases of the spiritual life, and of its death. So also the
cures of diseases, or healings, as in Isaiah: Jehovah smiteth Egypt,
smiting and healing; whence he turneth himself unto Jehovah, and He
shall be entreated for them, and shall heal them (Isa. 19:22). Surely He
was pierced for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities;
the chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and in His wound we are
healed (Isa. 53:5); speaking of the Lord. \[4\] In Jeremiah: Return, ye
perverse sons, I will heal your backslidings (Jer. 3:22). Behold, I will
cause to come up to it cure and healing, and I will heal them; and I
will reveal to them abundance of peace and truth (Jer. 33:6). Go up to
Gilead, and take balm, O virgin daughter of Egypt; in vain hast thou
multiplied medicines; there is no healing for thee (Jer. 46:11). And in
Ezekiel: By the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that,
cometh up the tree for food, whose leaf falleth not, neither is the
fruit consumed; it springeth up again in its months, because the waters
thereof go forth out of the sanctuary; therefore the fruit thereof shall
be for food, and the leaf thereof for medicines (Ezek. 47:12). "The
fruit which shall be for food" denotes the good of love and charity
which is for the nourishment of the spiritual life; "the leaf which
shall be for medicine" denotes the truths of faith which are for the
refreshment and restoration of that life. (That "fruit" denotes the good
of love and of charity, see n. 3146, 7690; and that "leaf" denotes the
truth of faith, n. 885.) \[5\] As diseases and sicknesses, and also
healings and medicines, are not said in the Word of the natural life,
but of another life which is distinct from the natural life; it is
therefore plain to him who gives some consideration to the matter, that
man has another life, which is that of his internal man. They who have
gross thoughts with respect to the life of man, believe that he has no
other life than that of the body, which is the life of the external or
natural man. They wonder what the life of the internal man may be, and
even what the internal man is. If they are told that that life is the
life of faith and charity, and that the internal man is man's spirit,
which lives after death, and which is essentially the man himself, they
wonder still more. And such of them as live only for the body, and not
for the soul, thus who are merely natural men, have no apprehension
whatever of what is said about the life of faith and charity, and about
the internal man, because their thought is merely from natural light,
and not at all from spiritual light. Wherefore also after death they
remain gross in respect to thought, and live in the shadow of death,
that is, in falsities from evil; and they are wholly in thick darkness,
and blind to the light of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9032.">9032.</span></span>

In the last two verses the subject treated of is spiritual truth, which
is the truth of the doctrine of faith from the Word, invalidated by
means of memory-truth, which is the truth of the literal sense of the
Word. But as it is commonly believed that the truth of the doctrine of
faith of the church is one and the same thing with the truth of the
literal sense of the Word, the subject may be illustrated by an example.
The genuine truth of the doctrine of the church is that charity toward
the neighbor and love to the Lord make the church with man, and that
these loves are insinuated by the Lord through faith, that is, by means
of the truths of faith which are from the Word, consequently that faith
alone does not make the church with man. He who is in this truth, and
consults the Word, is everywhere confirmed therein. But when he meets
with words about faith, and no mention is made at the same time of love,
he hesitates, and begins to revolve doubts with respect to the truth of
the doctrine of his faith. Consequently this truth is for the time
invalidated, and is separated from the other truths which are of
undoubted faith. \[2\] Let the words of the Lord in Mark about faith
serve for illustration: He that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved; but he that believeth not shall be condemned (Mark 16:16). As
faith is here treated of, and not love at the same time, the mind may
halt in doubt concerning the truth of its doctrine-that heavenly love
insinuated by means of the truths of faith makes the church. But when
this memory-truth, that is, truth of the literal sense of the Word, is
viewed interiorly, it is plain that it nevertheless does agree with the
truth of doctrine; for in the internal sense by "being baptized" is
signified to be regenerated (see n. 4255, 5120), and to be regenerated
is to be led into the good of love and charity by means of the truths of
faith (n. 8548-8553, 8635-8640, 8742-8747). From this it is evident that
the truth which is the truth of the literal sense of the Word agrees
with the truth of doctrine, provided it is understood what is signified
by "being baptized." And the reason why it is said that "he that
believeth not shall be condemned," is that such a one cannot be
"baptized," that is, regenerated, thus cannot be introduced into the
church, still less become a church; for baptism is a symbol of
regeneration, and thus of introduction into the church, which is
effected by introduction into good by means of truths from the Word.
\[3\] From all this it is now plain how it is to be understood what is
signified in the internal sense by "a man smiting his companion with a
stone or with his fist, and that if the man did not die, but lay down in
bed, and then rose and walked with his staff, the smiter should be
guiltless," but that "he should give his cessation, and should heal
him;" in the internal sense, that if the truth of the doctrine of faith
of the church be invalidated by means of memory-truth from the literal
sense of the Word, and yet is not extinguished, it shall be made good
and restored, which is effected by a right interpretation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9033.">9033.</span></span>

The invalidation of spiritual truth, that is, of the truth of the
doctrine of faith of the church, has been treated of in the two
preceding verses; and in the two verses which follow, the subject
treated of is the invalidation of memory-truth, which is the truth of
the literal sense of the Word. This truth indeed appears like the
former, but still it is not like it; and therefore here for the sake of
elucidation take this example. It is a spiritual truth, or a genuine
truth of the doctrine of faith of the church, that the Lord punishes no
one, because He is mercy itself; and therefore whatsoever He does, He
does from mercy, and by no means from anger and revenge; and yet the
Lord says in Matthew: Be ye not afraid of those who are able to kill the
body, but rather fear Him who is able to destroy both body and soul in
Gehenna (Matt. 10:28). Here it is said of God that He is "to be feared,"
because He "is able to destroy body and soul in Gehenna," when yet He
destroys no one. Nevertheless this is a truth; and therefore it is not
to be extinguished, that is, denied; for if it is denied, faith in the
Word perishes; and if this perishes, man cannot spiritually live, for
man has spiritual life through faith from the Word. \[2\] The case
herein is this. It is a law of Divine order that good should have its
recompense-thus heaven-within itself; and it is from this that evil has
in itself its punishment, thus hell. The former law is from the Lord,
because the Lord wills good to all; but the latter law not so, because
the Lord wills evil to no one. Nevertheless so it is done; not from the
Lord, but from the man who is in evil, consequently from evil. Yet this
is attributed to the Lord in the sense of the letter of the Word,
because it so appears. Therefore, because it is an apparent truth, it
must not be denied, that is, extinguished; for thus faith in the Word
would be extinguished, which faith is for the simple (see n. 2447, 6071,
6991, 6997, 7533, 7632, 7643, 7679, 7710, 7877, 7926, 8197, 8227, 8228,
8282, 8483, 8631, 8632, 9010).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9034.">9034.</span></span>

And when a man shall smite his manservant, or his maidservant, with a
rod. That this signifies if anyone within the church ill-treats the
truth of memory, or its affection, from his own power, is evident from
the signification of "smiting," as being to ill-treat, for "smiting" is
predicated of any injury whatsoever; from the signification of "a man"
\[vir\], here a man of the sons of Israel, as being one who is of the
church, and who consequently is in spiritual truth, which is the truth
of the doctrine of faith of the church from the Word (see n. 6426, 6637,
6862, 6868, 7035, 7062, 7198, 7201, 7215, 7223, 7957, 8234, 8805); from
the signification of a "manservant," as being memory-truth, which is the
truth of the Word, but of its literal sense (of which below); from the
signification of a "maidservant," as being natural affection, thus the
affection of memory knowledges, because these are in the natural (n.
1895, 2567, 3835, 3849, 8993, 8994); and from the signification of a
"rod," as being natural power (n. 4876, 4936, 6947, 7011, 7026), here,
one's own power, because the manservant of whom it is said, was bought.
From this it is plain that by the words, "if a man shall smite his
manservant, or his maidservant," is signified if anyone within the
church ill-treats the memory-truth of the Word, or its affection. \[2\]
The reason why a "manservant" denotes the truth of the literal sense of
the Word, is that by a "servant" in general are signified lower or
exterior things, because these serve higher or interior things (n. 2541,
5161, 5164, 5936, 7143); consequently by a "servant" is signified the
natural, because this serves the spiritual (n. 3019, 3020, 5305, 7998),
consequently memory-truth, which belongs to the literal sense of the
Word, for this serves spiritual truth, which belongs to the internal
sense. The truth of the internal sense of the Word is the same as the
genuine truth of the doctrine of faith of the church. \[3\] How the
truth of the literal sense of the Word serves spiritual truth, shall be
briefly told. The man of the church first learns truth from the literal
sense of the Word, which is general truth accommodated to the
apprehension of the external man, who is in natural light. This truth is
received by an external way, that is, by hearing, and is stored up in
the memory of the external man, where are also various memory-knowledges
derived from the world (n. 2469-2494). Afterward the things stored up in
this memory are subjected to the sight or view of the internal man, who
sees from the light of heaven. The internal man calls forth therefrom by
selection the truths which agree with the good which flows in from the
Lord by the way of the soul, and which the man had received. There the
Lord conjoins these truths with good. The truths which are thus
conjoined in the internal man are called "spiritual truths," and the
good with which the truths are conjoined is called "spiritual good."
This good, formed by means of truths, is what makes the spiritual life
of man. The truths themselves there are called "the truths of faith,"
and the good is called "the good of charity." The good in which truths
have thus been implanted is the church with man. \[4\] From this it is
plain in what manner the truths of the literal sense of the Word serve
for the formation of spiritual truths, in general for the formation of
faith and of charity, which make the spiritual life; which life consists
in being affected with truths for the sake of good, and in being
affected with good from truths, and finally in being affected with
truths from good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9035.">9035.</span></span>

And he die under his hand. That this signifies so that it be
extinguished under his view, is evident from the signification of
"dying," as being to be extinguished (see above, n. 9026); and from the
signification of "under his hand," as being under his view, for by
"hand" is signified the power which belongs to spiritual truth (n. 5327,
5328, 7011), thus which is of the view, for this is effected by virtue
of this truth, and is a noticing. For the truths of the literal sense of
the Word, stored up in the natural memory of man, form there as it were
a field for the view of the internal man, into which light from heaven
flows. From this field, as before said, the internal man selects such
things as agree with the good in him, comparatively as the eye selects
from the field of a garden such things as conduce to the uses of its
life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9036.">9036.</span></span>

In being avenged he shall be avenged. That this signifies the punishment
of death, is evident from the signification of "avenging," or "taking
vengeance," as being the punishment of death, here of spiritual death,
which is damnation; for the truth of the literal sense of the Word is
being extinguished, and with it faith in the Word. (How the case herein
is, see above, n. 9033; and also below, n. 9039.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9037.">9037.</span></span>

Nevertheless if he shall stand for a day or two. That this signifies a
state of life abiding even to fullness, is evident from the
signification of "a day," as being a state of life (see n. 893, 2788,
3785, 4850); and from the signification of "two days," as being a
succeeding state (n. 1335), thus a full state, namely, of view; for when
mention is made in the Word of "one day," or "one week," or "one month,"
or "one year," an entire period of time, or state, is signified (n.
2906); and when it is added, "or two days," the signification is, even
to fullness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9038.">9038.</span></span>

He shall not be avenged. That this signifies no punishment of death, is
evident from the signification of "vengeance being taken," as being the
punishment of death (see above, n. 9036).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9039.">9039.</span></span>

Because he is his silver. That this signifies what is acquired from
one's own, is evident from the signification of "silver," as being truth
(see n. 1551, 2954, 5658, 6112, 6914, 6917), here, as a bought slave is
treated of, it denotes truth acquired by one's own. That is called
"truth acquired by one's own" which by induction from principles
conceived from one's own is believed to be truth, and yet is not truth.
Such is the truth with those who explain the Word without being
enlightened by the light of heaven; that is, who read it not with any
affection of truth for the sake of the good of life; for these are not
enlightened. If after a full view this truth is extinguished, there is
no punishment of death, that is, damnation, because it is not Divine
spiritual truth; but if it is extinguished before a full view, there is
damnation, because there is a rejection of the truth of faith itself.
For that which has been made of anyone's faith, even if it is not true,
ought not to be rejected, except after taking a full view; if it is
rejected sooner, the first beginning of the man's spiritual life is
plucked up by the roots; and therefore the Lord never breaks such truth
with a man, but as far as possible bends it. Let an example serve for
illustration. \[2\] He who believes that the glory and therefore the joy
of heaven consist in ruling over many, and from this conceived principle
explains the Lord's words concerning the servants who gained ten pounds
and five pounds, that they should have power over ten cities and over
five cities (Luke 19:11); and also the Lord's words to the disciples,
that they should sit upon thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel
(Luke 22:30); if before taking a full view he extinguishes his faith,
which is a faith of truth from the literal sense of the Word, he
occasions the loss of his spiritual life. But if after taking a full
view, he interprets these words of the Lord from His other words that
"whosoever will be greatest must be the least," and "whosoever would be
the first must be the servant of all" (Matt. 20:26-28; Mark 10:42-45;
Luke 22:24-27), if he then extinguishes his faith as regards heavenly
glory and joy from rule over many, he does not occasion the loss of his
spiritual life; for by the "cities" over which those were to have power
who gained the pounds are signified the truths of faith (n. 2268, 2449,
2712, 2943, 3216), and the derivative intelligence and wisdom; in like
manner by the "thrones" upon which the disciples were to sit (n. 2129,
6937). \[3\] Those in heaven who are preeminently in intelligence and
wisdom from the truths of faith, are in such humiliation that they
attribute everything of power to the Lord, and nothing to themselves;
and therefore they do not make anything of glory and joy to consist in
ruling, but in serving; and when they are in this state, they are in
rule, and also in glory and joy, above others; yet not as before said
from the love of rule, but from the affection of love and charity, which
is that of serving others. For the Lord flows with power into those who
are humble; but not into those who are puffed up, because the former
receive influx, but the latter reject it (n. 7489-7492).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9040.">9040.</span></span>

Verses 22-27. And when men shall quarrel, and shall strike a pregnant
woman, and her births go forth, and harm is not done, with fining he
shall be fined, as the woman's master shall lay upon him; and he shall
give according to the judges. And if harm is done, then thou shalt give
soul for soul, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot, burning for burning, wound for wound, blow for blow. And when a
man shall smite the eye of his manservant, or the eye of his
maidservant, and shall destroy it; he shall let him go free for his eye.
And if he shall knock out his manservant's tooth, or his maidservant's
tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth. "And when men shall
quarrel," signifies grievous contention among truths; "and shall strike
a pregnant woman," signifies the injuring of the good which is from
truth; "and her births go forth," signifies if nevertheless it is
confirmed in the natural; "and harm is not done," signifies thus no
injury there; "with fining he shall be fined," signifies amendment; "as
the woman's master shall lay upon him," signifies until it agrees with
the truth of good; "and he shall give according to the judges,"
signifies according to what is equitable; "and if harm is done,"
signifies injury; "then thou shalt give soul for soul," signifies the
law of order that thou shalt do to thy neighbor as thou wouldest that he
should do to thee, consequently that what thou doest to another shall be
done to thyself, "the soul," denotes the spiritual life; "eye for eye,"
signifies if anything in the interior intellectual; "tooth for tooth,"
signifies if anything in the exterior intellectual; "hand for hand,"
signifies if anything of the power of spiritual truth; "foot for foot,"
signifies if anything of the power of natural truth; "burning for
burning," signifies if anything of the affection of love which is
interiorly in the will; "wound for wound," signifies if anything of the
affection of love which is exteriorly in the will; "blow for blow,"
signifies if anything of affection in the intellectual-that is to say,
if anything of all these be extinguished or injured; "and when a man
shall smite the eye of his manservant," signifies if the internal man
shall injure the truth of faith in the external or natural man; "or the
eye of his maidservant," signifies or the affection of truth therein;
"and shall destroy it," signifies if he shall extinguish it; "he shall
let him go free for his eye," signifies that it can longer serve the
internal man; "and if he shall knock out his manservant's tooth, or his
maidservant's tooth," signifies if he shall destroy truth or the
affection of it in the sensuous part; "he shall let him go free for his
tooth," signifies that it can no longer serve the internal man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9041.">9041.</span></span>

And when men shall quarrel. That this signifies grievous contention
among truths, is evident from the signification of "quarreling," as
being grievous contention; and from the signification of "men" \[viri\],
here men of the sons of Israel, as being those who are of the church and
in its truths; in the abstract sense, the truths of the church (see
above, n. 9034).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9042.">9042.</span></span>

And shall strike a pregnant woman. That this signifies the injuring of
the good which is from truth, is evident from the signification of "to
strike," as being to injure; and from the signification of "a pregnant
woman," as being the formation of good from truth. That this is
signified by "a pregnant woman," is because the regeneration of man,
which is the generation of the spiritual life in him, is meant in the
internal sense of the Word by the generation of his natural life which
is from his parents. For when a man is born anew, he is then first
conceived, afterward carried as in the womb, and finally is born. And
because regeneration, or the generation of spiritual life, is the
conjunction of truth and of good, that is, of faith and of charity,
therefore by "carrying in the womb" is signified the initiation of truth
into good. From this it is plain what is signified by "a pregnant
woman," namely, the state of the formation of good from truths. (That
"the womb" denotes where truth and good lie conceived, see n. 4918,
6433; and that "to be in the womb," and "to come forth from the womb"
denote to be regenerated, n. 4904, 8043; also that "generations" and
"births" denote those of faith and charity, n. 613, 1145, 1255, 2020,
2584, 6239.) \[2\] The state of the formation of good from truths is
also signified by "a pregnant woman" in Jeremiah: Behold I bring them
from the land of the north, and I will gather them from the sides of the
earth; among them the blind and the lame, she that is pregnant, and she
that bringeth forth together (Jer. 31:8). In the internal sense this
treats of a new church from the Lord, in which sense by "bringing them
from the land of the north" is signified from an obscure state of faith
(see n. 3708); by "the sides of the earth from which they shall be
gathered" is signified where the truth and good of the church begin, for
"the earth" denotes the church (n. 566, 662, 1066, 1067, 1262, 1413,
1607, 1733, 1850, 2117, 2118, 2928, 3355, 4447, 4535, 5577, 8011, 8732),
and its "sides" denote where its first and its last are; by "the blind"
are signified those who are in ignorance of truth, and yet receive truth
when instructed (n. 2383, 6990); by "the lame," those who are in good,
but not genuine good because of their ignorance of truth (n. 4302); by
"she that is pregnant," those in whom good is being formed by means of
truths; and by "she that bringeth forth," those who are in the life of
faith in act (n. 3905, 3915, 3919). That such things are here signified
can be seen from the fact that otherwise it would have been superfluous
and worthless to make mention of "the blind and lame," or of "she that
is pregnant, and she that bringeth forth together."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9043.">9043.</span></span>

And her births go forth. That this signifies if nevertheless it is
confirmed in the natural, is evident from the signification of "going
forth," when said of the formation of good from truths, as being to go
from the internal or spiritual man into the external or natural (of
which below); and from the signification of "births," as being goods
from truths acknowledged in memory and perception, and thus confirmed;
for in the spiritual sense by "bringing forth" is meant to acknowledge
in faith and act (n. 3905, 3915, 3919, 6585). The case herein is that
the man who is conceived anew, carried as it were in the womb, and born,
that is, who is being regenerated, first learns from the doctrine of the
church, or from the Word, the things which are of faith and charity,
which he then stores up among the memory-knowledges that are in the
memory which belongs to the external or natural man. From this they are
called forth into the internal man, and are stored up in its memory
(that man has two memories see n. 2469-2494). This is the beginning of
spiritual life with the man, but he is not yet regenerated. In order to
be regenerated, the external or natural man must be in compliance, and
consequently in agreement, with his internal man. (That a man has not
been regenerated until his external or natural man has also been
regenerated, see n. 8742-8747; and that the external man is regenerated
through the internal by the Lord, n. 3286, 3321, 3493, 4588, 5651, 6299,
8746; and also that the whole man has been regenerated when his natural
has been regenerated, n. 7442, 7443.) Seeing then that the things which
belong to regeneration are expressed in the Word by the things which
belong to the generation or birth of man from his parents in the world,
it can be seen from the process of regeneration above described what is
meant or signified in the spiritual sense by "conception," by "gestation
in the womb," and what by "going forth from the womb," and by "birth;"
namely, that "going forth from the womb" denotes to go from the internal
man into the external or natural, and that "birth" denotes spiritual
good, that is, the good of charity formed from the truths of faith,
going forth from the internal man into the external or natural man. When
good is in the natural man, the man is a new man; his life is then from
good, and his form is from truths derived from good; and he is like an
angel, for the angels have their life from good, and their form from
truths, which form is the human form. But to the natural man this is a
paradox.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9044.">9044.</span></span>

And harm is not done. That this signifies thus no injury there, namely,
in the natural, is evident without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9045.">9045.</span></span>

With fining he shall be fined. That this signifies amendment, is evident
from the signification of "to be fined," as being amendment, for a fine
is for the sake of amendment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9046.">9046.</span></span>

As the woman's master shall lay upon him. That this signifies until it
agrees with the truth of good, is evident from the signification of "as
he shall lay upon him," when spoken of a fine, as being amendment even
to satisfaction, thus until there is agreement (of which below); from
the signification of "the master," that is, of the woman, as being
truth; and from the signification of "the woman," as being good. For in
the spiritual sense of the Word "the master" or "man" \[vir\] signifies
truth, and "the woman" good, because by the marriage of a man with a
woman is represented the marriage of truth and good (see n. 915, 2517,
4510, 4823). By "amendment until there is agreement," is meant
restoration for the injury occasioned by the untimely birth; in the
spiritual sense, that is occasioned by the bringing forth or thrusting
out, not in right order, of good derived from truths, by the internal
man into the external or natural man. Restoration is made when they
afterward come into agreement, and they do this when the external or
natural man does not act from itself, but from the internal man; or when
the spiritual acts in the natural, as the soul in its body. When this
comes to pass, the external or natural lives from the life of the
internal, and this is the new life, or life of the regenerated man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9047.">9047.</span></span>

And he shall give according to the judges. That this signifies according
to what is equitable, is evident from the signification of "the judges,"
as being those who decide and decree from what is just and fair;
consequently "to give according to the judges," or before the judges,
denotes according to what is equitable, thus neither more nor less; if
more, they shall make it equal, also if less.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9048.">9048.</span></span>

And if harm is done. That this signifies injury, is evident without
explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9049.">9049.</span></span>

Then thou shalt give soul for soul. That this signifies the law of order
that thou shalt do to thy neighbor as thou wouldest have another do to
thee, consequently that what thou doest to another shall be done to
thee, is evident from the fact that "to give soul for soul, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth," and so forth, denotes that as thou hast done to
another so shall it be done to thee. The reason why this law was given
to the sons of Israel, is that such is the law in the spiritual world.
He who there does good to another from the heart, receives the like
good. Consequently he who does evil to another from the heart, receives
the like evil. For good that is from the heart is conjoined with its
reward, and evil that is from the heart is conjoined with its
punishment; consequently there is heaven for the good, and hell for the
evil. That this is so, it has been given me to know from much
experience. The case herein is this. With him who does good from the
heart, there inflows from heaven on every side, good into the heart and
soul of him who does it, and by inspiring inspires it; and then at the
same time the affection of love for the neighbor to whom he does good is
increased, and with this affection a delight which is heavenly and
unutterable. The cause of this is that in heaven the good of love from
the Lord reigns universally, and constantly flows in according to the
degree in which it is practiced toward another. The case is similar in
respect to evil. With him who from the heart does evil to another, there
inflows from hell on every side evil into the heart of him who does it,
and by exciting excites it; and then at the same time the affection of
the love of self is increased, and with it the delight of hatred and
revenge against those who do not submit themselves. The cause of this is
that in hell the evil of the love of self reigns universally, and
constantly flows in according to the degree in which it is practiced
toward another. When this occurs, the punishers are at once present, who
ill-treat the offender; and thereby the evil with its delight is
restrained. \[2\] These things are so for the reason that the laws of
order in the other life are not learned from books, and stored up
therefrom in the memory, as with men in the world, but are written on
hearts, the laws of evil on the heart of the evil, and the laws of good
on the heart of the good. For every man carries with him into the other
life that which by his life in the world he had set in his heart;
namely, evil with the evil; and good with the good. \[3\] The law of
order from which these things flow is that which the Lord taught in
Matthew: All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them; this is the law and the prophets (Matt. 7:12; Luke
6:31). Order is from the Divine truth which proceeds from the Lord. The
laws of order in heaven are truths from good, and in hell are truths
separated from good. They are said to be separated, not by reason of the
Lord, but by reason of man. Good is separated by the nonreception of it.
\[4\] The law which is called "the law of retaliation," is thus
described in Leviticus: He that smiteth the soul of a beast shall
restore it, soul for soul; if a man shall cause a blemish in his
neighbor; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him; breach for
breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; as he shall cause a blemish in a
man, so shall it be rendered unto him. He that smiteth a beast shall
restore it; and he that smiteth a man shall be killed (Lev. 24:18-21).
As evil carries with it its penalty, it is therefore said by the Lord
that "evil must not be resisted," and at the same time in the following
words in Matthew it is explained how the case is with this law in the
spiritual world, with those who are in good, relatively to those who are
in evil: Ye have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth; but I say unto you, Resist not evil; but whosoever shall
strike thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any
man would drag thee to law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go one mile, go with him
twain. Give to everyone that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow
of thee turn not thou away (Matt. 5:38-42). \[5\] Who cannot see that
these words are not to be understood according to the sense of the
letter? For who will turn the left cheek to him who deals a blow on the
right cheek? And who will give his cloak to him who would take away his
coat? And who will give his property to all who ask? And who will not
resist evil? But no one can understand these words who does not know
what is signified by "the right cheek" and "the left cheek," what by "a
coat" and "a cloak," also what by "a mile," and likewise by "borrowing,"
and so on. The subject there treated of is spiritual life, or the life
of faith; not natural life, which is the life of the world. The Lord
there opens, and also in this chapter, and the following, the interior
things that belong to heaven, but by means of such things as are in the
world. The reason why He did so by such things, was that not worldly
men, but only heavenly men, should understand. The reason why worldly
men were not to understand, was lest they should profane the interior
things of the Word, for by so doing they would cast themselves into the
most frightful hell of all, which is the hell of the profaners of the
Word. Therefore it is said by the Lord in Luke: Unto you it is given to
know the mysteries of the kingdom of God; but to the rest in parables;
that seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not hear (Luke 8:10).
And in John: Isaiah said, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their
heart; that they may not see with their eyes, and understand with their
heart, and should convert themselves, and I should heal them (John
12:39, 40). It is said "lest I should heal them," because they who are
healed and return again to falsities and evils, commit profanation.
These are they who are meant in Matthew 12:43-45. \[6\] But it shall now
be told what is meant in the internal sense by the words of the Lord
above quoted. In this sense it there treats of those who wish to destroy
by means of falsities the truths of faith, thus the spiritual life with
a man when he is in temptations, and in persecutions; and in good
spirits when they are in infestations by evil spirits. By "the cheek" is
signified the affection of interior truth, by "the right cheek" the
affection of truth from good; by "dealing a blow" is signified the act
of injuring this affection; by "coat" and "cloak" is signified truth in
the external form (n. 4677, 4741, 4742); by "dragging to law" is
signified the endeavor to destroy; by "a mile" is signified that which
leads to truth, for the like is signified by "a mile" as by "a way"
(that "a way" denotes that which leads to truth, see n. 627, 2333,
3477); by "lending" is signified to instruct. From this it is plain what
is signified by "giving to all who ask," namely, to confess all things
of one's faith in the Lord. The reason therefore why evil ought not to
be resisted, is that evil does no harm to those who are in truth and
good, for they are protected by the Lord. \[7\] These are the things
which have been hidden under the above words of the Lord; and this being
the case, the Lord only says, "Ye have heard that it was said, An eye
for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," but says no more; because by "an
eye" is signified the interior truth of faith; and by "a tooth," the
exterior truth of faith, as will be seen in what follows. From all this
it is evident in what manner the Lord spoke when He was in the world,
namely, that He spoke, as everywhere in the Word of the Old Testament,
at the same time for the angels in heaven, and for men in the world; for
His speech was in itself Divine and heavenly, because it was from the
Divine, and through heaven. But the things which He spoke were presented
by means of such things as corresponded in the world. What they
correspond to, the internal sense teaches. \[8\] That "to deal a blow"
or "to smite the cheek" denotes to destroy truths, is plain from
passages in the Word where mention is made of "smiting the cheek." And
because in the genuine sense this signifies the destruction of truth,
therefore in the opposite sense it signifies the destruction of falsity,
in which sense it occurs in these passages: Thou wilt smite all mine
enemies on the cheek; Thou wilt break the teeth of the wicked (Ps. 3:7).
They shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek (Mic.
5:1). The bridle of him that leadeth astray shall be on the cheeks of
the peoples (Isa. 30:28). For "the face" signifies the affections (n.
4796, 4797, 4799, 5102, 5695, 6604), consequently those things which
belong to the face signify such things as belong to the affections, and
correspond to their functions and uses; as the "eye" signifies the
understanding of truth, the "nostrils" the perception of truth, those
things which belong to the mouth, as the "jaws," the "lips," the
"tongue," signify such things as relate to the utterance of truth (n.
4796-4805).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9050.">9050.</span></span>

That "soul" signifies the spiritual life, is evident from the
signification of "soul," as being the life of man, but the life of his
faith, which is spiritual life. In the Word throughout mention is made
of "the heart" and of "the soul," and by "the heart" is signified the
life of love, and by "the soul" the life of faith. Man has two faculties
receptive of life from the Lord, the one called the will, and the other
the understanding. To the faculty which is called the will belongs love,
for the goods of love make its life. But to the faculty which is called
the understanding belongs faith, for the truths of faith make its life.
But these two lives with man are nevertheless one, and when they are
one, then the things which are of faith are also of love, for they are
loved; and on the other hand the things which are of love are also of
faith, because they are believed. Such is the life of all in heaven.
\[2\] The reason why the life of love, or what is the same thing, the
will, is called in the Word "the heart;" and why the life of faith, or
what is the same thing, the understanding, is called "the soul;" is that
they who are in love to the Lord and are called celestial, constitute in
the Grand Man or heaven the province of the heart; and they who are in
faith in the Lord and thereby in charity toward the neighbor constitute
the province of the lungs (see n. 3635, 3883-3896). From this it is that
by "heart" in the Word is signified love, which is the life of the will,
and by "soul" is signified faith, which is the life of the understanding
(n. 2930, 7542, 8910); for in the original tongue "soul" is named from
breathing, which is of the lungs. \[3\] That faith pertains to the
intellectual faculty, is because this faculty is enlightened by the Lord
when man receives faith. From this he has light, or a perception of
truth, in such things as are of faith, when he reads the Word. And that
love pertains to the will faculty, is because this faculty is kindled by
the Lord when the man receives love. From this he has the fire of life,
and a sensitive perception of good. \[4\] From all this it can be seen
what is properly meant in the Word by "the heart," and what by "the
soul;" as in the following passages: Thou shalt love Jehovah thy God
from all thy heart, and from all thy soul, and from all thy strength
(Deut. 6:5). Thou shalt love Jehovah thy God, and shalt serve Him, from
all thy heart and from all thy soul (Deut. 10:12; 11:13). These statutes
and judgments thou shalt keep, and shalt do them, in all thy heart, and
in all thy soul (Deut. 26:16). Jesus said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God from all thy heart, and in all thy soul, and with all thy strength,
and with thy thought (Matt. 22:37; Mark 12:30, 32; Luke 10:27). "The
heart" denotes the life of love; and "the soul," the life of faith; "the
strength," those things which proceed from the life of love, thus which
are from the heart or the will; and "the thought," those things which
proceed from the life of faith, thus which are from the soul, or an
enlightened understanding. \[5\] In like manner in Isaiah: A deluded
heart maketh him go astray, that he rescue not his soul, and say, Is
there not a lie in my right hand? (Isa. 44:20). In Jeremiah: I will
rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in the land, in
truth, with all My heart and with all My soul (Jer. 32:41); speaking of
Jehovah, that is, of the Lord; "the heart" is predicated of the Divine
good, which is of love of mercy; and "the soul" is predicated of the
Divine truth, which is of faith with man. \[6\] That these things are
signified by "heart" and "soul" in the Word, is at this day known to few
within the church, for the reason that it has not been considered that
man has two faculties distinct from each other, namely, the will and the
understanding, and that these two faculties constitute one mind, in
order that man may be truly man. Neither has it been considered that all
things in the universe, both in heaven and in the world, bear relation
to good and truth, and that they must be conjoined together in order
that they may be anything, and produce anything. From ignorance of these
things it has resulted that they have separated faith from love; for he
who is ignorant of these universal laws cannot know that faith bears
relation to truth, and love to good, and that unless these are conjoined
together they are not anything; for faith without love is not faith, and
love without faith is not love, because love has its quality from faith,
and faith has its life from love; consequently faith without love is
dead, and faith with love is alive. That this is so, can be seen from
everything in the Word; for where faith is treated of, there also love
is treated of, in order that in this way the marriage of good and truth,
that is, that heaven, and in the supreme sense the Lord, may be in each
and all things of the Word. (That there is such a marriage, see n. 683,
793, 801, 2516, 2712, 4138, 5138, 5502, 6343, 7945, 8339.) From all this
it is now evident why the man of the church has not hitherto known what
is meant in the Word by "heart," and what by "soul." \[7\] That" soul"
in the Word denotes the life of faith, can be plainly seen from the
passages where "the soul" is mentioned, as in the following. In Moses:
Thou shalt not take the mill or the upper millstone to pledge; for he
taketh the soul to pledge (Deut. 24:6). It is said that "he who taketh a
mill taketh the soul to pledge" because in the internal sense by "a
mill" are signified those things which are of faith (n. 7780). In
Isaiah: It shall be as when a hungry man dreameth, as if he were eating;
but when he awaketh, his soul is fasting; or as when a thirsty man
dreameth, as if he were drinking; but when he awaketh, behold he is
weary, and his soul hath appetite (Isa. 29:8). "A fasting soul," and "a
soul that hath appetite," denote the desire of learning the goods and
truths of faith. In the same: If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry,
and sate the afflicted soul (Isa. 58:10). "To draw out thy soul to the
hungry" denotes to be desirous to instruct in the truths of faith; and
"to sate the afflicted soul" denotes to instruct in the good of faith.
\[8\] In Jeremiah: Though thou clothest thyself with double-dyed, though
thou deckest thee with ornament of gold, though thou rendest thine eyes
with antimony, in vain shalt thou make thyself beauteous; thy lovers
will abhor thee, they will seek thy soul (Jer. 4:30). Here "soul"
denotes the life of faith, consequently faith itself in man, because
this makes his spiritual life. That faith is meant by "soul," is plain
from the particulars in this verse. In the same: They shall come and
sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together unto the good of
Jehovah, to the wheat, and to the new wine, and to the oil, and to the
sons of the flock and of the herd; and their soul shall become as a
watered garden; I will water the weary soul, and every sorrowful soul
(Jer. 31:12, 25). "The soul" denotes the life of faith in the man of the
church, who is said "to become as a garden," because by "a garden" is
signified the intelligence which is from the truths of faith (n. 100,
108, 2702); and the soul is said to be "watered," because by "being
watered" is signified to be instructed. \[9\] In the same: We bring our
bread with the peril of our souls, because of the sword of the
wilderness (Lam. 5:9). "The peril of souls" denotes the danger of the
loss of faith and consequently of spiritual life; for "the sword of the
wilderness" denotes falsity fighting against the truths of faith (n.
2799, 4499, 6353, 7102, 8294). In Ezekiel: Javan, Tubal, and Meshech,
these were thy traders, with the soul of man, and with vessels of brass,
they furnished thy trading (Ezek. 27:13). "The soul of man" denotes the
interior truth of faith from good; "vessels of brass," exterior truths
of faith from good; "vessels" denoting exterior truths or memory-truths
(see n. 3068, 3079), and "brass," the good of the natural (n. 425,
1551). Unless it were known that "the soul of man" denotes faith, it
could not be understood what is signified by "trading with the soul of
man, and with vessels of brass." \[10\] In the same: Every living soul
that creepeth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live; whence
is exceeding much fish; because these waters are come hither, and are
healed (Ezek. 47:9); speaking of the new temple, that is, of a new
spiritual church from the Lord; "the living soul that creepeth" denotes
memory-truths which are of faith; "much fish from thence" denotes
memory-knowledges (n. 40, 991); "rivers" denote the things that are of
intelligence, which are from the truths of faith (n. 2702, 3051).
Neither in this passage would it be known without the internal sense
what is meant by "much fish" in consequence of the rivers coming
thither. Again: Save me, O God, for the waters are come even unto my
soul (Ps. 69:1). The waters compassed me about, even to my soul (Jon.
2:5). In these passages "waters" denote falsities, and also temptations
which are caused by injected falsities (n. 705, 739, 756, 790, 8137,
8138, 8368). \[11\] In Jeremiah: Jehovah said, Shall not My soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? (Jer. 5:9, 29). Admit chastisement, O
Jerusalem, lest My soul be turned away from thee, and I make thee a
waste (Jer. 6:8). "The soul," when predicated of the Lord, denotes
Divine truth. In John: The second angel poured out his vial into the
sea, and it became blood as of a dead man, whence every living soul died
in the sea (Rev. 16:3). "The sea" denotes memory-knowledges in the
complex (n. 28); "blood," the truths of faith from good, and in the
opposite sense, the truths of faith falsified and profaned (n. 4735,
6978, 7317, 7326); consequently "living soul" denotes life derived from
faith. \[12\] In Matthew: Be not anxious for your soul, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink (Matt. 6:25). "Soul" denotes the truths of
faith; "eating" and "drinking" denote to be instructed in the good and
truth of faith, for here in the internal sense the subject treated of is
spiritual life and its nourishment. Again: Whoever will find his soul
shall lose it, and whoever shall lose his soul for My sake shall find it
(Matt. 10:39). "The soul" denotes the life of faith such as it is with
those who believe, and in the opposite sense the life not of faith such
as it is with those who do not believe. In Luke: In your patience
possess ye your souls (Luke 21:19). "To possess the souls" denotes those
things which are of faith and consequently of spiritual life. The
signification is similar in very many other passages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_188"></span>[9030-1](ac181.htm#fr_188.md) That is, compensate
him for the loss of his time. \[REVISER.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9051-9100](ac182.md)
