[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac198)  [Next](ac200.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="9901.">9901.</span></span>

In the breastplate of judgment. That this signifies a representative of
heaven in respect to Divine truth shining forth from the Divine good of
the Lord, is evident from the signification of "the breastplate of
judgment," as being Divine truth shining forth from the Divine good of
the Lord (see n. 9857); and as being a representative of heaven (n.
9879, 9882).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9902.">9902.</span></span>

Upon his heart. That this signifies from the Divine love to eternity, is
evident from the signification of "the heart," as being the good of love
(see n. 3313, 3635, 3883-3896, 7542, 9050); consequently, when said of
the Lord, who is here represented by Aaron, it denotes the Divine love.
Consequently "to carry upon the heart" denotes to preserve to eternity
from the Divine love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9903.">9903.</span></span>

When he goeth in unto the holiness. That this signifies in all worship,
is evident from the signification of "going in unto the holiness," as
being worship; for all Aaron's ministration at the altar and in the Tent
of meeting was called "holiness," and this ministration was worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9904.">9904.</span></span>

For a remembrance before Jehovah continually. That this signifies from
mercy to eternity, is evident from the signification of "remembrance,"
when said of the Divine, as being to preserve or deliver, from mercy (n.
9849); and from the signification of "continually," as being to
eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9905.">9905.</span></span>

And thou shalt put unto the breastplate of judgment the Urim and
Thummim. That this signifies the shining forth of Divine truth from the
Lord in ultimates, is evident from the signification of "the breastplate
of judgment," as being Divine truth shining forth from the Divine good
of the Lord (see n. 9857); and from the signification of "the Urim and
Thummim," as being light and the shining forth therefrom. That "the Urim
and Thummim" denote light shining forth, is because through the stones
in the breastplate the light of heaven shone forth with variety
according to the answers that were being given through them. For this
reason they were of different colors. For the Divine truth that proceeds
from the Lord's Divine good appears before the angels as light, and from
it is all the light of heaven. The colors derived from it, which are
modifications of this light with the angels, are variegations of
intelligence and wisdom with them; for all wisdom and intelligence are
from this Divine truth or light. From this it can be seen that by the
shining forth of various colors from this light, Divine truths, which
are answers, are presented to view in the heavens. In like manner there
was a shining forth through the Urim and Thummim, when inquiry was made
of the Divine. But be it known that when the shining forth appeared,
then at the same time an answer to the subject of inquiry was given in
an audible voice. This was done through angels, to whom this answer was
revealed by the Lord by means of such a shining forth; for, as before
said, Divine truths which are answers appear in this manner in the
heavens. \[2\] (That the light of heaven is the Divine truth that
proceeds from the Lord's Divine good, see n. 1053, 1521-1533, 1619-1632,
2776, 3094, 3138, 3167, 3190, 3195, 3222, 3223, 3337, 3339, 3341, 3636,
3643, 3862, 3993, 4060, 4180, 4302, 4408, 4414, 4415, 4419, 4527, 4598,
5400, 6032, 6313, 6315, 6608, 6907, 7174, 8644, 8707, 8861, 9399, 9407,
9570, 9571; and that colors appear in the heavens, and that they are
modifications of this light with the angels, thus are variegations of
intelligence and wisdom with them, n. 3993, 4530, 4677, 4742, 4922,
9466, 9467, 9865.) \[3\] That this is the case, is also evident from the
signification of "the Urim and Thummim;" for "Urim" means a shining
fire; and "Thummim," the shining forth therefrom; the "shining fire"
denotes the Divine truth from the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love,
and the "shining forth" denotes this same truth in ultimates, thus in
the effect. But be it known that in the Hebrew tongue "Thummim" means
"integrity;" but in the angelic tongue a "shining forth." It is said "in
the angelic tongue" because the angels converse with one another from
the very essence of the subject perceived inwardly within themselves,
thus according to its quality. From this the speech flows forth into a
conformable sound that is audible to the angels only. The shining forth
of the Divine truth is, in sound, "Thummim," whence comes its name. The
like is perceived by the angels when thum is read in the Hebrew tongue,
by which is signified what is entire, or integrity. It is from this that
by "integrity," <span id="fr_216"></span>[9905-1](#fn_216.md) in the
internal sense of the Word, is signified Divine truth in the effect,
which is a life according to the Divine commandments (as can be seen
from many passages in the Word; as Josh. 24:14; Judges 9:16, 19; Ps.
25:21; 37:37; 84:11; 101:2; 119:1). \[4\] From this also it is that the
Urim and Thummim are called "the judgment of the sons of Israel," also
"the breastplate of judgment," and likewise "the judgment of Urim;" for
"judgment" signifies Divine truth in doctrine and in life, as may be
seen above (n. 9857). From all this it can now be seen that through the
Urim and Thummim, that is to say, through the shining forth of the light
of heaven, the breastplate revealed Divine truths in the natural sphere,
thus in ultimates. There is also a similar shining forth inwardly with
those who are in truths from good, which dictates, and as it were gives
answers, when truth is sought from the affection of the heart, and when
it is loved as good. That there is such a shining forth, whereby Divine
truth is revealed from heaven in the natural man, with those who are
enlightened from the Word, is not perceived in the world, for the reason
that it is not known that any light from heaven enlightens man's
understanding. But that such is the case has been given me to perceive,
and also to see. Be it known further that this shining forth appears in
ultimates, because all things that belong to light from the Divine
descend even to the ultimate bounds; and because they descend to these,
they also shine forth there, and from thence. This then is the reason
why the breastplate was put upon the ephod, and above its girdle; for
the ephod represented Divine truth in ultimates (n. 9824); and its
girdle represented a general bond, that all things might be held in
connection (n. 9828, 9837). Therefore it is said, "and they shall bind
the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod, that
it may be upon the girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate
withdraw not from upon the ephod" (verse 28 of this chapter). The reason
why the names of the sons of Israel were also engraved on it, was that
the twelve tribes likewise represented all things of Divine good and
truth in the heavens, consequently heaven together with all the
societies there; and that they represented various things according to
the order in which they are mentioned in the Word (see n. 3858, 3862,
3926, 3939, 4060, 4603, 6335, 6337, 6397, 6640, 7836, 7891, 7973, 7996,
7997).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9906.">9906.</span></span>

And they shall be upon Aaron's heart. That this signifies from the
Divine good of the Lord's Divine love, may be seen above (n. 9902).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9907.">9907.</span></span>

When he goeth in before Jehovah. That this signifies in all worship, is
evident from the signification of "going in before Jehovah," or what is
the same thing, "to the holiness," as being worship (see above, n.
9903).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9908.">9908.</span></span>

And Aaron shall carry the judgment of the sons of Israel. That this
signifies the Divine truth of heaven and of the church, is evident from
the signification of "judgment," as being Divine truth in doctrine and
in life (see n. 9857). As it was the Urim and Thummim which are here
called "judgment," it is the Divine truth that proceeds from the Lord,
and that shines forth in ultimates, which is here meant by "judgment,"
for the Urim and Thummim have this signification (n. 9905).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9909.">9909.</span></span>

Upon his heart before Jehovah continually. That this signifies
perpetually shining forth from good, is evident from the signification
of "the heart," as being the good of love (see n. 3313, 3635, 3883-3896,
7542, 9050); and from the signification of "continually," as being
perpetually. The reason why it means shining forth, is that the
breastplate was upon the heart, and by "the breastplate" is signified
Divine truth shining forth from the Lord's Divine good (n. 9823).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9910.">9910.</span></span>

Verses 31-35. And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue. And
there shall be a mouth of the head of it in the midst thereof; there
shall be a lip for the mouth of it round about, the work of the weaver,
as the mouth of a coat of mail it shall be, that it be not rent. And
upon the skirts of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of
crimson, and of scarlet double-dyed, upon the skirts thereof round
about; and bells of gold in the midst of them round about; a bell of
gold and a pomegranate, a bell of gold and a pomegranate, upon the
skirts of the robe round about. And it shall be upon Aaron to minister;
and the voice thereof shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holiness
before Jehovah, and when he goeth out; that he die not. "And thou shalt
make the robe of the ephod," signifies Divine truth in the internal form
in the spiritual kingdom; "all of blue," signifies by means of influx
from the good of the celestial kingdom; "and there shall be a mouth of
the head of it in the midst thereof," signifies the method of the influx
from what is above; "there shall be a lip for the mouth of it round
about," signifies bounded and closed on every side; "the work of the
weaver," signifies from the celestial; "as the mouth of a coat of mail
it shall be, that it be not rent," signifies thus strong and safe from
injury; "and upon the skirts of it thou shalt make," signifies in the
extremes where is what is natural; "pomegranates," signifies
memory-knowledges of good; "of blue, and of crimson, and of scarlet
double-dyed," signifies from the good of charity and of faith; "upon the
skirts thereof round about," signifies in the extremes where the natural
is, on every side; "and bells of gold" signifies all things of doctrine
and of worship from good passing over to those who are of the church;
"in the midst of them round about," signifies from what is within the
memory-knowledges of good on every side; "a bell of gold and a
pomegranate, a bell of gold and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the
robe round about," signifies thus everywhere; "and it shall be upon
Aaron," signifies a representative of the Lord; "to minister," signifies
when engaged in worship and in evangelization; "and the voice thereof
shall be heard," signifies the influx of truth with those who are in the
heavens and who are on earth; "when he goeth in unto the holiness before
Jehovah, and when he goeth out," signifies in every state of good and
truth in worship; "that he die not," signifies that the representative
does not perish, and therewith the conjunction with the heavens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9911.">9911.</span></span>

And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod. That this signifies Divine
truth in the internal form in the spiritual kingdom, is evident from the
signification of "the robe," as being the spiritual kingdom in general,
and specifically Divine truth there in the internal form (see n. 9825).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9912.">9912.</span></span>

All of blue. That this signifies by means of influx from the good of the
celestial kingdom, is evident from the signification of "blue"
\[hyacinthinum\], as being the celestial love of truth (see n. 9466),
which is the good of mutual love; and the good of mutual love is the
external good of the celestial kingdom; for the goods in the heavens
proceed in order from the inmosts to the extremes, and they inflow in
the same order as they proceed; for to proceed is to flow in. (In what
order goods proceed, see n. 9873.) It is this external good of the
celestial kingdom that flows into the internal good of the spiritual
kingdom, which is signified by "the robe." From this comes-forth the
good of the spiritual kingdom, which is the good of charity toward the
neighbor. This is the reason why the robe was all of blue. With regard
to the influx of goods, the case is this. There is no good which is good
unless it has within it an interior good from which it is; the interior
good from which it is makes its essence; whence it is that this interior
good exists in the good which follows, almost as the soul exists in its
body. It is this following good of which it is said that it proceeds
from another good, which is more interior. That the good of charity
toward the neighbor proceeds from the good of mutual love, which is a
prior or interior good, has been shown several times. The good of mutual
love is the external good of innocence, and unless the good of charity
has within it the good of innocence, it is not the good of charity (n.
2526, 2780, 3183, 4797, 6765, 7840, 9262), consequently not unless it
has within it the good of mutual love. This is the reason why the robe
was to be all of blue; for "blue" denotes the good of mutual love, or
what is the same thing, the external good of innocence; and "the robe"
denotes Divine truth in the internal form in the spiritual kingdom,
which is the same thing as the good of charity (n. 9825).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9913.">9913.</span></span>

And there shall be a mouth of the head of it in the midst thereof. That
this signifies the method of the influx from what is above, is evident
from the signification of "the mouth of the head of the robe in the
midst thereof," as being where there is influx from what is above; or
what is the same thing, from what is within, thus from the celestial
kingdom into the spiritual kingdom. That the external good of the
celestial kingdom flows into the internal good of the spiritual kingdom,
may be seen just above (n. 9912). That "the mouth of the head of the
robe in the midst thereof" has this signification, is because by "the
robe" is signified the spiritual kingdom, and specifically its internal
(n. 9825); and by "the neck," where was the mouth of the head of the
robe, is signified the influx, communication, and conjunction of
celestial with spiritual things (n. 3542, 5320, 5328); for the head with
man corresponds to the Lord's celestial kingdom, and the body to His
spiritual kingdom; consequently the intervening neck, which is
encompassed and clothed by the mouth of the head of the robe,
corresponds to the intermediation or influx of the celestial kingdom
into the spiritual kingdom. \[2\] That such things are signified by "the
mouth of the head of the robe in the midst thereof," may seem like an
absurdity, especially to those who know nothing of heaven, and of the
spirits and angels there, consequently nothing of correspondence. That
there is a correspondence of all things in man with all things in the
heavens has been shown at the end of many chapters (see the places cited
in n. 9280); and also that in general the head corresponds to celestial
things, the body to spiritual things, and the feet to natural things (n.
4938, 4939). From this it is plain that by virtue of its correspondence,
the neck signifies the influx, communication, and conjunction of
celestial with spiritual things. Consequently "the mouth of the head of
the robe," which was made to encompass the neck, signifies the method of
this influx; for by Aaron's garments were represented in general the
things that belong to the Lord's spiritual kingdom (n. 9814). From this
it is evident that by the description of its mouth or circuit is
described the influx itself. Be it known moreover, that angels and
spirits appear clothed in garments; and that each of their garments is
representative; as is well known to all who are in the heavens. It is
from this that each of Aaron's garments also was representative of such
things as are in the heavens; for the Word that is from the Lord has
been so written that there is conjunction by its means. That the man of
the church does not know this, in spite of his having such a Word, is
because he turns his interiors toward the world, insomuch that he cannot
be raised toward heaven, and be instructed (n. 9706, 9707, 9709).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9914.">9914.</span></span>

And there shall be a lip for the mouth of it round about. That this
signifies that it is bounded and closed on every side, is evident from
the signification of "a lip," or border, round about the mouth or upper
opening of the robe, as being that which is bounded and closed on every
side; for this "lip," or border, which was round about, bounded and
closed the robe. By this and what presently follows is described the
method of the influx of celestial good into spiritual good. That this
influx takes place by a method like that with man of the influx of
forces from the head through the neck, is evident from what was said in
the foregoing article about correspondence. \[2\] What the nature of
this influx is, shall also be briefly told. All the first things, that
belong to the head, that is, to the cerebrum and cerebellum, are
gathered together there into little bundles of fibers, and into little
nerves, and after being gathered together they are passed down through
the neck into the body, and are there diffused in all directions, and
move the organs in complete compliance with the will, which begins in
the brains. Similar also is the downflow and inflow of powers and forces
from the celestial kingdom (which is the head in the Grand Man, that is,
in heaven) into the spiritual kingdom (which is like the body there).
This influx is also what is meant and described by "the mouth of the
head of the robe in the midst," and its bounding termination by "the lip
round about." It is for this reason that by "the lip of its mouth" is
signified what is bounded and closed on every side. The bounding itself
is now described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9915.">9915.</span></span>

The work of the weaver. That this signifies from the celestial, is
evident from the signification of "the work of the weaver," as being
from the celestial. By "work" is signified that which is done, or which
comes-forth, thus that which is from something else; and "the weaver"
denotes one who causes the thing to be, or to come-forth; thus he
denotes the celestial, because the spiritual comes-forth from and
through the celestial. (That the good of the celestial kingdom flows
into the good of the spiritual kingdom, and causes this good to come
forth, was shown above, n. 9913, 9914.) Whether we say "the good of the
celestial kingdom," or "the celestial," it is the same thing; for the
celestial is the good of the celestial kingdom. The case is similar with
"the good of the spiritual kingdom," and "the spiritual." What the good
of the celestial kingdom or the celestial is, and what the good of the
spiritual kingdom or the spiritual is may be seen from the passages
cited in n. 9277.) \[2\] There are three things in the heavens which
follow on in order; namely, the celestial, the spiritual, and the
natural; the celestial makes the inmost heaven, the spiritual the middle
heaven, and the natural which proceeds from the spiritual makes the
ultimate heaven. These same three things are in man, and in him they
follow on in the same order as in the heavens; for a regenerated man is
a heaven in the least form, corresponding to the Grand Man (n. 9279).
But the faculties which receive these three things are called the will,
the understanding, and the memory-knowledge by virtue of which is the
thought or imagination of the external or natural man. The will receives
the celestial, or good; the intellectual receives the spiritual, or
truth from this good; and the memory-knowledge which makes the
understanding of the natural man, brings the two former to a close.
These three are signified in the Word by "the embroiderer," "the
thinker," <span id="fr_217"></span>[9915-1](#fn_217.md) and "the weaver."
(That "the embroiderer," or "the embroidered work" denotes
memory-knowledge, see n. 9688; also that "the thinker," or that which is
thought, denotes the understanding, n. 9598, 9688.) Thus "the weaver"
denotes the will. The reason why "the weaver" denotes the will is that
the will flows into the understanding, and weaves it, insomuch that the
things which are in the understanding are woven fabrics from the will;
for that which the will wills, it forms so as to appear to the sight in
the understanding. This sight is thought, consequently by "the thinker"
is signified the understanding. \[3\] As by Aaron's garments was
represented the spiritual kingdom joined to the celestial kingdom (n.
9814); and as the celestial kingdom corresponds to the will in man, and
the spiritual kingdom to the understanding in him (n. 9835), therefore
in application to garments mention is made of "the work of the
embroiderer," of "the thinker," and of "the weaver," and by these are
signified things which are from the faculty of memory-knowledge, from
the understanding, and from the will; or what is the same, from the
natural, the spiritual, and the celestial. \[4\] That such things are
signified, can be seen by all who believe that the Word is Divine, and
that it therefore contains within it things that belong to the Lord, to
heaven, and to the church; for these things are Divine. Apart from
these, what purpose would be served by Jehovah Himself declaring of
what, and by what work, the garments of Aaron should be made? and which
of them should be the work of the embroiderer, which the work of the
thinker, and which the work of the weaver? All these particulars are
distinctly mentioned in what follows in the book of Exodus in these
words: Them hath He filled with wisdom of heart, to do all the work of
the workman, and of the thinker, and of the embroiderer; in blue, and in
crimson, and in scarlet double-dyed; and of the weaver, even of them
that do all work, and of those who think thoughts (Exod. 35:35). "The
workman" here denotes Divine celestial good, from which is the will of
the regenerated man (n. 9846); his "work" is mentioned in the first
place, because it is immediately from the Divine; and from celestial
good all things are mediately born and proceed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9916.">9916.</span></span>

As the mouth of a coat of mail it shall be, that it be not rent. That
this signifies thus strong and safe from injury, is evident from the
signification of "a coat of mail," as being what is strongly woven
together; wherefore it is said, "that it be not rent," that is, that it
be safe from injury. Something thus woven together is signified by this
term in the original tongue. An idea of what is thus woven together can
be had from correspondence; for in the internal sense there is here
treated of the influx of celestial good into spiritual good. It is this
influx which is signified by "the mouth of the head of the robe," and is
described by "the work of the weaver," and "of a coat of mail;" and to
this influx from the heavens corresponds in man the influx of life from
the head through the neck into the body (n. 9913, 9914). And because to
this influx corresponds the woven fabric of the neck which is of strong
sinews; and lower down a kind of interwoven circle of bones; through
both of which the influx is rendered safe from all injury, therefore, as
before said, an idea can be had of the several expressions in this
verse, namely, of what is signified by "the mouth of the head of the
robe in the midst," by "the lip which is round about" it, by "the work
of the weaver," and by "the mouth of the coat of mail" which it had,
lest it should be rent. Be it known that all the representatives in
nature bear relation to the human form, and have their signification
according to this relation (n. 9496); and that all clothing derives its
signification from that part of the body which it covers (n. 9827);
consequently so also does this upper part of the robe which encompasses
and covers the neck.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9917.">9917.</span></span>

And upon the skirts of it thou shalt make. That this signifies in the
extremes where is what is natural, is evident from the signification of
"the skirts of the robe," as being the extremes where is what is
natural. For by "the robe" is specifically signified Divine truth in the
spiritual kingdom in its internal form, and in general the spiritual
kingdom (see n. 9825); and by "the skirts" which are round about below,
are signified the extremes of this kingdom; and the extremes of the
spiritual kingdom are natural. For the goods and truths in the heavens
follow on in this order: in the highest or inmost heavens are celestial
goods and truths; in the middle heavens are spiritual goods and truths;
and in the ultimate heavens are natural goods and truths (concerning
which succession in the heavens and with man, see what was said above,
n. 9915). And because the memory-knowledges of truth and good are in the
external or natural man, therefore also pomegranates were placed in the
skirts, for by "pomegranates" are signified the memory-knowledges of
good; and also among the pomegranates were bells of gold, because by
"bells" are signified such things as are from memory-knowledges. \[2\]
That "the skirts of the robe" denote the extremes where is what is
natural, is evident from the passages of the Word where "skirts" are
mentioned, as in Isaiah: I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and
lifted up, and His skirts filled the temple (Isa. 6:1). By "the throne
upon which the Lord was sitting" is signified heaven, and specifically
the spiritual heaven (n. 5313, 8625); by "skirts" here are signified
Divine truths in the ultimates or extremes, such as are the truths of
the Word in the sense of the letter; which are said to "fill the temple"
when they fill the church. The like is signified by "the skirts filling
the temple" as by "the smoke and cloud filling the tabernacle," and also
the temple, as repeatedly mentioned in the Word. (That by "smoke" is
there signified Divine truth in ultimates, such as is the sense of the
letter of the Word, see n. 8916, 8918; as also by a "cloud," n. 4060,
4391, 5922, 6343.) \[3\] That a woman laboring with an issue of blood
was made whole when she touched the skirt of the Lord's garment (Matt.
9:20, 22), and in general that as many as touched the skirt of His
garment were made whole (Matt. 14:36; Mark 6:56), signified that health
went forth from the Divine extremes or ultimates; for that there are
strength and power in the ultimates of good and truth which are from the
Divine may be seen above (n. 9836); and also that answers are given
there (n. 9905). In Matthew: Jesus said of the Scribes and Pharisees
that they do all their works to be seen of men, that they make broad
their phylacteries, and enlarge the skirts of their robes (Matt. 23:5).
It is here very evident that "the skirts of the robe" denote the
external things which stand forth to view, and that "enlarging" them
denotes to do works outwardly, so that they may appear, or be seen.
\[4\] In Jeremiah: Jerusalem hath sinned a sin, her uncleanness was in
her skirts (Lam. 1:8, 9). "Uncleanness in the skirts" denotes in the
deeds and words, thus in the extremes; for the extremes or outermost
things derive their essence from the interior ones; and therefore when
the interiors are unclean, the extremes also are unclean, although the
uncleannesses may not appear before men; for the reason that men look at
the outward form, and therefore do not see the interiors. Nevertheless
these uncleannesses that are in the interiors appear before the angels,
and in the other life are also uncovered with everyone, because external
things are there taken away; consequently it becomes manifest what has
been the quality of the works in their essence. \[5\] In Nahum: I will
uncover thy skirts upon thy faces, and I will show the nations thy
nakedness (Nah. 3:5). "To uncover the skirts upon the faces" denotes to
remove external things so that internal ones may appear; for in various
ways the external things of the natural man hide the internal things,
which are hypocrisies, deceits, lies, hatreds, revenges, adulteries, and
other like things; and therefore when the external things are taken
away, the internal ones appear in their uncleanness and filthiness.
\[6\] In Jeremiah: If thou say in thine heart, Wherefore have these
things covered me up? For the multitude of thine iniquity have thy
skirts been unveiled, thy heels have suffered violence. I will lay bare
thy skirts upon thy faces, that thy disgraces may be seen, even thine
adulteries (Jer. 13:22, 26, 27); speaking of the abominations of
Jerusalem; "to unveil the skirts, and lay them bare" denotes to take
away the external things which cover, so that the interiors may be seen;
for a man learns to counterfeit what is good, honorable, and sincere,
for the sake of reputation, honor, and gain, when yet he has evils and
falsities of various kinds hidden within. As by "skirts" are signified
external things, therefore mention is also made of "heels," because "the
heels" denote the lowest things of the natural (n. 259, 4938,
4940-4951). From all this it can now be seen that by "the skirts of the
robe" are signified goods and truths in the ultimates or extremes, which
are in the natural world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9918.">9918.</span></span>

Pomegranates. That hereby are signified memory-knowledges of good, is
evident from the signification of "pomegranates," as being the
memory-knowledges of good (see n. 9552). That pomegranates were put upon
the skirts of the robe, was because "the skirts" signified the ultimates
or extremes of heaven and the church, and the ultimates or extremes of
the church are memory-knowledges, as is evident from what was said above
(n. 9915, 9917), about the successive order of goods and truths in the
heavens and with man. The memory-knowledges of good and truth which are
signified by "the pomegranates," are doctrinal things from the Word,
which are memory-knowledges insofar as they are in the memory which is
in the external or natural man. But when they enter into the memory
which is in the internal or spiritual man, as is the case when the man
lives according to them, then doctrinal things as to truth become of
faith, and doctrinal things as to good become of charity, and are called
spiritual. When this is done, they almost vanish out of the external or
natural memory, and appear as it were innate, because they are then
implanted in the man's life, like all those things which through daily
use have become as it were of his nature. From this it is evident what
memory-knowledges are, and what purpose they serve; consequently what
purpose the doctrinal things of the church serve so long as they are
kept solely in the memory; for so long as they are kept in the memory
only, they have a place beneath intelligence and wisdom; and they do not
ascend, or enter into the life, until they become of faith and charity
in the internal man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9919.">9919.</span></span>

Of blue, and of crimson, and of scarlet double-dyed. That this signifies
from the good of charity and of faith, is evident from the signification
of these things in n. 9687, 9833. The reason why fine linen was not
interwoven, as in the ephod, is that the tunic, which was the inmost
garment, was of fine linen; and this for the reason that "fine linen"
signifies truth from a celestial origin (n. 5319, 9469), which is
spiritual good itself proceeding from celestial good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9920.">9920.</span></span>

Upon the skirts thereof, round about. That this signifies in the
extremes where there is what is natural, on every side, is evident from
the signification of "the skirts," as being the extremes where there is
what is natural (see above, n. 9917); and from the signification of
"round about," as being on every side; for where "the skirts" signify
the extremes, the whole circumference which consists of the skirts,
signifies the whole extreme, consequently, everywhere, or on every side.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9921.">9921.</span></span>

And bells of gold. That this signifies all things of doctrine and of
worship from good passing over to those who are of the church, is
evident from the signification of "bells," as being all things of
doctrine and of worship passing over to those who are of the church (of
which below); that they are from good is signified by their being of
gold, for "gold" signifies good (see n. 113, 1551, 1552, 5658, 6914,
6917, 8932, 9490, 9510, 9874, 9881, 9884). That "the bells" denote all
things of doctrine and of worship passing over to those who are of the
church, is because by means of the bells the people heard and perceived
the presence of Aaron in his ministration, for by "the people" are
signified those who are of the church, and by "Aaron's ministry" are
signified all things of doctrine and of worship; and therefore it is
said in what follows: And they shall be upon Aaron to minister; and the
voice thereof shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holiness before
Jehovah, and when be cometh out (Exod. 28:35); from which it is plain
what is signified by "the bells." The reason why these bells were put in
the skirts, was that the holy things of doctrine are in the extremes,
and the hearing and perception are there, and are from thence (see n.
9824, 9905).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9922.">9922.</span></span>

In the midst of them round about. That this signifies from what is
within the memory-knowledges of good on every side, is evident from the
signification of "in the midst," as being that which is within (see n.
1074, 2940, 2973, 5897); thus "in the midst," when said of the hearing
and perception of doctrine and of worship, which are signified by "the
bells," denotes from what is within; from the signification of "the
pomegranates," in the midst of which were the bells, as being the
memory-knowledges of good (n. 9918); and from the signification of
"round about," as being on every side (as above, n. 9920). The reason
why the bells were placed in the midst of the pomegranates, was that the
memory-knowledges which are signified by "the pomegranates," are
recipients, and are as it were vessels, of truth and good (n. 1469,
1496, 3068, 5373, 5489, 7770); and the doctrine and worship which are
signified by "the bells," must be from the good and truth which are
within the memory-knowledges, as in their vessels; if the doctrine and
the worship are not from good and truth, but only from memory-
knowledges, they have nothing of life. It is said that the doctrine and
worship must be from the good and truth which are within the
memory-knowledges; but not from the memory-knowledges apart from the
good and truth. \[2\] But as few can apprehend how the case herein is,
it shall be unfolded to the apprehension insofar as this can be done.
All things of the external or natural memory are called
"memory-knowledges;" for there is an external memory, which is the
memory of things in the natural world; and there is an internal memory,
which is the memory of things in the spiritual world (n. 2469-2494,
2831, 5212, 9394, 9723, 9841). The things which have been inscribed on
the internal memory are not called memory-knowledges, because they are
things of the man's life; but they are called truths of faith and goods
of love. These are the things which must be within memory-knowledges.
For there is in man an external, which is called the external man; and
an internal, which is called the internal man. The internal must be in
the external, as the soul is in its body; thus the things which are in
the internal man must be in those which are in the external man, for
then there is a soul or life in the latter. Wherefore if there are no
internal things, that is, things of the internal man, in the external
things, there is no soul, and consequently no life, in them. And as the
good of love and of faith is internal, it follows that this good must be
in the external things, thus in the memory-knowledges; for as before
said, the memory-knowledges are recipients and as it were vessels of
internal things. Consequently the doctrine and the worship must be from
what is within the recipients or vessels, and they are not in recipients
and vessels which are empty or void of what is internal. From all this
it is evident how it is to be understood that all things of doctrine and
of worship must be from the interior things of the memory-knowledges of
good, which is signified by the bells of gold being in the midst of the
pomegranates. \[3\] Be it known further that there are memory-knowledges
of good, and memory-knowledges of truth; and that the truths in them are
again vessels recipient of good, for the truths of faith are vessels of
the good of love. For the illustration of this subject see what has been
already said and shown about memory-knowledges, namely: That
memory-knowledges are things of the memory in the natural man (n. 3293,
3309, 3310, 4967, 5212, 5774, 5874, 5886, 5889, 5934): That the internal
man is opened by means of memory-knowledges (n. 1495, 1548, 1563, 1895,
1940, 3085, 3086, 5276, 5871, 5874, 5901): That memory-knowledges are
means for growing wise, and also means for becoming insane (n. 4156,
4760, 8628, 8629): That memory-knowledges are vessels of truth, and
truths are vessels of good (n. 1469, 1496, 3068, 3079, 3318, 5489, 5881,
6023, 6071, 6077, 6750, 7770, 8005, 9394, 9724): That memory-knowledges
are of service to the internal man (n. 1486, 1616, 2576, 3019, 3020,
3665, 5201, 5213, 6052, 6068, 6084, 9394): That when memory-knowledges,
which are things of the external memory, become of the life, they vanish
out of the external memory; but remain inscribed on the internal memory
(n. 9394, 9723, 9841): That the man who is in the truths of faith from
the good of charity, can be raised above memory-knowledges (n. 6383,
6384): That this is called being raised above the things of the senses
(n. 5089, 5094, 6183, 6313, 6315, 9730): That when a man dies he carries
with him into the other life the memory-knowledges, that is, the things
of the external memory; but that they are then quiescent; and in what
manner (n. 2475-2486, 6931).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9923.">9923.</span></span>

A bell of gold and a pomegranate, a bell of gold and a pomegranate, upon
the skirts of the robe round about. That this signifies thus everywhere
and wholly, namely, that the doctrine and the worship must be from what
is within the memory-knowledges, is evident from what has been shown
just above concerning the bells and the pomegranates. The repetition
involves that it must be thus everywhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9924.">9924.</span></span>

And it shall be upon Aaron. That this signifies a representative of the
Lord, is evident from the representation of Aaron, as being a
representative of the Lord in respect to the good of love (see n. 9806,
9809); here in respect to those things which concern evangelization and
worship; because such things are signified by "the bells in the midst of
the pomegranates," and by "the voice to be heard therefrom when Aaron
went in unto the holiness."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9925.">9925.</span></span>

To minister. That this signifies when engaged in worship and in
evangelization, is evident from the signification of "ministering," when
said of Aaron, by whom is represented the Lord, as being worship and
evangelization. By "worship" is signified everything that is
representative of worship from the good of love and the truths of faith;
for the worship that is from these is truly worship, whereas worship
without these is like a shell without a kernel, and like a body without
a soul. And yet such was the worship with the Jewish and Israelitish
nation, for this worship merely represented internal things, which, as
has been said, are of love and faith. Nevertheless the Lord provided
that such worship should be perceived in the heavens, and that thus by
means of it there should be effected the conjunction of heaven with man;
not indeed through internal things, but through correspondences with
external things (on which subject see the places cited in n. 9320,
9380). This is the worship that is signified by "the ministry of Aaron."
\[2\] That evangelization is also signified is because by evangelization
are meant all things in the Word which treat of the Lord, and all things
in worship which represented Him. For evangelization is annunciation
about the Lord, His coming, and the things that are from Him which
belong to salvation and eternal life. And as all things of the Word in
its inmost sense treat solely of the Lord, and all things of worship
represented Him, therefore the whole Word is the Evangel, in like manner
all worship that was done according to the things commanded in the Word.
And because the priests presided over the worship, and likewise taught,
therefore by their "ministry" were signified worship and evangelization.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9926.">9926.</span></span>

And the voice thereof shall be heard. That this signifies the influx of
truth with those who are in the heavens and who are on earth, is evident
from the signification of "being heard," as being reception and
perception (see n. 5017, 5471, 5475, 7216, 8361, 9311), consequently
also influx, because the things which are received and perceived must
flow in; and from the signification of "the voice," when said of Aaron,
by whom is represented the Lord, as being Divine truth (see n. 8813);
for "the voice" denotes the annunciation of this truth, and because it
denotes its annunciation, it exists with those who are in the heavens
and on earth. For Divine truth fills all things of heaven, and makes all
things of the church. Such an annunciation was represented by the voice
from the bells of gold, when Aaron went in unto the holiness before
Jehovah, and when he came out, as is said in what now follows in this
verse. \[2\] That in the Word a "voice" signifies the Divine truth which
is heard and perceived in the heavens and on earth, is evident from the
following passages. In David: The voice of Jehovah is upon the waters;
the voice of Jehovah is in power; the voice of Jehovah is with honor;
the voice of Jehovah breaketh the cedars; the voice of Jehovah cleaveth
as a flame of fire; the voice of Jehovah maketh the wilderness to
tremble; the voice of Jehovah maketh the hinds to calve; but in His
temple everyone saith, Glory (Ps. 29:3-9). In this psalm Divine truth is
treated of, in that it destroys falsities and evils; this Divine truth
is "the voice of Jehovah;" but the "glory" which is spoken of denotes
the Divine truth in heaven and in the church. (That "glory" denotes the
Divine truth, see n. 9429; and that the "temple" denotes heaven and the
church, n. 3720.) \[3\] In John: To Him who is the Shepherd of the sheep
the doorkeeper openeth; and the sheep hear His voice. The sheep follow
Him, because they know His voice. A stranger they follow not, because
they know not the voice of strangers. And other sheep I have, which are
not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice.
But ye are not of My sheep, for My sheep hear My voice, and I know them,
and they follow Me (John 10:2-5, 16, 26, 27). That the "voice" here
denotes the Divine truth proceeding from the Lord, thus the Word, is
very evident; "the voice of strangers" denotes falsity. \[4\] In Isaiah:
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of
Jehovah, for the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed. The voice saith,
Cry. O Zion, that tellest good tidings, get thee up upon the high
mountain! O Jerusalem, that tellest good tidings, lift up thy voice with
strength! lift it up. Behold the Lord Jehovih cometh in strength (Isa.
40:3, 5, 6, 9, 10; also John 1:23). "The voice" here denotes
annunciation from the Word about the coming of the Lord, thus it also
denotes the Divine truth which the Word announces; "the wilderness"
denotes the state of the church at that time, which was as it were in
the wilderness because the Word was no longer understood; "the glory
which shall be revealed" denotes the Word as to its interiors. (That
this is meant by "glory," may be seen above, n. 9429.) That "Jehovah,
for whom a way was to be prepared," and "the Lord Jehovih, who should
come in strength," denote the Lord, is plain, for this is clearly
stated. \[5\] In Isaiah: The voice of thy watchmen; they shall lift up
the voice when they shall see eye to eye that Jehovah will return to
Zion (Isa. 52:8); "the watchmen" denote those who search the Scriptures
concerning the coming of the Lord, their "voice" denotes the Word, which
is the Divine truth that is the source. In Jeremiah: The Maker of the
earth by His understanding hath stretched out the heavens. At the voice
which He uttereth there is a multitude of waters in the heavens (Jer.
5:12, 13; 51:6). "The voice" here denotes Divine truth; "waters" denote
truths which are in the heavens and from the heavens. (That "waters" in
the Word denote truths, see n. 2702, 3058, 3424, 4976, 5668, 9323.)
\[6\] So also in the following passages: The voice of the Son of man was
like the sound of many waters (Rev.1:15). I heard a voice from heaven,
as the voice of many waters (Rev. 14:2). The voice of Jehovah is upon
the waters, Jehovah is upon great waters (Ps. 29:3). Jehovah hath
uttered His voice before His army, for without number is he that doeth
His word (Joel 2:11). In this passage also "voice" denotes Divine truth,
and likewise the Word which they do. Again: Jehovah shall utter His
voice from Jerusalem, so that the heavens and the earth shall shake
(Joel 3:16). Sing psalms unto the Lord, ye kingdoms of the earth, to Him
that rideth upon the heaven of heaven of old; lo, He shall utter in a
voice a voice of strength (Ps. 68:32, 33). I say unto you, The hour
cometh when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they
that hear shall live (John 5:25). That "the voice" in this passage
denotes Divine truth, consequently the Word of the Lord, is manifest.
\[7\] In Ezekiel: The spirit lifted me up, and I heard behind me the
voice of a great earthquake, saying, Blessed be the glory of Jehovah.
And I heard the voice of the wings of the living creatures, and the
voice of the wheels, even the voice of a great earthquake (Ezek.
3:12-13). The voice of the wings of the cherubs was heard even to the
outer court, as the voice of God Shaddai when He speaketh (Ezek. 10:5).
Here also "the voice" denotes Divine truth; for "the cherubs" signify
the providence and guard of the Lord that there be no approach to
Himself and to heaven except through the good of love (n. 9277, 9509);
"the voice of the wings," and "the voice of the wheels," denote
spiritual truths. \[8\] In the present verse, in which Aaron is treated
of, it is the sound or ringing from the bells which is called a "voice."
In other passages of the Word also sounds and blarings from trumpets,
and sounds and peals from thunders, are called "voices;" and thereby in
like manner are signified Divine truths (see n. 7573). Moreover, the
sounds of musical instruments of various kinds have also a like
signification; but those which give out a stridulous and a discrete
sound signify Divine spiritual truths; while those which give out a
continuous sound signify Divine celestial truths (n. 418-420, 4138,
8337). From this it is evident that by the sounds or "voices" of the
bells are signified Divine spiritual truths; for the garments of Aaron,
and specifically the robe, in the skirts of which were the bells, round
about, represented the Lord's spiritual kingdom or heaven (n. 9814,
9825).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9927.">9927.</span></span>

When he goeth in unto the holiness before Jehovah, and when he goeth
out. That this signifies in every state of good and truth in worship, is
evident from the signification of "going in unto the holiness," and of
"going in before Jehovah," as being worship (of which above, n. 9903,
9907). That it is the state of good and truth in worship which is
signified, is because all things of worship with the Israelitish and
Jewish nation were representative of internal worship; and internal
worship is from good and truth; that is, from the affection of good and
from the faith of truth. That it is every state of these which is
signified, is because it is said, "when he goeth in, and when he goeth
out," and by "going in and going out" are signified all the things of
the state. For whatever belongs to motion, as "walking," "going,"
"advancing," signifies a state of life. (That "walking" has this
signification, see n. 519, 1794, 3335, 4882, 5493, 5605, 8417, 8420; in
like manner "advancing," and "journeying," n. 8103, 8181, 8397, 8557;
and that motions and progressions in the other life signify states, n.
1273-1277, 1376-1381, 2873, 3356, 9440.) From this it is evident that
"going in and going out" denote everything of the state or thing that is
being treated of; and as the subject here treated of is worship from
good and truth, it is every state of good and truth in worship that is
signified by "going in and going out." \[2\] This signification of
"going in and going out" is from the representatives in the other life;
for there they go, walk, advance, go in and out, just as in the world;
but all these acts are done according to the state of the life of their
thoughts and affections (as may be seen in the places above cited). That
these acts also originate from their thoughts and affections, and are
correspondences, and thus real appearances, they do not notice. From
this it is evident that all things of motion signify those which belong
to the state of life; consequently that "going in and going out" signify
every state of life, thus the state of the thing that is being treated
of, from beginning to end. It is from this that among the ancients it
was a customary form of speaking to say that they knew a person's coming
in and his going out, or his entrance and his departure, when they meant
that they knew every state of his life. And as this form of speaking
originates from the correspondences in the other life, as has been
already said, therefore in the Word also a like expression is made use
of, and where this is done the like is signified; as in the following
passages. In the first book of Samuel: Achish called David, and said
unto him, Thou art upright, and good in mine eyes is thy going out and
thy coming in with me in the camp; for I have not found evil in thee (1
Sam. 29:6). "Good in the eyes is thy going out and thy coming in"
denotes that every state of his life was well-pleasing to him. \[3\] In
the second book of Samuel: Thou knowest Abner, that he came to persuade
thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that
thou doest (2 Sam. 3:25). "To know the going out and the coming in"
denotes to know all the thoughts and all the acts of the life; and
therefore it is also said, "and to know all that thou doest." In the
second book of Kings: I know thy sitting down, and thy going out and thy
coming in, and that thou hast set thyself in motion against Me (2 Kings
19:27; Isa. 37:28); where Sennacherib the king of Assyria is spoken of;
"knowing his going out and his coming in" denotes all things of his
counsel. In David: Jehovah shall keep thee from all evil, He shall keep
thy soul. Jehovah shall keep thy going out and thy coming in, from this
time forth and even for evermore (Ps. 121:7, 8). "To keep the going out
and the coming in" denotes everything of the life according to the state
of good and truth. \[4\] In Moses: Let Jehovah, the God of the spirits
of all flesh, set a man over the assembly, who may go out before them,
and who may come in before them, that the assembly of Jehovah be not as
a flock that hath no shepherd (Num. 27:16, 17). "Who may go out before
them, and who may come in before them," denotes one who may lead them;
thus one whom they may look to and follow in every state of life. In
John: He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth
up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that
entereth by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. I am the shepherd of
the sheep; by Me if anyone enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in
and out, and shall find pasture (John 10:1, 2, 9). "To enter in" (that
is, into heaven), denotes into the good of love and faith, for this good
makes heaven; and therefore "to go in and to go out," denotes to be led
by the Lord in respect to every state of life; consequently it denotes
to think and will what is good from freedom, that is, from love and
faith which are from the Lord, for these make freedom. \[5\] In Luke:
Jesus sent the twelve disciples to preach the kingdom of God. And He
said unto them, Into whatsoever house ye enter, there abide, and thence
go out (Luke 9:2-4). "To enter into a house," "to abide there," and "to
go out thence," denote to enjoy heavenly consociation with those who
receive the Lord in faith and love; for in heaven those who are together
in one society are also in one "house," and they come in and go out
there, because they are in a like good; but those who are in an unlike
good cannot do so; and if they do enter in, they do not enter by the
doors, but by some other way. He who does not know that such things are
signified, cannot know what is involved in the words, that "into
whatsoever house they should enter, they should there abide, and thence
go out." \[6\] In Ezekiel: When the prince shall go in, he shall go in
by the way of the porch of the gate, and he shall go out by the way
thereof. When the people of the land shall go in before Jehovah in the
appointed feasts, he that goeth in by the way of the north gate to
worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that goeth in
by the way of the south gate shall go out by the way of the north gate;
he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he had gone in, but
shall go straight before him. But when the prince goeth in in the midst
of them, they shall go in; and when they shall go out, they shall go out
(Ezek. 46:8-10). In the internal sense a new heaven and a new church are
here treated of; and by "the prince" is signified the truth of faith
from the good of love. In what manner this truth enters in with angels
in the heavens and with men of the church on earth, and how it afterward
progresses toward the interiors when it has entered in by an external
way, and toward the exteriors when it has entered by an internal way, is
described by the going in and going out of the prince and of the people
of the land. "The south" denotes the state of the truth of faith in the
internal man; and "the north," its state in the external man; "the going
in and going out" denote the state of life as to good and truth, thus as
to worship. \[7\] From all this it can be known clearly enough that "to
go in and go out" denote such things as belong to the state of life from
good and truth; for otherwise what could it matter that the prince
should go in by one way, or by another way? and also the people of the
land? For by "the house" or temple there mentioned, into which there was
entrance, and out of which there was going out, is signified heaven and
the church (see n. 3720); by "the prince" is signified the truth of
faith (n. 5044); by "the people of the land," those who are in heaven,
or who are of the church (n. 2928); by "the way," that which leads to
truth (n. 627, 2333); by a "gate," doctrine (n. 2851, 3187); by "the
south," where truth is in light (n. 9642), thus truth in the internal
man; and by "the north," where truth is in obscurity (n. 3708), thus
truth in the external man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9928.">9928.</span></span>

That he die not. That this signifies that the representative does not
perish, and therewith the conjunction with the heavens, is evident from
the signification of "dying," when said of Aaron and his office, as
being the ceasing of the representatives, and consequently of
conjunction with the heavens; for by Aaron was represented the Lord, and
by his office the whole work of salvation, and on the part of man,
worship. That this worship was representative, and that by means of
representative worship there was conjunction with the heavens, has been
abundantly shown. (See the places cited in n. 9320; also what was the
representative of a church with the Israelitish and Jewish nation, n.
9280, 9457, 9481, 9576, 9577; and that the conjunction of the Lord and
of heaven with man at that time was by means of representatives, n.
9481.) From this also it was that when Aaron was performing holy things
he was clothed with garments that represented heavenly things; and that
if he had done otherwise he would have died; especially if he had gone
in to perform holy things without the knowledge of the people; for with
the people there was the representative of a church, and with Aaron the
representative of the Lord, from whom and toward whom is everything of
worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9929.">9929.</span></span>

Verses 36-38. And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and engrave upon
it with the engraving of a signet, Holiness to Jehovah. And thou shalt
put it upon a thread of blue, and it shall be upon the miter; over
against the faces of the miter shall it be. And it shall be upon Aaron's
forehead, and Aaron shall bear the iniquity of the holy things, which
the sons of Israel shall sanctify, in respect to all the gifts of their
holy things; and it shall be upon his forehead continually, to make them
well-pleasing before Jehovah. "And thou shalt make a plate of pure
gold," signifies enlightenment from the Lord's Divine good; "and engrave
upon it with the engraving of a signet," signifies what is perpetual and
impressed on hearts according to the heavenly sphere; "Holiness to
Jehovah," signifies the Divine Human of the Lord, and from this all
celestial and spiritual good; "and thou shalt put it upon a thread of
blue," signifies influx into the truth of celestial love; "and it shall
be upon the miter," signifies from infinite wisdom; "over against the
faces of the miter it shall be," signifies to eternity; "and it shall be
upon Aaron's forehead," signifies from the Lord's Divine love; "and
Aaron shall bear the iniquity of the holy things," signifies the
consequent removal of falsities and evils with those who are in good;
"which the sons of Israel shall sanctify, in respect to all the gifts of
their holy things," signifies acts of worship representative of removal
from sins; "and it shall be upon Aaron's forehead continually,"
signifies a representative of the Lord's love to eternity; "to make them
well-pleasing before Jehovah," signifies the Divine of the Lord in them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9930.">9930.</span></span>

And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold. That this signifies
enlightenment from the Lord's Divine good, is evident from the
signification of "a plate," as being enlightenment; and from the
signification of "gold," as being the good of love, here the Lord's
Divine good, because there was inscribed upon it, "Holiness to Jehovah."
(That "gold" denotes the good of love, see n. 113, 1551, 1552, 5658,
6914, 6917, 8932, 9490, 9510, 9874, 9881.) That "the plate" denotes
enlightenment, was from its brightness, for it was resplendent from gold
upon Aaron's forehead, and all brightness signifies enlightenment such
as is in the heavens from the Lord as the Sun. Enlightenment in the
heavens is wisdom and intelligence from the Divine truth proceeding from
the Lord from that Sun, for this enlightens their interiors. Their
interiors correspond to the understanding with man, which is enlightened
by the Lord when the truth and good of the church and heaven are
perceived; for the understanding is the recipient subject; because
without a subject there is no reception. That this "plate" denotes
enlightenment from the Lord's Divine good, is because upon it was
inscribed "Holiness to Jehovah," and it was placed upon the front of the
miter, which was upon Aaron's head. The "holiness" which is from Jehovah
denotes the Divine truth that proceeds from the Lord's Divine good (n.
6788, 8302, 8330, 9229, 9680, 9820). In order that this plate might
represent the shining forth, that is, the enlightenment, from which come
wisdom and intelligence, it was bound on the forefront of the miter.
\[2\] As by "the plate" was signified enlightenment from the Lord's
Divine good, it was also called "the plate of the crown of holiness,"
and likewise "the crown of holiness;" for a crown is a representative of
Divine good, and "holiness" denotes the Divine truth thence proceeding,
as was said above. That it was called "the plate of the crown of
holiness," is plain in what follows in this book of Exodus: Lastly they
made the plate of the crown of holiness of pure gold, and wrote upon it
with the writing of the engravings of a signet, Holiness to Jehovah
(Exod. 39:30). That it was also called "the crown of holiness," is
evident from another passage in Exodus: Thou shalt set the miter upon
his head, and put the crown of holiness upon the miter (Exod. 29:6). He
set the miter upon his head; and upon the miter, opposite the faces of
it, did he set the plate of gold, the crown of holiness (Lev. 8:9).
\[3\] That a crown represented Divine good from which is Divine truth,
is evident from the crowns of kings; for kings represented the Lord in
respect to Divine truth (see n. 2015, 2069, 3009, 4581, 4966, 5044,
5068, 6148); wherefore they had a crown on the head, and a scepter in
the hand; for government from Divine good was represented by a crown,
and government from Divine truth by a scepter. \[4\] That a "crown" has
this signification is evident from the following passages. In David: I
will make a horn to bud unto David; I will set in order a lamp for Mine
anointed. His enemies will I clothe with shame; but upon Himself shall
His crown flourish (Ps. 132:17, 18); "David" here denotes the Lord (n.
1888), like the "anointed" (n. 3008, 3009); his "horn" denotes power (n.
2832, 9081); "a lamp" denotes the Divine truth from which is
intelligence (n. 9548, 9783); the "crown" denotes the Divine good from
which is wisdom, and from which is also His government; the crown, which
denotes wisdom, is said "to flourish" because in respect to the Human He
acquired wisdom in the world by means of combats against and victories
over the hells (n. 9548, 9783), which are the "enemies that shall be
clothed with shame." \[5\] Again: Thou art angry with Thine anointed,
Thou hast condemned His crown even to the earth (Ps. 89:38, 39); where
also "the anointed" denotes the Lord; "anger" denotes a state of
temptations which existed when He was in combats with the hells; the
lamentation at that time is described by "anger" and "condemnation;" as
for instance the last lamentations of the Lord on the cross, that He was
"forsaken;" for the cross was the last of the temptations, that is, of
the combats with the hells; and after this last temptation He put on
Divine good, and in this way united His Divine Human to the Divine
Itself that was in Him. \[6\] In Isaiah: In that day shall Jehovah
Zebaoth be for a crown of adornment, and for a diadem of comeliness, to
the remains of His people (Isa. 28:5); where "a crown of adornment"
denotes the wisdom which is of good from the Divine; "a diadem of
comeliness," the intelligence of truth from this good; this is
predicated of Divine things with the people; the "people" here denote
the church, because it was there. \[7\] In the same: For Zion's sake I
will not be silent, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until her
righteousness go forth as brightness, and her salvation burn as a lamp;
and thou shalt be a crown of comeliness in the hand of Jehovah, and a
miter of the kingdom in the hand of thy God (Isa. 62:1, 3). By "Zion"
and "Jerusalem" is meant the church, by "Zion" the celestial church, and
by "Jerusalem" the spiritual church thence derived; "a crown of
comeliness" denotes the wisdom which is of good, and "a miter of the
kingdom," the intelligence which is of truth; and as by "a crown" is
signified the wisdom which is of good, therefore it is said to be "in
the hand of Jehovah;" and as by "a miter" is signified the intelligence
which is of truth, therefore it is said to be "in the hand of God;" for
where good is treated of, the name "Jehovah" is used, and where truth is
treated of, the name "God" (n. 2586, 2769, 6905). \[8\] In Jeremiah: Say
thou to the king and to the mistress, Renounce yourselves, sit down; for
the adornment of your head is come down, even the crown of your
comeliness (Jer. 13:18); where "the crown of comeliness" denotes the
wisdom which is of good from Divine truth, for "comeliness" denotes the
Divine truth of the church (n. 9815). In the same: The joy of our heart
hath ceased; our dance is turned into mourning; the crown of our head is
fallen (Lam. 5:15, 16). "The crown of the head" denotes the wisdom which
those who are of the church have from Divine truth, by virtue of which
they are more excellent than the rest of the peoples, and hence have a
kind of government. \[9\] In Ezekiel: He put a jewel upon thy nose, and
earrings in thine ears, and a crown of adornment upon thine head (Ezek.
16:12). The subject here treated of is the setting up of the church; "a
jewel upon the nose" denotes the perception of good; "earrings in the
ears" denote the perception of truth, and obedience; "a crown upon the
head" denotes the wisdom thence derived. In Job: He hath stripped me of
my glory, and taken away the crown of my head (Job 19:9); where "glory"
denotes the intelligence which is of Divine truth (n. 9429); "the crown
of the head" denotes the wisdom thence derived. \[10\] In Revelation:
Upon the thrones I saw four and twenty elders, clothed in white
garments; who had upon their heads golden crowns. They fell down before
Him that was sitting upon the throne, and worshiped Him that liveth
forever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne (Rev. 4:4,
10). The "four and twenty elders" signify all those who are in good from
truths, and in the abstract sense all goods from truths (n. 6524, 9404);
the "thrones" denote truths from the Divine (n. 5313, 6397, 8625, 9039);
the "golden crowns on their heads" are representatives of wisdom from
the Divine, and because this is from the Divine, therefore they cast
them before Him that was sitting upon the throne. \[11\] As the good of
wisdom is acquired by means of temptation combats, which are carried on
by means of the truths of faith, therefore crowns were assigned to those
who fought against evils and falsities and overcame; and for this reason
also the crowns of martyrdom were badges of command from the Lord over
evils. That "crowns" denote the rewards of victory over evils, and that
for this reason they denote the goods of wisdom, because these are the
rewards, is also evident from Revelation: I saw, and behold a white
horse; and he that sat upon it had a bow; and there was given unto him a
crown; and he went forth conquering, and to conquer (Rev. 6:2). The
"white horse and he that sat upon it" signify the Lord as to the Word
(n. 2760-2762); "a bow" denotes the doctrine of truth, by means of which
the combat is waged (n. 2686, 2709); from this it is evident that the
"crown," because said of the Lord, denotes the Divine good, which is the
reward of victory. \[12\] And in another passage: Afterward I saw, and
behold a white cloud; and upon the cloud one sitting like unto the Son
of man, having upon his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp
sickle (Rev. 14:14). "A white cloud" denotes the literal sense of the
Word (n. 4060, 4391, 5922, 6343, 6752, 8781); "the Son of man" denotes
the Divine truth which is from the Lord (n. 9807); "a golden crown," the
Divine good from which is the Divine truth; "a sharp sickle" denotes the
dispersing of evil and falsity. And again: Be thou faithful unto death,
and I will give thee the crown of life (Rev. 2:10). Behold I come
quickly; hold fast that which thou hast, that no one take thy crown
(Rev. 3:11). The "crown" denotes good from truths, thus wisdom; for this
belongs to the good of love from the truths of faith. From all this it
can now be seen what is signified by a "crown," and what by "the crown
of holiness," which was the plate of gold on which was engraved
"Holiness to Jehovah."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9931.">9931.</span></span>

And grave upon it with the engraving of a signet. That this signifies
what is perpetual and impressed on hearts according to the heavenly
sphere, is evident from the signification of "to engrave," as being to
impress on the memory (see n. 9841, 9842), thus also on the heart; for
that which is impressed on the interior memory, which belongs to the
life, is said to be "impressed on the heart," and as this remains to
eternity, it also signifies what is perpetual; and from the
signification of "the engraving of a signet," as being the heavenly
sphere (n. 9846). The reason why it is said to be "impressed on hearts
according to the heavenly sphere," is that the things which have been
impressed on the memory, especially on the interior memory, which is the
book of life (see n. 2474), have been impressed according to the
heavenly sphere; for a man who is in the good of love from the truths of
faith resembles heaven, and moreover, is a heaven in the least form (see
the places cited in n. 9279, 9632); thus in him there is the heavenly
form; for all the societies in heaven have been set in order in
accordance with the heavenly form, because all the affections of good
and the consequent thoughts of truth flow in accordance with this form
(n. 9877). (That when a man is in heavenly love all the
memory-knowledges are arranged in the heavenly form, and that love so
arranges them, see n. 6690.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9932.">9932.</span></span>

Holiness to Jehovah. That this signifies the Divine Human of the Lord,
and from this all celestial and spiritual good, is evident from the
signification of "holiness," as being the Divine that proceeds from the
Lord, thus as being the Lord Himself in respect to the Divine Human,
from which is everything Divine in the heavens. It is from this that
celestial good, which is the good of love to the Lord from the Lord; and
spiritual good, which is the good of love toward the neighbor from the
Lord, are holy. For the Lord alone is holy, and that which proceeds from
Him is the only holiness in the heavens and on earth (see n. 9229, 9680,
9820). (That the holiness proceeding from the Lord is called "the Holy
Spirit," see n. 9818; and that angels, prophets, and apostles, are
called "holy" from their reception of Divine truth from the Lord, n.
9820; and also that "the sanctuary" denotes heaven from the Divine
there, n. 8330, 9479.) It is said, "Holiness to Jehovah," because
"Jehovah" in the Word denotes the Lord (see the places cited in n.
9373). The reason why "Holiness to Jehovah" was engraved on the plate of
gold, and placed upon the miter upon Aaron's forehead, was that in this
way it was in the view of all the people, consequently there was
holiness in their minds while they were in worship, and this holiness
corresponded to the holiness that is in the universal heaven, which is
the Divine Human of the Lord; for as before said this makes heaven. That
which is in the general view of all the people, and which thereby reigns
universally in their minds, enters into everything of thought and of
affection, and consequently into everything of worship, and affects it
(n. 6159, 6571, 7648, 8067, 8865); and therefore when this very great
holiness was constantly before their eyes, and from this reigned
universally in their minds, it made holy all things of worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9933.">9933.</span></span>

And thou shalt put it upon a thread of blue. That this signifies influx
into the truth of celestial love, is evident from the signification of
"blue," as being the truth of celestial love (of which below). Influx
into this truth is signified by the plate on which was engraved
"Holiness to Jehovah" being put upon a thread of blue, for in this way
it hung from it and was bound to it, and in the spiritual sense by
"being bound to," and "hanging," is signified to inflow, because all
conjunction whatever is effected by means of influx. That the influx is
into the truth of celestial love about the Lord's Divine Human, which is
signified by "Holiness to Jehovah," is because in that sphere of heaven
where is the truth of celestial love, no other Divine is perceived than
the Divine Human of the Lord. \[2\] For the case herein is as follows.
There are three heavens, which have been distinguished from one another
by means of the degrees of good. In the inmost heaven is the good of
celestial love, which is the good of love to the Lord; in the second or
middle heaven is the good of spiritual love, which is the good of
charity toward the neighbor; in the first or ultimate heaven is the good
of natural love, from spiritual and from celestial love, which is the
good of faith and obedience. In each heaven there is an internal and an
external. As just said, the internal in the inmost heaven is the good of
love to the Lord, and the external there is the good of mutual love,
which belongs to the love of good for the sake of good. This good is
what is meant by the truth of celestial love, which is signified by "the
thread of blue." In the sphere where is this truth, the Lord's Human is
perceived as being the Divine Itself in the heavens, and therefore as
soon as an angel is raised into this sphere, he comes into this light
also. This perception flows in from the Lord, because the Divine Human
of the Lord makes heaven. This is the influx which is here signified.
(That "blue" denotes the celestial love of truth, or what is the same
thing, the truth of celestial love, see n. 9466, 9687, 9833.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9934.">9934.</span></span>

And it shall be upon the miter. That this signifies from infinite
wisdom, is evident from the signification of "the miter," as being
intelligence (see n. 9827); and when said with reference to the Lord,
who was represented by Aaron, the "miter" denotes Divine or infinite
wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9935.">9935.</span></span>

Over against the faces of the miter shall it be. That hereby is
signified to eternity, is evident from the signification of "over
against the faces of the miter," when said of the Lord, who is
represented by Aaron, as being to eternity (see n. 9888).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9936.">9936.</span></span>

And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead. That this signifies from the
Lord's Divine love, is evident from the representation of Aaron, as
being the Lord as to Divine good, which is the good of His Divine love
(see n. 9806); and from the signification of "the forehead," when it
refers to the Lord, as being His Divine love; for by "the face of the
Lord," or what is the same, by "the face of Jehovah," are signified all
things of the Divine love; such as mercy, peace, good, wisdom (n. 222,
223, 5585, 6848, 6849, 9306, 9545, 9546). That "the face of Jehovah" or
"the face of the Lord" has this signification, is because by "the face"
in general are signified the interior things of man, which are his
affections and the consequent thoughts, thus the things that belong to
his love and faith (see the places cited in n. 9546). The reason why
these things are signified by "the face," is that they shine forth from
the face as it were in their type or effigy; wherefore also the face is
called the effigy of the mind. Hence it is that by "the face," when said
of Jehovah or the Lord, are signified the things which are of His Divine
love. That by "the forehead" is specifically signified the Divine love
itself, is because the interiors have been allotted their provinces in
the face; those which are of love being in the province of the forehead;
those which are of wisdom and intelligence being in the province of the
eyes; those which are of perception being in the province of the
nostrils; and those which are of utterance being in the province of the
mouth. From this it is evident why "the forehead," when said of the
Lord, who is represented by Aaron, signifies the Divine love. \[2\] As
the forehead with man corresponds to his love, therefore they who are in
celestial love (that is, in love to the Lord from the Lord) are said to
have "a mark on their foreheads," by which is signified that they are
under the Lord's protection, because they are in His love, as in the
following passages: Jehovah said, Go through the midst of Jerusalem, and
set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that groan and sigh for all the
abominations that are done in the midst thereof; and smite; let not your
eye spare; but come not near against any man upon whom is the mark
(Ezek. 9:4-6). Behold the Lamb standing on the Mount Zion, and with Him
a hundred and forty and four thousand, having the name of His Father
written on their foreheads (Rev. 14:1). They shall see the faces of God
and of the Lamb, and His name shall be on their foreheads (Rev. 22:4).
It was said that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither
any green thing, nor any tree; but only the men that have not the mark
of God on their foreheads (Rev. 9:4). \[3\] "Having the mark," or seal,
"of God," and "the name of God," "on their foreheads," denotes to be in
safety from the infestation of evils which are from hell, because they
are in the Lord through love; "the grass and the green thing," which
were not to be hurt, denote the memory-truth through which is the truth
of faith (n. 7571, 7691); "the tree," which also was not to be hurt,
denotes the perception of truth from good (n. 103, 2163, 2722, 2972,
4552, 7692). \[4\] In Moses: Thou shalt love Jehovah thy God from all
thine heart, and from all thy soul, and from all thy strengths. Thou
shalt bind these words for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be for
frontlets between thine eyes (Deut. 6:5, 8). "To be for frontlets"
denotes for a sign of love to Jehovah God; it is said "between the
eyes," because "the eyes" signify the intelligence and wisdom which are
from this love, and wisdom from this love is to have God continually
before the eyes. That this is the meaning is evident, because love to
Jehovah God is treated of. It is said that they should "love Him from
all the heart, from all the soul, and from all the strengths," by which
is signified with all that is in man. "From the heart" denotes from the
will in which is the good of love (n. 7542, 9050, 9300, 9495); "from the
soul" denotes from the understanding in which is the truth of faith,
thus from faith (n. 9050), which two are of the internal man; "from all
the strengths" denotes from the things that belong to the understanding
and the will in the external man. The strengths and power of the love of
both the external and the internal man are signified by "the hands" (n.
4931-4937, 7518); and therefore it is said that "these words shall be
bound for a sign upon the hand." \[5\] As by virtue of its
correspondence "the forehead" signifies heavenly love with the good; so
with the evil it signifies infernal love, which is opposite to heavenly
love. The forehead of the latter is called a "brazen forehead" in Isaiah
48:4; and a "hardened forehead" in Ezekiel 3:7, 8; and of those who are
in infernal love it is said that "they had the mark of the beast upon
their foreheads" (Rev. 13:16; 14:9; 20:4); and also "the name of Babylon
upon their foreheads" (Rev. 17:5).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9937.">9937.</span></span>

And Aaron shall bear the iniquity of the holy things. That this
signifies the consequent removal of falsities and evils with those who
are in good from the Lord, is evident from the representation of Aaron,
as being the Lord in respect to the good of love (see n. 9806); and from
the representation of the priesthood which Aaron administered, as being
the whole office which the Lord discharges as the Savior (n. 9809); from
the signification of "bearing iniquity," as being the removal of
falsities and evils with those who are in good (of which below); and
from the signification of "the holy things," as being the gifts which
they brought to Jehovah or the Lord in order that their sins might be
expiated, which gifts were burnt-offerings, sacrifices, and
meat-offerings. That these things are meant by "the holy things," is
clear, for it is said, "which the sons of Israel shall sanctify in
respect to all the gifts of their holy things." That "bearing iniquity"
denotes to remove falsities and evils, or sins, with those who are in
good, is because it is said of the Lord, for the Lord was represented by
Aaron, and the whole work of salvation was represented by the office, or
priesthood, of Aaron. That it is said of the Lord that He "bore sins"
for the human race, has been known in the church; but still it is not
known what is meant by "bearing iniquities and sins." It is believed by
some that it denotes that He took on Himself the sins of the human race,
and suffered Himself to be condemned even to the death of the cross; and
that because the condemnation for sins was cast on Him, mortals were
thus freed from damnation; and also that the damnation was taken away by
the Lord through the fulfilling of the law, because the law would have
condemned everyone who did not fulfil it. \[2\] But these things are not
meant by "bearing iniquity," because every man's deeds remain with him
after death, and according to the quality of these he is then judged
either to life or to death. Their quality is from his love and his
faith, for love and faith make the life of a deed; and therefore they
cannot be taken away by transfer to another who would bear them. From
this it is evident that something else is meant by "bearing iniquities;"
but what is meant can be seen from the bearing itself of iniquities or
sins by the Lord. For the Lord bears them when He fights for man against
the hells, because man cannot fight against these from himself; but the
Lord alone does this, and indeed continually for every man, but with a
difference according to his reception of the Divine good and Divine
truth. \[3\] When the Lord was in the world, He fought against all the
hells, and completely subjugated them. From this He also became
righteousness. Thus He redeemed from damnation those who receive the
Divine good and truth from Him. Unless this had been done by the Lord,
no man could have been saved; for insofar as the Lord does not remove
them, the hells are constantly with man, and have dominion over him; and
He removes them in proportion as the man desists from evils. He who once
conquers the hells, conquers them to eternity; and in order that this
might be done by the Lord, He made His Human Divine. He, therefore, who
alone fights for man against the hells (or what is the same thing,
against evils and falsities, for these are from the hells) is said "to
bear sins," for He alone supports this burden. That by "bearing sins" is
also signified the removal of evils and falsities from those who are in
good, is because this is the consequence; for insofar as the hells are
removed from man, so far evils and falsities are removed, because as
before said both of these are from the hells. Evils and falsities are
"sins" and "iniquities." How the case herein is can be seen from what
was shown above (n. 9715, 9809), where the Lord's merit and
righteousness, and also the subjugation of the hells by Him are treated
of. \[4\] The reason why it is said of Aaron that he should "bear
iniquities," was that he represented the Lord, and his priesthood
represented the Lord's whole work of salvation (n. 9806, 9809); and the
main work of salvation is to redeem and deliver man from the hells, and
thus to remove evils and falsities. It is said to remove evils and
falsities, because deliverance from sins (that is, the forgiveness of
them) is nothing else than their removal; for they remain with the man;
but insofar as the good of love and the truth of faith are implanted, so
far the evil and falsity are removed. The case herein is like that with
heaven and hell. Heaven does not abolish hell; but removes from itself
those who are there. For it is the good and truth from the Lord which
make heaven; and these are what effect this removal. The case is similar
with man, who of himself is a hell; but when he is being regenerated, he
becomes a heaven, and insofar as he becomes a heaven, so far hell is
removed. It is a common opinion that evils, that is, sins, are not
removed in this way; but are absolutely separated. But such persons are
not aware that from himself the whole man is nothing but evil, and that
insofar as he is kept in good by the Lord, the evils which belong to him
appear as if they were rooted out; for when a man is kept in good, he is
withheld from evil. Nevertheless no one can be withheld from evil and
kept in good unless he is in the good of faith and of charity from the
Lord; that is, only insofar as he suffers himself to be regenerated by
the Lord. For as before said, heaven is implanted in man by
regeneration, and thereby the hell which is with him is removed. \[5\]
From all this it can be seen again that "bearing iniquities," when said
of the Lord, denotes to continually fight for man against the hells,
thus continually to remove them; for there is a perpetual removing, not
only while man is in the world, but also in the other life to eternity.
It is impossible for any man to remove evils in this way; for from
himself man cannot remove the least of evil, still less the hells, and
least of all to eternity. (But see what has been shown on this subject
before, namely, that the evils with man are not absolutely separated;
but are removed insofar as he is in this good from the Lord, n. 8393,
9014, 9333-9336, 9444-9454.) (That while He was in the World the Lord
conquered the hells by means of the combats of temptations, and thereby
disposed all things into order; and also that He did this from Divine
love, in order to save the human race; and that thus He also made His
Human Divine, may be seen in the places cited in n. 9528e; and also that
in temptations, which are spiritual combats against the evils which are
from hell, the Lord fights for man, n. 1692, 6574, 8159, 8172, 8175,
8176, 8273, 8969.) How the Lord while in the world bore the iniquities
of the human race, that is, fought with the hells and subjugated them,
and thus acquired for Himself the Divine power of removing these things
with all who are in good, and thus became merit and righteousness, is
described in Isaiah 59:16-20; 63:1-9, as has been already explained (n.
9715, 9809). \[6\] When these things are understood, it can be known
what is signified by all that is said in the fifty-third chapter of the
same prophet concerning the Lord, in which from beginning to end the
state of His temptations is treated of; thus the state in which He was
while He fought with the hells, for temptations are nothing else than
combats with these. This state is thus described: He bore our
sicknesses, and carried our griefs; He was pierced for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; Jehovah made to fall on
Him the iniquity of us all; and thus He gave the wicked to their
sepulcher; the will of Jehovah shall prosper by His hand; He shall see
from the labor of His soul and be sated; and by His wisdom shall justify
many, because He hath borne their iniquities, and thus hath carried the
sin of many (Isa. 53:4-5). He is also called there "the Arm of Jehovah,"
by which is signified Divine power (n. 4932, 7205). That by "bearing
sicknesses," "sorrows," and "iniquities," and by "being pierced and
bruised by them," is signified a state of temptations, is evident; for
in such a state there are griefs of soul, distresses, and despairs,
which in this way cause anguish. Such things are induced by the hells,
for in temptations they assault the very love of him against whom they
fight; the love of everyone being the inmost of his life. The Lord's
love was the love of saving the human race, which love was the Esse of
His life, for this love was the Divine in Him. In Isaiah also, where the
subject treated of is the combats of the Lord, this is described in
these words: He said, Surely they are My people, therefore He became
their Savior. In all their distress He was distressed; in His love and
in His pity He redeemed them; and He took them up, and carried them all
the days of eternity (Isa. 63:8, 9). \[7\] That while He was in the
world the Lord endured such temptations, is only briefly described in
the Gospels, but at great length in the prophets, and especially in the
Psalms of David. In the Gospels it is only said that He was led into the
wilderness, and was afterward tempted by the devil, and that He was
there forty days, and was with the beasts (Mark 1:12, 13; Matt. 4:1).
But that from His earliest childhood even to the end of His life in the
world He was in temptations, that is, in combats with the hells, He did
not reveal, in accordance with these words in Isaiah: He was oppressed,
and was afflicted, yet He opened not His mouth; He is led as a lamb to
the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, He opened not
His mouth (Isa. 53:7). His last temptation was in Gethsemane (Matt. 26;
Mark 14), and then came the passion of the cross; that He thereby fully
subjugated the hells, He Himself teaches in John: Father, rescue Me from
this hour. But for this sake came I into this hour. Father, glorify Thy
name. Then came there a voice out of heaven, saying, I have glorified it
and will glorify it. Then said Jesus, Now is the judgment of this world;
now shall the prince of this world be cast out (John 12:27, 28, 31).
"The prince of the world" is the devil, thus all hell; "to glorify"
denotes to make the human Divine. The reason why mention is made only of
the temptation after forty days in the wilderness, is that "forty days"
signify and involve temptations to the full, thus the temptations of
many years (n. 8098, 9437); "the wilderness" signifies hell, and "the
beasts with which He fought there" signify the diabolical crew. \[8\]
The removal of sins with those who are in good, that is, those who have
practiced repentance, was represented in the Jewish Church by the
he-goat called "Asasel," upon the head of which Aaron was to lay his
hands, and to confess the iniquities of the sons of Israel, and all
their transgressions in respect to all their sins, and was then to send
it into the wilderness, and that in this way the he-goat should bear
upon him all their iniquities into a land of separation (Lev. 16:21,
22). By Aaron is here represented the Lord; by "the he-goat" is
signified faith; by "the wilderness," and "the land of separation,"
hell; and by "bearing thither the iniquities of the sons of Israel" is
signified to remove them, and cast them into hell. No one can know that
such things were represented, except from the internal sense; for
everyone can see that the iniquities of a whole congregation could not
be borne into the wilderness by any he-goat; for what had the he-goat in
common with iniquities? But as at that time all representatives
signified such things as belong to the Lord, to heaven and to the
church, so also did these. The internal sense therefore teaches what
these things involve, namely, that it is the truth of faith by means of
which man is regenerated, consequently by means of which sins are
removed; and because the faith of truth is from the Lord, it is the Lord
Himself who effects this; according to what was said and shown in the
preface to Genesis 22, and also in n. 3332, 3876, 3877, 4738. (That
Aaron represents the Lord, see n. 9806, 9810; also that a "he-goat of
the goats" denotes the truth of faith, n. 4169, 4769.) That "the
wilderness" denotes hell, is because the camp in which were the sons of
Israel signified heaven (n. 4236); and therefore the wilderness is
called a "land of separation," or of "cutting off." Thus by "bearing
iniquities into that land," that is into the wilderness, is signified to
cast evils and falsities into hell, from which they are; and they are
cast thither when they are removed so as not to appear, which is
effected when a man is withheld from them by being kept in good by the
Lord, according to what was said above. \[9\] The like that was
signified by the casting out of sins into the wilderness is signified by
"casting them forth into the depths of the sea," as in Micah: He will
have compassion upon us; He will suppress our iniquities; and He will
cast all their sins into the depths of the sea (Micah 7:19). "The depth
of the sea" also denotes hell. \[10\] From all this it is now evident
that by "Aaron bearing the iniquities of the holy things," is signified
the removal of sins by the Lord from those who are in good; and that
their removal is continually being effected by the Lord; and that this
is meant by "bearing iniquities." So also in another passage in Moses:
Jehovah said unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons with thee shall hear the
iniquity of the sanctuary; and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear
the iniquity of your priesthood. The sons of Israel shall no more come
nigh the Tent of meeting, to bear sin, by dying. But the Levite shall do
the work of the Tent, and they shall bear their iniquity (Num. 18:1, 22,
23). The like is meant by "bearing," in Isaiah: Attend unto Me O house
of Israel that have been carried from the womb. Even to old age I am the
same, and even to hoar hairs will I carry; I have made, and I will
carry; yea, I will bear, and will rescue (Isa. 46:3, 4). \[11\] That
"bearing iniquity" denotes to expiate, thus to remove sins, is evident
in Moses: Moses was indignant with Eleazar and with Ithamar because the
he-goat of the sacrifice of sin had been burnt, saying, Wherefore did ye
not eat it in the place of holiness, seeing that Jehovah hath given it
you to bear the iniquities of the congregation, to expiate them before
Jehovah (Lev. 10:16, 17)? (That "expiation" means a cleansing from
evils, thus removal from sins, see n. 9506; and that Aaron was enjoined
to expiate the people, and to pardon their sins, Leviticus 4:26, 31, 35;
5:6, 10, 13, 16, 18; 9:7; 15:15, 30.) That "to bear sins," when not said
of the priesthood, denotes to be damned, thus to die, see Leviticus 5:1,
17; 7:18; 17:16; 19:8; 20:17, 19, 20; 22:9; 24:15; Numbers 9:13; 18:22;
Ezekiel 18:19, 20; 23:49.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9938.">9938.</span></span>

Which the sons of Israel shall sanctify in respect to all the gifts of
their holy things. That this signifies acts of worship representative of
removal from sins, is evident from the signification of "gifts" or
"offerings," which among the Israelitish and Jewish nation were chiefly
burnt-offerings, sacrifices, and meat-offerings, as being the interior
things of worship, for these were what they represented. The interior
things of worship are those which are of love and faith, and from this
forgivenesses of sins, that is, removals from them, because sins are
removed through faith and love from the Lord. For insofar as the good of
love and of faith enters, or what is the same thing, so far as heaven
enters, so far sins are removed, that is, so far hell is removed, both
that which is within man, and that which is without him. From this it is
evident what is meant by "the gifts which they sanctified," that is,
offered. The gifts were called "holy," and presenting or offering them
was called "sanctifying" them, because they represented holy things; for
they were offered for expiations, thus for removals from sins, which are
effected through faith and love to the Lord from the Lord. \[2\] They
were called "gifts and offerings made to Jehovah," although Jehovah,
that is, the Lord, does not accept any gifts or offerings, but gives to
everyone freely. Nevertheless He wills that these things should come
from man as from himself, provided he acknowledges that they are not
from himself, but from the Lord. For the Lord imparts the affection of
doing good from love, and the affection of speaking truth from faith;
but the affection itself flows in from the Lord, and it appears as if it
were in the man, thus from the man; for whatever a man does from the
affection which is of love, he does from his life, because love is the
life of everyone. From this it is evident that what are called "gifts
and offerings made to the Lord" by man are in their essence gifts and
offerings made to man by the Lord; and their being called "gifts and
offerings" is from the appearance. All who are wise in heart see this
appearance; but not so the simple; and yet the gifts and offerings of
the latter are grateful, insofar as they are offered from ignorance in
which is innocence. Innocence is the good of love to God, and dwells in
ignorance, especially with the wise in heart; for they who are wise in
heart know and perceive that there is nothing of wisdom in themselves
from themselves; but that everything of wisdom is from the Lord, that
is, everything of the good of love, and everything of the truth of
faith; thus that even with the wise innocence dwells in ignorance. From
this it is evident that the acknowledgment of this fact, and especially
the perception of it, is the innocence of wisdom. \[3\] The gifts that
were offered in the Jewish Church, and which were chiefly
burnt-offerings, sacrifices, and meat-offerings, were also called
"expiations from sins," because they were offered for the sake of the
forgivenesses of them, that is, removals from them. Those who belonged
to that church also believed that their sins were accordingly forgiven;
nay, that they were entirely taken away; for it is said that after they
had offered these things they would be "forgiven" (see Lev. 4:26, 31,
35; 5:6, 10, 13, 16, 18; 9:7, 15, 30). But they did not know that these
offerings represented interior things, thus such things as are done by
man from the love and faith that are from the Lord; and that these are
the things which expiate, that is, remove sins, and that after they have
been removed they appear as if they were quite removed or taken away, as
has been shown above in this and in the preceding articles. For that
nation was in representative worship, thus in external worship without
internal, by means of which there was at that time a conjunction of
heaven with man. (See the places cited in n. 9320e, 9380.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9939.">9939.</span></span>

And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead continually. That this signifies a
representative of the Lord's love to eternity, is evident from the
signification of "the forehead," as being love (see n. 9936); from the
representation of Aaron, as being the Lord (n. 9806); and from the
signification of "continually," as being to eternity. That "continually"
denotes to eternity, is because all things that belong to time, when
said of the Lord, signify eternal things; therefore also "continually."
For "continually," "daily," and "always," are predicated of time. From
this also it is that "yesterday," and "today," when said of the Lord,
likewise signify that which is eternal (n. 2838).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9940.">9940.</span></span>

To make them well-pleasing before Jehovah. That this signifies what is
Divine of the Lord in them, is evident from the signification of
"well-pleasing," when said of Jehovah, that is, the Lord, as being from
His Divine, for that which is well- pleasing to the Lord is that which
is from Him with man, spirit, or angel; for it is then in another, in
whom it is looked at, and thus is well-pleasing. The things which are
from the Lord are either nearer to, or more remote from Him; and they
are said to be "from His will," "from good pleasure," "from leave," and
"from permission." The things which are from will are most nearly from
Him; those which are from good pleasure are somewhat more remotely from
Him; those which are from leave still more remotely; and those which are
from permission are most remotely from Him. These are the degrees of the
influx and reception of the Divine. But each degree contains innumerable
things which are distinct from those which are in any other degree; and
these innumerable things are arcana of heaven, a few only of which fall
into the human understanding. For instance, to take only those things
which take place from permission, which, although they are in the last
place, nevertheless on account of the numberless arcana therein cause a
man to fall into confusion when he looks at them from the happenings of
things in nature, and from appearances, and still more when from the
fallacies of the senses. Yet the arcana of permission are comparatively
few as compared with those of the higher degrees, which are the things
that take place from leave, from good pleasure, and from will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9941.">9941.</span></span>

Verses 39, 40. And thou shalt checker the tunic of fine linen, and thou
shalt make a miter of fine linen, and a belt thou shalt make with the
work of the embroiderer. And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make tunics,
and thou shalt make for them belts; and tiaras shalt thou make for them,
for glory and for comeliness. "And thou shalt checker the tunic of fine
linen," signifies the inmost things of the spiritual kingdom that
proceed from the truths of celestial love; "and thou shalt make a miter
of fine linen," signifies the wisdom there; "and a belt," signifies a
bond, and separation from the external things of this kingdom; "thou
shalt make with the work of the embroiderer," signifies by means of the
knowledges of good and truth; "and for Aaron's sons," signifies the
Divine truths that proceed from the Lord's Divine good in the heavens;
"thou shalt make tunics," signifies the things which are of faith there;
"and thou shalt make for them belts," signifies a holding together in
connection; "and tiaras shalt thou make for them," signifies the
intelligence there; "for glory and for comeliness," signifies the truth
of the spiritual church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9942.">9942.</span></span>

And thou shalt checker the tunic of fine linen. That this signifies the
inmost things of the spiritual kingdom that proceed from the truths of
celestial love, is evident from the signification of Aaron's garments in
general, as being the spiritual kingdom joined to the celestial kingdom
(see n. 9814), and as the tunic was the inmost of these garments,
therefore by it are signified the inmost things of this kingdom (that
"Aaron's tunic" denotes the Divine truth in the spiritual kingdom that
proceeds immediately from the Divine celestial, see n. 9826); and from
the signification of "fine linen," as being truth from a celestial
origin (see n. 9469). Of this tunic it is said that it was to be
checkered, and by what is checkered is meant the work of a weaver, and
by "the work of a weaver" is signified that which is from the celestial
(n. 9915); the word by which "checkering" is expressed in the original
tongue, means also "weaving." \[2\] That this tunic was woven, or from
the work of the weaver, is evident from what follows in the book of
Exodus: They made tunics of fine linen, the work of the weaver, for
Aaron and his sons (Exod. 39:27). That it was checkered, that is, woven,
of fine linen, was for the reason that there might be represented that
which proceeds immediately from the celestial, which is relatively as it
were continuous; for the things which proceed from the celestial are
like those which with man proceed from his will; for all things with man
that belong to the understanding proceed from his will. Those things
which proceed interiorly from the will are as it were continuous
relatively to those which proceed exteriorly; and therefore among those
things which proceed interiorly from the will there is especially the
affection of truth; for all the affection of love in the understanding
flows in from the man's will. The case is similar in the heavens, where
the celestial kingdom corresponds to the will of man, and the spiritual
kingdom to his understanding (see n. 9835); and because the garments of
Aaron represented the Lord's spiritual kingdom joined to His celestial
kingdom (n. 9814), therefore the tunic represented that which is inmost
there, thus that which proceeds most closely from the celestial kingdom,
for the tunic was the inmost garment. From this it is evident why the
tunic was woven or checkered, and why it was of fine linen; for by "that
which is woven" is signified that which is from the will, or from the
celestial (n. 9915), and by "fine linen" is signified the truth which is
from celestial love (n. 9469). \[3\] The spiritual which is from the
celestial is also signified in other parts of the Word by "tunics," as
by "the tunics of skin" which Jehovah God is said to have made for the
man and his wife after they had eaten of the tree of knowledge (Gen.
3:20, 21). That by these "tunics" is signified truth from a celestial
origin, cannot be known unless these things are unfolded according to
the internal sense; and therefore this shall be unfolded. By the man and
his wife is there meant the celestial church, by the man himself as a
husband is meant this church as to good, and by his wife this church as
to truth. This truth and that good were the truth and good of the
celestial church. But when this church had fallen, which took place by
means of reasonings from memory-knowledges about truths Divine, and
which is signified in the internal sense by the persuasion of the
serpent, this first state after the fall of that celestial church is
what is there described, and its truth is described by "the tunics of
skin." \[4\] Be it known that by the creation of heaven and earth in the
first chapter of Genesis, in the internal sense, is meant and described
the new creation, or regeneration, of the man of the church at that
time, thus the setting up of a celestial church; and that by the
paradise are meant and described the wisdom and intelligence of that
church, and by eating of the tree of knowledge its fall in consequence
of reasoning from memory-knowledges about Divine things. That such is
the meaning may be seen from what has been shown on this subject in the
explications at those chapters. For all the things contained in the
first chapters of Genesis are made up historical things, in the internal
sense of which, as before said, are Divine things concerning the new
creation or regeneration of the man of the celestial church. This method
of writing was customary in the most ancient times, not only among those
who were of the church, but also among those who were outside the
church, as among the Arabians, Syrians, and Greeks, as is evident from
the books of those times, both sacred and profane. \[5\] In imitation of
these books, because derived from them, the Song of Songs was written by
Solomon; for this book is not a holy book, because it does not contain
within it heavenly and Divine things in a series, as do the holy books.
The book of Job also is a book of the Ancient Church. Mention is also
made of holy books of the Ancient Church which are now lost, as in Moses
(Num. 21:14, 15, 27, and following verses). The historical parts of
these books were called "the Wars of Jehovah," and their prophetical
parts were called "the Enunciations" (see n. 2686, 2897). That in the
historical parts of the books called "the Wars of Jehovah," the style
was of this nature, is clear from what has been taken from them and
quoted by Moses. In this way their historical things approached a
certain prophetic style, of such a nature that the things might be
retained in the memory by little children and also by the simple. That
the books named above were holy, is evident from what is quoted in
verses 28, 29, and 30 of the same chapter, when compared with what is
found in Jeremiah 48:45, 46, where there are similar expressions. That
among people outside the church such a style was very much used at that
time, and was almost the only style, is clear from the fables of those
writers who were outside the church, in which they wrapped up moral
things, or such as belong to the affections and life. \[6\] In the
historical things that were not made up, but were true, such as are
those in the books of Moses after the first chapters of Genesis, and
likewise in the books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings, "tunics"
also signified spiritual truth, and the good of truth, that proceed from
celestial truth and good. (Be it known that spiritual truth and good are
such as are the truth and good of the angels in the middle or second
heaven; but that celestial truth and good are such as are the truth and
good of the angels in the third or inmost heaven, see the places cited
in n. 9277.) It is recorded in the books of Moses that Israel the father
gave to Joseph his son a tunic of various colors, and that on account of
this his brethren were indignant, and afterward stripped it off and
dipped it in blood and sent it so to their father (Gen. 37:3, 23,
31-33). These were true historicals, and as these in like manner
contained within them, or in the internal sense, holy things of heaven
and the church, thus Divine things, therefore by that "tunic of various
colors" was signified the state of good and truth which Joseph
represented, which was a state of spiritual truth and good that proceed
from the celestial (see n. 3971, 4286, 4592, 4963, 5249, 5307, 5584,
5869, 5877, 6417, 6526, 9671). For all the sons of Jacob represented in
their order such things as belong to heaven and the church (n. 3858,
3926, 4060, 4603, 6335, 6337, 6397, 6640, 7836, 7891, 7996); but in this
case they represented the opposite things. \[7\] As all things contained
in the books of the Word, both the historical and prophetical, are
representative and significative of Divine celestial and spiritual
things, therefore the affection of this truth is described by the
"king's daughter," and the truth itself by her "garments," in David: The
king's daughter is among Thy precious ones; at Thy right hand doth stand
the queen in the best gold of Ophir. The daughter of Tyre shall bring an
offering; the rich of the people shall entreat Thy faces. The king's
daughter is all glorious within; thy <span
id="fr_218"></span>[9942-1](#fn_218) clothing (thy tunic.md) is of weavings
(or checkering) of gold. She shall be brought to the king in broidered
work (Ps. 45:9, 12-14). (That a "daughter" in general signifies the
affection of spiritual truth and good, thus also the church, see n.
2362, 3024, 3963, 9055e; and that a "king," when said of the Lord,
signifies Divine truth, n. 2015, 2069, 3009, 4581, 4966, 5068, 6148.)
From this it is evident that all those things which are related in this
psalm about the king's daughter signify such things as belong to the
affection of truth and good from the Lord in the church. Its being said
that "the daughter of Tyre shall bring an offering," signifies the
knowledges of good and truth (that "Tyre" signifies these, see n. 1201);
in like manner "the rich of the people," for by "riches" in the
spiritual sense nothing else is meant than the knowledges of good and
truth (n. 1694, 4508). From this it is evident what is signified by "the
king's daughter being glorious within," and that "her clothing was of
the weavings of gold;" for by her "clothing" is meant a tunic, as is
evident from the signification of this word in the original tongue,
where it signifies the garment next the body. That it means a tunic is
evident in John 19:23, 24, where the Lord's tunic is described, which in
David (Ps. 22:18) is called, by the same word, "clothing." So in the
second book of Samuel (13:18), it is said that the king's daughters were
clad in tunics of divers colors (of which below). By "the weavings of
gold" in David the like is meant as by "the checkerings of the tunic of
Aaron," the same word being used in the original tongue. (What is meant
by the "broidered work" in which she was to be brought to the king, see
n. 9688.) \[8\] As such things were represented by the king's daughter
and by her garment, or tunic, therefore a king's daughters were at that
time clothed in this manner, as is evident in the second book of Samuel:
There was upon Tamar a tunic of divers colors; for with such wraps were
the king's daughters clothed (2 Sam. 13:18). \[9\] Now as spiritual
goods and truths were represented by tunics, it can be seen what is
signified by "Aaron's tunic," also what by "the tunics of his sons,"
which are spoken of in the following verse of the present chapter, where
it is said that "for Aaron's sons they should make tunics, belts, and
tiaras, for glory and for comeliness." And as their tunics represented
these holy things, it was said that Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron,
who were burnt by fire from heaven, because they offered incense from
strange fire, were brought forth outside the camp in their tunics (Lev.
10:1-5); for by "strange fire" is signified love from some other source
than what is celestial, for in the Word "holy fire" denotes celestial or
Divine love (n. 6832, 6834, 6849, 7324, 9434). Consequently the
spiritual goods and truths signified by their "tunics" were defiled, and
therefore they were brought forth outside the camp in their tunics.
\[10\] The like is also signified by "tunic" in Micah: My people holds
as an enemy by reason of a garment; ye strip the tunic from off them
that pass by securely (Micah 2:8); in this passage "tunic" is expressed
in the original tongue by another word, which, however, signifies
spiritual truth and good; "stripping the tunic from off them that pass
by securely" denotes to deprive of their spiritual truths those who live
in simple good; "to hold anyone as an enemy by reason of a garment"
denotes to do evil to them on account of the truth which they think,
when yet no one is to be injured on account of what he believes to be
true, provided he is in good (n. 1798, 1799, 1834, 1844). \[11\] From
all this it can now be seen what is signified by a "tunic" in Matthew:
Jesus said, Swear not at all; neither by the heaven, nor by the earth,
nor by Jerusalem, nor by the head. Let your discourse be, Yea, yea; Nay,
nay. Whatsoever is beyond these is from evil. If any man would drag thee
to the law, and take away thy tunic, let him have thy cloak also (Matt.
5:34-37, 40). he who does not know what is the state of the angels in
the Lord's celestial kingdom, cannot possibly know what these words of
the Lord involve; for the subject here treated of is the state of good
and truth with those who are in the Lord's celestial kingdom, with whom
all truth is imprinted on the heart. For from the good of love to the
Lord they know all truth, insomuch that they never reason about it, as
is done in the spiritual kingdom; and therefore when truths are being
spoken of, they only say, Yea, yea, or Nay, nay; and they do not even
mention faith there. (Concerning their state see the places cited in n.
9277.) From this then it is evident what is signified by the injunction
"swear not at all;" for by "swearing" is signified to confirm truths (n.
3375, 9166), which is done in the spiritual kingdom by means of the
rational, and memory-knowledges from the Word. By "dragging to the law,
and desiring to take away the tunic," is meant to debate about truths,
and to wish to persuade that they are not true; a "tunic" denotes truth
from what is celestial; for the celestial leave to everyone his truth
without further reasoning. \[12\] By a "tunic" is signified the truth
from what is celestial in another passage also in Matthew: Jesus sent
the twelve to preach the kingdom of the heavens, saying that they should
not possess gold, nor silver, nor brass in their girdles; nor a scrip
for the journey; neither two tunics, nor shoes, nor staves (Matt. 10:5,
7, 9, 10). By these words was represented that those who are in goods
and truths from the Lord possess nothing of good and truth from
themselves, but that they have all truth and good from the Lord. For by
the twelve disciples were represented all who are in goods and truths
from the Lord, and in the abstract sense all goods of love and truths of
faith from the Lord (n. 3488, 3858, 6397). Goods and truths from self,
and not from the Lord, are signified by "possessing gold, silver, and
brass in the girdles," and by a "scrip;" but truths and goods from the
Lord are signified by "a tunic, shoe, and staff;" by "the tunic,"
interior truth, or truth from the celestial; by "the shoe," exterior
truth, or truth in the natural (n. 1748, 6844); and by "the staff," the
power of truth (n. 4876, 4936, 6947, 7011, 7026). But by "two tunics,"
"two pairs of shoes," and "two staves," are signified truths and their
powers from both the Lord and self. That they were allowed to have one
tunic, one pair of shoes, and one staff, is evident in Mark 6:8, 9, and
in Luke 9:2, 3. \[13\] When it is known from these examples what is
signified by a "tunic," it is manifest what is signified by "the Lord's
tunic," of which we read in John: They took the garments, and made four
parts, to every soldier a part, and the tunic; and the tunic was without
seam, woven from the top throughout. They said, Let us not divide it,
but cast lots for it, whose it shall be; that the Scripture might be
fulfilled which saith, They divided My garments among them, and upon My
tunic did they cast a lot. These things the soldiers did (John 19:23,
24; also Ps. 22:18). Who cannot see, if he thinks from reason at all
enlightened, that these proceedings signified Divine things, and that
otherwise they would not have been foretold by David? But what they
signify cannot be known without the internal sense, thus without
knowledge therefrom as to what is signified by "garments;" by "casting
lots" upon, or "dividing" them; by a "tunic;" and by its being "without
seam," that is, woven throughout; and by "soldiers." From the internal
sense it is plain that by "garments" are signified truths, and by "the
Lord's garments," Divine truths; by "casting a lot," and "dividing" them
is meant to pull these truths asunder and disperse them (n. 9093); by
the "tunic" is signified Divine spiritual truth from the Divine
celestial, the like as by "Aaron's tunic," because Aaron represented the
Lord; so also by its being "without seam," and "woven from the top
throughout," the like is signified as by the "checkered," or woven,
"work," in Aaron's tunic. That the tunic was not divided signified that
the Divine spiritual truth which proceeds most nearly from Divine
celestial truth could not be dispersed, because this truth is the
internal truth of the Word, such as is with the angels in heaven. \[14\]
Its being said that "the soldiers did this," signifies that it was done
by those who should fight for truths, thus by the Jews themselves, with
whom was the Word, and who nevertheless were of such a nature that they
dispersed it. For they had the Word, and yet they were not willing to
know from it that the Lord was the Messiah and the Son of God who was to
come, nor anything internal of the Word, but only what is external;
which they also wrested to their loves, which were the loves of self and
of the world, thus to favor the lusts which spring from these loves.
These things were signified by "the dividing of the Lord's garments;"
for whatever they did to the Lord represented the state of Divine truth
and Divine good among them at that time; thus that they treated Divine
truths in the same way as they treated Him. (That the Lord while in the
world was the Divine truth itself, see the places cited in n. 9199,
9315.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9943.">9943.</span></span>

And thou shalt make a miter of fine linen. That this signifies the
wisdom there, is evident from the signification of "a miter," as being
intelligence, and when said of the Lord, who is here represented by
Aaron, as being wisdom (see n. 9827); and from the signification of
"fine linen," as being truth from a celestial origin (n. 9469); for the
wisdom which is here signified by "the miter" comes from this truth. For
all wisdom and intelligence are from the Divine truth that proceeds from
the Lord's Divine good. There are no other wisdom and intelligence that
really are such, because there are none from any other source.
Intelligence is to know and understand truths Divine, and afterward to
have faith in them; and wisdom is to will and love these truths, and
from this to live according to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9944.">9944.</span></span>

And a belt. That this signifies a bond, and separation from the external
things of this kingdom, is evident from the signification of "a belt,"
as being the external bond that holds together all things of love and
faith in their connection and form, so that they look to one end (see n.
9341, 9828, 9837). That it also signifies separation from the external
things, is because in this way it gathers up and holds together the
internal things, and that which gathers up and holds together the
internal things, also separates them from the external things. The
internal things of the spiritual kingdom are signified by "the tunic,"
because this was the inmost clothing, and its external things are
signified by "the robe," and "the ephod," because these were the outer
garments. (That by the garments of Aaron was represented the spiritual
kingdom, see n. 9814; by the ephod its external, n. 9824; by the robe
its interior, n. 9825; and by the tunic the inmost, n. 9826.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="9945.">9945.</span></span>

Thou shalt make with the work of the embroiderer. That this signifies by
means of the knowledges of good and truth, is evident from the
signification of "the work of the embroiderer," as being that which is
from memory-knowledges (see n. 9688). It is said "by means of the
knowledges of good and truth," because by these knowledges are meant
interior memory-knowledges such as are those of the church concerning
faith and love. That these memory-knowledges are here signified by "the
work of the embroiderer," is because by "the belt" of the tunic, which
was of the work of the embroiderer, is signified the inmost bond of the
spiritual kingdom (of which just above); and because all things in the
spiritual world are held together in connection by means of knowledges,
and the affections thence derived.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9946.">9946.</span></span>

And for Aaron's sons. That this signifies the Divine truths that proceed
from the Lord's Divine good in the heavens, is evident from the
representation of the sons of Aaron, as being the Divine truths that
proceed from the Lord's Divine good (see n. 9807). That "in the heavens"
is signified, is because what is Divine of the Lord in the heavens is
that which is represented by the priesthood of Aaron and his sons;
Divine good in the heavens by the priesthood of Aaron, and Divine truth
from Divine good there by the priesthood of his sons. It is said "in the
heavens," because the Lord Himself is above the heavens, for He is the
Sun of heaven; and yet His presence is in the heavens, and is as if He
Himself were there. He Himself in the heavens, that is, His Divine good
and His Divine truth there, can be represented; but not His Divine which
is above the heavens, for the reason that the latter cannot fall into
human minds, and not even into angelic minds, because it is infinite;
but the Divine in the heavens which is from it, is accommodated to
reception.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9947.">9947.</span></span>

Thou shalt make tunics. That this signifies the things which are of
faith there, is evident from the signification of a "tunic," when said
of Aaron, as being Divine truth inmostly in the spiritual kingdom, thus
that which proceeds immediately from the celestial (see n. 9826, 9942);
but when it is said of Aaron's sons, the "tunic" denotes that which is
of faith, for it denotes that which proceeds from the spiritual which is
from the celestial. This proceeding is what is called "the faith of
truth."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9948.">9948.</span></span>

And thou shalt make for them belts. That this signifies a holding
together in connection, is evident from the signification of "belts," as
being external bonds which hold together in connection the truths and
goods of faith and love (see n. 9341, 9828, 9837, 9944).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9949.">9949.</span></span>

And tiaras shalt thou make for them. That this signifies the
intelligence there, is evident from the signification of a "miter," and
in general of a covering for the head, as being intelligence and wisdom
(see n. 9827); consequently also a "tiara;" for the covering of the head
for the sons of Aaron was called a "tiara."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9950.">9950.</span></span>

For glory and for comeliness. That this signifies the truth of the
spiritual church, is evident from the signification of "for glory and
for comeliness," as being to present, in an internal and an external
form, Divine truth such as it is in the spiritual kingdom joined to the
celestial kingdom (see above, n. 9815); but here it denotes the truth of
the spiritual church which is thence derived; for by Aaron is
represented Divine good in the heavens, and by his sons the Divine truth
thence derived. Moreover, the Divine good there is as a father, and the
Divine Truth from it is as a son; and because this is so, by "father" in
the Word is signified good, and by "sons" truths. And indeed truths are
born from goods when the man is being born anew, that is, when he is
being regenerated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_216"></span>[9905-1](ac199.htm#fr_216.md) Rendered
"sincerity," "integrity," "perfection," and "uprightness," in the
English Bible. \[REVISER.\]

<span id="fn_217"></span>[9915-1](ac199.htm#fr_217.md) skilled craftsman

<span id="fn_218"></span>[9942-1](ac199.htm#fr_218.md) Here "thy," but
"her" in n. 3081 and 5044. \[REVISER\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9951-10000](ac200.md)
