[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac195)  [Next](ac197.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="9751.">9751.</span></span>

There shall be hangings a hundred cubits in length. That this signifies
also full of truth from good, is evident from the signification of "the
hangings of the court," as being the truths of the ultimate heaven (see
above, n. 9743); from the signification of "a hundred," as being what is
full (see n. 9745); and from the signification of "length," as being
good (n. 1613, 9487).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9752.">9752.</span></span>

And the pillars thereof twenty, signifies the goods of truth fully
supporting (as above, n. 9747).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9753.">9753.</span></span>

And their bases twenty, of brass, signifies truths from good also fully
supporting (as also above, n. 9748).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9754.">9754.</span></span>

The hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver, signifies the
methods of conjunction by means of truth (as also above, n. 9749).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9755.">9755.</span></span>

And the breadth of the court at the corner of the sea. That this
signifies the state of this heaven in respect to memory-truths, is
evident from the signification of "breadth," as being truth (see n.
1613, 3433, 3434, 4482, 9487); from the signification of "the court," as
being the ultimate heaven (see above, n. 9741); and from the
signification of "the sea," as being where there is a collection of
memory-knowledges, from which there is reasoning about truths, thus also
the natural and the sensuous, because these are what contain them. Here
by "the corner of the sea" is meant the west corner, and by "the west"
is signified good in obscurity. But when the west is not called "the
west," but "the sea," then memory-knowledge is signified, which also is
relatively in obscurity, because memory-knowledge belongs to the natural
or external man; and the natural or external man is in the light of the
world, which light relatively to the light of heaven, in which is the
internal man, is like the shade when the sun is setting. \[2\] This can
also be seen from the things which appear in the other life. The Sun of
heaven, which is the Lord, appears at a middle altitude toward the right
eye; from this the angels of the heavens have all light, and with the
light all intelligence and wisdom. But when the sun of the world is
thought of, it does not appear; but in its stead there appears something
dark which is in the opposite direction, at the back. There also is the
west to the heavens, for the Lord as a Sun is the east in heaven. From
this it can be seen that by "the west" is signified good in obscurity,
and that the external or natural man is in this good, who as before said
is in the light of the world, which light relatively to the light of
heaven is like the shade when the sun is setting. But the truth of the
natural man is signified by "the water of the sea," and this truth is
memory-knowledge; for the truth in the natural or external man is truth
in knowledge; whereas the truth in the spiritual or internal man is the
truth of faith. Truth in knowledge also becomes truth in faith when it
is raised out of the natural or external man into the spiritual or
internal man. Hence the truths with a man in his youth are truths in
knowledge; but in adult age, if he suffers himself to be regenerated,
they become truths in faith; for the internal man is successively opened
even to this age. \[3\] That "the sea" denotes a collection of
memory-knowledges, comes from the fact that "waters," "springs," and
"rivers," signify truths, and therefore collections of these are
signified by "seas." That this is so, is also evident from passages in
the Word where mention is made of "the sea" and of "seas;" as in David:
The earth is Jehovah's, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they
that dwell therein. He hath founded it upon the seas, and established it
upon the streams (Ps. 24:1, 2); where "the earth" and "the world" denote
the church; "the seas upon which He hath founded the world," denote
memory-truths; "the streams upon which He hath established it," denote
the truth of faith. That the earth, the world, seas, and rivers are not
meant here, is evident, for the world is not founded upon the seas, nor
is it established upon the streams. \[4\] Again: Thou didst break
through the sea by Thy strength; Thou hast broken the heads of the
whales upon the waters. Thou hast broken the heads of Leviathan, Thou
gavest him for meat to the people Ziim, Thou hast dried up the rivers of
strength (Ps. 74:13-15); in the internal sense, the subject here treated
of is the memory-knowledges that destroy the truths of faith; "the
whales whose heads are broken," denote memory-knowledges in general (n.
42, 7293); in like manner "Leviathan" (n. 7293); "the people Ziim to
whom he was to be given for meat," denote those who are in falsities, or
the falsities themselves. From this it is evident what is denoted by
"the sea," namely, memory-knowledge misapplied to weaken and destroy
truths. In Habakkuk: Thou didst tread the sea with Thy horses, the mire
of many waters (Hab. 3:15); where "treading the sea with horses," when
spoken of Jehovah, denotes to instruct the natural man who has
memory-knowledges. \[5\] In Zechariah: In that day, living waters shall
go out from Jerusalem; part of them toward the eastern sea, and part of
them toward the hinder sea (Zech. 14:8); "living waters from Jerusalem"
denote truths of faith made living from the good of love; "the eastern
sea and the hinder sea" denote the natural and sensuous in which are
memory-knowledges, which are collections of truths. In Hosea: They shall
walk after Jehovah, and the sons shall come with honor from the sea.
They shall come with honor as a bird out of Egypt (Hos. 11:10, 11) "sons
from the sea" denote the memory-truths that belong to the natural man;
for this reason it is said that "they shall come as a bird out of
Egypt," for "Egypt" in the Word denotes memory-knowledge (n. 9340,
9391). \[6\] In Ezekiel: All the princes of the sea shall come down from
upon their thrones, and shall cast away their mantles, and put off the
garments of their embroidery; they shall be clothed with terrors; they
shall say, How hast thou perished that wast inhabited in the seas, the
renowned city, that wast strong in the sea (Ezek. 26:16, 17); where the
subject treated of is the vastation of the knowledges of good and truth,
which are "Tyre" (n. 1201); the knowledges of good and truth are the
memory-knowledges of the church; "the princes of the sea" denote the
primary knowledges (n. 1482, 2089, 5044); "to cast away the mantles and
garments of embroidery" denotes to cast away memory-truths (n. 9688). As
these things are signified by "Tyre," therefore Tyre is said to be
"inhabited in the seas, and to be a city strong on the sea." \[7\] In
Jeremiah: The sea is come up upon Babylon; she is covered with the
multitude of the waves thereof. Her cities have been brought into
desolation (Jer. 51:42, 43); "Babylon" denotes worship which in
externals appears holy, but in internals is profane (n. 1182, 1326);
"the sea upon Babylon" denotes falsity from memory-knowledges; its
"waves" denote reasonings therefrom, and the consequent denials; "the
cities which are brought into desolation" denote doctrinal things. \[8\]
In like manner in Revelation: Every pilot, and everyone who is employed
upon the seas, and mariners, and all they who trade upon the sea, stood
afar off, when they saw the smoke of the burning of Babylon, saying,
Woe, woe, the great city, wherein were made rich all that have ships in
the sea by reason of her costliness! Then an angel took up a stone as it
were a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with
violence shall Babylon be cast down (Rev. 18:17-21). "ships" denote
doctrinal things from the Word (see n. 6385); hence it is plain what is
meant by a "pilot," and a "mariner," also by "the sea," and "those who
trade upon it;" "a stone as it were a millstone," denotes the truth
through which is faith; "being cast into the sea," denotes into the
falsity of memory-knowledges. In the other life there appear seas, and
also ships upon them; as has often been granted me to see. The seas
there in a bad sense signify the falsities of memory-knowledges, and
those who are in the ships signify those who boast of having such
things, and teach them. \[9\] In Jeremiah: Thus said Jehovah, that
giveth the sun for a light by day, the statutes of the moon and of the
stars for a light by night, who throweth into commotion the sea, that
the waves thereof are tumultuous (Jer. 31:35); "the sun for a light by
day" denotes the good of love from which comes the light in truths; "the
statutes of the moon and of the stars for a light by night" denote the
goods of faith and of knowledges, from which comes the light of truth in
the dark; "to throw the sea into commotion that the waves thereof are
tumultuous," denotes to dispel the falsities of memory-knowledges from
which come reasonings about truth. \[10\] In Isaiah: By shortening is My
hand shortened, that there is no redemption? Or is there no power in Me
to rescue? Behold by My rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a
wilderness; their fish shall rot, because there Is no water, and it
dieth of thirst (Isa. 50:2); "to dry up the sea" denotes to destroy the
good and truth of memory-knowledges; "to make the rivers a wilderness"
denotes to vastate the truths themselves; "the fish which shall rot"
denotes the memory-knowledge that belongs to the natural man (see n. 40,
991); "because there is no water" denotes that there is no truth (n.
2702, 3058, 3424, 4976, 5668, 8568). \[11\] In like manner elsewhere in
the same: The waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be
made quite dry and shall dry up. And the stream shall recede; the rivers
of Egypt shall be diminished and dried up (Isa. 19:5, 6); "the waters
that shall fail from the sea" denote truths where there is a collection
of them; "the rivers of Egypt which shall be dried up," denote
memory-knowledges. Again: The earth is full of the knowledge of Jehovah,
as the waters cover the sea (Isa. 11:9); "the waters" denote truths;
"the sea," a collection of them, that is, of memory-knowledges;
therefore it is said, "the earth is full of the knowledge of Jehovah."
\[12\] In John: The second angel sounded, and as it were a great
mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea; and the third part of
the sea became blood; whence there died the third part of the creatures
that were in the sea having souls; and the third part of the ships was
destroyed (Rev. 8:8, 9); "a great mountain burning with fire" denotes
the love of self; "the sea into which it was cast" denotes
memory-knowledge in general; "the blood which was from it" denotes truth
falsified and profaned (n. 4735, 6978, 7317, 7326); "the creatures which
thereby died" denote those who are in the doctrinal things of truth.
\[13\] In like manner elsewhere in the same: The second angel poured out
his vial into the sea; and it became blood as of a dead man; whence
every living soul in the sea died (Rev. 16:3); here by "the sea" is
meant memory-knowledge that is of service to evils to destroy truths,
and to confirm falsities. Again: A beast coming up out of the sea
speaking blasphemies (Rev. 13:1, and following verses); "a beast out of
the sea" denotes memory-knowledge destroying the truths of faith. From
all this it can be seen that "the sea" denotes where there is a
collection of memory-knowledges, from which there is reasoning about the
truths of faith. \[14\] As "the sea" has this signification, it is said
of Zebulun: He shall dwell at the shore of the seas, and at a haven of
ships (Gen. 49:13). He shall suck the affluence of the sea, and the
covered things of the hidden things of the sand (Deut. 33:19); by
"Zebulun" in the representative sense are meant those who draw
conclusions from memory-knowledges about the truths of faith; wherefore
it is said that "he should dwell at the shore of the seas." \[15\] But
in the opposite sense "the sea" denotes memory-knowledge which looks to
the world; its "waves" are in this case reasonings from worldly things
about Divine ones; consequently "to be sunk in the sea" denotes to be
immersed in memory-knowledges from worldly and earthly things even to
the denial of truth Divine; as in Matthew: Whoso shall cause to stumble
one of these little ones that believe in Me, it is expedient for him
that an ass millstone be hanged about his neck, and that he be sunk in
the depth of the sea (Matt. 18:6); "a millstone" denotes the truth that
is of service to faith (n. 4335, 7780); "an ass" denotes the natural,
because it is a beast of service (n. 2781, 5741, 5958, 6389, 8078);
consequently "an ass millstone," <span
id="fr_210"></span>[9755-1](#fn_210.md) denotes memory-knowledge that is
natural and worldly; "the neck" denotes the conjunction of things
interior and exterior (n. 3542); "being hanged there" denotes the
shutting off and interception of good and truth (n. 3542, 3603); "being
sunk in the depth of the sea" denotes in what is merely worldly and
bodily, thus into hell. These things spoken by the Lord, like all other
things spoken by Him, are therefore significative. \[16\] But
memory-knowledge is signified by "the sea" in accordance with the
density and blackness of its waters; and on the other hand, in
accordance with their tenuity and transparence. From this it is that the
memory-knowledge which looks to heaven, which is spiritual in the
natural man, is called "a glassy sea" (Rev. 15:1, 2). That there shall
be no reasoning about the truths of faith from memory-knowledges; but
that truths shall be impressed on the heart, is signified by, "the sea
shall be no more" (Rev. 21:1).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9756.">9756.</span></span>

Shall be hangings of fifty cubits. That this signifies truths sufficient
for uses, is evident from the signification of "the hangings of the
court," as being truths such as are in the ultimate heaven (of which
above, n. 9743); and from the signification of "fifty," as being all
things of one side, and likewise as much as is sufficient; for "fifty"
signifies the like as "five," and that "five" has this signification,
see n. 9604, 9689; thus also sufficient for uses, for this is as much as
is sufficient.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9757.">9757.</span></span>

The pillars thereof ten and their bases ten. That this signifies the
supporting goods and derivative truths also sufficient for uses, is
evident from the signification of "the pillars," as being supporting
goods (as above, n. 9747); from the signification of "the bases," as
being truths from good also supporting (n. 9748); and from the
signification of "ten," as being as much as is sufficient, that is,
sufficient for uses. The case with the goods and truths which support is
the same as with the truths themselves which are supported (n. 9747).
"Ten" therefore here involves the like as "fifty," or "five," namely,
sufficient for uses. Moreover, ten arises out of five by multiplication,
being its double; and numbers multiplied have the like signification as
the simple numbers (n. 5291, 5335, 5708, 7973).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9758.">9758.</span></span>

And the breadth of the court at the corner of the east eastward. That
this signifies the state of truth of this heaven, where goods are, is
evident from the signification of "breadth," as being a state of truth
(see n. 1613, 3433, 3434, 4482, 9487); from the signification of "the
court," as being the ultimate heaven (of which above, n. 9741); and from
the signification of "the east" and "the sunrise," as being the good of
love (n. 1250, 3249, 3708).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9759.">9759.</span></span>

Shall be fifty cubits, signifies sufficient for uses (as above, n.
9756).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9760.">9760.</span></span>

And the hangings for the one wing shall be fifteen cubits. That this
signifies truths in light, as many as are sufficient, is evident from
the signification of "fifteen," as being as much as is sufficient; from
the signification of "the hangings," as being truths (of which above, n.
9743); and from the signification of a "wing," as being where truth is
in light. That the "wing" has this signification is because by the
"wing" is signified one side of the breadth of the court toward the
corner of the east; for its breadth was fifty cubits, and in the middle
of the breadth was the gate, the covering of which was twenty cubits
(verse 16). The two sides, one to the right of the gate, and the other
to the left, are called the "wings," the hangings for each being fifteen
cubits; therefore as before said the whole breadth was fifty cubits. It
is plain therefore that one wing was toward the south, and the other
toward the north. Consequently by "the hangings of the wing toward the
south" are signified truths in light, for "the south" denotes where
truth is in light (n. 9642); and by "the hangings of the wing toward the
north" (of which in the following verse) are signified truths in
obscurity, for "the north" denotes where truth is in obscurity (n.
3708).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9761.">9761.</span></span>

The pillars thereof three, and their bases three. That this signifies
goods and the derivative truths fully supporting, is evident from the
signification of "the pillars," as being goods supporting (of which
above, n. 9747, 9757); from the signification of "the bases," as being
truths from good likewise supporting (n. 9748); and from the
signification of "three," as being what is full (n. 2788, 4495, 7715).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9762.">9762.</span></span>

And for the other wing shall be hangings of fifteen cubits, the pillars
thereof three, and their bases three. That this signifies similar things
where truths are in obscurity, is evident, for they are the same words
as those which were unfolded just above. And that by "the hangings of
this wing" are signified truths in obscurity, see just above (n. 9760).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9763.">9763.</span></span>

And for the gate of the court a covering. That this signifies
introduction into this heaven, and a guard lest it should be entered by
any except those who are prepared, is evident from the signification of
a "gate," as being communication and introduction (see n. 8989); from
the signification of "the court," as being the ultimate heaven (n.
9741); and from the signification of "the covering," as being a guard
lest it be entered; for the gate was guarded by the covering. That it
denotes a guard lest it should be entered by any except those who are
prepared, is because no one is introduced into heaven unless he is
prepared. The case herein is this. Those who come from the world into
the other life, which takes place immediately after their decease, bring
with them worldly and earthly things which do not agree with the
spiritual and celestial things in which the angels are; and therefore
those who are to be raised into heaven are first prepared, which is
effected by the separation of the worldly and earthly things which they
have brought with them; for if they were taken up into heaven sooner,
they could not possibly remain in the societies there, because they have
a taste and love for grosser things than are suited to the purity in
which the angels are. But after they have been prepared, they are taken
up and introduced by the Lord into heaven, and are admitted into those
angelic societies with which they are in agreement in respect to the
truths and goods of faith and of love. From all this it can be seen what
is meant by a guard lest heaven should be entered by any except those
who are prepared.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9764.">9764.</span></span>

Of twenty cubits. That this signifies to the full is evident from the
signification of "twenty," as being what is full (see n. 9641).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9765.">9765.</span></span>

Of blue, and crimson, and scarlet double-dyed, and fine twined linen.
That this signifies the goods of charity and of faith, is evident from
what has been already shown (n. 9687), where the same words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9766.">9766.</span></span>

The work of the embroiderer. That this signifies which belong to
memory-knowledge, is evident from the signification of "the work of the
embroiderer," as being memory-knowledge (see n. 9688).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9767.">9767.</span></span>

Its pillars four, and their bases four. That this signifies goods and
the derivative truths supporting the conjunction, is evident from the
signification of "pillars and their bases," as being goods and the
derivative truths which support (see n. 9761); and from the
signification of "four," as being conjunction (n. 8877, 9601, 9674).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9768.">9768.</span></span>

All the pillars of the court round about. That this signifies all the
good that supports heaven, is evident from the signification of "all the
pillars round about," as being all the good that supports (that "the
pillars" denote goods supporting, see n. 9747, 9757); and from the
signification of "the court," as being the ultimate heaven (n. 9741).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9769.">9769.</span></span>

Shall be filleted with fillets of silver, and their hooks shall be of
silver. That this signifies all the methods of conjunction by means of
truth, is evident from the signification of "fillets," and of "hooks,"
as being methods of conjunction (of which above, n. 9749); and from the
signification of "silver," as being truth (n. 1551, 2954, 5658, 6112,
6914, 6917, 7999).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9770.">9770.</span></span>

And their bases of brass. That this signifies supports by means of good,
is evident from the signification of "the bases," as being supports (see
n. 9643); and from the signification of "brass," as being good (n. 425,
1551).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9771.">9771.</span></span>

The length of the court shall be a hundred cubits. That this signifies
the good of this heaven to the full, is evident from the signification
of "length," as being good (see n. 1613, 9487); from the signification
of "the court," as being the ultimate heaven (n. 9741); and from the
signification of "a hundred," as being to the full (of which above, n.
9745).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9772.">9772.</span></span>

And the breadth fifty by fifty. That this signifies truth as much as is
sufficient, is evident from the signification of "breadth," as being
truth (see n. 1613, 3433, 3434, 4482, 9487); and from the signification
of "fifty," as being as much as is sufficient (n. 9756).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9773.">9773.</span></span>

And the height five cubits. That this signifies the degrees of good and
truth also as much as is sufficient, is evident from the signification
of "height," as being degrees in respect to good (see n. 9489), and
because this is predicated of the ultimate heaven, it denotes degrees
also in respect to truth, for this heaven is in the good and truth of
faith; and from the signification of "five," as being as much as is
sufficient (n. 9689). The reason why by "height" are signified degrees
in respect to good and truth is that by "what is high" is signified what
is internal (n. 1735, 2148, 4599); therefore the higher anything is, so
much the more interior it is. In heaven that which is more interior is
nearer to the Lord, for the Lord is in the inmost, and from the inmost
all things proceed. Distances from the inmost are degrees of good and
truth from Him. As the Lord is the inmost, He is also the Highest, for
He is the Sun of heaven, from which is all height in the heavens. For
this reason it is that the Lord is called in the Word "the Highest."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9774.">9774.</span></span>

Of fine twined linen. That this signifies from the understanding, is
evident from the signification of "fine twined linen," as being what
belongs to the understanding (see n. 9596, 9744).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9775.">9775.</span></span>

And their bases of brass, signifies the supports of all things by means
of good (as above, n. 9770). That it denotes of all things, is because
all the things of the court are treated of in this verse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9776.">9776.</span></span>

And as for all the vessels of the Habitation in all the service thereof.
That this signifies the memory-truths and goods that belong to the
external man, is evident from the signification of "vessels," as being
memory-knowledges (see n. 3068, 3079, 9394, 9544); from the
signification of "the Habitation," as being heaven (n. 9594, 9596,
9632); and from the signification of "service," as being the external or
natural of man (n. 3019, 3020, 5305, 7998). That man's external or
natural is denoted by "service," is because it ought to serve the
internal or spiritual of man. For man has been created according to the
image of heaven and the image of the world, the internal or spiritual
man according to the image of heaven, and the external or natural man
according to the image of the world (see n. 9279). Just as the world
ought to serve heaven, so man's external or natural ought to serve his
internal or spiritual. Moreover, the natural was created for service;
for it does not live from itself, thus can do nothing from itself; but
from the internal or spiritual, that is, through this from the Lord.
From this it is also evident that man's external or natural is nothing
unless it is of service to the internal or spiritual, and that it
becomes something in proportion as it is of service. To be of service is
to obey, and the natural obeys when it does not take for itself from the
understanding reasons which favor the evils of the loves of self and of
the world; but when it complies with the dictates of reason and the
doctrine of the church, which declare that good and truth ought to be
done, not for the sake of self and the world as ends, but for the sake
of good and truth itself. In this manner the Lord does these through
man's heaven, that is, through his internal; for all good and truth are
from the Lord, insomuch that good and truth with man are the Lord
Himself. From all this it can be seen why it is that the external man
must be a thing of service to the internal man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9777.">9777.</span></span>

All the pegs thereof and all the pegs of the court, shall be of brass.
That this signifies all things which conjoin and strengthen each heaven,
the middle and the ultimate, by means of good, is evident from the
signification of "the pegs," as being things that conjoin and strengthen
(of which in what follows); from the signification of "the Habitation,"
which is here meant by "thereof," as being heaven, specifically the
middle heaven (see n. 9594, 9596, 9632); from the signification of "the
court," as being the ultimate heaven (n. 9741); and from the
signification of "brass," as being external good (see n. 425, 1551).
\[2\] That, "pegs," "stakes," or "nails," denote things which conjoin
and strengthen, is because they do conjoin and strengthen. Similar
things are also signified by them in the Word throughout; as in Isaiah:
Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains
of thine habitations; forbid not; lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy
stakes (Isa. 54:2); a new church from the Lord is here treated of;
"enlarging the place of the tent, and stretching forth the curtains of
the habitations," denotes the doctrine of good and truth, and the
consequent worship (n. 9596); "long cords," and "stakes," denote an
ample connection and confirmation of truths. That the court also had its
cords may be seen in Exodus 35:18; Numbers 3:37; 4:32. \[3\] Again: Look
upon Zion; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a
tabernacle that shall not be dispersed; the stakes thereof shall never
be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be pulled away (Isa.
33:20); where "stakes," and "cords," in like manner denote things which
strengthen and conjoin. "Nails" also denote strengthening and
conjunction in Isaiah 41:7, and in Jeremiah 10:4; but are there used in
regard to idols, by which are signified doctrines of falsity, because
from own intelligence (n. 8941, 9424). However, by "the nail" on which
anything is hung, is signified affixing and adjoining, in Isaiah 22:23,
24, and in Ezekiel 15:3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9778.">9778.</span></span>

Verses 20, 21. And thou shalt command the sons of Israel, and let them
take unto thee olive oil pure, beaten, for the luminary, to cause the
lamp to go up continually. In the Tent of meeting, without the veil
which is over the Testimony, Aaron and his sons shall order it from
evening until morning before Jehovah; a statute of an age for their
generations with the sons of Israel. "And thou shalt command the sons of
Israel," signifies the church through the Word from the Lord; "and let
them take unto thee olive oil," signifies the good of charity and of
faith; "pure, beaten," signifies consequently genuine and clear; "for
the luminary," signifies the spiritual heaven; "to cause the lamp to go
up continually," signifies the consequent faith, and through faith
intelligence of truth and wisdom of good from the Lord; "in the Tent of
meeting," signifies where is the presence of the Lord; "without the veil
which is over the Testimony," signifies where there is communication,
and, through the uniting intermediate, conjunction with the Lord in the
inmost heaven; "Aaron and his sons shall order it," signifies perpetual
influx from the Lord; "from evening until morning before Jehovah,"
signifies continually in every state; "a statute of an age," signifies
Divine order; "for their generations with the sons of Israel," signifies
what is eternal in the spiritual kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9779.">9779.</span></span>

And thou shalt command the sons of Israel. That this signifies for the
church through the Word from the Lord, is evident from the
representation of Moses, who is meant by "thou," as being the Lord in
respect to the Word, or the Word which is from the Lord (see n. 4859,
5922, 6752, 7014, 7089, 9372); and from the representation of the sons
of Israel, as being those of the spiritual church (n. 9340). From this
it is plain that by "Moses commanding the sons of Israel" is signified
that it was commanded for the church through the Word by the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9780.">9780.</span></span>

And let them take unto thee olive oil. That this signifies the good of
charity and of faith, is evident from the signification of "olive oil,"
as being the good of celestial love (see n. 886), but here the good of
spiritual love, which is the good of charity toward the neighbor and the
good of faith. That this good is here signified by "olive oil," is
because it was for the luminary, that is, for the lampstand, and by the
"lampstand" is signified the spiritual heaven (n. 9548). The spiritual
heaven on earth is the spiritual church. "Oil," and "the olive-tree," in
the Word signify both celestial good and spiritual good; celestial good
where the subject treated of is the celestial kingdom or the celestial
church, and spiritual good where it is the spiritual kingdom or the
spiritual church. These kingdoms or churches are distinguished by their
goods. The goods of the celestial kingdom, or of the celestial church,
are the good of love to the Lord and the good of mutual love; and the
goods of the spiritual kingdom, or of the spiritual church, are the good
of charity toward the neighbor and the good of faith (n. 9741). These
goods and the truths therefrom are treated of in the Word throughout,
for the Word is the doctrine of good, because it is the doctrine of love
to the Lord and of love toward the neighbor (see Matt. 22:35-40); and
all good is of love, even the good of faith, for this comes forth from
the good of love, and not without it. \[2\] As the Word is the doctrine
of good, therefore in order that the Word may be understood, it must be
known what good is; and no one knows what good is unless he lives in
good according to the Word; for when anyone lives in good according to
the Word, then the Lord instills good into his life, from which the man
perceives it and feels it, and consequently apprehends the nature of it;
otherwise it does not appear, because it is not perceived. From this it
can be seen in what state they are who merely know what is in the Word,
and persuade themselves that it is so, and yet do not do it. They have
no knowledge of good, consequently none of truth; for truth is known
from good, and never without good, except as memory-knowledge devoid of
life, which perishes in the other life. \[3\] That "oil" and also "the
olive" denote good, is evident from the passages in the Word where they
are mentioned, as in Zechariah: I saw a lampstand of gold. Two
olive-trees were beside it; one on the right side of the flask, and the
other on the left side thereof. These are the two sons of oil that stand
beside the Lord of the whole earth (Zech. 4:2, 3, 14); where "the two
olive-trees," and "the two sons of oil," denote the good of love to the
Lord, which is on His right, and the good of charity toward the
neighbor, which is on His left. In like manner in John: The two
witnesses prophesied a thousand two hundred and sixty days. These are
the two olive-trees and the two lampstands that stand before the God of
the earth (Rev 11:3, 4); where "the two olive-trees and the two
lampstands" denote these same goods, which, being from the Lord, are
called "the two witnesses." \[4\] Again: I heard a voice in the midst of
the four living creatures, saying, Hurt not the oil and the wine (Rev.
6:6); where "the oil" denotes the good of love and charity, and "the
wine," the good and truth of faith. Again: I will set in the wilderness
the cedar of Shittah, and the myrtle, and the wood of oil (Isa. 41:19).
They shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together
unto the good of Jehovah, to the wheat, and to the new wine, and to the
oil (Jer. 31:12). The field is wasted, the land mourneth; for the grain
is wasted, the new wine is dried up, the oil languisheth (Joel 1:10).
The floors are full of pure grain, and the presses overflow with new
wine and oil (Joel 2:24). I will give the rain of your land in its
season, that thou mayest gather in thy grain, thy new wine, and thine
oil (Deut. 11:14). \[5\] "Grain, new wine, and oil" are here spoken of,
but that these things are not meant can be seen by everyone who
considers; for the Word, being Divine, is spiritual, not worldly, and
therefore it does not treat of the grain, the new wine, and the oil of
the earth, insofar as these are of service to the body for foods, but
insofar as they are of service to the soul; for all foods in the Word
signify heavenly foods, as do the bread and the wine in the Holy Supper.
What "the grain" and "the new wine" signify in the passages here quoted,
may be seen above (n. 3580, 5295, 5410, 5959); from this it is evident
what "the oil" signifies. \[6\] The case is the same with all things
spoken by the Lord while He was in the world, as when He said of the
Samaritan that "he came to the man who was wounded by thieves, and bound
up his wounds and poured in oil and wine" (Luke 10:33, 34). Here are not
meant oil and wine, but the good of love and of charity, by "oil" the
good of love, and by "wine" the good of charity and of faith; for the
subject treated of, is the neighbor, thus charity toward him (that
"wine" has this signification, see n. 6377). \[7\] In like manner what
the Lord said of the ten virgins, of whom "five took their lamps and no
oil with them, and five took also oil," and that the latter were
admitted into heaven, but the former rejected (Matt. 25:3, 4, and
following verses); "oil in the lamps" denotes the good of love and of
charity in the truths of faith; "the virgins who took their lamps and no
oil" denote those who hear the Word, read it, and say that they believe,
and yet do no good in consequence, and if they do any good, it is not
done from the love of good or of truth, but from the love of self and of
the world. \[8\] As "oil" signified the good of charity, therefore also
the sick were anointed with oil and were healed, as we read of the
Lord's disciples, who "went forth and cast out demons, and anointed with
oil them that were sick, and healed them" (Mark 6:13). And in David:
Thou wilt make fat my head with oil; my cup shall run over (Ps. 23:5);
where "to make fat the head with oil" denotes to endow with celestial
good. In Moses: Jehovah fed him with the produce of the fields; He made
him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the stone of the rock
(Deut. 32:13); speaking of the Ancient Church; where "sucking oil out of
the stone of the rock" denotes to be imbued with good through the truths
of faith. \[9\] In Habakkuk: The fig-tree shall not blossom, neither
shall produce be in the vines; the labor of the olive shall lie, and the
fields shall yield no food (Hab. 3:17); here neither fig-tree, nor vine,
nor olive, nor fields are meant, but heavenly things to which they
correspond; as also everyone is able to acknowledge from himself who
acknowledges that the Word treats of such things as belong to heaven and
the church, thus as belong to the soul. But they who think of nothing
but worldly, earthly, and bodily things, do not see the internal things,
and even do not wish to see them, for they say within themselves, What
are spiritual things? What are celestial things? and so, What is
heavenly food? That these are such things as belong to intelligence and
wisdom they indeed know when it is so said; but that they belong to
faith and love, they do not desire; for the reason that they do not
imbue their life with such things, and therefore do not attain to the
intelligence and wisdom of heavenly truths and goodnesses. \[10\] In
Ezekiel: I washed thee with waters, and I washed away thy bloods from
upon thee, and I anointed thee with oil. I clothed thee with broidered
work. Thy garments were fine linen, silk, and broidered work; thou didst
eat fine flour, and honey, and oil. But thou didst take thy broidered
garments, and coveredst images; and didst set Mine oil and Mine incense
before them (Ezek. 16:9, 10, 13, 18). Who cannot see that in this
passage are not meant garments of broidered work, fine linen, and silk,
nor oil, honey, or fine flour; but Divine things which are of heaven and
the church; for the subject treated of is Jerusalem, by which is meant
the church; and therefore by the several things mentioned are meant such
things as are of the church. That by each particular is meant some
special thing of the church, is evident; for in the Word, which is
Divine, there is not a word that is worthless. (That "Jerusalem" denotes
the church, see n. 3654; also what is meant by " broidered work," n.
9688; by "fine linen," n. 5319, 9469; by "fine flour," n. 2177; by
"honey," n. 5620, 6857; by "washing with waters," n. 3147, 5954, 9088;
and by "washing away bloods," n. 4735, 9127.) \[11\] In Hosea: Ephraim
feedeth on wind, they make a covenant with the Assyrian, and oil is
carried down into Egypt (Hos. 12:1); these things are quite
unintelligible unless it is known what is meant by "Ephraim," what by
"the Assyrian," and what by "Egypt;" yet there is here described the
understanding of the man of the church, which is perverted through
reasonings from memory-knowledges; for "Ephraim" denotes this
understanding (n. 3969, 5354, 6222, 6238, 6267); "the Assyrian,"
reasoning (n. 1186); and "Egypt," memory-knowledge (n. 9391);
consequently "to carry down oil into Egypt" denotes to defile in this
way the good of the church. \[12\] That the Lord so often went up the
Mount of Olives (Luke 21:37; 22:39), was because "oil" and "the olive"
signified the good of love, as also does a "mountain" (n. 6435, 8758).
The reason was that while the Lord was in the world all things
respecting Him were representative of heaven; for thereby the universal
heaven was adjoined to Him; wherefore whatever He did and whatever He
said was Divine and heavenly, and the ultimate things were
representative. The Mount of Olives represented heaven in respect to the
good of love and of charity; as also can be seen in Zechariah: Jehovah
shall go forth, and fight against the nations. His feet shall stand in
that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before the faces of
Jerusalem, and the Mount of Olives shall be cleft asunder, that a part
thereof shall recede toward the east, and toward the sea, with a great
valley; and a part of the mountain shall recede toward the north, and a
part of it toward the south (Zech. 14:3-4). \[13\] Here the Lord and His
coming are the subject treated of; by "the Mount of Olives" is signified
the good of love and of charity; thus the church, for these goods make
the church. That the church would recede from the Jewish nation, and
would be set up among the Gentiles, is signified by "the mountain being
cleft asunder toward the east, toward the sea, and toward the north, and
the south;" in like manner as by the words of the Lord in Luke: Ye shall
be cast down outside; whereas they shall come from the east, and the
west, and from the north, and the south, and shall sit down in the
kingdom of God (Luke 13:28, 29). In a universal sense by "Jehovah going
forth and fighting against the nations," and by "His feet standing upon
the Mount of Olives which is before the faces of Jerusalem," is meant
that the Lord from Divine love would fight against the hells; for "the
nations" denote evils which are from the hells (n. 1868, 6306), and "the
Mount of Olives," on which were His feet, denotes the Divine love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9781.">9781.</span></span>

Pure, beaten. That this signifies genuine and clear, is evident from the
signification of "pure," when said of the good which is signified by
"oil," as being genuine; for the more celestial good is-thus the more
genuine-so much the purer it is; and from the signification of "beaten,"
when said of the good which is signified by "oil," as being clear. Good
is said to be clear when it becomes truth; for good appears by means of
truth, because truth is the form of good; and good does not appear in
light except in a form. The better therefore that good is presented in a
form, the more clearly it appears, for the result is that good itself
shines forth, even so as to affect both the understanding and at the
same time the will of others. For as is the case with good and truth, so
it is with the will and the understanding in man, because the will has
been appointed for the reception of good, and the understanding for the
reception of truth; and the will does not appear in light except through
the understanding, for it is understanding which gives form to what is
of the will, and presents it in clearness. That which is formed is as it
were divided into parts, and among these parts, which are analytically
associated together, there are established various regards or relations.
In this manner good is presented to view in the understanding and is
rendered clear. When good has been rendered clear in the understanding,
it is the truth of this good. From this then it is that the oil was to
be beaten, as also the frankincense, of which it is said that it shall
be pure, and that some of it shall be beaten very small, and thus burned
as incense (Exod. 30:34-36). The like that is signified by "beaten" is
also signified by being "ground in a mill," as can be seen from the
signification of "wheat" and of "fine flour;" "wheat" signifying good,
and "fine flour" its truth. Just as that which is beaten and ground
signifies in the genuine sense good made clear, so what is beaten and
ground, in the opposite sense signifies evil made clear. This is
signified by Moses beating the golden calf, and grinding it very small;
and when it was as fine as dust, casting it into the brook that
descended from the mountain (Deut. 9:21; see n. 9391).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9782.">9782.</span></span>

For the luminary. That this signifies the spiritual heaven, is evident
from the signification of "the luminary," or "lampstand," as being the
spiritual heaven (see n. 9548).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9783.">9783.</span></span>

To cause the lamp to go up continually. That this signifies the
consequent faith, and through faith the intelligence of truth and wisdom
of good from the Lord, is evident from the signification of a "lamp," as
being faith and the consequent intelligence of truth and wisdom of good
(see n. 9548). That a "lamp" denotes faith, is because the Divine truth
that proceeds from the Lord is light in the heavens; this light, when
received by the angels who are there, or by man, is like a lamp, for it
illuminates all things of the mind, and imparts intelligence and wisdom.
This light when received is faith. But be it known that faith is not a
lamp, that is, does not illuminate the mind, unless it is from charity;
thus unless it is charity. The case with faith and charity is the same
as with truth and good; truth is the form of good, that is, it is good
so formed as to appear in light. So faith is the form of charity, or
charity formed. Moreover, truth pertains to faith, and good to charity;
for that which is true is believed, and becomes of faith; and that which
is good is loved, and becomes of charity. The truth and good itself
which are loved are the neighbor, and the love of these is charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9784.">9784.</span></span>

In the Tent of meeting. That this signifies where is the presence of the
Lord, is evident from the fact that the Tent was made in order that the
Lord might there meet Moses and Aaron, and also the sons of Israel.
Therefore also what is holy of worship was instituted there, as can be
seen from the following passages in Exodus: They shall make a continual
burnt-offering at the door of the Tent of meeting before Jehovah; where
I will meet with you, to speak there with thee. And there I will meet
with the sons of Israel; and it shall be sanctified by My glory. And I
will sanctify the Tent of meeting, and the altar. Aaron also and his
sons will I sanctify, that they may minister to Me in the priesthood.
And I will dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel (Exod. 29:42-45).
And that the Lord met with them there, that is, that He was present
there, can be seen from this passage: When all things were finished, the
cloud covered the Tent of meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled the
Habitation. And Moses could not enter into the Tent of meeting, because
the cloud dwelt upon it, and the glory of Jehovah filled the Habitation.
The cloud of Jehovah was upon the Habitation by day; and there was fire
therein by night, in the eyes of all the house of Israel (Exod. 40:33,
to the end). From all this it can be seen that by "the Tent of meeting"
is signified where the presence of the Lord is. The reason was that the
Tent represented heaven, and heaven is heaven by virtue of the presence
of the Lord in it, on which account also it was called "the Habitation
of Jehovah."

<span class="margnote"><span id="9785.">9785.</span></span>

Without the veil which is over the Testimony. That this signifies where
there is communication, and, through the uniting intermediate,
conjunction with the Lord in the inmost heaven, is evident from the
signification of "the veil," as being the intermediate that unites the
inmost heaven and the middle heaven (see n. 9670, 9671), thus where
there is communication and conjunction; and from the signification of
"the Testimony," as being the Lord in respect to Divine truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9786.">9786.</span></span>

Aaron and his sons shall order it. That this signifies perpetual influx
from the Lord, is evident from the signification of "ordering," when
said of the Lord, who was represented by Aaron, as being influx; for all
communication of Divine good and Divine truth from the Lord, and all
conjunction with Him, are effected through influx. Angels and men are
recipient forms. That perpetual influx is signified, is because the
subject treated of is the ordering of the lamp from evening until
morning, by which is signified continually and perpetually. That the
influx is from the Lord, is because by Aaron was represented the Lord as
to Divine good, and by his sons the Lord as to Divine truth (of which in
what follows).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9787.">9787.</span></span>

From evening until morning before Jehovah. That this signifies
continually in every state, is evident from the signification of
"evening," as being the end of one state (see n. 8426); and from the
signification of "morning," as being the beginning of another (n. 8427).
That it denotes continually in every state, is because "evening"
involves every state of shade which is signified by the following night;
and "morning" involves every state of light which is signified by the
following day; for with the Lord things following and future are
together in the present, because everything which the Lord ordains, that
is, provides with man and angel, is eternal. From this it can be seen
that by the "ordering of the lamp from evening until morning" is
signified the perpetual influx of good and of truth from the Lord
continually in every state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9788.">9788.</span></span>

It shall be a statute of an age. That this signifies the Divine order,
is evident from the signification of "a statute," as being Divine order
(see n. 7884, 7995, 8357); and from the signification of "age," as being
what is eternal; moreover, what is Divine is eternal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9789.">9789.</span></span>

For their generations with the sons of Israel. That this signifies what
is eternal in the spiritual kingdom, is evident from the signification
of "generations," as being what is eternal (of which in what follows);
and from the signification of "the sons of Israel," as being the
spiritual church (see n. 9340), and therefore the spiritual kingdom; for
the spiritual kingdom of the Lord in the heavens is the spiritual
heaven, and on earth it is the spiritual church. "Generations" denote
what is eternal, because by them in the internal sense are meant the
generations of faith and charity (n. 613, 2020, 2584, 6239, 9042, 9079),
thus the things which are of heaven and the church, which are eternal.
Moreover, by "the sons of Israel," of whom the "generations" are
predicated, is signified the church (n. 9340). That by "generations" is
signified what is eternal, is plain from the following passages in the
Word: My righteousness shall be to eternity, and My salvation unto
generations of generations. Awake as in the days of antiquities, the
generations of eternities (Isa. 51:8, 9). I will set thee for a
magnificence of eternities, a joy of generation and generation (Isa.
60:15). The smoke thereof shall go up to eternity; from generation to
generation it shall be laid waste, none shall pass through it for
everlasting of everlastings (Isa. 34:10). The counsel of Jehovah shall
stand to eternity, the thoughts of His heart to generation and
generation (Ps. 33:11). I will praise Thy name to eternity and forever,
generation to generation shall praise Thy works (Ps. 145:2, 4). They
shall fear Thee with the sun, and before the moon, from generation of
generations (Ps. 72:5). This is My name to eternity, and this My
memorial unto generation and generation (Exod. 3:15); besides many other
passages. It is said "to eternity," and "to generation and generation,"
and "eternity" is predicated of the Divine celestial, or good; and
"generation," of the Divine spiritual, or truth; for in the Word,
especially in the prophetic Word, there are for the most part two
expressions relating to one and the same thing, as in the passages above
quoted, "to eternity," and "to generation and generation;" and this on
account of the heavenly marriage in each and all things of the Word. The
heavenly marriage is the marriage of good and truth, or the conjunction
of the Lord and heaven (see the passages cited in n. 9263).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9790.">9790.</span></span>

CONTINUATION ABOUT THE FIRST EARTH SEEN IN THE STARRY HEAVENS. It has
also been granted me to see some of the in- habitants of a lower class.
They were seen in a garment such as is worn by rustics in Europe. There
was also seen a man with his wife. She appeared of handsome figure and
becoming mien, as did likewise the man. But I was surprised at his grand
style of walking, with steps as it were haughty, while on the other hand
the woman walked with a lowly gait. The angels said that such is the
custom on that earth, and that the men who are like this are loved,
because they are nevertheless good. It was said further that they are
not allowed to have more wives than one, because this is contrary to the
laws.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9791.">9791.</span></span>

A man who is in the spirit, when allowed to do so by the Lord, can look
at what occurs in the earth to which he is near; for in the other life
there is no space, thus no distance between those who are in a similar
state (according to what was said above, n. 9579-9581). What I have just
mentioned took place in the same way as with the spirits of some of the
earths in our solar system, to whom it was given by the Lord to see
through my eyes many things in our earth, as already stated in several
places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9792.">9792.</span></span>

The woman who was seen had a wide garment in front of her bosom, behind
which she could hide herself. It was so made that she could insert her
arms, and clothe herself with it, and so go away. The lower part of it
could be drawn up; and when drawn up and applied to the body, it
appeared like a stomacher, such as is worn by the women of our earth.
But the same garment served the man also for a covering, and he was seen
to take it from the woman and apply it to his own back, loosening the
lower part, which then flowed down to his feet like a gown, and in this
manner he walked clad.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9793.">9793.</span></span>

Afterward I spoke with spirits who were from that earth, and told them
many things about our earth; as that there are sciences here which do
not exist elsewhere, such as astronomy, geometry, mechanics, physics,
chemistry, medicine, optics, and philosophy; besides arts which also are
unknown elsewhere, as the art of ship-building, of casting metals, of
writing on paper, and of printing what is written, and thus of
communicating it to all in the whole earth, and of preserving it to
posterity for thousands of years; and that it has been so done with the
Word, which is from the Lord, and that therefore the revealed Word
remains unchanged in this earth (see n. 9350-9360).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9794.">9794.</span></span>

Lastly there was shown me the hell of those who are from that earth.
Those who were seen from it excited the greatest terror. I would not
venture to describe their monstrous faces. Sorceresses also were seen
there who practice direful arts; they appeared clad in green, and
excited horror.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9795.">9795.</span></span>

The second earth that was seen in the starry heaven will be described at
the end of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9796.">9796.</span></span>

CHAPTER THE TWENTY-EIGHTH THE DOCTRINE OF CHARITY AND FAITH When it is
known what the internal man is, and what the external man, the source of
the Understanding of Truth, and of the Will of Good, can then be known.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9797.">9797.</span></span>

In proportion as the internal man has been opened toward heaven, thus to
the Lord, in the same proportion a man is in the light of heaven, thus
in the same proportion he is in the understanding of truth. The light of
heaven is the Divine truth that proceeds from the Lord; to be
enlightened by this light is to understand truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9798.">9798.</span></span>

In proportion as the internal man has been opened to the Lord, and the
external man subordinated to it, in the same proportion a man is in the
fire of heaven; thus in the same proportion he is in the will of good.
The fire of heaven is the Divine love that proceeds from the Lord; to be
kindled by this fire is to will good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9799.">9799.</span></span>

Therefore the understanding of truth is to see truths from the Word by
virtue of enlightenment from the Lord; and the will of good is to will
these truths from affection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9800.">9800.</span></span>

They who are in love and faith in the Lord, and in charity toward the
neighbor, are in the understanding of truth and in the will of good, for
with them there is a reception of the good and truth which are from the
Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_210"></span>[9755-1](ac196.htm#fr_210.md) That is, a millstone
turned by an ass. \[REVISER.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9801-9850](ac197.md)
