[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac206)  [Next](ac208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="10301.">10301.</span></span>

Pure. That this signifies free from evil, is evident from the
signification of "pure," as being free from evil. As all evil is impure,
and all good is pure, therefore we speak of being "purified from sins
and iniquities," and this is said of the heart, that is, of the will;
for in the Word the "heart" signifies the will (see n. 2930, 7542, 8910,
9300, 9495); because it signifies the love (n. 3883-3896, 9050).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10302.">10302.</span></span>

Holy. That this signifies free from the falsity of evil, is evident from
the signification of "holy," as being the Divine truth that proceeds
from the Lord (see n. 6788, 7499, 8302, 8330, 9229, 9818, 9820); hence
that is called "holy" which is free from the falsity of evil. It is said
"the falsity of evil," because there is falsity without evil, as in the
case of some good people among the nations outside the church, and also
with some among Christians within the church. But in itself the falsity
that is defiled by evil is evil, for it is from evil; whereas the
falsity with those who are in good is not defiled by evil, but is
purified from it. Therefore also such falsity is accepted by the Lord
almost as truth, and is also easily turned into truth, for they who are
in good are inclined to receive truth. (Concerning falsity, both that
from evil, and that not from evil, see at the places cited in n. 9304,
10109.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10303.">10303.</span></span>

And thou shalt bruise of it small. That this signifies the disposing of
truths into their series, is evident from the signification of
"bruising," when said of frankincense and spices; by which are signified
truths, as being the disposing of truths into their series; for
"bruising" has a like signification with "grinding," but "grinding" is
said of wheat, barley, and spelt; and "bruising," of oil, frankincense,
and spices. \[2\] What is specifically signified by "bruising" and
"grinding" cannot be known unless it is known how the case is with man
in respect to the goods and truths which are signified by "wheat,"
"barley," "meal," "fine flour," "oil," "frankincense," and "spices,"
when these goods and truths have been disposed for uses; for "grinding"
and "bruising" denote so to dispose them that they may be of use. When
"grinding" is said of the goods which are signified by "wheat" or
"barley," then by "grinding" is signified the disposing and bringing
forth of good into truths, and in this way its application to uses.
Moreover, good never puts itself forth into uses except by means of
truths. In these it is disposed, and thus qualified, for unless good has
been disposed in truths it has no quality; but when it is disposed in
truths, it is then disposed, into series in application to things
according to uses, into which things good enters as the affection of
love, whence comes what is grateful, pleasant, and delightful. The like
is here signified by "bruising small," for "pure frankincense" denotes
spiritual good (n. 10296); and the truths which are disposed by this
good are denoted by the spices stacte, onycha, and galbanum (n.
10292-10294). \[3\] What is meant by disposing into series shall also be
briefly told. Truths are said to be disposed into series when they have
been disposed according to the form of heaven, in which form are the
angelic societies. What this form is may be seen from the correspondence
of all the members, viscera, and organs of man with the Grand Man, which
is heaven (concerning which correspondence see at the places cited in n.
10030). In these members, viscera, and organs, each and all things have
been disposed into series and series of series. These are formed by the
fibers and vessels, as is known to those who from anatomy are acquainted
with the textures and contextures of the interiors of the body. Into
like series have been disposed the truths from good with man. \[4\] From
this it is that a regenerated man is a heaven in the least form
corresponding to the greatest; and that a man is wholly his own truth
and good. (That a regenerated man is a heaven in the least form, see at
the places cited in n. 9279; and that a man is his own truth and good,
n. 10298; and that the truths with man have been disposed into series
according to the angelic societies with the regenerate, n. 5339, 5343,
5530.) The series into which truths have been disposed with the good,
and the series into which falsities have been disposed with the evil,
are signified in the Word by "sheaves" and "bundles" (as in Lev.
23:9-15; Ps. 126:6; 129:7; Amos 2:13; Micah 4:12; Jer. 9:22; Zech. 12:6;
Matt. 13:30). \[5\] It therefore being evident what is signified by
"bruising," and "grinding," it can be known what is signified in the
internal sense by the statement that: The sons of Israel ground the
manna in mills, or bruised it in a mortar, and baked it into cakes (Num.
11:8); for by the "manna" was signified celestial and spiritual good (n.
8464); and by "grinding" and "bruising," a disposing that it might serve
for use; for whatever is said in the Word is significative of such
things as are in heaven and the church, for every detail has an internal
sense. It can also be known what is signified by the statement that:
They should not take to pledge the mill or the millstone, for he taketh
the soul to pledge (Deut. 24:6); for by "the mill and the millstone" is
signified that which prepares good so that it can be applied to uses; by
"barley" also and by "wheat" is signified good, and by "meal" and "fine
flour" truths; and as before said, good is applied to use by means of
its own truths. \[6\] From this it can be seen what is signified by the
"mill," by the "millstone," and by "sitting at the mills," in the
following passages: Then shall two be grinding at the mill; the one
shall be taken, and the other shall be left (Matt. 24:41). He that shall
cause to stumble one of these little ones that believe in Me, it were
better for him that an ass millstone were hanged on his neck, and he
were sunk into the depth of the sea (Matt. 18:6; Mark 9:42). A mighty
angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea,
saying, Thus with violence shall Babylon be thrown down, and the voice
of the mill shall be heard no more at all in her (Rev. 18:21, 22). I
will cause to cease from them the voice of joy, and the voice of the
millstones, and the light of the lamp (Jer. 25:10). O daughter of
Babylon, sit on the earth; there is no throne, O daughter of the
Chaldeans; take the mill and grind meal (Isa. 47:1, 2). As in a good
sense a "mill," and "grinding," signify application to good uses, so in
the opposite sense they signify application to evil uses; hence when
they are said of Babylon and Chaldea, they signify application in favor
of their loves, which are the loves of self and of the world; for by the
"barley and wheat" with them is signified good adulterated, and by the
"meal" thence, truth falsified. The profanation of good and truth by
application in favor of these loves is also signified by the statement
that: Moses ground to powder the golden calf, and scattered it upon the
waters that came down from Mount Sinai, and made the sons of Israel
drink it (Exod. 32:20; Deut. 9:21).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10304.">10304.</span></span>

And shalt put it before the Testimony in the Tent of meeting. That this
signifies the worship of the Lord in heaven and in the church, is
evident from the signification of the "incense," which was to be put
before the Testimony, as being worship (see above, n. 10298); from the
signification of "the Testimony," as being the Lord as to Divine truth
(n. 9503); and from the representation of the Tent of meeting, as being
heaven (n. 9457, 9481, 9485); and as it denotes heaven, it also denotes
the church, for the church is heaven on earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10305.">10305.</span></span>

Whither I will come to meet thee. That this signifies from the influx of
the Lord, is evident from the signification of "coming to meet," when
said of the Lord, as being His presence and influx (see n. 10147, 10148,
10197); here from the influx of the Lord, because the subject treated of
is worship, which is signified by "incense;" for everything of worship
which is truly worship flows in from the Lord, as can be seen from what
was shown above (n. 10299).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10306.">10306.</span></span>

A holy of holies shall it be to you. That this signifies because it is
from the Lord, is evident from the signification of "holy," as being all
that, and only that, which proceeds from the Lord (see n. 6788, 7499,
8302, 8330, 9229, 9818, 9820).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10307.">10307.</span></span>

And the incense which thou makest in its quality, ye shall not make for
yourselves. That this signifies that worship from the holy truths of the
church must not be applied in favor of the loves of man, is evident from
the signification of "incense," as being worship (see above, n. 10298);
from the signification of "making in its quality," as being from the
holy truths of the church; for to make in its quality is to make from
the same spices, and by the spices, which were stacte, onycha, and
galbanum, are signified the holy truths of the church in their order (n.
10292-10294); and from the signification of "not making for yourselves,"
as being not to apply in favor of one's own uses, thus of one's loves,
for that which a man does for the sake of himself, he does for the sake
of his loves. Such application is here meant because it is said, "to
make for yourselves." \[2\] How the case herein is, shall also be told.
All the truths of the church have regard to two loves, namely, to love
to God, and to love toward the neighbor. That the whole Word, which is
Divine truth itself, and from which are all the truths of the church,
hangs on these two loves, is evident in Matthew 22:37; Mark 12:30, 31;
and Luke 10:27, where it is said that all the Law and the Prophets hang
on these loves, and by "the Law and the Prophets" is signified the whole
Word. Quite the contrary, however, is it to apply Divine truth, or the
truths of the church, in favor of the loves of man. By so doing a man
turns from the Lord to himself, which is to turn from heaven to hell,
and becomes as one of the spirits there; for in hell they have the Lord
at the back and their own loves in front; nay, when looked at by the
angels they appear inverted, with the head downward and the feet upward.
\[3\] When truths Divine are applied in favor of the loves of man, they
are no longer truths, because by means of these applications evil enters
them, and perverts them, and makes them appear false. If it is then said
to such men that they are not so to be understood, but otherwise, they
are not willing to apprehend it, and some do not apprehend it; for to
say what is contrary to principles confirmed by his loves, is to say
what is contrary to the man himself, because contrary to his
understanding which is from his will. As regards those who by means of
application in favor of their loves falsify truths and adulterate goods,
much is said in the Word where Babel is treated of, especially in
Revelation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10308.">10308.</span></span>

Holy to Jehovah shall it be to thee. That this signifies that worship
must be applied in favor of love Divine, is evident from the
signification of "holy," as being all that which proceeds from the Lord
(as above, n. 10306); and from the signification of "incense," of which
it is said that "holy to Jehovah shall it be to thee," as being worship
(n. 10298); that it denotes that it is to be applied in favor of love
Divine, follows from what immediately precedes, where it is said that
they "should not make such incense for themselves," by which is
signified that worship from the holy truths of the church must not be
applied in favor of the loves of man (n. 10307). By "love Divine" is
meant love to the Lord and love toward the neighbor; that the latter
love also is Divine, is because it too proceeds from the Lord; for no
one can love the neighbor from himself. He who does so from himself,
loves the neighbor and confers benefits upon him for the sake of
himself, which is to love himself. That the whole Word, which is the
Divine truth itself from which are all the truths of the church, has
regard to the above-mentioned two loves as ends, see just above (n.
10307); hence also Divine worship must look to the same, because all
worship which is truly worship is from truths, as can be seen from what
was shown above concerning the spices of the incense, by which are
signified the truths of worship; and the truths of worship are applied
in favor of Divine love when worship is performed by a man from the Lord
(according to what was said above, in n. 10299).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10309.">10309.</span></span>

The man who shall make like unto it, to make an odor with it. That this
signifies the imitation of Divine worship by means of the affections of
truth and good from what is man's own, is evident from the signification
of "making like it," as being the imitation of Divine worship, for by
"making" is signified imitating, and by the "incense" of which this is
said, is signified Divine worship, as above; and from the signification
of "making an odor," as being to please, and as this is done by means of
the affections of truth and good, these are what are signified by
"pleasing," for "odor" denotes the perceptivity of what is grateful,
thus what is pleasing (see n. 10292). That it denotes from what is man's
own is evident, because it is said, "the man who shall make like unto it
shall be cut off from his peoples." For that is from man's own which is
not from the affection of truth and good for the sake of truth and good,
but for the sake of self; and to do anything for the sake of self is to
do it for the sake of profit, honors, and reputation, as ends; and not
for the sake of the salvation of the neighbor and the glory of the Lord;
hence it is from evil and not from good; or what is the same, it is from
hell and not from the Lord. This therefore is what is meant by the
imitation of Divine worship by means of the affections of truth and good
from what is man's own, which is signified by "making incense like unto
it, to make an odor with it." Accordingly, those who do this are those
who love the world more than heaven, and themselves more than God.
Moreover, when such persons think inwardly, or by themselves, they do
not believe anything about heaven and the Lord; but when they think out
of themselves, as is the case when they speak before men, they then
speak of heaven and the Lord from greater affection and faith than
others, and this in proportion as they are inflamed by self-advantage,
honors, and reputation. Their state then is that they are inwardly black
and outwardly white, that is, they are devils in the form of angels of
light; for the interiors which should be open to heaven are closed, and
the exteriors which are open to the world are open; and if then from an
affection as it were of love they raise their eyes and hands to heaven,
they are nevertheless like effigies made by art, and such they appear to
the angels. And if you are willing to believe it, there are many such in
hell, who are present with and inspire men of like character, especially
preachers, who imitate Divine worship by means of affections of truth
and good from their own; which also is permitted by the Lord, because in
this way they too perform a use; for good men nevertheless receive the
Word from them well, because from whatever mouth the Word comes, it is
received by a man according to the quality of his good. But such
external things, being pretenses, are stripped off them in the other
life; and then their spirit appears black, as it had been in the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10310.">10310.</span></span>

Shall be cut off from his peoples. That this signifies separation from
heaven and the church, and spiritual death, is evident from the
signification of being "cut off from the peoples," as being separation
and spiritual death (see n. 10288); that it denotes separation from
heaven is evident from what was said just above (n. 10309); that it also
denotes separation from the church is because those alone are of the
church in whom the church is; and the church is in those who are in the
affection of truth for the sake of truth, and in the affection of good
for the sake of good, thus who are in love toward the neighbor and in
love to God; for the neighbor is good and truth, and also is God,
because good and truth are of God, thus are God with them. They who are
not of this character are not of the church, no matter how much they may
be in the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10311.">10311.</span></span>

ON THE THIRD EARTH IN THE STARRY HEAVEN. There appeared spirits from
afar who were not willing to come near, for the reason that they could
not be with the spirits of our earth who were then about me. From this I
perceived that they were from another earth, and I was afterward told
that they were from a certain earth in the universe; but where that
earth is, was not told me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10312.">10312.</span></span>

Differently from the spirits of our earth, they were unwilling to think
at all about their bodies, or even about anything bodily and material;
and for this reason they were not willing to come near; for spirits are
associated and dissociated in accordance with the affections and the
thoughts thence derived. But after the removal of some spirits from our
earth they came nearer and spoke with me; yet there was still felt an
anxiety arising from the collision of spheres; for spiritual spheres
that emanate from the life of their affections and consequent thoughts
encompass all spirits and societies of spirits; and therefore if the
affections are contrary, there results a collision which gives rise to
anxiety.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10313.">10313.</span></span>

The spirits of our earth declared that they did not dare to approach
them, because when they do so they are not only seized with anxiety, but
also, from phantasy, they seem to themselves to be as it were bound hand
and foot with serpents, from which they cannot be loosed until they
retire. Such a phantasy is from correspondence; for the bodily sensuous
of man is represented in the other life by serpents, and therefore by
"serpents" in the Word is also signified the sensuous, which is the
lowest of the life of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10314.">10314.</span></span>

As the spirits of that earth are of this nature, they do not appear as
do other spirits, in a clearly defined human form, but as a cloud; the
better of them as a dusky cloud with a human whiteness scattered about
in it. They said that inwardly they are white, and that when they become
angels this duskiness is turned into a beautiful blue, which also was
shown me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10315.">10315.</span></span>

I asked them whether they had been in such an idea concerning their
bodies when they lived in the world as men. They said that the men of
their earth make no account of their bodies, but only of the spirit
therein, because they know that the spirit is to live forever, and that
the body will perish. The face, however, they do not call the body,
because the affections of their spirits appear from the face, and the
thoughts that come from the affections, from the eyes. They also said
that some in their earth believe that the spirits of their bodies have
existed from eternity, and were infused into the body at conception; but
they added that now they know that it is not so, and they repent of
having been in so false an opinion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10316.">10316.</span></span>

When I asked them whether they wished to see anything on our earth,
which it was possible to do through my eyes, they first replied that
they could not do so, and afterward said that they did not wish it,
because they could see nothing but earthly and material things, from
which they remove their thoughts as far as possible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10317.">10317.</span></span>

A continuation about this third earth in the universe will be found at
the end of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10318.">10318.</span></span>

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FIRST. THE DOCTRINE OF CHARITY AND FAITH <span
id="fr_226"></span>[10318-1](#fn_226) Without a revelation from the
Divine, man cannot know anything about eternal life, nor indeed anything
about God, and still less about love to Him and faith in Him. For man is
born into mere ignorance, and afterward has all things to learn from
what is of the world, from which he must form his understanding. He is
also born hereditarily into all evil that belongs to the love of self
and the love of the world. The delights from these loves reign
continually, and prompt to such things as are diametrically contrary to
the Divine. From this then it is that from himself man knows nothing
about eternal life; and therefore there must needs be a revelation from
which he may know this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10319.">10319.</span></span>

That the evils of the love of self and of the world induce such
ignorance about the things of eternal life, is very evident from those
within the church who although they know from revelation that there is a
God, that there are a heaven and a hell, that there is eternal life, and
that this life must be acquired by means of the good of love and of
faith, nevertheless fall, both learned and unlearned, into denial. From
this it is again evident what great ignorance would prevail if there
were no revelation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10320.">10320.</span></span>

Seeing therefore that man lives after death, and this to eternity; and
that a life awaits him in accordance with his love and faith, it follows
that from love toward the human race, the Divine has revealed such
things as will lead to that life, and will conduce to man's salvation.
That which the Divine has revealed is with us the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10321.">10321.</span></span>

As the Word is a revelation from the Divine, it is Divine in general and
in particular, for that which is from the Divine cannot be otherwise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10322.">10322.</span></span>

That which is from the Divine descends through the heavens down to man,
and therefore in the heavens it has been accommodated to the wisdom of
the angels who are there, and on earth it has been accommodated to the
apprehension of the men who are there. Therefore in the Word there is an
internal sense for the angels, which is spiritual; and an external sense
for men, which is natural. From this it is that there is a conjunction
of heaven with man by means of the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10323.">10323.</span></span>

The genuine sense of the Word is apprehended by none but those who are
enlightened; and those only are enlightened who are in love to the Lord
and in faith in Him, for the interiors of such are raised by the Lord
even into the light of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10324.">10324.</span></span>

The Word in the letter cannot be apprehended except by means of doctrine
made from the Word by one who is enlightened. For the sense of the
letter of the Word has been accommodated to the apprehension of even
simple men; and therefore they need doctrine out of the Word for a lamp.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10325.">10325.</span></span>

The books of the Word are all those which have an internal sense; and
those which have not an internal sense are not the Word. The books of
the Word in the Old Testament are the five books of Moses, the book of
Joshua, the book of Judges, the two books of Samuel, the two books of
Kings, the Psalms of David, the Prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations,
Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum,
Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi; and in the New
Testament the four Gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; and
Revelation. EXODUS 31 1. And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying, 2. See, I
have called by name Bezalel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the
tribe of Judah; 3. And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in
wisdom, and in intelligence, and in knowledge, and in all work; 4. To
think thoughts, to make in gold, and in silver, and in brass; 5. And in
graving of stone for filling, and in carving of wood, to do in all work.
6. And I, behold I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of
the tribe of Dan; and in the heart of everyone that is wise in heart I
have put wisdom; and they shall make all that I have commanded thee; 7.
The Tent of meeting, and the ark for the Testimony, and the propitiatory
that is thereupon, and all the vessels of the Tent; 8. And the table and
its vessels, and the pure lampstand and all its vessels, and the altar
of incense; 9. And the altar of burnt-offering and all its vessels, and
the laver and its base; 10. And the garments of the ministry, and the
garments of holiness for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons,
to minister in the priest's office; 11. And the oil of anointing, and
the incense of spices for the holy; according to all that I have
commanded thee shall they do. 12. And Jehovah said unto Moses, saying,
13. And speak thou unto the sons of Israel, saying, But yet ye shall
keep My Sabbaths; for it is a sign between Me and you to your
generations, to know that I am Jehovah who maketh you holy. 14. And ye
shall keep the Sabbath; for this is holy to you; he that profaneth it,
dying he shall die; for everyone that doeth work on that day, that soul
shall be cut off from the midst of his peoples. 15. Six days shall work
be done; and on the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Sabbath, holy to
Jehovah; everyone that doeth work on the Sabbath day, dying he shall
die. 16. And the sons of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to perform the
Sabbath to their generations, a covenant of an age. 17. This is a sign
between Me and the sons of Israel to an age; for in six days Jehovah
made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day He rested, and took
breath. 18. And He gave unto Moses, in His completing to speak with him
on Mount Sinai, the two tables of the Testimony, tables of stone,
written with the finger of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10326.">10326.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. The subject treated of in this chapter in the internal
sense is, first, the setting up of a representative church with those
who are in the good of love to the Lord and in the good of faith in Him.
This is signified by the things summarily enumerated as to be made by
Bezalel of the tribe of Judah and Aholiab of the tribe of Dan. Afterward
the subject treated of is the conjunction of the Lord with this church
by means of representatives. This is signified by the Sabbath which was
to be kept holy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10327.">10327.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE. Verses 1-11. And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying,
See, I have called by name Bezalel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of
the tribe of Judah; and I have filled him with the spirit of God, in
wisdom, and in intelligence, and in knowledge, and in all work; to think
thoughts, to make in gold, and in silver, and in brass; and in graving
of stone for filling, and in carving of wood, to do in all work. And I,
behold I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe
of Dan; and in the heart of everyone that is wise in heart I have put
wisdom; and they shall make all that I have commanded thee: the Tent of
meeting, and the ark for the Testimony, and the propitiatory that is
thereupon, and all the vessels of the Tent; and the table and its
vessels, and the pure lampstand and all its vessels, and the altar of
incense; and the altar of burnt-offering and all its vessels, and the
laver and its base; and the garments of the ministry, and the garments
of holiness for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to
minister in the priest's office; and the oil of anointing, and the
incense of spices for the holy; according to all that I have commanded
thee shall they do. "And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying" signifies
enlightenment and perception by the Lord through the Word; "See, I have
called by name Bezalel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of
Judah" signifies those who are in the good of love, with whom the church
was to be set up; "and I have filled him with the spirit of God"
signifies influx and enlightenment from the Divine truth which is from
the Divine good; "in wisdom, and in intelligence, and in knowledge, and
in all work" signifies in respect to those things which are of the will
and which are of the understanding in the internal and in the external
man; "to think thoughts, to do in gold, and in silver, and in brass"
signifies to represent goods and truths interior and exterior which are
of the understanding from the will, thus which are of faith from love;
"and in graving of stone for filling" signifies to represent all things
of faith that are of service to the good of love; "and in carving of
wood, to do in all work" signifies to represent all manner of good; "and
I, behold I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach of the
tribe of Dan" signifies those who are in the good and truth of faith,
and with whom the church is to be set up; "and in the heart of everyone
that is wise in heart I have put wisdom" signifies all who will and do
what is good and true for the sake of what is good and true; "and they
shall make all that I have commanded thee" signifies Divine truths from
the Word that were to be represented in outward things; "the Tent of
meeting, and the ark for the Testimony" signifies a representative of
heaven in general where the Lord is; "and the propitiatory that is
thereupon" signifies a representative of the hearing and reception of
all things of worship which are from the good of love; "and all the
vessels of the tent" signifies a representative of all ministering goods
and truths; "and the table and its vessels" signifies a representative
of spiritual good derived from celestial; "and the pure lampstand and
all its vessels" signifies a representative of truth from this good, and
things ministering; "and the altar of incense" signifies a
representative of worship from these things; "and the altar of
burnt-offering and all its vessels" signifies a representative of
worship from the good of love and the truths thereof; "and the laver and
its base" signifies a representative of purification and regeneration
and also of the natural; "and the garments of the ministry, and the
garments of holiness for Aaron the priest" signifies a representative of
the Lord's spiritual kingdom adjoined to His celestial kingdom; "and the
garments of his sons" signifies a representative of lower spiritual
things; "to minister in the priest's office" signifies a representative
of the Lord's work of salvation; "and the oil of anointing" signifies a
representative of the Lord in respect to the Divine good of the Divine
love in his Divine Human; "and the incense of spices" signifies a
representative of worship from truths; "for the holy" signifies for the
representative church; "according to all that I have commanded thee
shall they do" signifies according to the Divine truths from the Word,
which were to be represented in outward things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10328.">10328.</span></span>

And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying. That this signifies enlightenment
and perception by the Lord through the Word, is evident from what was
shown above (n. 10290).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10329.">10329.</span></span>

See, I have called by name Bezalel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of
the tribe of Judah. That this signifies those who are in the good of
love and with whom the church was about to be set up, is evident from
the signification of "calling by name," as being to choose such, namely,
as are suitable (of which below); and from the representation of
Bezalel, as being those who are in the good of love. That these are here
represented by Bezalel, is because he was of the tribe of Judah, and by
this tribe are signified those who are in celestial good, which is the
good of love to the Lord; and in a sense abstracted from persons, the
good of celestial love. (That this is signified by "Judah" and his
tribe, see n. 3654, 3881, 6363, 6364, 8770.) But what is represented by
Uri the father of Bezalel, and by Hur his grandfather, is evident from
the generation of celestial good. This is generated from the doctrine of
celestial truth and good, and therefore by these persons are signified
these doctrines. (That by Hur is represented the doctrine of truth, see
n. 9424.) \[2\] They who keep the mind only in the sense of the letter
of the Word, which is done in the historic parts more intently than in
the prophetic, may wonder that it is said that such things are signified
by the names of these men. But those will not wonder who are acquainted
with the nature of the Word, for there is what is spiritual in each and
all things. In the very names of the persons and places in the Word
there is nothing spiritual unless they signify real things of the church
and of heaven, for these things are spiritual, and therefore it follows
that even by these names spiritual things are signified. (That the names
in the Word signify real things, see n. 1224, 1264, 1888, 4442, 5095,
5225, 6516; and that these names do not enter heaven, but the things
which are signified, n. 1876, 10216, 10282.) \[3\] That "to call by
name" denotes to choose such as are suitable, is because by a name apart
from the person is signified the quality, as can be seen from the
passages in the Word where "name" is mentioned. (That by "name" is
signified quality, see n. 144, 145, 1754, 1896, 2009, 2724, 3004-3011,
3421, 6674, 6887, 8274, 8882, 9310; and likewise by "calling," without a
name, n. 3421, 3659; and that "to call by name" denotes to choose, n.
8773.) \[4\] Two men are here named who were called by Jehovah to do the
works commanded to Moses on Mount Sinai, namely, Bezalel of the tribe of
Judah, and Aholiab of the tribe of Dan. By "Bezalel" are signified those
who are in the good of celestial love, and by "Aholiab" those who are in
the good and truth of faith. Those who are in the good of celestial love
are in the inmost of heaven and of the church; and those who are in the
good and truth of faith are in the outermost thereof. Thus by these two
are signified all in the complex with whom the church can be set up; for
by the first and the last, or by the inmost and the outermost, are
signified all persons or all things. For in what now follows the subject
treated of is the setting up of the church, and therefore these two are
named, by whom are signified all with whom the church can be set up.
(That by "the first and the last" are signified all persons and all
things, n. 10044; and that by "Aholiab of the tribe of Dan" are
signified those who are in the good of faith, will be seen in what
follows.) From all this it is now evident that by, "I have called by
name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah," are
signified those who are in the good of love, with whom the church was to
be set up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10330.">10330.</span></span>

And I have filled him with the spirit of God. That this signifies influx
and enlightenment from the Divine truth which is from the Lord's Divine
good, is evident from the signification of "filling with the spirit of
God," as being influx and enlightenment from Divine truth; for
"filling," when said of Jehovah, denotes influx, and with man
enlightenment; and "the spirit of God" denotes the Divine truth which is
from the Lord's Divine good. The reason why "filling," when said of
Jehovah or the Lord, denotes influx, and with man enlightenment, is that
influx is predicated of all the good and of all the truth that come out
of heaven from the Lord; and as this influx enlightens man,
enlightenment is predicated of man. (That this Divine truth which
proceeds from the Lord's Divine good is signified by "the Spirit of
God," see in n. 9818.) \[2\] As few know how the case is with the influx
of Divine truth and with the consequent enlightenment with man,
something may here be said about this. That no good of love and no truth
of faith are from man, but that they are with him from heaven from the
Divine there, is known in the church; and also that those are in
enlightenment who receive this. But the influx and enlightenment are
effected in the following way. Man is of such a nature that in respect
to his interiors, which are of thought and will, he can look downward,
and he can look upward. To look downward is to look outward into the
world and to self, and to look upward is to look inward to heaven and to
God. Man looks outward from self, and this is called looking downward,
because when he does so from himself he looks to hell. But man looks
inward not from self, but from the Lord; and this is called looking
upward, because in respect to his interiors which are of the will and
understanding he is then raised by the Lord to heaven, and thus to the
Lord. Moreover, the interiors are actually raised, and are then actually
withdrawn from the body and from the world. When this is done, the
interiors of the man come actually into heaven, and into its light and
heat. From this he has influx and enlightenment, for the light of heaven
illumines his understanding, because this light is the Divine truth
which proceeds from the Lord as a Sun; and the heat of heaven enkindles
the will, because this heat is the good of love which at the same time
proceeds from the Lord as a Sun. As the man is then among the angels,
there is communicated to him from them, that is, through them from the
Lord, the understanding of truth and the affection of good. This
communication is what is called influx and enlightenment. \[3\] But be
it known that influx and enlightenment take place according to the
capability of reception on the part of man, and the capability of
reception is according to the love of what is good and true; and
therefore those are raised who are in the love of what is good and true
for the sake of what is good and true as ends; whereas those who are not
in the love of what is good and true for the sake of what is good and
true, but for the sake of self and the world, cannot be raised, because
they continually look and gravitate downward; thus they cannot receive
the Divine influx from heaven, and be enlightened. The intelligence
which with them appears like the intelligence of truth, is from a
deceptive light which, whether it is false or true, shines before their
eyes from things confirmed and consequently persuasive. But this
brightness becomes mere thick darkness when light from heaven flows in,
as has been shown me by living experience. From all this it can be seen
why it is that so many heresies arise in the world, namely, because
leaders and guides have looked to themselves and have had their own
glory as their end, and accordingly the things of the Lord and of heaven
as means to this end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10331.">10331.</span></span>

In wisdom, and in intelligence, and in knowledge, and in all work. That
this signifies in respect to those things which are of the will and
which are of the understanding in the internal and in the external man,
is evident from the signification of "wisdom," as being those things
which are of the will in the internal man; from the signification of
"intelligence," as being those things which are of the understanding in
the internal man; from the signification of "knowledge," as being those
things which are of the understanding and of the consequent speech in
the external man; and from the signification of "work," as being those
things which are of the will and of the consequent effect in the
external man. Thus by these words are signified all things of the man
who is in the good of celestial love, both interior and exterior, which
receive the influx of Divine truth from the Lord and from this are in
enlightenment (of which just above). \[2\] But it shall be briefly told
what is meant by "wisdom, intelligence, knowledge, and work." They who
do not know what the internal man is and what the external, and also
what the understanding is and what the will, cannot apprehend in what
manner wisdom, intelligence, knowledge, and work are distinct from one
another, for the reason that they cannot have a distinct idea of the one
and of the other. Wherefore they who have not this knowledge call him
wise who is only intelligent; nay, who merely has knowledge. But he is
wise who does truths from love; he is intelligent who does them from
faith; he has knowledge who does them from knowledge; and "work" denotes
that which is done from all these; thus "work" denotes their effect in
which they conjoin themselves together. \[3\] Wherefore in the genuine
sense no one can be called wise, nor intelligent, nor as possessing
knowledge, who does not do these things. For wisdom and intelligence and
knowledge are all of life, and not of doctrine without life; for the
life is the end for the sake of which these are. Such therefore as is
the end, such are the wisdom, the intelligence, and the knowledge. If
the end is genuine good, which is the good of love to the Lord and of
charity toward the neighbor, then there are wisdom, intelligence, and
knowledge in their proper sense; for then they are with the man from the
Lord. But if the end is for the sake of the good of the love of self and
of the world, they are not wisdom, intelligence, and knowledge, because
in this case they are with the man from himself. For the good of the
love of self and of the world as the end is evil, and of evil as the end
it is by no means possible to predicate anything of wisdom and of
intelligence, or even of knowledge; for what is knowledge unless there
is in it the intelligence of truth and the wisdom of good, seeing that
in this case it causes the man to think that what is evil is good, and
that what is false is true? \[4\] With those who are in the good of love
to the Lord, wisdom, intelligence, knowledge, and work, follow together
in order from inmost to outermost. With such men, wisdom is inmost, for
it is to will well from love; intelligence is second, for it is to
understand well from willing well. These two are of the internal man.
Knowledge consists in knowing well, and work in doing well, both from
willing well. These two are of the external man. From this it is evident
that wisdom must be in intelligence, intelligence in knowledge, and
knowledge in work. Thus work includes and brings to a conclusion all the
interior things, for it is the ultimate in which they close. \[5\] From
all this it can be seen what is meant by "works" and "deeds," which are
so often mentioned in the Word, as in the following passages: The Son of
man shall render unto everyone according to his deeds (Matt. 16:27). I
will recompense them according to their work, and according to the deed
of their hands (Jer. 25:14). Jehovah, whose eyes are open upon all the
ways of man, to give to everyone according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his works (Jer. 32:19). Return ye everyone from his evil
way, and make your works good (Jer. 35:15). I will visit upon him his
ways, and will recompense to him his works (Hos. 4:9). Jehovah doeth
with us according to our ways, and according to our works (Zech. 1:6). I
will give unto everyone of you according to your works (Rev. 2:23). They
were judged every man according to their works (Rev. 20:13, 15). Behold
I come quickly, and My reward is with Me, to give to every man according
to his works (Rev. 22:12). By "works" in these passages are meant all
things that are in man, because all the things of man that are in his
willing and understanding are in his works; for it is from these that he
does them. From this, works have their life; for without these, works
are like a shell without a kernel, or like a body without a soul. That
which proceeds from man proceeds from his interiors, consequently works
are the manifestations of these, and are the effects by which they
appear. \[6\] It is a general law that such as a man is, such is all his
work. For this reason it is that by the "works according to which there
will be reward and retribution," is meant the quality of the man in
respect to love and to faith, for the works are of the love and of the
faith with the man. (That man is nothing but his own love and his own
faith, or what is the same, his own good and his own truth, see n.
10076, 10177, 10264, 10284, 10298.) \[7\] Moreover, the very willing of
man is nothing but work, because that which anyone wills he does, unless
he is prevented by some irremovable obstacle. Therefore by being "judged
according to the deeds," denotes to be judged according to the will.
They who do good from willing good are called in the Word the
"righteous," as is evident in Matthew 25:37, 46. Of such it is said,
"They shall shine as the sun in heaven" (Matt. 13:43). And in Daniel:
They that be intelligent shall shine as the brightness of the expanse;
and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars (Dan. 12:3). "They
that turn many to righteousness" denotes those who from willing well do
what is good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10332.">10332.</span></span>

To think thoughts to make in gold, and in silver, and in brass. That
this signifies to represent in goods and truths, interior and exterior,
which are of the understanding from the will, thus which are of faith
from love, is evident from the signification of "thinking thoughts," or
of inventing inventions, as being that which proceeds from the
understanding (see n. 9598, 9688); from the signification of "making,"
as being that which proceeds from the will (n. 9282), for that which a
man makes proceeds from his will, here from his will through his
understanding, for it is said, "to think thoughts to make;" from the
signification of "gold," as being good, and of "silver," as being truth
(see n. 1551, 1552, 5658, 6914, 6917, 8932, 9490, 9874, 9881); and from
the signification of "brass," as being the good of the natural or
external man (n. 425, 1551). Consequently by "gold, silver, and brass"
are signified goods and truths interior and exterior; by "gold,"
interior good; by "silver," interior and exterior truth; and by "brass,"
external good. That it is a representative of these goods and truths
that is signified, is because the subject treated of is a representative
church, and all the things that Bezalel was to make were representative.
\[2\] From all this it is evident that by "thinking thoughts to make in
gold, and in silver, and in brass" is signified to represent goods and
truths interior and exterior which are of the understanding from the
will. That there are also signified the things which are of faith from
love, is because truths are of faith and bear relation to the
understanding, and goods are of love and bear relation to the will. It
is said "the understanding from the will, and faith from love," because
the understanding is not anything except from the will, for that which a
man understands and does not will, is not of the man's understanding,
but is of the understanding of another in himself, and therefore this
understanding perishes. It is otherwise with understanding from the
will, for this understanding is of the man himself, because the will is
the man himself. The case is similar with faith and love, for as before
said, the truths of faith bear relation to the understanding, and the
goods of love to the will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10333.">10333.</span></span>

And in graving of stone for filling. That this signifies to represent
all things of faith that are of service to the good of love, is evident
from the signification of the "graving of stone," as being a
representative of all things of faith from love; for by the "graving of
stone" is meant the graving of the stones in the breastplate, which were
the Urim and Thummim, and by which were represented all things of faith
and of love (n. 3858, 6335, 6640, 9823, 9863, 9865, 9868, 9873, 9905);
and from the signification of "filling," as being to be of service to
the good of love from which these things are; for the fillings therein
were made in gold, and by "gold" is signified the good of love (n. 1551,
1552, 5658, 6914, 6917, 8932, 9490, 9874, 9881).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10334.">10334.</span></span>

And in carving of wood, to do in all work. That this signifies to
represent all manner of good, is evident from the signification of the
"carving of wood," as being a representative of good (that "wood"
denotes good, see n. 643, 2784, 2812, 3720, 8354, 9472); and from the
signification of "all work," as being all manner of good. It is said
"all manner of good" because there are many genera and species of goods.
There is celestial good and there is spiritual good; there is good
interior and exterior, exterior good being natural and sensuous; there
is the good of innocence, the good of love, the good of faith. Good must
be in all truth in order that it may be truth. Moreover, the good with
man is formed by means of truths, consequently good is varied and
becomes manifold, so manifold indeed that no angel, no spirit, and no
man, is in like good with another. The universal heaven consists in
variety as to good, and by this variety one is distinguished from
another. For if a number had the same good, there would be no
distinction; but these various goods are so ordered by the Lord that
together they constitute one general good. Be it known that the Divine
good is one, because infinite (n. 10261); but that with angels, spirits,
and men, it is varied in quality and quantity by its reception in
truths; for truths qualify good, that is, give to good its quality; and
truths are manifold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10335.">10335.</span></span>

And I, behold I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of
the tribe of Dan. That this signifies those who are in the good and
truth of faith, with whom the church is to be established, is evident
from the representation of Aholiab, as being those who are in the good
and truth of faith. That these are represented by Aholiab is because he
was of the tribe of Dan, and by this tribe are signified those who are
in the good and truth of faith (see n. 3923, 6396). The reason why these
two, Bezalel of the tribe of Judah, and Aholiab of the tribe of Dan,
were chosen to do the works by which were to be represented Divine
celestial and spiritual things, was that by "Bezalel" are meant all who
are in the good of love, and by "Aholiab" all who are in the good and
truth of faith; thus by "Bezalel" are meant those who are in the inmost
things, and by "Aholiab" those who are in the outermost things, of
heaven and the church; and when the inmost and the outermost are
mentioned, all are understood who are in the universal heaven and in the
universal church (as may be seen above, n. 10329; and that when "first
and last" are mentioned, all things are understood, n. 10044). \[2\]
Moreover, the tribe of Judah was actually the first of the tribes, and
the tribe of Dan was the last of them. That the tribe of Judah was
actually the first of the tribes is evident from the blessing of his
sons by their father Israel, see Genesis 49, where Reuben, Simeon, and
Levi, who were the firstborn, are cursed, and Judah is blessed. (See
concerning Reuben, verses 3 and 4 of that chapter; concerning Simeon and
Levi, verses 5-7; and concerning Judah, verses 8-12.) (That Dan is the
last of the tribes, see at n. 1710, 3929, 6396.) Moreover, in the inmost
heaven are those who are in the good of love to the Lord, and in the
outermost heaven are those who are in the truth of faith from good.
\[3\] It is said "in the truth of faith from good," because the truth of
faith is not the truth of faith with anyone unless it is from good, for
truth is born from good; and therefore unless good is in truth, there is
no soul in it, thus no life. Those who are in truths of faith from good
are in the ultimates of heaven, but not those who are in truths of faith
without good: these are not in heaven. As the truth of faith ministers
to the good of love as what is last to what is first, therefore it is
said of Aholiab that "Jehovah hath given him with Bezalel," that is, to
serve him; and it is said of Bezalel that "Jehovah hath filled him with
the spirit of God in wisdom, and in intelligence, and in knowledge, and
in all work" (verse 3).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10336.">10336.</span></span>

And in the heart of everyone that is wise in heart I have put wisdom.
That this signifies all who will and do what is good and true for the
sake of what is good and true, is evident from the signification of
"heart," as being the inmost of man which is called his will; and as
that is of the will of man which is of his love, therefore by the
"heart" is also signified the love. (That the "heart" denotes the love,
see n. 3635, 3883-3896, 9050; and that it denotes the will, n. 2930,
3888, 7542, 8910, 9113, 9300, 9495.) And from the signification of "one
that is wise in heart," as being one who wills and loves what is good
and true for the sake of what is good and true; for it is the part of
one who is wise, and it is wisdom, to do truths from love (n. 10331);
and it is the part of one who is wise in heart, and it is wisdom of
heart, to do what is good from love; and from the signification of
"putting wisdom in the heart," as being to do these things from the
Lord, thus from the good of love, because the good of love is from the
Lord; for all such will and do what is good and true for the sake of
what is good and true, because good and the truth of good are the Lord
with them, inasmuch as the things which are from Him, thus which are
His, are also Himself. \[2\] For this reason it is said that the Lord is
good itself and truth itself. That the Lord is good itself is evident
from His own words: "Why callest thou Me good? None is good save one,
God" (Matt. 19:16, 17; Luke 18:18, 19); also where the goods of love and
of charity are recounted: "Insofar as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these My brethren, ye have done it unto Me" (Matt. 25:40).
(That those are called "brethren" who are in good, thus that goods are
so called, see n. 2360, 3803, 3815, 4121, 5409. Thus those are the
Lord's "brethren" who are in good from Him, n. 4191, 5686, 5692, 6756.)
And that the Lord is truth itself, is evident from these words: "Jesus
said, I am the way, the truth, and the life" (John 14:6); and in another
place: "When He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He shall lead you into
all truth; for He shall not speak from Himself. He shall take of Mine,
and shall declare it unto you" (John 16:13-15). From this it is evident
what is meant by "putting wisdom in the heart." \[3\] The like is also
meant by "writing the law upon the heart," in Jeremiah: I will put My
law in the midst of them, and I will write it on their hearts. Neither
shall they teach any longer a man his companion, or a man his brother,
saying, Know ye Jehovah; for they shall all know Me (Jer. 31:33, 34). To
"write the law upon the heart" denotes to impart Divine truth to the
will, thus to the love. When this is done, Divine truth is no longer
drawn out from the memory, but is perceived from the good of love
itself; and therefore it is said, "they shall teach no longer a man his
companion, or a man his brother, saying, Know ye Jehovah, for they shall
all know Me." (That such are the celestial angels, who are in the inmost
heaven, see at the places cited in n. 9277.) \[4\] What it is to will
and do what is good and true for the sake of what is good and true,
which is signified by "putting wisdom in the heart of everyone that is
wise in heart," shall be briefly told. All who love the Lord above all
things, and the neighbor as themselves, do what is good and true for the
sake of what is good and true; for good and truth are the Lord Himself,
as before said, and therefore when they love good and truth, that is,
when they will and do them from love, they love the Lord; and so also do
those who love the neighbor as themselves, because in the universal
sense the neighbor is good and truth; for the neighbor is one's fellow
citizen, it is society, it is our country, it is the church, and it is
the Lord's kingdom; and to love the neighbor is to will well to these,
that is, to will their good; and therefore it is their good which is to
be loved; and when this is loved, the Lord is loved, because this good
is from Him. \[5\] From this it is evident that love toward the
neighbor, which is called charity, has in itself love to the Lord. If
this love is not in it, then one's fellow citizen, society, our country,
the church, and the Lord's kingdom, are loved for the sake of self, and
thus are not loved from good, but from evil; for whatever is from man
for the sake of self as the end is from evil. To love the neighbor for
the sake of self is to love him for the sake of profit and honor as
ends. The end is what determines whether it is from good or from evil,
for the end is the love, because that which a man loves he has for his
end. The end is also the will, for that which a man wills he loves.
Consequently the end regarded, or the purpose, is the man himself; for a
man is such as is his will, and such as is his love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10337.">10337.</span></span>

And they shall make all that I have commanded thee. That this signifies
Divine truths from the Word that were to be represented in outward
things, is evident from the signification of "making all that I have
commanded," when said with respect to the Lord, as being according to
Divine truths, for Divine truths are called the commandments of the Lord
(see n. 9417); and from the representation of Moses, as being the Word
(n. 9372). That it denotes that were to be represented in outward
things, is because the things which they were about to make were
representative, and things representative are outward things in which as
in types internal things are presented to view. The representatives
which they were to make are enumerated in verses 7 to 11, which follow.
(What representatives are may be seen at the places cited in n. 9280,
also n. 9457, 9481, 9576, 9577, 10149, 10252, 10276.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10338.">10338.</span></span>

The Tent of meeting, and the ark for the Testimony. That this signifies
a representative of heaven in general where the Lord is, is evident from
the signification of "the Tent of meeting," and of "the ark," as being a
representative of heaven (see n. 9457, 9481, 9485, 9784). That it
denotes a representative of heaven in general, is because by the Tent of
meeting within the veil where was the ark, was represented the inmost or
third heaven (n. 9485); by the Tent of meeting outside the veil, the
middle or second heaven; and by the court, the ultimate heaven (n.
9741). And from the signification of "the Testimony," as being the Lord
as to Divine truth (n. 8535, 9503).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10339.">10339.</span></span>

And the propitiatory that is thereupon. That this signifies a
representative of the hearing and reception of all things of worship
which are from the good of love, is evident from the signification of
"the propitiatory that was above the ark," as being a representative of
all things of worship which are from the good of love (see n. 9506).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10340.">10340.</span></span>

And all the vessels of the Tent. That this signifies a representative of
all ministering goods and truths, is evident from the signification of
"the vessels of the Tent of meeting," as being goods and truths that are
of service to the heavens, thus which minister. Ministering goods and
truths are knowledges and memory-knowledges. (That these are signified
by "vessels" in general, see n. 3068, 3079, 9724.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10341.">10341.</span></span>

And the table and its vessels. That this signifies a representative of
spiritual good from celestial, is evident from the signification of "the
table upon which were the breads of faces," as being a representative of
celestial and spiritual good (see n. 9527, 9545, 9684, 9685); and from
the signification of its "vessels," as being things ministering (that
these are the knowledges of good and of truth, see n. 9544).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10342.">10342.</span></span>

And the pure lampstand and all its vessels. That this signifies a
representative of truth from this good, and things ministering, is
evident from the signification of "the lampstand with its lamps and
reeds," as being a representative of the spiritual heaven and of the
faith and intelligence from the Lord therein, thus of truth from good
(n. 9548, 9551, 9555, 9558, 9561); and from the signification of the
"vessels of the lampstand," as being things for purification and for
cleansing (n. 9572), thus things ministering.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10343.">10343.</span></span>

And the altar of incense. That this signifies a representative of
worship from these things, is evident from the signification of "the
altar of incense," as being a representative of all things of worship
which are from the good of love and of faith (see n. 10177).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10344.">10344.</span></span>

And the altar of burnt-offering and all its vessels. That this signifies
a representative of worship from the good of love and the truths
thereof, is evident from the signification of "the altar of
burnt-offering," as being a representative of the Lord and of the
worship of Him from the good of love (see n. 9714, 9964, 10123, 10151,
10242, 10245); and from the signification of "its vessels," as being
truths that are of service to good (see n. 9723, 9724).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10345.">10345.</span></span>

And the laver and its base. That this signifies a representative of
purification and of regeneration, and also the natural, is evident from
the signification of "washing," which was done by means of the water in
the laver, as being a representative of purification and regeneration
(n. 10237, 10239); from the signification of "the laver," as being the
natural of man (n. 10235); and from the signification of "its base," as
being the sensuous, which is the ultimate of the natural (n. 10236).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10346.">10346.</span></span>

And the garments of the ministry, and the garments of holiness for Aaron
the priest. That this signifies a representative of the Lord's spiritual
kingdom adjoined to His celestial kingdom, is evident from the
signification of "the garments of Aaron," as being a representative of
the Lord's spiritual kingdom adjoined to His celestial kingdom (see n.
9814).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10347.">10347.</span></span>

And the garments of his sons. That this signifies a representative of
lower spiritual things, is evident from the representation of the sons
of Aaron and their garments, as being a representative of lower
spiritual things (see n. 10068).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10348.">10348.</span></span>

To minister to Me in the priest's office. That this signifies a
representative of the Lord's work of salvation, is evident from the
signification of "the priesthood of Aaron and his sons," as being a
representative of the Lord's work of salvation (see n. 9809, 10017).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10349.">10349.</span></span>

And the oil of anointing. That this signifies a representative of the
Lord in respect to the Divine good of the Divine love in His Divine
Human, is evident from what has been shown above concerning anointing
and the oil of anointing (see n. 9954, 10011, 10019, 10261).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10350.">10350.</span></span>

And the incense of spices. That this signifies a representative of
worship from truths, is evident from the signification of "incense," as
being what is representative of worship (see n. 9475, 10198, 10298); and
from the signification of its "spices," as being truths and the
affections of them (n. 10291, 10295).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_226"></span>[10318-1](ac207.htm#fr_226) Here concerning the
Word. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10351-10400](ac208)
