[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac203)  [Next](ac205.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="10151.">10151.</span></span>

And the altar. That this signifies receptivity of the Divine from the
Lord in the higher heavens, is evident from the signification of
"sanctifying," as being receptivity of the Divine from the Lord (see
above, n. 10149); and from the signification of "the altar," as being a
representative of the Lord as to Divine good (n. 9964), here as to the
Divine good proceeding from Him in the heavens where it is received,
thus in the higher heavens, for there the Lord is received as to Divine
good; but in the lower heavens the Lord is received as to Divine truth
(as was shown just above, n. 10150). \[2\] Be it known that whatever
represented the Lord Himself also represented heaven, for the Divine
that proceeds from the Lord, when received by the angels, makes heaven.
Thus in respect to what is their own the angels themselves do not make
heaven; but in respect to the Divine which they receive from the Lord.
That this is so can be seen from the fact that each one of them there
acknowledges, believes, and also perceives, that there is nothing of
good from himself, but only from the Lord; and that whatever is from
himself is not good; thus wholly according to the doctrine of the
church, that all good comes from above. As this is so, it follows that
it is the Divine of the Lord which makes the heavenly life with them,
consequently heaven. From this it can be seen how it is to be understood
that the Lord is the all in all of heaven; also that the Lord dwells
there in His own; and likewise that by an "angel" in the Word is
signified something of the Lord (as has been shown in the preceding
pages throughout). \[3\] So it is with the church. In respect to what is
their own the men of the church do not make the church, but in respect
to what is Divine which they receive from the Lord; for everyone in the
church who does not acknowledge and believe that all the good of love
and the truth of faith are from God, is not of the church; for he wishes
to love God from himself, and to believe in God from himself, which,
however, no one can do. From this also it is evident that the Divine of
the Lord makes the church, as it makes heaven. Moreover, the church is
the Lord's heaven on earth; consequently the Lord is also the all in all
in the church, as He is in heaven, and there dwells in His own with men,
as He does with the angels in heaven. Moreover, after their life in the
world, the men of the church who in this way receive what is Divine of
the Lord in love and faith, become angels of heaven; and no others.
\[4\] That the Divine of the Lord makes His kingdom with man, that is,
heaven and the church with him, the Lord also teaches in John: The
Spirit of truth shall abide with you, and shall be in you, and ye shall
know that I am in My Father, and ye in Me, and I in you (John 14:17,
20). The "Spirit of truth" denotes the Divine truth that proceeds from
the Lord, of which it is said that it "shall abide in you;" and
afterward that "He is in the Father, and they in Him, and He in them,"
whereby is signified that they would be in what is Divine of the Lord,
and that what is Divine of the Lord should be in them. That the Divine
Human is that which is there meant is plain. And again in the same:
Abide in Me, and I in you; as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself,
except it abide in the vine; so neither can ye, except ye abide in Me;
He that abideth in Me, and I in him, the same beareth much fruit; for
without Me ye can do nothing (John 15:4, 5).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10152.">10152.</span></span>

And Aaron and his sons will I sanctify, to minister to Me in the
priest's office. That this signifies a representative of the Lord in
both heavens in respect to the work of salvation, is evident from the
representation of Aaron, as being the Lord as to celestial good (see n.
9806, 9946, 10068); and from the representation of the sons of Aaron, as
being the Lord as to spiritual good (n. 10017, 10068); thus in both
heavens, as well the higher as the lower, for whether you say celestial
good, or the celestial kingdom, or the higher heavens, it is the same.
(Concerning the higher and the lower heavens, see what was said just
above, n. 10150, 10151.) And from the representation of the priest's
office, as being the Lord's work of salvation (n. 9809, 10017). From
this it is evident that by "sanctifying Aaron and his sons to minister
to Jehovah in the priest's office" is signified a representative of the
Lord in both heavens in respect to the work of salvation. \[2\]
Something may here be said about the Lord's work of salvation. It is
known in the church that the Lord is the Savior and the Redeemer of the
human race, but it is known to few how this is to be understood. They
who are in the externals of the church believe that the Lord redeemed
the world, that is, the human race, by His own blood, by which they mean
the passion of the cross; but they who are in the internals of the
church know that no one is saved by the Lord's blood, but by a life
according to the precepts of faith and charity from the Lord's Word.
They who are in the inmosts of the church understand by the Lord's blood
the Divine truth proceeding from Him, and by the passion of the cross
they understand the last of the Lord's temptation, by which He
completely subjugated the hells and at the same time glorified His
Human, that is, made it Divine; and that thereby He redeemed and saved
all who suffer themselves to be regenerated by a life according to the
precepts of faith and of charity from His Word. Moreover, by "the Lord's
blood" in the internal sense, according to which the angels in the
heavens perceive the Word, is meant the Divine truth proceeding from the
Lord (n. 4735, 5476, 6978, 7317, 7326, 7850, 9127, 9393, 10026, 10033).
\[3\] But no one can know how man was saved and redeemed by the Divine
through the subjection of the hells and the glorification of His Human,
unless he knows that there are with every man angels from heaven and
spirits from hell, and that unless these are constantly present with
man, he cannot think anything, or will anything; and thus that in
respect to his interiors man is either under the dominion of spirits who
are from hell, or else is under the dominion of angels who are from
heaven. When this is first known, it can then be known that unless the
Lord had wholly subjugated the hells, and reduced all things both there
and in the heavens into order, no one could have been saved; nor
likewise unless the Lord had made His Human Divine, and had thereby
acquired for Himself to eternity Divine power over the hells and over
the heavens. For neither the hells nor the heavens can be kept in order
without Divine power, because the power by which anything comes forth
must be perpetual for it to subsist, for subsistence is a perpetual
coming forth. \[4\] The Divine Itself which is called "the Father,"
without the Divine Human which is called "the Son," could not effect
this, because the Divine Itself without the Divine Human cannot reach
man, nor even an angel, when the human race has altogether removed
itself from the Divine. This came to pass in the end of the times, when
there was no longer any faith or any charity; and therefore the Lord
then came into the world and restored all things, and this by virtue of
His Human; and thus saved and redeemed man through faith and love to the
Lord from the Lord; for such the Lord can withhold from the hells and
from eternal damnation, but not those who reject faith and love from Him
to Him, for these reject salvation and redemption. \[5\] That the Divine
Itself does this by means of the Divine Human is evident from many
passages in the Word, as from those in which the Divine Human, which is
the Son of God, is called the right hand and arm of Jehovah; and in
which it is said that the Lord has all power in the heavens and on
earth. (That the Lord is called the "right hand and arm of Jehovah," see
n. 10019; and that He has all power in the heavens and on earth, n.
10089.) That by virtue of the Divine Human the Lord subjugated the
hells, and reduced all things therein and in the heavens into order, and
at the same time glorified His Human, that is, made it Divine, see the
places cited in n. 9528, 9715, 9809, 9937, 10019; and that the Divine
Itself, which is called "the Father," effected this by means of the
Divine Human is evident in John: In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and God was the Word; all things were made by Him,
and without Him was not anything made that was made; and the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us (John 1:1-3, 14); it is evident that the
Lord as to the Divine Human is He who is here called "the Word," for it
is said, "the Word was made flesh." And again: No one hath seen God at
any time, the Only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He
hath set Him forth (John 1:18). Ye have neither heard the voice of the
Father at any time, nor seen His shape (John 5:37). I am the way, the
truth, and the life; no one cometh unto the Father, but by Me.
Henceforth ye have known the Father, and have seen Him. He that seeth Me
seeth the Father (John 14:6-7, 9). No one knoweth the Father save the
Son, and he to whom the Son shall will to reveal Him (Matt. 11:27). From
all this it can now be seen what the work of salvation and of redemption
is, and that it is effected by virtue of the Lord's Divine Human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10153.">10153.</span></span>

And I will dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel. That this signifies
the presence of the Lord, and His influx, through good in heaven and in
the church, is evident from the signification of "dwelling," when said
of the Lord, as being to be present and to flow in; that this is through
the Divine good is because "to dwell" is predicated of good (see n.
2268, 2451, 2712, 3613, 8269, 8309), wherefore also it is said, "in the
midst," because by "the midst" is signified the inmost, and the inmost
is good (that this is signified by "the midst," see n. 2940, 5897, 6084,
6103). And from the representation of the sons of Israel, as being the
church (see n. 9340). \[2\] That by "dwelling in the midst," when said
of the Lord, is signified His presence and influx through Divine good,
is because the Lord flows in and is present with a man in the man's good
which he receives from the Lord; for good makes the man himself, because
everyone is such as is his good. By good is meant love, for everything
that is loved is called good. Everyone who spies out another knows that
the love or good makes the man, for when he has spied him out he leads
him by his love wherever he wishes, in so much that while he is kept in
his love, he is no longer his own master, and then all reasons that are
contrary to his love are of no avail, whereas those which agree with the
love are of all avail. \[3\] That this is the case is also very evident
in the other life. There all spirits are known by their loves, and when
they are kept in them, they cannot do anything contrary to them, for to
act contrary to them is to act contrary to themselves. They are
therefore the forms of their loves; they who are in the heavens are
forms of charity and of heavenly love, of such beauty as cannot be
described; but they who are in the hells are forms of their loves, which
are those of self and of the world, consequently they are also forms of
hatred and revenge, thus are such monsters as cannot be described. \[4\]
As therefore the whole man is such as is his love, it is evident that
the Lord cannot be present with a man who is in an evil love, but only
with a man who is in a good love, thus in his good. It is believed that
the Lord is present in the truth which is called the truth of faith, but
He is not present in truth without good. But where good is, there the
Lord is present in the truth through the good, and He is present in the
truth insofar as it leads to good, and as it proceeds from good. Truth
without good cannot be said to be within a man, it being merely in his
memory as so much memory-knowledge, which does not enter the man and
form him until it becomes of the life; and it becomes of the life when
he loves it, and from love lives according to it. When this is the case,
then the Lord dwells with him, as He Himself also teaches in John: He
that hath My commandments, and doeth them, he it is that loveth Me, and
I will love him, and will manifest Myself to him, and My Father will
love him, and We will come unto him, and make Our abode with him (John
14:21, 23); "to manifest Himself" denotes to enlighten in the truths of
faith from the Word; "to come unto him" denotes to be present; and "to
make abode with him" denotes to dwell in his good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10154.">10154.</span></span>

And I will be to them for God. That this signifies the presence of the
Lord and His influx into the truth in the church, is evident from the
signification of "to be for God," as being the presence of the Lord and
His influx into truth. It is into truth, because in the Word of the Old
Testament the Lord is called "God" where truth is treated of, and
"Jehovah" where good is treated of. From this also it is that angels are
called "gods" by virtue of their reception of Divine truth from the
Lord. From this also it is that in the original tongue God is called
"Elohim" in the plural, for truths are many, but good is one (Matt.
19:16, 17). (That the Lord is called "God" where truth is treated of,
and "Jehovah" where good is treated of, see n. 2586, 2769, 2807, 2822,
3921, 4287, 4402, 7010, 9167; also that the angels are called "gods"
from the reception of Divine truth from the Lord, n. 4295, 4402, 7268,
7873, 8192, 8302, 8867, 8941; and that the Lord is "Jehovah" in the
Word, see the places cited in n. 9373.) That the Lord is called "the
Father from eternity," and also "God," is manifest in Isaiah: Unto us a
Child is born, unto us a Son is given; and the government shall be upon
His shoulder, and His name is called God, Hero, Father of Eternity,
Prince of Peace (Isa. 9:5). A virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and
His name shall be called Immanuel, which is, God with us (Isa. 7:14;
Matt. 1:23). That by "I will be to them for God" is here signified the
presence and influx of the Lord into truth, is evident also from the
fact that by "I will dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel" is
signified the presence of the Lord and His influx through good. For in
the Word where good is treated of, truth also is treated of, on account
of the heavenly marriage, which is that of good and truth, in every
detail of the Word (see the places cited in n. 9263, 9314).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10155.">10155.</span></span>

And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God. That this signifies the
perceptivity that from the Lord is all good and all truth, is evident
from the signification of "knowing," as being to understand, believe,
and perceive (of which below); that it denotes to perceive that from the
Lord is all good and all truth, is because it is said "Jehovah God," and
the Lord is called "Jehovah" from good, and "God" from truth (see n.
2586, 2769, 2807, 2822, 3921, 4287, 4402, 7010, 9167). That "to know"
denotes to understand, believe, and perceive, is because it is said both
of man's understanding, and of his will. When said of the understanding
only, it denotes to understand; when of the understanding and at the
same time of the will it denotes to believe; and when of the will only,
it denotes to perceive. With those therefore who are merely in the
memory-knowledge of a subject, and from this are in thought about it,
"to know" denotes to understand; but with those who are in faith, "to
know" denotes to believe; and with those who are in love, "to know"
denotes to perceive. \[2\] But when "to know" is conjoined with "to
understand," "to see," or "to believe," then "to know" denotes to
perceive, because understanding, seeing, and believing bear relation to
the understanding, consequently to truth, while "to perceive" bears
relation to the will, consequently to good, as in these passages: Peter
said, We have believed and have known that Thou art the Christ, the Son
of the living God (John 6:69). Jesus said, Believe the works, that ye
may know and believe that the Father is in Me, and I in the Father (John
10:38). Jesus said, If ye had known Me, ye would have known My Father
also; and from henceforth ye have known Him and have seen Him (John
14:7). The Spirit of truth shall be sent, whom the world cannot receive,
because it seeth Him not, neither knoweth Him; but ye know Him, for He
abideth with you, and shall be in you (John 14:16, 17). Jesus spoke in
parables, that seeing they may see, and not know (Mark 4:11, 12). That
ye may know and see that it is an evil thing and a bitter, to forsake
Jehovah thy God (Jer. 2:19). Let him that glorieth glory in this, to
understand and know Me, that I am Jehovah (Jer. 9:24). I will betroth
thee to Me in faith; and thou shalt know Jehovah (Hos. 2:20). \[3\] In
these passages "to know" denotes to perceive, and to perceive is from
good; whereas "to understand" and "to see" are from truth; for they who
are in good or in love perceive within themselves that a thing is so;
but they who are in truth or in faith, see within themselves. Therefore
they who are in the Lord's celestial kingdom have perception that a
thing is so; but they who are in the Lord's spiritual kingdom have faith
that it is so (see the places cited in n. 9277; and also in n. 9992,
9995, 10105; and as to what perception is, in n. 125, 371, 483, 495,
503, 521, 536, 597, 607, 1121, 1384, 1387, 1398, 1442, 1919, 2144, 2515,
2831, 3528, 5121, 5145, 5227, 7680, 7977, 8780). \[4\] As in the proper
sense "to know" signifies to perceive from good, therefore it is also
said, "it is known from the heart" (Deut. 8:5); for "from the heart"
denotes from the good of love (n. 3883-3896, 7542, 9050, 9300, 9495);
and therefore doing good is called "knowing Jehovah" (Jer. 22:16). From
this it is evident that by "they shall know that I am Jehovah their
God," is signified the perceptivity that all good and truth are from the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10156.">10156.</span></span>

Who have brought them out from the land of Egypt. That this signifies
salvation from hell by the Lord, is evident from the signification of
"being brought out from the land of Egypt," as being to be liberated
from hell (see n. 8866, 9197), thus to be saved. That by "the land of
Egypt" is signified hell, is because by that land in the genuine sense
is signified the natural and its memory-knowledge; and to be brought
forth from the natural man and its memory-knowledge, and to be raised
into the spiritual man and its intelligence and wisdom, is also to be
brought forth from hell. For man is born natural, but becomes spiritual
through regeneration; and if he does not become spiritual, he is in
hell; for the memory-knowledge of the natural man, that is, of a man not
regenerated, is in the light of the world; but the intelligence of the
spiritual man, that is, of the regenerate man, is in the light of
heaven. And so long as a man is only in the light of the world, he is in
hell; but when he is at the same time in the light of heaven, he is in
heaven. \[2\] Moreover, those who are solely in natural
memory-knowledge, and consequently in no other light than the light of
the world, cannot possibly believe the things which are of heaven; and
even if they wish to enter into them by means of their own light, which
is called natural light, they meet as it were a thick darkness, which
blinds them and makes what is heavenly appear as nothing; for that which
appears in the mind like thick darkness is tantamount to nothing. Hence
it is that the merely natural man, no matter how much he believes
himself to surpass others in light, at heart denies Divine and heavenly
things; which also is the reason why so many of the learned reduce
themselves by their knowledges to such insanity; for many of them deny
the things that belong to the faith of the church and of heaven more
than the simple do. It is otherwise with those who suffer themselves to
be raised by the Lord into the light of heaven; for these are first
raised above the memory-knowledges that belong to the natural man; and
then from the light of heaven they see the things which are in their
natural man and are called memory-knowledges, and well discriminate
among them, adopting those they comprehend and which are congruent, and
rejecting or laying aside those they do not comprehend and which are
incongruent. In a word, the case herein is this. \[3\] So long as a man
is merely natural, so long his interiors, which see from the light of
heaven, are closed; and the exteriors, which see from the light of the
world, are open; and then the man looks downward, that is, into the
world and to himself, for all the things that belong to his will and
thought converge thither; and wherever the man looks, there his heart
turns, that is, his will and his love. But when a man becomes spiritual,
then his interiors, which see from the light of heaven, are opened, and
then the man looks upward, which is effected by means of an uplifting by
the Lord; thus he looks into heaven and to the Lord. Thither also are
raised all things that belong to his will and his thought; thus his
heart, that is, his love. \[4\] For man has been so created that in
respect to his internal he is formed according to the image of heaven,
and in respect to his external according to the image of the world (n.
6057, 9279), to the end that heaven and the world may be conjoined in
man, and that thus through man the Lord can inflow out of heaven into
the world, and can direct the world; in particular with each one, and in
general with all; and thus can conjoin the two, and thereby cause that
in the world also there may be an image of heaven. But when a man cares
solely for the world, heaven is closed with him; whereas when he suffers
himself to be raised by the Lord, then heaven is opened with him, and
the world is subjected to him. And when this is the case, hell is
separated and removed from him; and then for the first time the man
knows what good is and what evil is; but not before. This is what is
called "the image of God" with man (Gen. 1:27, 28). \[5\] These things
have been said that it may be known what the spiritual man is, and what
the natural man, and that unless the merely natural man is made
spiritual by the Lord, he is hell; consequently that it may be known why
by "Egypt" is signified hell, seeing that by it is also signified the
natural and its memory-knowledge. (That memory-knowledge is signified by
"Egypt," see the places cited in n. 9340; and that from this it
signifies the natural, n. 9391; and also hell, n. 8866, 9197.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10157.">10157.</span></span>

That I may dwell in the midst of them. That this signifies the Divine of
the Lord, that it is the all in all of heaven and the church, is evident
from the signification of "dwelling in the midst of the sons of Israel,"
when said of Jehovah, as being the presence of the Lord, and His influx
through good in heaven and in the church (see n. 10153); and as His
presence is there, His Divine is likewise the all in all there, for the
Lord is not present with the angels of heaven, and with the men of the
church, in their own; but in His own with them, thus in what is Divine,
according to what was shown above (n. 10151). And when the Lord is
present in His own Divine in the heavens and in the church, He is
likewise all in all there; hence He is heaven itself; and hence also it
is that the whole heaven hears relation to the Lord, in respect to His
Divine Human; and that heaven in the complex is a man, which is called
the Grand Man (of which much has been said at the end of many chapters,
see the places cited in n. 9276, end, 10030, end); and hence also it is
that by "man" in the Word is signified the church, and likewise heaven
(n. 478, 768, 3636); and that those who are in heaven, and truly in the
church, are said to be "in the Lord" (n. 3637, 3638) when they are in
the good of love and in the truth of faith to Him from Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10158.">10158.</span></span>

I am Jehovah their God. That this signifies from which are all the good
of love and the truth of faith, is evident from the fact that "Jehovah"
denotes the Divine being, and the Divine being is the Divine love, thus
Divine good; and that "God" denotes the Divine coming-forth, and the
Divine coming-forth is the Divine of faith, thus Divine truth. For all
truth comes forth from good, truth being the form of good. From all this
it is evident that when the Lord is called "Jehovah God," there is meant
all the good of love and the truth of faith; and when Jehovah God is
said to be "in the midst of the sons of Israel," there is meant the
perceptivity that from the Lord is all the good which is of love, and
the truth which is of faith (as above, n. 10155).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10159.">10159.</span></span>

CONTINUATION ABOUT THE SECOND EARTH IN THE STARRY HEAVEN. As I have
spoken with the spirits of that earth about the invisible and visible
God, I may mention that almost all in the universe worship God under a
visible form, and in fact in their idea under the human form, and that
this is implanted in them. It is by virtue of influx from heaven that it
is implanted in them, for wonderful to say the angels who are raised up
in the sphere of the third heaven, come into a plain perception about
this subject. The reason is that all in that heaven are in the love of
the Lord, and from this are as it were in the Lord, and because all
perception, such as belongs to the angels there, is from the order and
influx of heaven; for heaven in its whole complex bears relation to a
man, as can be seen from what has been shown about heaven as the Grand
Man, at the end of many chapters (see the places cited in n. 10030).
That heaven in its whole complex bears relation to a man, is from the
Divine Human of the Lord; for from this the Lord flows into heaven,
makes it, and forms it according to His own likeness. But this secret
can with difficulty be comprehended by those who through their own
intelligence have extirpated in themselves this implanted idea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10160.">10160.</span></span>

The question was asked, whether in their earth they live under the
commands of chiefs or kings; to which they replied that they do not know
what commands are, and that they live under themselves, distinguished
into nations, families, and households. It was further asked whether in
this way they are safe. They said that they are safe, because one family
never envies another, nor wishes to take away anything from it. They
were indignant at being asked such questions; as though it involved a
charge of hostility, and of some need of protection against robbers.
"What more do men need," said they, "than to have food and clothing, and
thus to dwell content and quiet under themselves?" \[2\] It was
perceived from the most ancient people who were from our earth that they
had so lived in their time, and that they then knew not what it was to
exercise command over others from the love of self, and from the love of
the world to heap up wealth beyond what is necessary; and that they then
had inward peace, and at the same time outward peace, and from this
heaven among men. Those times were therefore called by ancient writers
the Golden Age, and they were described by saying that the people did
what was just and right from the law written on their hearts. \[3\] The
state of life of those times is described in the Word by "dwelling under
themselves safely and alone without gates and bars" (Ezek. 38:11). And
as their habitations were tents, therefore in memory of this a tent was
erected which was for a house of God, and afterward the feast of tents
was instituted, in which they were glad from the heart. And as they who
lived in this way were free from the insane love of exercising command
for the sake of themselves, and of gaining the world for the sake of the
world, therefore heaven then let itself down to them, and the Lord was
seen by many in a human form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10161.">10161.</span></span>

Being questioned about their earth, they said that they have meadows,
beds of flowers, groves full of fruit trees; lakes in which there are
fish; birds of a sky-blue color with golden feathers; and animals larger
and smaller. Among the smaller animals they mentioned some which have a
humped back, like that of camels on our earth. Nevertheless they do not
feed on their flesh, but only on the flesh of fishes, and also on the
fruits of trees, and on vegetables. They said further that they do not
dwell in built houses, but in groves, in which amid the foliage they
make for themselves roofs as a protection against rain and the heat of
the sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10162.">10162.</span></span>

Being asked about their sun, which is seen as a star from our earth,
they said that it is of a fiery color, in appearance no larger than a
man's head. I was told by angels that the star which is their sun is
among the lesser stars, not far from the celestial equator.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10163.">10163.</span></span>

Spirits were seen like what they had been when they were men on their
earth. Their faces are not unlike the faces of the men of our earth,
except that their eyes are small, and also their noses. As this appeared
to me somewhat of a deformity, they said that to them small eyes and
noses are beautiful. A woman was seen clad in a mantle on which were
roses of various colors. When I asked how they procure their garments on
that earth, they replied that they gather from plants such things as
they can entwine into threads, and that after laying the threads
straight they place them together in double and triple rows, and moisten
them with a glutinous fluid, and in this way they induce a consistency,
and afterward color this fabric with the juices of plants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10164.">10164.</span></span>

It was also shown how they make the threads. The women sit half
reclining on a seat, and twist them with their toes, and when they are
twisted they draw them toward them, and work them with their hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10165.">10165.</span></span>

They also said that on that earth a husband has one wife, and no more;
and that they procreate children there to the number of from ten to
fifteen. They added that harlots are also found there, but that after
the life of the body, when they become spirits, these are sorceresses
and are cast into hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10166.">10166.</span></span>

Of the third earth in the starry heaven mention will be made at the end
of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10167.">10167.</span></span>

CHAPTER THE THIRTIETH THE DOCTRINE OF CHARITY AND FAITH <span
id="fr_222"></span>[10167-1](#fn_222.md) Few know from what origin comes
forth conjugial love. They who think from the world believe that it
comes forth from nature; but they who think from heaven believe that it
comes forth from the Divine in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10168.">10168.</span></span>

Love truly conjugial is the union of two minds, which is a spiritual
union; and all spiritual union descends from heaven. From this it is
that love truly conjugial is from heaven, and that its first being is
from the marriage of good and truth there. The marriage of good and
truth in heaven is from the Lord; wherefore in the Word the Lord is
called the "Bridegroom" and "Husband," while heaven and the church are
called the "bride" and "wife;" and therefore heaven is compared to a
marriage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10169.">10169.</span></span>

From all this it is evident that love truly conjugial is the union of
two persons in respect to their interiors, which belong to the thought
and the will, thus to truth and good; for truth belongs to the thought,
and good to the will. For one who is in love truly conjugial loves what
the other thinks and what the other wills; thus he also loves to think
as the other does, and he loves to will as the other does; consequently
to be united to the other, and to become as one man. This is what is
meant by the Lord's words in Matthew: "And they twain shall be one
flesh, therefore they are no more twain, but one flesh" (Matt. 19:4-6;
Gen. 2:24).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10170.">10170.</span></span>

The delight of love truly conjugial is an internal delight, because it
belongs to the minds, and is also an external delight from this, which
belongs to the bodies. But the delight of love not truly conjugial is
only an external delight without an internal one, and such a delight
belongs to the bodies and not to the minds. But this delight is earthly,
being almost like that of animals, and therefore in time perishes;
whereas the first-mentioned delight is heavenly, as that of men should
be, and therefore is permanent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10171.">10171.</span></span>

No one can know what love truly conjugial is, and what is the nature of
its delight, except one who is in the good of love and in the truths of
faith from the Lord; because, as has been said, love truly conjugial is
from heaven, and is from the marriage of good and truth there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10172.">10172.</span></span>

From the marriage of good and truth in heaven and in the church we can
learn what must be the nature of marriages on earth, namely, that they
must be between two, one husband and one wife, and that love truly
conjugial is never possible if there are a number of wives to one
husband.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10173.">10173.</span></span>

That which is done from love truly conjugial is done from freedom on
both sides, because all freedom is from love, and both have freedom when
one loves that which the other thinks and that which the other wills.
From this it is that the wish to command in marriages destroys genuine
love, for it takes away its freedom, thus also its delight. The delight
of commanding, which follows in its place, brings forth disagreements,
and sets the minds at enmity, and causes evils to take root according to
the nature of the domination on the one side, and the nature of the
servitude on the other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10174.">10174.</span></span>

From all this it can be seen that marriages are holy, and that to injure
them is to injure that which is holy; consequently that adulteries are
profane; for as the delight of conjugial love descends from heaven, so
the delight of adultery ascends from hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10175.">10175.</span></span>

Therefore those who take delight in adulteries can no longer receive any
good and truth from heaven. From this it is that those who have taken
delight in adulteries, afterward make light of and also at heart deny
the things of the church and of heaven. The reason of this is that the
love of adultery is from the marriage of evil and falsity, which is the
infernal marriage. EXODUS 30 1. And thou shalt make an altar for the
burning of incense; of shittim wood shalt thou make it. 2. A cubit the
length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shall it be;
and two cubits the height thereof; out of it shall be its horns. 3. And
thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, its roof and its walls round
about, and its horns; and thou shalt make for it a border of gold round
about. 4. And thou shalt make for it two rings of gold from under its
border, upon its two ribs; upon its two sides shalt thou make them; and
it shall be for receptacles for the staves, to carry it in them. 5. And
thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and shalt overlay them with
gold. 6. And thou shalt put it before the veil that is over the ark of
the Testimony, before the propitiatory that is over the Testimony,
whither I will come to meet thee. 7. And Aaron shall burn thereon
incense of spices morning by morning; in dressing the lamps he shall
burn it. 8. And when Aaron maketh the lamps to go up between the
evenings, he shall burn it, a continual incense before Jehovah to your
generations. 9. Ye shall not make strange incense go up upon it, nor a
burnt-offering, nor a meat-offering; and ye shall pour no drink-offering
upon it. 10. And Aaron shall make expiation upon the horns of it once in
the year, from the blood of the sin-offering of expiations; once in the
year he shall make expiation upon it to your generations; a holy of
holies is this to Jehovah. 11. And Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying, 12.
When thou shalt take up the sum of the sons of Israel, as to those who
are numbered of them, then they shall give everyone an expiation of his
soul to Jehovah in numbering them, that there be no plague in them in
numbering them. 13. This they shall give, everyone that passeth over
upon those who are numbered, half a shekel, in the shekel of holiness, a
shekel of twenty gerahs, the half of a shekel an uplifting to Jehovah.
14. Everyone that passeth over upon those who are numbered, from a son
of twenty years and upward, shall give an uplifting to Jehovah. 15. The
rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less, from the
half of the shekel, to give an uplifting to Jehovah, to make expiation
upon your souls. 16. And thou shalt take the silver of expiations from
among the sons of Israel, and thou shalt give it for the work of the
Tent of meeting; and it shall be to the sons of Israel for a memorial
before Jehovah, to make expiation upon your souls. 17. And Jehovah spoke
unto Moses, saying, 18. And thou shalt make a laver of brass, and its
base of brass, for washing; and thou shalt put it between the Tent of
meeting and the altar, and thou shalt put waters therein. 19. And Aaron
and his sons shall wash from it their hands and their feet. 20. When
they enter into the Tent of meeting they shall wash with waters, that
they die not; or when they come near unto the altar to minister, to burn
a fire-offering to Jehovah. 21. And they shall wash their hands and
their feet, that they die not; and it shall be to them a statute of an
age, to him and to his seed, to their generations. 22. And Jehovah spoke
unto Moses, saying, 23. And do thou take to thee chief spices, best
myrrh five hundred, and aromatic cinnamon the half thereof, two hundred
and fifty, and aromatic calamus two hundred and fifty; 24. And cassia
five hundred, in the shekel of holiness; and oil of olive a hin. 25. And
thou shalt make it an oil of anointing of holiness, an ointment of
ointment, the work of a perfumer, it shall be an oil of anointing of
holiness. 26. And thou shalt anoint with it the Tent of meeting, and the
ark of the Testimony: 27. And the table and all the vessels thereof, and
the lampstand and the vessels thereof, and the altar of incense; 28. And
the altar of burnt-offering and all the vessels thereof, and the laver
and its base. 29. And thou shalt sanctify them, and they shall be a holy
of holies; whosoever toucheth them shall be made holy. 30. And thou
shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and shalt sanctify them, to minister to
Me in the priest's office. 31. And thou shalt speak unto the sons of
Israel, saying, This shall be to Me an oil of anointing of holiness to
your generations. 32. Upon the flesh of man shall it not be poured; and
in the quality thereof ye shall not make any like it; holy is this; holy
shall it be to you. 33. The man who shall make ointment like it, and who
shall put of it upon a stranger, even he shall be cut off from his
peoples. 34. And Jehovah said unto Moses, Take to thee fragrant spices,
stacte, and onycha, and galbanum, things fragrant, and pure
frankincense, so much in so much shall it be. 35. And thou shalt make it
incense, an ointment the work of a perfumer, salted, pure, holy. 36. And
thou shalt bruise of it small, and shalt put it before the Testimony in
the Tent of meeting, whither I will come to meet thee, a holy of holies
shall it be to you. 37. And the incense which thou makest in its
quality, ye shall not make for yourselves; holy to Jehovah shall it be
to thee. 38. The man who shall make like unto it, to make an odor with
it, even he shall be cut off from his peoples. 10175a. THE CONTENTS. The
subjects treated of in this chapter are the altar of incense; the
expiation of everyone by means of silver; the laver and the washing from
it; and the preparation of the oil of anointing, and of the incense. In
the internal sense by "burning incense" is signified the hearing and
reception by the Lord of all things of the worship which is from love
and charity; by "the expiation of everyone by means of silver," is
signified the ascription of all things of worship to the Lord, and
nothing to self, that no one may have merit. By "the laver and the
washing" is signified purification from evils first in all worship. By
"the preparation of the oil of anointing" is signified the quality of
the love in worship; and by "the preparation of the incense," the
quality of the worship from it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10176.">10176.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE. Verses 1-10. And thou shalt make an altar for the
burning of incense; of shittim wood shalt thou make it. A cubit the
length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; four square shall it
be; and two cubits the height thereof; out of it shall be its horns. And
thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, its roof and its walls round
about, and its horns; and thou shalt make for it a border of gold round
about. And thou shalt make for it two rings of gold from under its
border, upon its two ribs; upon its two sides shalt thou make them; and
it shall be for receptacles for the staves, to carry it in them. And
thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and shalt overlay them with
gold. And thou shalt put it before the veil that is over the ark of the
Testimony, before the propitiatory that is over the Testimony, whither I
will come to meet thee. And Aaron shall burn thereon incense of spices
morning by morning, in dressing the lamps he shall burn it. And when
Aaron maketh the lamps to go up between the evenings, he shall burn it,
a continual incense before Jehovah to your generations. Ye shall not
make strange incense go up upon it, nor a burnt-offering, nor a
meat-offering; and ye shall pour no drink-offering upon it. And Aaron
shall make expiation upon the horns of it once in the year, from the
blood of the sin-offering of expiations; once in the year he shall make
expiation upon it to your generations; a Holy of holies is this to
Jehovah. "And thou shalt make an altar for the burning of incense"
signifies a representative of the grateful hearing and reception by the
Lord of all things of worship which are from love and charity; "of
shittim wood shalt thou make it" signifies from love Divine; "a cubit
the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof" signifies equally
from good and from truth; "foursquare shall it be" signifies thus
perfect; "and two cubits the height thereof" signifies the degrees of
good and of truth, and their conjunction; "out of it shall be its horns"
signifies the powers of truth from the good of love and of charity; "and
thou shalt overlay it with pure gold" signifies a representative of all
things of worship from good; "its roof" signifies the inmost; "and its
walls round about" signifies the interiors; "and its horns" signifies
the exteriors; "and thou shalt make for it a border of gold round about"
signifies a bounding from good lest they be approached and injured by
evils; "and thou shalt make for it two rings of gold from under its
border" signifies the sphere of Divine good, through which are
conjunction and preservation; "upon its two ribs" signifies with truths
on the one side; "upon its two sides shalt thou make them" signifies
with good on the other side; "and it shall be for receptacles for the
staves" signifies the power of truth from good there; "to carry it in
them" signifies its consequent preservation in its state; "and thou
shalt make the staves of shittim wood" signifies power from the good of
the Lord's love; "and shalt overlay them with gold" signifies the
foundation of all things upon good; "and shalt put it before the veil
that is over the ark of the Testimony" signifies in the interior heaven
where it is conjoined with the inmost heaven; "before the propitiatory
that is over the Testimony" signifies where there is the hearing and
reception by the Lord of all things of worship from the good of love;
"whither I will come to meet thee" signifies in this way the presence
and influx of the Lord; "and Aaron shall burn thereon" signifies the
uplifting by the Lord of worship from love and charity; "incense of
spices" signifies grateful hearing and reception; "morning by morning"
signifies when the state of love is in clearness; "in dressing the lamps
he shall burn it" signifies when truth also comes into its light; "and
when Aaron maketh the lamps to go up between the evenings, he shall burn
it" signifies an uplifting also in an obscure state of love when truth
also is in its shade; "a continual incense before Jehovah" signifies in
all worship from love from the Lord; "to your generations" signifies to
eternity with those who are in faith from love; "ye shall not make
strange incense go up upon it" signifies no worship from any other love
than the love of the Lord; "nor a burnt-offering, nor a meat-offering"
signifies no representative there of regeneration through the truths and
goods of celestial love; "and ye shall pour no drink-offering upon it"
signifies no representative there of regeneration through the truths and
goods of spiritual love; "and Aaron shall make expiation upon the horns
of it" signifies purification from evils through the truths of faith
which are from the good of love; "once in the year" signifies
perpetually; "from the blood of the sin-offering of expiations"
signifies through the truths which are from the good of innocence; "once
in the year he shall make expiation upon it" signifies the perpetual
removal of evils; "to your generations" signifies those of the church
who are in the truths and goods of faith; "a Holy of holies is this to
Jehovah" signifies because from the Divine celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10177.">10177.</span></span>

And thou shalt make an altar for the burning of incense. That this
signifies a representative of the grateful hearing and reception by the
Lord of all things of worship from love and charity, is evident from the
signification of the "altar for burning incense," as being a
representative of such things of worship as are uplifted to the Lord;
that these are from love and charity will be plain in what follows. By
the "altar" is signified the same as by that which is upon it, because
the altar is the containant, and that which is upon it is the thing
contained; and the containant and the thing contained make a one; as do
a table and the bread which is upon it; and a cup and the wine which is
in it. \[2\] The reason why an altar was made for burning incense, and
not a table, was because among the Israelitish nation altars were the
principal representatives of worship from love, for there was fire upon
them, and by "fire" is signified love and charity, from which is the
worship. (That altars were the principal representatives of worship, see
n. 4192, 4541, 8623, 8935, 8940, 9714.) \[3\] That the altar of incense
represented the hearing and reception of all things of the worship which
is from love and charity, was because by smoke, and consequently by
fumigation, was signified that which is lifted on high; and by the odor
of the smoke was signified that which is grateful, consequently that
which is heard and received by the Lord; and that alone is grateful, and
is received by the Lord, which is from love and charity; and for this
reason that altar was covered over with gold, and was called "the golden
altar," because "gold" signifies the good of love and of charity (see
the places cited in n. 9874, 9881). \[4\] The reason why that alone is
grateful, and is therefore heard and received by the Lord, which is from
love and charity, is because love makes the whole man, for every man is
such as is his love. From this it is that the angels in the heavens are
loves and charities in form; the very form they have is from this the
human form, because in respect to the Divine Human, the Lord, who is in
them and forms them, is the Divine love itself. From this it is that
their quality in respect to love is clearly perceived from their faces,
their speech, their gestures, and especially from the spheres of the
affections which flow forth from them to a distance. \[5\] And because
love to the Lord and charity toward the neighbor are from the Lord, and
because love is spiritual conjunction, therefore whatever proceeds from
this source is heard and received by the Lord. Whereas the holiness and
piety that are not from this source are indeed heard, but are not
gratefully received, for they are a hypocritical holiness and piety,
because they are a mere external without an internal; and a holy
external without an internal penetrates no further than to the first
threshold of heaven, and is there dispersed. Whereas a holy external
from a holy internal penetrates even into heaven, according to the
quality of the internal, thus to the Lord. For a holy external without
an internal is merely from the mouth and the gestures, whereas a holy
external from an internal is at the same time from the heart.
(Concerning the latter and the former holiness, see what was said and
shown in n. 8252-8257.) \[6\] In the Tent without the veil was the table
on which were the breads of faces, also the lampstand with the lamps,
and the altar of incense; by the breads of faces was represented love to
the Lord; by the lamps of the lampstand, charity and faith; and by the
incense upon the altar, the worship from these, and therefore it was
burned every morning and every evening when the lamps were prepared.
From this also it is evident that by "burning incense" was represented
the worship of the Lord from love and charity; and by the Tent itself in
which it took place, was represented heaven, where all worship is of
this nature. (That the breads represented celestial good, which is the
good of love to the Lord, see n. 9545; that the lampstand represented
spiritual good, which is the good of charity toward the neighbor and the
good of faith, n. 9548-9561; and that the Tent represented heaven, n.
9457, 9481, 9485, 9784, 9963.) \[7\] When worship is spoken of, that
holiness is meant which is effected by means of prayers, adorations,
confessions, and the like, that proceed from the internals which are of
love and charity. These are the acts of worship which are meant by
"burning incense," as can be seen from the following passages: Accepted
are my prayers as incense before Thee (Ps. 141:2). The four animals, and
the twenty-four elders, fell down before the Lamb, having everyone
harps, and golden vials full of incensings, which are the prayers of the
saints (Rev. 5:8). An angel came having a golden censer, and there were
given unto him many incensings, that he should offer them with the
prayers of all the saints upon the golden altar that was before the
throne. And the smoke of the incensings went up from the prayers of the
saints (Rev. 8:3, 4). \[8\] As by "incense" was signified worship and
its elevation, thus hearing and reception by the Lord, therefore it was
commanded by Moses that "they should take incense boxes with
frankincense and burn it before Jehovah, that from this they might know
whom Jehovah would choose, thus whom He would hear" (Num. 16:1, and
following verses); and when the people murmured, "Aaron ran into the
midst of the congregation with incense, when the plague had begun, and
thus stayed it" (Num. 16:44-49). In Malachi: From the rising of the sun
even unto its going down, the name of Jehovah shall be great among the
nations, and in every place incense shall be offered to My name, and a
clean meat-offering (Mal. 1:11); "a clean meat-offering" is added,
because by it is signified the good of love (n. 10137). In Moses: The
sons of Levi shall teach Jacob Thy judgments, and Israel Thy law; they
shall put incense in Thy nose, and a burnt-offering upon Thine altar
(Deut. 33:10); it is said, "shall put incense in Thy nose" because by
the "nostrils" is signified perception (n. 4624-4634); a
"burnt-offering" is here added because by it also is signified that
which is from the good of love. \[9\] But in the opposite sense by
"burning incense" is signified worship from contrary loves, which are
the loves of self and of the world; as by "burning incense to other
gods" (Jer. 1:16; 44:3, 5); by "burning incense to idols" (Ezek. 8:11;
16:18); and by "burning incense to the baals" (Hosea 2:13). \[10\] As
the "burnings of incense" signified such things as are raised upward and
are accepted by the Divine, therefore they were employed by the Gentiles
also in their religious ceremonials. That frankincense, censers, and
incense boxes were in use among the Romans and among other nations is
known from history. A religious ceremonial of this kind was derived from
the Ancient Church, which was spread through many regions of Asia; as
through Syria, Arabia, Babylon, Egypt, and Canaan. This church had been
a representative church, thus consisting in external things that
represented internal ones, which are celestial and spiritual; and from
this church many religious ceremonials were carried over to the nations
round about, and among these the burning of incense, and from them
through Greece into Italy; and in like manner the perpetual fires, for
guarding which chaste virgins were appointed, whom they called vestals.
vestals. \[11\] The offerings of incense in the Ancient Church, and from
this in the Israelitish, were prepared from fragrant substances, such as
stacte, onycha, galbanum, and frankincense; for the reason that odor
signified perception, and a fragrant odor a grateful perception (n. 925,
1514, 1517-1519, 3577, 4624-4634, 4748, 10054). But frankincense in
particular signifies the truth of faith, and therefore when
"frankincense" is mentioned in the Word, there is joined with it "oil,"
"bread," a "meat-offering," or "gold," by all of which is signified the
good of love; as in Isaiah: All they from Sheba shall come, they shall
bring gold and frankincense, and shall proclaim the praises of Jehovah
(Isa. 60:6). In like manner those who came from the east, of whom it is
written in Matthew, There came wise men from the east, seeking the Lord
just then born, and opening their treasures they offered gold,
frankincense, and myrrh (Matt. 2:1, 2, 11). (That those who were from
the east and were called "sons of the east," in the Word signify those
who were in the knowledges of good and truth, see n. 3249, 3762; in like
manner "Sheba," n. 1171, 3240; that "gold" signifies the good of love,
see the places cited in n. 9874, 9881.) \[12\] In Jeremiah: They shall
bring a burnt-offering and sacrifice, and a meat-offering and
frankincense (Jer. 17:26). By "a meat-offering" is likewise signified
the good of love (n. 9992, 10137). From this it is evident that by
"frankincense" in the Word is signified the truth which is of faith; for
in the Word, where good is spoken of, truth also is spoken of, on
account of the heavenly marriage which is that of good and truth in
every detail therein (see the places cited in n. 9263, 9314). For this
reason also "upon the meat-offering there was oil, and also
frankincense" (Lev. 2:1, 2, 15); but not upon the meat-offering which
was for sin (Lev. 5:11); nor upon the meat-offering of jealousy (Num.
5:15). The reason why there was no oil or frankincense on these
meat-offerings, was because they were given as an expiation from evils,
and so long as a man is in expiation he cannot receive the good of love
and the truth of faith, because the evils stand in the way; but it is
otherwise after expiation, or the removal of the evils. \[13\] As the
good of love is not possible except together with the truth of faith
(for good produces truth, and in truth procures for itself its quality,
and forms itself), therefore it was that "upon every meat-offering there
was frankincense," and also "upon the breads of faces" which were upon
the table in the Tent of meeting (Lev. 24:7); for "breads" signified the
good of love (n. 3478, 3813, 4211, 4217, 4735, 4976, 8410, 9323, 9545,
10040, 10137).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10178.">10178.</span></span>

Of shittim wood shalt thou make it. That this signifies from love
Divine, is evident from the signification of "shittim wood," as being
the good of merit and of righteousness that belongs to the Lord alone
(see n. 9472, 9486, 9715); that it also signifies love, is because when
the Lord was in the world, He from Divine love fought against all the
hells and subjugated them, and thereby saved the human race, and hence
alone had merit and was made righteousness (n. 9486, 9715, 9809, 10019,
10152). Therefore the good of the Lord's merit is His Divine love. That
"shittim wood" has such and so great a signification is because all
things which are in the threefold kingdom of the earth, animal,
vegetable, and mineral, signify spiritual and celestial things, and also
their opposites; for all nature is a theater representative of the
Lord's kingdom (see the places cited in n. 9280); also that "wood" in
general signifies the good of love, and specifically the good of merit
(n. 2784, 2812, 3720, 4943, 8354, 8740). From this it is that in the
supreme sense "wood" signifies Divine good, because all things which in
the internal sense signify such things as belong to the church and
heaven, in the supreme sense signify Divine things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10179.">10179.</span></span>

A cubit the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof. That this
signifies equally from good and from truth, is evident from the
signification of "length" as being good, and of "breadth," as being
truth (see n. 1613, 3433, 3434, 4482, 9487); equally from both is
signified by "the length a cubit, and the breadth a cubit," thus by the
measure being equal, because by measures in the Word things are
determined in respect to their quantity and quality, and the
determination is effected by means of numbers. The thing that is here
determined by the measure, which is a "cubit," is good and truth; the
former by the "length," and the latter by the "breadth." That "length"
denotes good is because it is reckoned from east to west, and by "east
and west" is signified good from one boundary to another; and breadth is
reckoned from south to north, and by "south and north" is signified
truth from one boundary to another. For such is the case in heaven,
where the Lord is the Sun, and also the East, from which all
determinations are there made. They who are in the front there are in
the perception of good according to the distance; they who are in clear
perception of good are in the east (n. 3708, 9668), and they who are in
obscure perception of good are in the west (n. 3708, 9653); but they who
are in the clear light of truth are in the south (n. 9642), and they who
are in the obscure light of truth are in the north (n. 3708). Hence it
is that in the Word such things are signified by these four quarters;
and that by "length" is signified good, and by "breadth" truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10180.">10180.</span></span>

Foursquare shall it be. That this signifies thus perfect, is evident
from the signification of "foursquare," as being righteous, and also
perfect (see n. 9177, 9861).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10181.">10181.</span></span>

And two cubits the height thereof. That this signifies the degrees of
good and of truth, and their conjunction, is evident from the
signification of "two," as being conjunction (see n. 1686, 5194, 8423);
and from the signification of "height," as being the degrees of good and
of the derivative truth (n. 9489, 9773). By degrees of height are meant
degrees from interiors to exteriors, or from inmosts to outermosts, the
nature of which degrees may be seen illustrated and shown above (n.
3405, 3691, 4145, 5114, 5146, 8603, 8945, 10099). \[2\] Degrees are of
two kinds, namely, degrees in length and breadth, and degrees in respect
to height and depth; the latter differ greatly from the former. Degrees
of length and breadth are those which succeed each other from the middle
to the circumference; but degrees of height proceed from interiors to
exteriors. The former degrees, namely of length and breadth, are degrees
which continually decrease toward the circumferences, as light decreases
from a flame down to its obscurity, and as the sight of the eye
decreases from the nearest objects to those which are most remote, and
as the intellectual sight decreases from those things which are in light
to those which enter into shade. But degrees of height, which proceed
from inmosts to outermosts, or from highests to lowests, are not
continuous, but discrete. They are circumstanced as are the inmosts of a
seed in respect to its exteriors; and as are the inmosts of a man in
respect to his outermosts; and as the inmost of the angelic heaven is in
respect to its outermost. These degrees are discriminated from each
other, and are thus distinct, as are that which produces and that which
is produced. \[3\] Things which are in an interior degree are more
perfect than those which are in an exterior degree, and there is no
likeness between them except through correspondences. From this it is
that those who are in the inmost heaven are more perfect than those who
are in the middle heaven, and that these are more perfect than those who
are in the ultimate heaven. It is the same with a man in whom is heaven;
his inmost is in a more perfect state than his middle, and this is in a
more perfect state than his ultimate; and they are associated together
in no other way than through correspondences, the nature of which has
been abundantly shown in the preceding explications. \[4\] He who does
not acquire a perception of these degrees cannot possibly know the
differences between the heavens, and those between the interior and
exterior faculties of man, thus neither can he know the difference
between the soul and the body. Nay, he cannot at all apprehend what the
internal sense of the Word is, and its difference from the external
sense, nor even the difference between the spiritual world and the
natural. He cannot even understand what and whence correspondences and
representations are, and scarcely what influx is. Sensuous men do not
apprehend these differences, for they regard as continuous any increase
or decrease according to these degrees, thus they regard these degrees
as being like those of length and breadth, and therefore they stand
outside, and far away from intelligence. \[5\] These degrees are degrees
of height, and therefore by what is high in the Word is meant what is
interior (n. 2148, 4210, 4599), and because interior, also more perfect.
From this it is that in the Word the Lord is called "the Highest,"
because He is perfection itself, intelligence and wisdom itself, and
good and truth itself; and from this it is that heaven is said to be on
high, because it is in perfection, intelligence, wisdom, good, and
truth, from the Lord; and therefore hell is said to be in the deep,
because there is in it no perfection, no intelligence and wisdom, and no
good and truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10182.">10182.</span></span>

Out of it shall be its horns. That this signifies the powers of truth
from the good of love and of charity, is evident from the signification
of "horns," as being the powers of truth (see n. 2832, 9719-9721). That
it signifies from the good of love and of charity is because all the
power of truth is from this source. Therefore also the horns were
continued on from the altar itself, or were "out of it;" for this altar
was a representative of the hearing and reception by the Lord of all
things of the worship that is from love and charity (n. 10177). \[2\]
That all the power of truth is from the good of love cannot be
apprehended by those who have only a material idea of power and
therefore how the case herein is must be told. In the heavens all power
is from the Divine truth that proceeds from the Lord's Divine good; from
this the angels have power, for the angels are receptions of the Divine
truth from the Lord (n. 1752, 4295, 8192). By the power which they have
from this they protect man by removing the hells from him; for one angel
prevails against a thousand spirits from the hells. This power is what
is meant by the keys of Peter, but by Peter who is there called a "rock"
is meant the Lord as to the truth of faith from the good of love (see
the preface to Genesis 22, and n. 3750, 4738, 6000, 6073, 6344, 10087);
and that a "rock" denotes the Lord as to the truth of faith (n. 8581).
\[3\] The power of Divine truth is meant also by "the voice of Jehovah"
in David: The voice of Jehovah is upon the waters. The voice of Jehovah
is in power. The voice of Jehovah breaketh the cedars. The voice of
Jehovah cleaveth the flame of fire. The voice of Jehovah maketh the
wilderness to tremble. The voice of Jehovah strippeth the forests;
Jehovah giveth strength to His people (Ps. 29:3-11); (that "the voice of
Jehovah" denotes the Divine truth proceeding from His Divine good, see
n. 9926). \[4\] The power of Divine truth is meant also by "the Word" in
John: All things were made by the Word, and without Him was not anything
made that was made (John 1:3); that "the Word" denotes the Divine truth
that proceeds from the Divine good, see above (n. 9987); wherefore also
the Lord when in the world first made Himself Divine truth, which is
also meant by "the Word was made flesh" (verse 14). The reason why the
Lord then made Himself Divine truth, was in order that He might fight
against all the hells and subjugate them, and thus reduce into order all
things there, and at the same time all things in the heavens (see n.
9715, 9809, 10019, 10052). \[5\] That truths from good have all power,
and that on the contrary falsities from evil have no power, is very well
known in the other life. For this reason it is that the evil who come
there from the world are deprived of persuasive faith, and likewise of
all knowledge of truth, and are thus left to the falsities of their
evil. \[6\] That truths from good have such power cannot be apprehended
by those who have the idea that truth and its faith are mere thought;
when yet man's thought from his will produces all the strength of his
body, and if it were inspired by the Lord through His Divine truth, man
would have the strength of Samson. But it is the Lord's good pleasure
that in respect to the things of his spirit, and that conduce to eternal
salvation, man should have strength through faith from love. From this
it can be seen what is meant by the power of truth from good, which is
signified by "the horns of the altars" both of burning offering and of
incense. \[7\] That "horns" signify this power is evident from the
passages in the Word where "horns" are mentioned, as in these passages:
In that day will I make a horn to grow for the house of Israel (Ezek.
29:21). Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength? (Amos 6:13).
Jehovah will give strength to His king, and will exalt the horn of His
anointed (1 Sam. 2:10). Jehovah hath exalted the horn of His people (Ps.
148:14). All the horns of the wicked will I cut off; but the horns of
the righteous shall be exalted (Ps. 75:10). The Lord hath cut off in the
wrath of His anger all the horn of Israel, and hath exalted the horn of
thine adversaries (Lam. 2:3, 17). Ye thrust with side and with shoulder,
and strike all the weak sheep with your horns, till ye have scattered
them abroad (Ezek. 34:21). I saw four horns. The angel said, These are
the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. The smiths
are come to cast down the horns of the nations, who lift up their horn
against the land of Judah (Zech. 1:18-21). His horns are the horns of
the unicorn; with them shall he strike the peoples all together to the
ends of the earth (Deut. 33:17). That in these passages by "horns" is
signified power, is evident, and indeed power in both senses, namely,
the power of truth against falsity, and of falsity against truth; for in
the internal sense the state of the church is everywhere treated of.
\[8\] In Amos: In that day I will visit upon the altars of Bethel, and
the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and shall fall to the earth
(Amos 3:14); by "the altars of Bethel," and by its "horns," are
signified evils and falsities destroying the good and truth of the
church, of which it is said that they "shall be cut off." \[9\] From all
this it can be seen what is meant by the "horns," of which such frequent
mention is made in Daniel, and by John in Revelation, as in these
passages: The beast had ten horns, and also a horn speaking to it (Dan.
7:8, 11, 20). The horn made war with the saints and prevailed until the
Son of man came (Dan. 7:21-22); Concerning the horns of the ram and the
horns of the he-goat, by which they made war with each other (Dan.
8:3-21). The dragon had ten horns (Rev. 12:3). In like manner the beast
that came up out of the sea (Rev. 13:1). And also the scarlet beast
(Rev. 17:3). The horns are ten kings (Rev. 17:12, 13; see also in Daniel
7:24). (That by "kings" in the Word are signified truths, and in the
opposite sense falsities, see n. 1672, 2015, 2069, 3009, 4575, 4581,
4966, 5044, 5068, 6148.) \[10\] As by a "horn" is signified truth in its
power, and in the opposite sense falsity destroying truth, therefore
speech is attributed to a horn (Rev. 9:13; Dan. 7:8; Ps. 22:21). \[11\]
That kings were anointed with oil from a horn (1 Sam. 16:1, 13; 1 Kings
1:39) represented truth from good in its power, for "horns" denote
truths in their power; "oil" denotes good; and "kings" denote those who
are in truths from good. (That "oil" denotes good, see n. 886, 9780; and
"kings," those who are in truths from good, thus abstractedly, truths
from good, n. 6148.) From this also it is that a horn is said "to sprout
forth" (Ps. 132:17), because all spiritual growth belongs to truth from
good; thus also in old times they made sprouting horns. (That good has
all power through truth, or what is the same, that all power belongs to
truth from good, see the places cited in n. 10019.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10183.">10183.</span></span>

And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold. That this signifies what is
representative of all things of worship from good, is evident from the
signification of "gold," as being the good of love (see n. 9874); and
that "overlaying with gold" denotes to found upon this good (n. 9490),
thus that it is representative of it is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10184.">10184.</span></span>

Its roof. That this signifies the inmost, is evident from the
signification of a "roof," as being the inmost. A "roof" denotes the
inmost because it is supreme or highest, and what is supreme or highest
signifies inmost, according to what was shown above (n. 10181); and
because a "roof" signifies the like as the head with man. For all the
representatives in nature bear relation to the human form, and have a
signification according to this relation (see n. 9496). (That the "head"
signifies the inmost, see n. 5328, 6436, 7859, 9656, 9913, 9914.) The
inmost here signified by the roof of the altar of incense is the inmost
of worship; for in worship there are similar things to those which are
in the man himself from whom the worship proceeds; namely, an internal,
a middle, and an external. The inmost is called celestial, the middle
spiritual, and the external natural (n. 4938, 4939, 9992, 10005, 10017,
10068). From the correspondence these degrees are signified by the
"head," the "breast," and the "feet;" in like manner by the "roof," the
"sides," and the "horns," of the altar of incense. \[2\] As by the
"roof" is signified the celestial, which is inmost, good is also
signified, for good is everywhere the inmost, and truth proceeds from
it, as, to speak comparatively, light does from flame. This is meant by
the "roof" in Matthew: Let him that is on the roof of the house not go
down to take anything out of his house (Matt. 24:17; Mark 13:15; Luke
17:31). The subject here treated of is the last times of the church, and
by being "on the roof" is signified the state of a man who is in good;
and by "going down to take anything out of the house," is signified a
return to the former state (n. 3652). As in Jeremiah: On all the roofs
of Moab, and in the streets thereof, all is mourning (Jer. 48:38); by a
"mourning on all the roofs" is signified the vastation of all goods with
those who in the representative sense are meant by Moab, namely, those
who are in natural good, who easily suffer themselves to be seduced (n.
2468); and by a "mourning in the streets" is signified the vastation of
all truths (that "streets" denote truths, see n. 2336). \[3\] As a
"roof" signified good, therefore the ancients had roofs on their houses
where they walked, and also where they worshiped, as can be seen in 1
Sam. 9:25, 26; 2 Sam. 11:2; Zeph. 1:5. In Moses: When thou buildest a
new house, thou shalt make a parapet for thy roof, that thou bring not
bloods on thine house if anyone fall from it. Thou shalt not sow thy
vineyard with mixed seed, lest the gathering from the seed which thou
hast sowed, and from the produce of the vineyard, be forfeited. Thou
shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together. Thou shalt not put on a
garment mixed with wool and linen together (Deut. 22:8-11). \[4\] From
all this it is also evident that by a "roof" is signified the good of
love; for each of these precepts involves similar things, which are not
disclosed except by means of the internal sense. This sense is that he
who is in good, which is the state of a regenerate man, shall not return
into a state of truth, which is his prior state, namely, during
regeneration; for in this state man is led by means of truth to good,
thus partly by himself; but in the later or posterior state, namely when
he has been regenerated, man is led by good, that is, through good by
the Lord. \[5\] This is the secret which lies hidden within each of
these precepts; thus the same as is contained in the Lord's words in the
following passages: Then he who is upon the house, let him not go down
to take anything out of his house; and he who is in the field, let him
not return back to take his clothes (Matt. 24:17, 18). He who is up on
the roof, let him not go down into the house, neither let him enter to
take away anything out of his house; and he who shall be in the field,
let him no more turn back to take his raiment (Mark 13:16). In that day,
whosoever shall be upon the house, and his vessels in the house, let him
not go down to take them away; and whosoever shall be in the field, let
him likewise not return to the things behind him; Remember Lot's wife
(Luke 17:31, 32). \[6\] Who cannot see that arcana of heaven are
contained in these passages? For otherwise what could be meant by its
being said that they should not go down from the house, or return back
from the field, and that they should remember Lot's wife? In like manner
in what is said in Moses, that they should make a parapet about the roof
lest blood should be shed if people fell down; and that a field should
not be sown mixedly with seed, and also about the produce of a vineyard;
and that they should not plough with an ox and an ass together; nor wear
a garment mixed with wool and linen. For by "the roof" is signified
good, and by being "upon the house," or "upon the roof," is signified
the state when a man is in good; by "falling from it" is signified a
relapse to the former state; and by "bloods" is signified the violence
then offered to good and truth (n. 374, 1005, 4735, 6978, 7317, 7326);
by a "vineyard" is signified the church with man; by the "produce of the
vineyard," a state of truth (n. 9139); by "the seed of wheat or barley,"
a state of good (n. 3941, 7605); by an "ox" also is signified good, and
by "ploughing with an ox," a state of good (n. 2781, 9135); in like
manner by "wool," and by "putting on a garment of wool" (n. 9470); and
by an "ass" is signified truth (n. 2781, 5741); and also by "linen" (n.
7601, 9959). But how the case is with this secret, see unfolded in the
places cited in n. 9274.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10185.">10185.</span></span>

And its walls round about. That this signifies the interiors, is evident
from the signification of "walls," or "sides," as being the interiors,
for as the "roof" signifies the inmost, the "walls" beneath signify the
interiors; by the interiors are meant the things beneath the inmost and
above the ultimate ones, thus the middle things. That the "walls"
signify the interiors is because the sides and breast with man signify
the interiors, for all the representatives in nature bear relation to
the human form, and have a signification in accordance with this
relation (see n. 9496); as for instance a house; its highest part called
the roof signifies the like as the head with a man; its more interior
things which are below the highest, signify the like as the breast and
sides; and its foundation, the like as the feet and soles of the feet.
That this is so, is because the universal heaven bears relation to a
man, and from this there is an influx into universal nature, for the
natural world comes forth and subsists from the spiritual world. When
the spiritual world is spoken of, there is meant the Divine of the Lord
which is there. \[2\] That all things in nature bear relation to the
human form, is also evident from all the things in the vegetable
kingdom, in which kingdom all things are clothed with leaves, bearing
flowers before they bring forth fruits, while fruits are the ultimate
ends for the sake of which are the prior things, and to which they all
look. For the leaves in that kingdom bear relation to the lungs, and are
as it were in the place of the respiration, because by their means the
sap is drawn up, and therefore a tree stripped of its leaves bears no
fruit. From this also it is that "leaves" in the Word signify the truths
of faith (n. 885), for in like manner by their means is drawn up the
living power whereby good is formed. \[3\] The blossoming before the
fruit corresponds to the state of that age with man when the conjugial
inclination enters minds and gladdens them, thus when truth is being
conjoined with good. But the fruit corresponds to the good itself,
which, insofar as it ripens like fruit, puts itself forth into works.
From this it is that "fruits" in the Word signify the works of charity;
and the blossoming before the fruit is compared to the voice and joy of
the bride and bridegroom; and so in all other things. \[4\] Therefore
one who is able to reflect wisely will very clearly notice that the
heavenly paradise is represented in the earthly one, and that from this
all things in nature bear relation to such as are in the spiritual
world. And one who is able to draw further conclusions will perceive
that nature does not subsist from itself, but through influx from
heaven, that is, from the Divine in heaven; insomuch that if the
communication were taken away, all things of the earth would fall down
to nothing. That this is so the simple apprehend, but not the wise of
the world, for the reason that the simple attribute all these things to
the Divine, but the wise of the world attribute them to nature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10186.">10186.</span></span>

And its horns. That this signifies the exteriors, is evident from the
signification of "horns," as being the powers of truth from good (see
above, n. 10182); that they denote the exteriors also, is because truth
from good is in its power in the extremes or ultimates (see n. 9836);
and because the horns of the altar bear relation also to the arms and
hands with man, by which also is signified truth in its power in the
ultimates or extremes (see the places cited in n. 10019, 10062, 10076,
10082).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10187.">10187.</span></span>

And thou shalt make for it a border of gold round it. That this
signifies a bounding from good lest they be approached and injured by
evils, is evident from the signification of "a border," as being a
bounding to prevent approach and injury by evils (see n. 9492); and from
the signification of "gold," as being good (n. 9874, 9881). The reason
why the border was made of gold was because it represented a closure
from good; for good cannot be approached by evils, because evils cannot
by any means endure the sphere of good; when evils, that is, those who
are in evils, or those who are from hell, come unto this sphere, which
is the sphere of heaven, they are direfully tortured, and insofar as
they enter into this sphere, so far they feel infernal torments within
them, and consequently become like those who are lying in the death
agony; and therefore they instantly cast themselves down into hell, and
no longer dare to lift up their heads. This is the reason why those who
are in heaven are in safety from the infestation of evils from the
hells; and this is meant by the words of Abraham to the rich man who was
in hell: Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, that they who
would pass over from hence to you cannot, neither can they who are there
pass over to us (Luke 16:26); and by these words: They shall say to the
mountains and to the rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of Him
that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb (Rev. 6:6;
Hosea 10:8). But as regards truth, this can be approached by the evil,
because the evil pervert truths by wrong interpretations, and so apply
them to favor their own cupidities; but in proportion as good is present
in truths, truths cannot be approached. From this it can be seen what
kind of protection is possible in the other life to those who are solely
in truths, which are called the truths of faith, and not at the same
time in good. By good is meant charity toward the neighbor and love to
the Lord, for all goods are from this source. From all this it is now
evident why a border was made round about the sides of the altar of
incense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10188.">10188.</span></span>

And thou shalt make for it two rings of gold from under its border. That
this signifies the sphere of Divine good, through which are conjunction
and preservation, is evident from the signification of "two," as being
conjunction (see n. 5194, 8423); from the signification of "gold," as
being good (n. 9874, 9881); and from the signification of a "border," as
being a bounding to prevent their being approached and injured by evils
(of which just above, n. 10187). From all this it is evident that by
"two rings of gold from under the border" is signified the sphere of
Divine good through which is conjunction; and that preservation also is
signified, is because the altar of incense was carried by staves
inserted in the rings, and by "carrying" is signified preservation (n.
9900). \[2\] What the sphere of Divine good is shall here be briefly
told. The sphere of Divine good fills the universal heaven, and also
extends itself into hell, for it is like the sphere of the sun's heat in
the world, which in summer penetrates even into dark places where the
sun does not appear. This Divine sphere was likened by the ancients to
radiant circles in the midst of which was God, and round about were
angels. Accordingly those who suffer themselves to be led by the Lord,
thus who receive the Divine from Him, are in the sphere of Divine good
in proportion to their reception of it; while those who do not receive
it are indeed in the same sphere, but their interiors have been so much
closed up that they do not feel the influx. For those who are in hell
are in externals and are not in internals, and from their externals
there exhale evils and the derivative falsities, which appear around
them like the smoke from a furnace; causing the external sphere of
Divine good to be dulled there, while the internal sphere of it still
remains; but it is not received because it has been closed to them;
nevertheless the Lord rules the hells by means of it. \[3\] The reason
why there is a sphere of Divine good which proceeds from the Lord, is
because the Sun of heaven, which is the Lord, is Divine love itself, for
this so appears; the heat thence proceeding is the good of love, and the
light thence proceeding is the truth of faith; hence in the Word by the
"sun" is meant the Divine love; by "fire," and "heat," the good of love;
and by "light," the truth of faith. \[4\] Moreover, from every angel
proceeds a sphere from his love, also from every spirit good and evil
according to his love; but the spheres proceeding from these do not
extend themselves far, whereas the Divine sphere extends through the
universe, for it proceeds from the inmost, and the inmost is the all in
all the things that follow in succession from it. (Concerning these
spheres, see what has already been shown, partly also from experience,
n. 1048, 1053, 1316, 1504-1512, 1695, 2401, 4464, 5179, 6206, 7454,
6598-6613, 8063, 8630, 8794, 8797, 9490-9492, 9498, 9499, 9534, 9606,
9607.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10189.">10189.</span></span>

Upon its two ribs. That this signifies conjunction with truths on the
one side, and preservation by means of them, is evident from the
signification of "ribs," when by them are meant sides, as being truths;
for the sides which are called "ribs" look to the south and the north,
and by the "south" is signified truth in light (see n. 9462), and by the
"north" truth in shade (n. 3708). But by "sides" properly so called is
signified good, because they look to the east and the west, and by the
"east" is signified good in clearness, and by the "west" good in
obscurity (n. 3708, 9653). Therefore it is here said, "thou shalt make
for it two rings of gold from beneath the border, upon the two ribs
thereof thou shalt make them, upon the two sides thereof." That the
sides properly so called look to the east and the west, but that the
sides which are called "ribs" look to the south and the north, is plain
in Exodus 26:13, 26, 27, 35. Moreover "ribs," being supports of the
breast, signify the truths that support good. \[2\] In heaven however
the case is this. On the right are those who are in the light of truth,
thus who are in the south; but on the left are those who are in the
shade of truth, thus who are in the north; before the face are those who
are in the clear perception of good, thus who are in the east; but at
the back are those who are in the obscure perception of good, thus who
are in the west. These, who are in good, constitute the celestial
kingdom of the Lord; and the former, who are in truth, constitute His
spiritual kingdom. This is the appearance to the angels there in
whatever direction they turn themselves, for the angels have the Lord,
who is the very East, continually before the face; but the contrary is
the case with those who are in hell, for these have the Lord continually
at the back. \[3\] For in the other life the quarters are not determined
toward fixed regions, as they are in the world; but according to fixed
and ruling loves. \[4\] For an angel or a spirit is his own love, and
where the love is, thither he turns himself; they who are in love to the
Lord and in charity toward the neighbor, and from this in faith, look at
the Lord before them wherever they turn their bodies and their faces.
For the Lord turns them to Himself, because He enters by the way of the
east into them, and constantly keeps them in a determination toward
Himself. Hence their external sight, determined by the internal sight
that belongs to the understanding, and this by the love that belongs to
the will, looks in the direction in which the love carries it. It is
similar with men in the world in respect to their interiors that belong
to their spirit. Moreover, in the other life all are distinguished
according to the way in which each one turns himself. (That the spaces
and places in the other life are of this nature, and that from this they
signify states, see n. 2625, 2837, 3356, 3387, 4321, 4882, 5605, 7381,
9440, 9667, 10146.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10190.">10190.</span></span>

Upon its two sides shalt thou make them. That this signifies conjunction
with good on the other side and preservation by means of it, is evident
from what has been said and shown just above (n. 10189). From the same
also it can be seen how the case is with the Divine sphere round about,
namely that it is a sphere of the good of love from the Lord as a Sun
from the east even to the west, and a sphere of truth from good from the
south to the north. Thus the sphere of Divine good in the midst is like
an axis, with the sphere of Divine truth proceeding from it on both
sides, on the right and on the left.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10191.">10191.</span></span>

And it shall be for receptacles for the staves. That this signifies the
power of truth from good there, is evident from the signification of the
"receptacles" (or "rings," for these were the receptacles), as being the
Divine sphere (of which just above, n. 10188); and from the
signification of "the staves," as being the power of truth from good (n.
9496).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10192.">10192.</span></span>

To carry it in them. That this signifies its consequent preservation in
its state, is evident from the signification of "carrying," as being to
hold together in a state of good and truth, thus to come forth and
subsist (see n. 9500, 9737), and also to preserve (n. 9900).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10193.">10193.</span></span>

And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood. That this signifies
power from the good of the Lord's love, is evident from the
signification of "the staves," as being power (see n. 9496); and from
the signification of "shittim wood," as being the good of the Lord's
love (n. 10178).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10194.">10194.</span></span>

And shalt overlay them with gold. That this signifies the foundation of
all things upon good, is evident from the signification of "overlaying
with gold," as being to found upon good (see n. 9490). What is meant by
being founded on good shall be briefly told. It is believed by some that
truth is that on which all things are founded; but they are very much
mistaken; for no truth is possible with a man unless he is in good. The
truth with a man which is devoid of good is an external without an
internal, thus a shell without a kernel, residing only in the memory.
This truth may be likened to a painting of a flower, of a tree, or of an
animal, which inwardly is nothing but clay; whereas truth from good not
only resides in the memory, but is also inrooted in the life, and may be
likened to the flower, the tree, or the animal itself, the perfection of
which increases toward the interiors; for that which has been created by
the Divine is more perfect the more interiorly it is examined. This can
be very clearly seen from the representatives in the other life.
Representatives are there presented according to the states of the
interiors among spirits, for they are correspondences. Around the
spirits who are in truths from good appear most beautiful
representatives, namely, houses and palaces flashing with gold and
precious stones, also gardens and paradises of unspeakable beauty; all
these things being from the correspondence. But around those who are in
truths, and not from good, there appear nothing but stony places, rocks,
and bogs, and sometimes shrubberies, but unpleasant and barren; these
also being from the correspondence. And around those who are in
falsities from evil appear swamps, privies, and many monstrous objects.
The cause of this being so is that all the representatives in the other
life are outward things shaped according to the states of the interior
ones; for in this way the spiritual world presents itself to view there.
From this it can be seen what is meant by being founded upon good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10195.">10195.</span></span>

And thou shalt put it before the veil that is over the ark of the
Testimony. That this signifies in the interior heaven where it is
conjoined with the inmost heaven, is evident from the signification of
"the veil," which was before the ark and between the holy and the holy
of holies, as being an intermediate uniting the second and the third
heavens (see n. 9670, 9671); and from the signification of "the ark of
the Testimony," as being the inmost heaven (n. 9485). (That the Tent
together with the place within the veil and without the veil and
together with the court represented the three heavens, see n. 9457,
9481, 9485, 9741.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10196.">10196.</span></span>

Before the propitiatory that is over the Testimony. That this signifies
where there is the hearing and reception by the Lord, of all things of
worship from the good of love, is evident from the signification of "the
propitiatory," as being the hearing and reception by the Lord of all
things of worship from the good of love (see n. 9506); and from the
signification of "the Testimony," as being the Lord in respect to the
Word (n. 8535, 9503), thus in respect to the Divine truth, for the Lord
in respect to Divine truth is the Word (n. 9987). \[2\] A few words may
here be said about Divine good and Divine truth. The Lord as to the
Divine Itself which is called "the Father," and as to the Divine Human
which is called "the Son," is the Divine love itself, thus Divine good
itself; but the Lord as heaven, which is beneath the Lord as a Sun, is
the Divine truth; yet this Divine truth has within it the Divine good
accommodated to the reception of angels and spirits. This Divine is what
is called "the Spirit of Jehovah" and "the Holy." The reason why this is
called Divine truth, and not Divine good, is that angels and spirits are
created, and from this are receptions of the Divine truth that proceeds
from the Divine good. They, like men, enjoy two faculties, namely,
understanding and will, and the understanding has been formed to receive
Divine truth, and the will to receive Divine good. The understanding
serves them for reception, and also for perception. \[3\] An idea of
this subject can be obtained by the simple from a comparison with the
sun of the world, and with the world that comes forth from it. In the
sun of the world there is fire, but that which proceeds from it is heat
and light. Everyone is able to know that the light is not in the sun
itself, but that the light proceeds from it. And insofar as the light
proceeding from the sun has heat in it, plants live and grow, and bring
forth fruits and seeds. These things are said by comparison, because
universal nature is a theater representative of the Lord's kingdom; and
it is such a representative theater because the natural world came forth
through the spiritual world from the Divine, and perpetually comes
forth, that is, subsists; hence it is that in the Word by the "sun" is
meant the Lord as to Divine love, in like manner by "fire;" and that by
"light" is meant the Lord as to Divine truth (as in John 1:9; 3:19; 9:5;
12:46).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10197.">10197.</span></span>

Whither I will come to meet thee there. That this signifies in this way
the presence and influx of the Lord, is evident from the signification
of "coming to meet," when said of Jehovah, as being the presence and
influx of the Lord (see n. 10147, 10148).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10198.">10198.</span></span>

And Aaron shall burn incense thereon. That this signifies the uplifting
by the Lord of worship from love and charity, is evident from the
signification of "burning incense," as being the uplifting of all things
of worship from love and charity (n. 10177); and from the representation
of Aaron as high priest, as being the Lord as to Divine good, and as to
the work of salvation (n. 9806, 9965, 10068). That "burning incense"
signifies the uplifting of worship, is because "fire" signified the good
of love, hence all things that came forth from fire signified such as
proceed from love; for which reason it is that not only light, but also
smoke, were representative. (That by "fire" is signified the good of
love, see n. 4906, 5215, 6314, 6832, 6834, 6849, 7324, 10055.) That
smoke also was representative is evident in these passages: Jehovah will
create over every habitation of Zion a cloud by day, and a smoke and the
shining of a flame of fire by night (Isa. 4:5). The temple was filled
with smoke from the glory of God, and from His power (Rev. 15:8). That
the smoke of incense denotes the uplifting of prayers, thus in general
the uplifting of all things of worship, is evident in the same: The
smoke of the incense went up with the prayers of the saints (Rev. 8:4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10199.">10199.</span></span>

Incense of spices. That this signifies grateful hearing and reception,
is evident from the signification of "incense," as being the hearing and
reception by the Lord of all things of worship from love and charity
(see n. 10177); and from the signification of "spices," as being things
that are grateful. It is from their odor that spices denote what is
grateful, for "odor" signifies perceptivity; consequently a sweet odor
signifies a grateful perceptivity, and an offensive odor an ungrateful
perceptivity. For all things which are perceived by man through the
organs of sense signify spiritual things, which bear relation to the
good of love and to the truths of faith, as do smell, taste, sight,
hearing, and touch; hence "smell" signifies the perceptivity of interior
truth from the good of love; "taste" signifies the perception and
affection of knowing and of being wise; "sight," the understanding of
the truths of faith; "hearing," perceptivity from the good of faith, and
from obedience; and "touch" in general, communication, transfer, and
reception. \[2\] The reason of this is that all external sensations
derive their origin from internal sensations which are of the
understanding and will, thus in man from the truths of faith and from
the good of love, for these constitute the understanding and the will of
man. But the internal sensations, which are proper to the understanding
and will with man, have not that sense which the external sensations
have, but are turned into such when they flow in; for all things made
sensible to man by the external organs of sense, flow in from internal
things, because all influx is from internal things into external, but
not the reverse. For there is no such thing as physical influx, that is,
influx from the natural world into the spiritual, but only from the
spiritual world into the natural. The interiors of man which belong to
his understanding and will are in the spiritual world, and his externals
which belong to the senses of the body are in the natural world. From
this also it can be seen what correspondence is, and what is its nature.
\[3\] (That smell in general corresponds to perception in respect to the
quality of a thing, see n. 1514, 1517-1519, 3577, 4624-4634, 10054;
taste, to the perception and affection of knowing and of growing wise,
n. 3502, 4791-4805; sight, to the understanding of the truths of faith,
n. 3863, 4403-4421, 4567, 5114, 5400, 6805; hearing, to the perception
of the good of faith, and to obedience, n. 3869, 4652-4660, 7216, 8361,
9311, 9926; and that touch denotes communication, transfer, and
reception, n. 10130.) \[4\] From all this it is evident that "spices"
signify such things as are gratefully perceived, such as are those which
are from love and charity; specifically, interior truths, because these
are from this source, as is evident from the following passages in the
Word: Instead of spice shall be rottenness; and instead of a girdle
rending, and instead of braided work baldness (Isa. 3:24); where the
subject treated of is the daughters of Zion, by whom is signified the
celestial church, which church is in interior truths from the good of
love to the Lord; "spice" here denotes interior truth; "rottenness," the
privation thereof; a "girdle" denotes conjunction; a "rending" denotes
the dispersion of connection and order; "braided work" denotes
memory-truth, which is exterior truth, or the truth of the external man;
and "baldness" denotes the deprivation of it. (That a "girdle" denotes
conjunction and a bond, that all things may be kept in connection, so as
to look to one end, see n. 9828; that "braided work" denotes
memory-truth, n. 2831; and "baldness," the deprivation of it, n. 9960.)
\[5\] In Ezekiel: An eagle great with wings came unto Lebanon, and
brought down therefrom a small branch of cedar into the land of Canaan;
in a city of those who deal in spices he set the head thereof (Ezek.
17:3, 4); the subject here treated of in the internal sense is the
beginning of a spiritual church and its growth, and afterward its
perversion and end; by "an eagle great with wings" is signified the
interior truth of this church (n. 3901, 8764); "wings" denote exterior
truths (n. 8764, 9514); "Lebanon" denotes this church; the "cedar" there
denotes the truth of the spiritual church; the "city of those who deal
in spices" denotes where there is the doctrine of interior truth (that
"cities" in the Word signify doctrines, see n. 402, 2449, 3216, 4492,
4493); it is from interior truths that it is called the "city of those
who deal in spices." \[6\] Again: The traders of Sheba and Raamah, by
the chief of spice, and by every precious stone and gold, gave their
tradings (Ezek. 27:22); the subject here treated of is Tyre, by which is
signified the church in respect to the knowledges of good and truth;
"traders" denote those who have these knowledges and communicate them;
"Sheba and Raamah" denote those who are in the knowledges of things
celestial and spiritual; "the chief of spice" denotes that which is
grateful from interior truths; "precious stones" denote these truths
themselves; and "gold" denotes their good. (That "Tyre" denotes the
church in respect to the interior knowledges of good and truth, and in
the abstract sense these knowledges themselves, see n. 1201; and that
"traders" denote those who have these knowledges and communicate them,
n. 2967, 4453; "Sheba and Raamah," those who are in the knowledges of
things celestial and spiritual, n. 1171, 3240; a "precious stone,"
interior truth, n. 9863, 9865, 9873, 9874; and "gold," its good, see the
places cited in n. 9874, 9881.) \[7\] From this it is evident what was
represented by the Queen of Sheba coming to Jerusalem to Solomon, "with
camels carrying spices, and gold, and precious stone" (1 Kings 10:1, 2);
and by the wise men of the east offering to the child Jesus "gold,
frankincense, and myrrh" (Matt. 2:11). As "spices" signified interior
truths, thus such as are grateful, therefore the incense was made
aromatic, and also the oil of anointing (of which in what follows in
this chapter). \[8\] By interior truths are meant those which have been
made to be of the man's life and affection, thus which are with him
inwardly; but not the truths that are merely in the memory, and not made
to be of the life. These truths are called external truths relatively,
because they have not been inscribed on the life, but only on the
memory; for they reside in the external man, and not in the internal
man. The truths of faith which have been inscribed on the life are in
the will, and those things which are in the will are in the internal
man, for by means of the truths of faith the internal man is opened, and
communication is effected with the heavens. From this it is evident that
interior truths with man are those which are from the good of love and
of charity. Whether you say the will, or the love, it is the same, for
that which is of man's will is of his love; and therefore truths
inscribed on the life, which are called interior truths, are those which
have been inscribed on the love, thus on the will, from which they
afterward proceed when they come into speech and act. \[9\] For heaven
(in which is the internal man that has been opened) does not flow
immediately into truths, but mediately through the good of love; and
heaven cannot enter with man when the internal man is closed, because
there is not any good of love there to receive it; and therefore with
those with whom the internal man has not been opened by means of truths
from the good of love and of charity, hell flows in with falsities from
evil, however much the truths of faith, even interior ones, may reside
in the external man only, that is, in the memory. From all this it can
now be seen what is meant by interior truths which are grateful and are
signified by "spices," namely, those which are from the good of love and
of charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10200.">10200.</span></span>

Morning by morning. That this signifies when the state of love is in
clearness, is evident from the signification of "morning," as being when
the state of love is in clearness (see n. 10134); hence "morning by
morning" denotes when there is this state. That in the heavens there is
continually a succession of states of love and light, that is, of good
and truth, as on earth there are morning, noon, evening, and twilight;
and spring, summer, autumn, and winter, has been occasionally shown
above; also that these times of the day and of the year have their
origin from this source; for the things which come forth in the world
are images of those which come forth in the heavens, because everything
natural comes forth from what is spiritual, that is, from the Divine in
the heavens. From this it is evident what is the nature of the
variations of states in the heavens, for they are known from comparison
with the states of heat and light in the world; for heat in the heavens
is the good of love from the Lord, and light there is the truth of faith
from the Lord. The reason for such successions of states there is that
the angels there may be continually being perfected; for in this way
they pass through all the varieties of good and of truth, and become
imbued with them. The differences of the varieties of the good of love
and of the truth of faith in the heavens are also like the differences
of heat and of light in the several regions or climates of the earth,
namely, of one kind nearer to the equator, and of another at a greater
distance on each side therefrom; and differently in each day of every
year, and also in one year differently from another; for there is never
a return of what is absolutely alike, or the same; it being provided
that what is absolutely the same is never found either in the spiritual
world or in the natural. From this the perfection continually increases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_222"></span>[10167-1](ac204.htm#fr_222.md) Here concerning
Love Truly Conjugial. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10201-10250](ac205.md)
