[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac200)  [Next](ac202.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="10001.">10001.</span></span>

Thou shalt bring near unto the door of the Tent of meeting. That this
signifies the conjunction of both in heaven, is evident from the
signification of "bringing near," as being presence and conjunction (see
n. 9997), here the conjunction of Divine good and Divine truth from the
Lord in heaven; from the signification of "the door," as being
introduction (see n. 8989); and from the representation of the Tent of
meeting, as being heaven (see n. 9457, 9481, 9485, 9963). That the
bullock, the rams, the bread, the cakes, and the wafers of unleavened
things in the basket, and Aaron with his sons, were to be presented at
the door of the Tent of meeting, and that Aaron and his sons were there
to be clothed with garments and anointed, and the things mentioned were
to be there offered upon the altar, was because the place where was the
door of the Tent of meeting represented the marriage of Divine good with
Divine truth. For by the altar, which also was placed at the door of the
Tent, was represented the Lord as to Divine good, and by the Tent of
meeting was represented the Lord as to Divine truth; hence by the place
at the door of the Tent was represented the conjunction of good and
truth, which conjunction is called the heavenly marriage. (That by the
altar of burnt offering was represented the Lord as to Divine good, see
n. 9964; and by the Tent of meeting the Lord as to Divine truth, n.
9963.) That the altar was placed there is evident in Moses, "And Moses
placed the altar of burnt-offering at the door of the Tent" (Exod.
40:29). (That the conjunction of good and truth is the heavenly
marriage, and that it is heaven, see n. 2173, 2508, 2618, 2803, 3004,
3132, 3952, 4434, 6179.) From all this it is now evident that by
"bringing Aaron and his sons near to the door of the Tent of meeting' is
signified the conjunction of both, namely, of the Divine good and the
Divine truth from the Lord in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10002.">10002.</span></span>

And shalt wash them with waters. That this signifies purification by
means of the truths of faith, is evident from the signification of
"washing with waters," as being purification by means of the truths of
faith (see n. 3147, 5954, 9088); (that all purification and regeneration
are effected by means of the truths of faith, see n. 2799 middle, 7044,
8635-8640, 8772; and that "waters" denote the truths of faith, n. 739,
2702, 3058, 3424, 4976, 7307, 8568).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10003.">10003.</span></span>

And thou shalt take the garments, and shalt clothe Aaron. That this
signifies a representative of the Lord's spiritual kingdom, is evident
from the signification of "the garments of Aaron," as being a
representative of the Lord's spiritual kingdom (see n. 9814).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10004.">10004.</span></span>

With the tunic. That this signifies the inmost of this kingdom, is
evident from the signification of "the tunic with which Aaron was
clothed," as being the Divine spiritual that proceeds immediately from
the Divine celestial, thus the inmost of the spiritual kingdom (see n.
9826, 9942).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10005.">10005.</span></span>

And the robe of the ephod. That this signifies the middle of this
kingdom, is evident from the signification of "the robe" as being the
Divine spiritual that proceeds mediately from the Divine celestial, thus
the middle of the spiritual kingdom (see n. 9825). It is called "the
robe of the ephod" because the robe belonged to the ephod; moreover, it
was distinguished from the tunic by the girdle; for there were two
girdles, one in common for the ephod and the robe together, the other
for the tunic alone, which signified that those things of the spiritual
kingdom which were represented by the tunic, were distinct from those
which were represented by the robe and the ephod together. The "girdle,"
or "belt," signifies the general bond by which the interior things are
held in connection (n. 9828), and also by which the one is separated
from the other (n. 9944). \[2\] The case herein is this. There are three
things that follow or succeed in order, which three in the heavens are
called the Celestial, the Spiritual, and the Natural thence derived. The
celestial is the good of love to the Lord; the spiritual is the good of
charity toward the neighbor; and the natural thence derived is the good
of faith. The celestial, which is the good of love to the Lord,
constitutes the inmost or third heaven; the spiritual, which is the good
of charity toward the neighbor, constitutes the middle or second heaven;
and the natural thence derived, which is the good of faith, constitutes
the ultimate or first heaven. As the garments of Aaron represented the
Lord's spiritual kingdom (n. 9814), it is evident from what has been
said what the tunic represented, and what the robe, and what the ephod;
namely, that the tunic represented the uniting medium of the spiritual
kingdom with the celestial kingdom, and therefore it was distinguished
by the girdle from the robe and the ephod, which represented the
spiritual kingdom, internal and external. (Concerning the tunic, see n.
9826, 9942; concerning the robe, n. 9825; and concerning the ephod, n.
9824.) \[3\] An idea of this subject can also be had from what has been
previously shown concerning the Tent of meeting, by which was
represented heaven, wherein is the Lord. By its inmost, where was the
ark of the Testimony, was represented the inmost or third heaven; by the
Habitation, which was outside the veil, was represented the middle or
second heaven; and by the court, the first or ultimate heaven; thus also
the celestial, the spiritual, and the derivative natural. But the
uniting medium of the inmost heaven and the middle heaven was
represented by the veil between the holy place and the holy of holies,
in like manner as by the tunic upon Aaron. (Concerning the inmost of the
Tent where was the ark, see n. 9485; concerning the Habitation which was
outside the veil, n. 9594, 9632; concerning the court, n. 9741; and
concerning the veil, as being the uniting medium of the inmost and
middle heavens, n. 9670, 9671.) \[4\] A still better idea of all this
can be formed from the correspondence of man with the heavens, in that
there is a correspondence of all things in man with all things in the
heavens. (See what has been previously shown at the end of many
chapters.) The head with man corresponds to the inmost or third heaven,
where is celestial good; the breast as far as the loins corresponds to
the middle or second heaven, where is spiritual good; and the feet
correspond to the ultimate or first heaven, where is natural good. But
the neck is by correspondence the uniting medium of the inmost and
middle heavens (n. 9913, 9914), in like manner as was the veil in the
Tent. For all the representatives in nature bear relation to the human
form, and have a signification according to their relation to it (n.
9496). From all this it can now be seen why the tunic was kept distinct
by the girdle from the robe and the ephod, and also why the robe is
called "the robe of the ephod."

<span class="margnote"><span id="10006.">10006.</span></span>

And the ephod. That this signifies the ultimate of the spiritual
kingdom, is evident from the signification of "the ephod," as being the
ultimate of the spiritual kingdom (see n. 9824).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10007.">10007.</span></span>

And the breastplate. That this signifies Divine truth shining forth from
the Lord's Divine good, is evident from what was shown above concerning
the breastplate (n. 9823, 9863-9873, 9905).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10008.">10008.</span></span>

And thou shalt set the miter upon his head. That this signifies the
Divine wisdom, is evident from the signification of "the miter," as
being intelligence, and when said concerning the Lord, who is
represented by Aaron, as being Divine wisdom (see n. 9827).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10009.">10009.</span></span>

And shalt put the crown of holiness upon the miter. That this signifies
the Lord's Divine Human, is evident from what was said above (n. 9930,
9931) about the plate of gold on which was engraved "Holiness to
Jehovah," which is here called "the crown of holiness."

<span class="margnote"><span id="10010.">10010.</span></span>

And thou shall take the oil of anointing. That this signifies a
representative of inauguration into Divine good, is evident from the
signification of "oil," as being the good of love, and in the supreme
sense the Divine good of the Divine love in the Lord; and from the
signification of "anointing," as being inauguration to represent this
good (see n. 9947, 9954).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10011.">10011.</span></span>

And shalt pour it upon his head, and anoint him. That this signifies a
representative of the Divine good in the Lord as to the whole Human, is
evident from the signification of "pouring oil upon Aaron's head," as
being the Divine good upon the whole Human of the Lord; for by "oil" is
signified the Divine good (see n. 4582, 9474), by "Aaron" the Lord as to
Divine good (n. 9806), and by the "head" the whole Human; and from the
signification of "to anoint," as being a representative of this thing
(n. 9474, 9954). That the "head" denotes the whole Human, or the whole
man, is because everything of man descends from the head, for the body
is a derivation thence, and therefore that which man thinks and wills,
which is done in the head, is presented in effect in the body. The head
is like the supreme or inmost in the heavens, which descends and flows
into the heavens that are beneath, and produces and derives them.
Therefore also the head with man corresponds to the inmost heaven, the
body as far as the loins to the middle heaven, and the feet to the
ultimate heaven. In a word, that which is inmost is the only thing in
the derivatives that essentially lives. From this it is evident that as
the Divine is the inmost of all things, or what is the same, the supreme
of all things, it is the one only thing from which is the life of all
things, and therefore insofar as a man receives of the Divine, so far he
lives. \[2\] Moreover, the oil with which the priest was anointed flowed
down from the crown of the head into the body, as can be seen in these
passages: Like the good oil upon the head, coming down into Aaron's
beard, that cometh down upon the mouth of his garments (Ps. 133:2). A
woman poured an alabaster box of balm upon the head of Jesus as He lay,
and Jesus said, She hath poured this balm upon My body for the burying
(Matt. 26:7, 12). There came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment
of spikenard very precious, and breaking the alabaster box, she poured
it upon the head of Jesus; and Jesus said, She hath come beforehand to
anoint My body for the burying (Mark 14:3, 8). From all this also it is
evident that "to anoint the head" denotes to anoint the whole body.
\[3\] That by the "head" is meant the whole man, is also evident from
many passages in the Word, as the following: The redeemed of Jehovah
shall return, and shall come unto Zion with singing; and everlasting joy
upon their heads (Isa. 35:10). The precious things of the products of
the sun, the chief things of the mountains of the east, and the precious
things of the earth, for the head of Joseph, and for the crown of the
head of the Nazirite of his brethren (Deut. 33:14-16). The storm of
Jehovah shall rush upon the head of the wicked (Jer. 30:23). I will put
their way on their head (Ezek. 11:21; 16:43; 22:31; Joel 3:4, 7; Obad.
15). Woe to those who made kerchiefs upon the head of every stature to
hunt souls (Ezek. 13:18). God shall bruise the head, the hairy crown
(Ps. 68:21). From all this it is now evident that by the "head" is
signified the whole man, and thus that by "pouring oil upon Aaron's
head" is signified the Divine good in the Lord upon the whole Human.
(That when the Lord was in the world He made Himself Divine truth, and
when He departed out of the world He made Himself Divine good, see the
places cited in n. 9315 end, 9199 end.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10012.">10012.</span></span>

And thou shalt bring near his sons. That this signifies the conjunction
of the Divine truth that proceeds from the Lord's Divine good, is
evident from the representation of the sons of Aaron, as being the
Divine truth that proceeds from the Lord's Divine good (see n. 9807);
and from the signification of "bringing near," as being conjunction (see
n. 9806, 10001).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10013.">10013.</span></span>

And shalt clothe them with tunics. That this signifies a representative
of the proceeding Divine spiritual, is evident from the signification of
the "tunics for the sons of Aaron," as being the Divine truth that
proceeds from the Divine spiritual that is represented by the tunic of
Aaron (see n. 9947).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10014.">10014.</span></span>

And thou shalt gird them with a belt. That this signifies a bond of
conjunction, that all things may be kept in connection, and thence in
the heavenly form, is evident from the signification of the "belt," as
being an external bond holding together all the truths and goods of
faith in connection and in form (see n. 9341, 9828, 9837, 9944).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10015.">10015.</span></span>

Aaron and his sons. That this signifies the Lord as to Divine good and
the Divine truth thence proceeding, is evident from the representation
of Aaron, as being the Lord as to Divine good (see n. 9806); and from
the representation of the sons of Aaron, as being the Lord as to the
Divine truth thence proceeding (n. 9807).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10016.">10016.</span></span>

And shalt bind the tiaras on them. That this signifies intelligence from
wisdom, is evident from the signification of "tiaras," as being
intelligence from wisdom (see n. 9949).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10017.">10017.</span></span>

And the priesthood shall be to them. That this signifies the Lord as to
the work of salvation in successive order, is evident from the
signification of "the priesthood," as being a representative of the Lord
as to all the work of salvation (see n. 9809). That it denotes in
successive order is because the subject here treated of is the
priesthood of the sons of Aaron, and by his sons are represented the
things which proceed, thus which succeed in order (n. 9807). The case
herein is this. The priesthood which is represented by Aaron, is the
work of salvation of those who are in the Lord's celestial kingdom,
which kingdom is properly understood in the Word by the "kingdom of
priests;" but the priesthood which is represented by the sons of Aaron,
is the work of salvation of those who are in the Lord's spiritual
kingdom, which proceeds next from His celestial kingdom. Hence it is
that by the "priesthood" is here meant the Lord's work of salvation in
successive order. But the priesthood which is represented by the Levites
is the Lord's work of salvation again proceeding from the former. \[2\]
There are three things which succeed in order: the celestial, which is
the good of love to the Lord; the spiritual, which is the good of
charity toward the neighbor; and the natural thence derived, which is
the good of faith. And because there are these three which succeed in
order, there are also three heavens, and in them goods in this order.
The work of salvation of those who are in celestial good is represented
by the priesthood of Aaron; the work of salvation of those who are in
spiritual good is represented by the priesthood of the sons of Aaron;
and the work of salvation of those who are thence in natural good is
represented by the priesthood of the Levites. And as the things that
succeed in order proceed from the good of love to the Lord, which is
represented by Aaron and his priesthood, therefore it is said of the
Levites that they were "given to Aaron," for the things that proceed
belong to that from which they proceed, because the things proceeding or
successive derive their being from it, according to what was said just
above (n. 10011). (That the Levites were given to Aaron and his sons in
order that they might perform the ministry of the priesthood under them,
see the book of Numbers, chapter 3, verse 1 to the end of the chapter.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10018.">10018.</span></span>

For a statute of an age. That this signifies according to the eternal
laws of order, is evident from the signification of "a statute," as
being a law of order (see n. 7884, 7995, 8357); and from the
signification of "an age," as being eternal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10019.">10019.</span></span>

And thou shalt fill the hand of Aaron and the hand of his sons. That
this signifies inauguration to represent the Divine power of the Lord
through Divine truth from Divine good, is evident from the signification
of "filling the hand," as being to inaugurate to represent the Lord as
to Divine truth from Divine good, and as to the power thence derived.
There were two things by which inauguration into the priesthood was
effected-anointing, and filling the hand; by anointing was effected
inauguration to represent the Lord as to Divine good, for the oil by
which the anointing was done signifies the good of love (see n. 10011);
and by filling the hand was effected inauguration to represent the Lord
as to Divine truth from Divine good, thus as to power. For by the "hand"
is signified power (n. 878, 4931-4937, 5327, 5328, 6947, 7011, 7188,
7189, 7518, 7673, 8050, 8069, 8153); and "hand" is predicated of the
truth which is from good (n. 3091, 3563, 4931, 8281, 9025), because all
power is of truth from good (n. 5623, 6344, 6423, 6948, 8200, 8304,
9327, 9410, 9639, 9643). And as the head and the whole body exercise
their power by the hands, and power is the activity of life with man,
therefore by "hand" is also signified whatever pertains to man, thus the
man himself insofar as his action is concerned (n. 9133); from all which
it can be seen what is signified by "filling the hand." (That the Lord
alone has all power, and that an angel, spirit, or man has none at all,
save what is from the Lord, see n. 8200, 8281, 9327, 9410, 9639.) That
by these two things-anointing and the filling of the hand-inauguration
into the priesthood was effected, was because all things whatsoever that
are and come forth in the heavens and on earth, bear relation to good
and to truth. \[2\] How the filling of the hand was effected is
described in this chapter (verses 9 to 36), and also in Leviticus (8:22
to the end). It was effected by means of the second ram, which is
therefore called "the ram of fillings." The process of filling was that
the ram should be slain, that some of his blood should be put upon the
earlap of the right ear, the thumb of the right hand, and the great toe
of the right foot, of Aaron and his sons; that some of the blood from
the altar, and of the oil of anointing, should be sprinkled upon Aaron
and his sons, and upon their garments; that the fat, the tail, the fat
upon the intestines, the caul of the liver, the kidneys and their fat,
and the right shoulder, of that ram; also the bread, the cakes, and the
wafers of unleavened things from the basket; should be put upon the
palms of Aaron and his sons, and should be waved, and afterward be burnt
upon the burnt-offering of the first ram; that the breast after it was
waved, and the left shoulder, should be for Aaron and his sons, and the
flesh cooked in a holy place and the bread remaining in the basket,
should be eaten by them at the door of the Tent of meeting. This was the
process of filling the hands; but what the particulars signified will of
the Lord's Divine mercy be told in what follows. \[3\] The Divine power
of the Lord, which was represented by the filling of the hands of Aaron
and his sons, is the Divine power of saving the human race; and the
power of saving the human race is power over the heavens and over the
hells. For man is saved by this power of the Lord, and not by any other;
because all the good which is of love, and all the truth which is of
faith, flow in through the heavens from the Lord, and they cannot flow
in unless the hells are removed, for all evil, and from this all
falsity, are from the hells. Man is saved by the removal of the evils
and the derivative falsities that are from the hells, and by the influx
then of the good of love and of the truth of faith through heaven from
the Lord. (That when the Lord was in the world He subjugated the hells,
and reduced the heavens into order, and acquired to Himself Divine power
over them, see n. 9486, 9715, 9809, 9937, and the places cited in n.
9528e.) This power of the Lord is what was represented by the filling of
the hands of the priests; for by the "priesthood" was signified all the
work of the Lord's salvation (n. 9809). \[4\] That the Lord has this
power He Himself teaches in plain words in these passages: All power has
been given to Me in the heavens and on earth (Matt. 28:18). Jesus said
to the seventy who said that the demons were obedient to them, Behold I
give you power to tread upon serpents and upon scorpions, and over all
the power of the enemy; that nothing at all shall harm you. All things
have been delivered to Me by My Father (Luke 10:19, 22). By these words
is described the power of the Lord over the hells; "demons" denote those
who are in the hells; "serpents and scorpions" denote evils and the
falsities of evil; "to tread upon them" denotes to destroy these evils
and falsities; the hells are also meant by "the enemy over which they
were to have power." \[5\] That the Lord acquired this power when He was
in the world, is evident in Isaiah: Who is this that cometh from Edom,
marching in the multitude of his strength, great to save? Mine own arm
performed salvation to Me; therefore He became their Savior (Isa. 63:1,
5, 8); that these things are said of the Lord, is known in the church.
In like manner those said elsewhere in these passages: His own arm
performed salvation to Him, and His righteousness uplifted Him.
Therefore He put on righteousness as a coat of mail, and a helmet of
salvation upon His head; and the Redeemer came to Zion (Isa. 59:16-21).
The saying of Jehovah unto my Lord, Sit Thou at My right hand, until I
make Thine enemies a stool for Thy feet. Jehovah shall send forth the
scepter of Thy strength out of Zion; rule Thou in the midst of Thine
enemies; the Lord is at Thy right hand (Ps. 110). That these things are
said of the Lord, He Himself teaches in Matthew 22:43. His dominion over
the hells is described by "sitting at the right hand;" for by "the right
hand" is signified the power possessed by Divine truth from Divine good.
The hells and the evils and falsities therefrom are the "enemies who
were to be made a stool for His feet," and also the "enemies in the
midst of whom He was to rule." \[6\] That the "right hand of Jehovah"
denotes Divine power, is evident from many passages in the Word; as in
the following: Thy right hand, O Jehovah, is become great in power; Thy
right hand, O Jehovah, breaketh in pieces the enemy (Exod. 15:6). O God,
Thou givest me the shield of salvation, and Thy right hand holdeth me up
(Ps. 18:35). Their arm did not save them; but Thy right hand, and Thine
arm, and the light of Thy faces (Ps. 44:3); it is said "Thy right hand,
and Thine arm, and the light of Thy faces," because the "right hand"
denotes power, the "arm" denotes strength, and the "light of the faces"
denotes Divine truth from Divine good. (That the "arm" denotes strength,
see n. 4932, 4934, 4935, 7205; that "light" denotes Divine truth, n.
9548, 9684; and that "the faces of Jehovah" denote Divine good, n. 222,
5585, 9306.) Again: O God, Thy right hand upholdeth me (Ps. 63:8). O
Jehovah, Thou hast an arm with might; strong is Thy hand, exalted shall
be Thy right hand (Ps. 89:13). Jehovah hath sworn by His right hand, by
the arm of His strength (Isa. 62:8). O Jehovah, let Thy hand be for the
man of Thy right hand, for the son of man Thou hast made strong for
Thyself; then will we not go back from Thee (Ps. 80:17-18). \[7\] From
all this it can now be seen what is meant by the words of the Lord in
these passages: Jesus said, Henceforth ye shall see the Son of man
sitting at the right hand of power (Matt. 26:64). Henceforth shall the
Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God (Luke 22:69). That
"the Son of man" denotes the Lord as to Divine truth, see in n. 9807;
and that "the right hand" denotes Divine power, is evident from what has
now been shown; therefore also it is called "the right hand of power,"
and "the right hand of might." From all this it is now evident what was
represented by the anointing of Aaron and of his sons, and what by the
filling of their hands; namely, by the anointing, the Divine good of the
Divine love in the Lord (see n. 9954 end); and by the filling of their
hands, the Divine truth and the Divine power thence derived. That Divine
good has all power through Divine truth, and that the Lord alone has
this power, may be seen in the passages cited above; therefore also in
the Word of the Old Testament the Lord is called "Hero," a "Man of War,"
and also "Jehovah Zebaoth," or "of armies."

<span class="margnote"><span id="10020.">10020.</span></span>

Verses 10-14. And thou shalt bring near the bullock before the Tent of
meeting; and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of
the bullock. And thou shalt slay the bullock before Jehovah at the door
of the Tent of meeting. And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock,
and shalt put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger; and all
the blood thou shalt pour out at the base of the altar. And thou shalt
take all the fat that covereth the intestines, and the caul upon the
liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and shalt
burn them on the altar. And the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and
his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp; this is sin. "And
thou shalt bring near the bullock," signifies the state of application
of the natural or external man, such as he is in his infancy; "before
the Tent of meeting," signifies for purification, the reception of truth
from heaven, and its conjunction with good; "and Aaron and his sons
shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock," signifies a
representative of the reception of good and truth in the natural or
external man; "and thou shalt slay the bullock before Jehovah,"
signifies preparation for the purification of good and truth from the
Divine in the external or natural man; "at the door of the Tent of
meeting," signifies that there may be conjunction of these; "and thou
shalt take of the blood of the bullock," signifies Divine truth
accommodated in the natural or external man; "and shalt put it upon the
horns of the altar with thy finger," signifies the Divine power of the
Lord from His own; "and all the blood thou shalt pour out at the base of
the altar," signifies Divine truth wholly in the sensuous, which is the
ultimate of man's life; "and thou shalt take all the fat," signifies
good accommodated; "that covereth the intestines," signifies which
pertains to ultimate or lowest things; "and the caul upon the liver,"
signifies the interior good of the external or natural man; "and the two
kidneys, and the fat that is upon them," signifies the interior truth of
the external or natural man, and its good; "and shalt burn them on the
altar," signifies from the Lord's Divine love; "and the flesh of the
bullock," signifies the evil of the former loves there; "and his skin,"
signifies falsity in ultimates; "and his dung," signifies all the other
unclean things; "shalt thou burn with fire without the camp," signifies
that they are to be committed to hell and consumed with the evils of the
love of self; "this is sin," signifies thus purified from evils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10021.">10021.</span></span>

And thou shalt bring near the bullock. That this signifies the state of
application of the natural or external man, such as he is in his
infancy, is evident from the signification of "bringing near," as being
presence and conjunction (see n. 9378, 9997, 10001), and also
application (n. 8439); here application for purification and the
reception of good and truth from the Divine, for this is signified by
this sacrifice and by sacrifices in general; and from the signification
of "the bullock," as being the good of charity and of innocence in the
natural or external man (n. 9391), thus the external or natural man as
he is in his infancy, for then he is in the good of innocence; and while
he is in this state, he is also in a state of application for
purification and for the reception of good and truth from the Divine.
\[2\] As these are the things now treated of in the internal sense, it
must be told how the case herein is. When a man is being regenerated,
which takes place when he comes to mature age, he is then first led into
a state of innocence; but into a state of external innocence, almost
like that of little children, whose innocence is external innocence that
dwells in ignorance. During the man's regeneration, this state is the
plane of the new life, and moreover the man is then like an infant; for
when he is being regenerated, he is conceived anew, is born, becomes an
infant, and grows up to maturity, which is effected by means of truth
implanted in good; and insofar as he then comes into genuine good, so
far he comes into the good of internal innocence, which innocence dwells
in wisdom. And as the regeneration of man is an image of the
glorification of the Lord, it is clear that the Lord glorified Himself,
that is, made His Human Divine, in this way; for in the internal sense
in this chapter the subject treated of is the Lord's glorification (n.
9985). But as the glorification of the Lord in respect to His Human
transcends the understanding, therefore in order that it may in some
measure be apprehended, it is unfolded by means of its image or
likeness. These things have been premised in order that it may be known
what is meant by purification, and by the reception of good and truth,
and by their conjunction, which are signified by sacrifices in general,
and here in particular by the sacrifices of the inauguration of Aaron
and his sons into the priesthood. That the regeneration of man is an
image of the glorification of the Lord, see n. 3138, 3212, 3296, 3490,
4402, 5688: That the innocence of infants is external innocence, and
dwells in ignorance, n. 2305, 2306, 3495, 3504, 4563, 4797, 5608, 9301:
That the man who is being regenerated is conceived anew, is born,
becomes an infant and a child, and grows up to maturity, n. 3203: That
the innocence of infancy is a plane, n. 2780, 3183, 3994, 4797, 5608,
7840: That the knowledges of truth and good are implanted in the
innocence of infancy as their plane, n. 1616, 2299, 3504, 4797: That the
innocence of the regenerate is internal innocence, and dwells in wisdom,
n. 1616, 3495, 3994, 4797, 5608, 9301, 9939: The difference between the
external innocence of little children, and the internal innocence of the
wise, n. 2280, 4563, 9301: That such is the case can be seen from the
education and regeneration of little children in the other life, n.
2289-2309: That all the good of the church and of heaven has innocence
in it, and that without innocence good is not good, n. 2736, 2780, 6013,
7840, 7887, 9262: What innocence is, n. 3994, 4001, 4797, 5236, 6107,
6765, 7902, 9262, 9936.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10022.">10022.</span></span>

Before the Tent of meeting. That this signifies for purification, the
reception of truth from heaven, and its conjunction with good, is
evident from the representation of "the Tent of meeting," as being
heaven where the Lord is (see n. 9457, 9481, 9485). That purification,
the implanting of truth, and its conjunction with good are also
signified here, is because the bullock was brought thither to be
sacrificed, and by sacrifices are signified both purification and the
implanting of truth and of good, and their conjunction. (That by
sacrifices were represented purifications from evils and falsities, and
also expiations, see n. 9990, 9991; and that by the place before the
Tent, which is called the door thereof, is represented the conjunction
of truth and good, which is called the heavenly marriage, n. 10001.)
From this then it is that by "bringing the bullock near before the Tent
of meeting" is signified the application of the external or natural man,
such as he is in his infancy, to his purification from evils and
falsities, and thus to the reception of truth from heaven, and its
conjunction with good. \[2\] As what now follows in this chapter
concerns sacrifices and burnt-offerings, it must be told what was in
general represented by them. By burnt-offerings and sacrifices in
general was represented purification from evils and falsities; and
because purification was represented, there was also represented the
implanting of good and truth from the Lord, and likewise their
conjunction. For when a man has been purified from evils and falsities,
which is effected by their removal, then good and truth from the Lord
flow in, and insofar as good and truth flow in, in this state, so far
they are implanted, and so far they are conjoined; for the Lord is
continually present with good and truth with every man, but He is not
received except insofar as evils and falsities are removed, thus insofar
as the man is purified from them. The conjunction of truth and good is
regeneration. From this it can be seen what was in general represented
by burnt-offerings and by sacrifices; but what was specifically
represented is evident from the animals of different kinds that were
sacrificed. \[3\] As these three things, namely, purification from evils
and falsities, the implanting of truth and good, and the conjunction of
these, were represented by the sacrifices and burnt-offerings, therefore
by them is also signified all worship from the truth of faith and the
good of love (n. 6905, 8680, 8936); for all worship has as its end that
the man may be purified from evils and falsities, consequently that
goods and truths from the Lord may be implanted in him, and that thus he
may be regenerated, which is effected by their conjunction. Their
conjunction is heaven or the Lord's kingdom with the man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10023.">10023.</span></span>

And Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the
bullock. That this signifies a representative of the reception of good
and truth in the natural or external man, is evident from the
signification of "laying on hands," as being to communicate that which
is one's own to another; that it also denotes reception is because that
which is communicated is received by the other; from the signification
of "the head," as being the whole (see n. 10011); and from the
signification of "the bullock," as being the good of innocence and of
charity in the external or natural man (on which see n. 9391, 10021).
That by "laying on the hand" is signified communication and reception,
is because by "the hand" is signified power, and as this is the activity
of life, by "the hand" is also signified whatever pertains to man, thus
the whole man insofar as he is acting (see the places cited in n.
10019); and by the "laying on" is signified communication in respect to
him who lays on, and reception in respect to him, or to that, on which
it is laid. From this is plain what was signified by the laying on of
the hand among the ancients, namely, the communication and transfer of
that which was being dealt with, and also its reception by another,
whether it was power, or obedience, or blessing, or testification. \[2\]
That by the "laying on of the hand" was signified power, is evident from
the following passages in Moses: Jehovah said unto Moses, that he should
lay his hand upon Joshua, and should set him in the presence of Eleazar
the priest before the whole assembly, and thus should give of his glory
upon him, and all the assembly should obey him (Num. 27:18-20); that by
"to lay on the hand" is here signified the communication and transfer of
the power which Moses had, and its reception by Joshua, is plain; and
hence it is said that "thus he should give of his glory upon him." \[3\]
In the same: When the Levites were purified, and the ministry of the
priesthood under Aaron was committed to them, it was commanded that two
bullocks should be brought with a meat-offering, and that Aaron should
bring the Levites before Jehovah, and the sons of Israel should lay
their hands upon the Levites, and the Levites should lay their hands
upon the heads of the bullocks, one of which was to be offered for a
sacrifice, the other for a burnt-offering; and in this way they were to
separate the Levites from the midst of the sons of Israel, and they
should be Jehovah's (Num. 8:7-14); that the sons of Israel were "to lay
their hands upon the Levites" signified the transfer of the power of
ministering for them, and its reception by the Levites, thus separation;
and by the Levites "laying hands upon the head of the bullocks" was
signified the transfer of this power to Jehovah, that is, to the Lord.
Therefore it is said that in this way they should be "separated from the
midst of the sons of Israel, and should be Jehovah's." \[4\] In the
same: After the sons of Israel had confessed their sins, then Aaron was
to lay both his hands upon the head of the living goat Asasel, and was
to confess over him all the iniquities of the sons of Israel, and all
their sins, and was to put them upon the head of the goat, and send him
into the wilderness (Lev. 16:21); that "the laying on of the hands upon
the goat" signified the communication and transfer of all the iniquities
and sins of the sons of Israel, and their reception by the goat, is
plain; "the wilderness whither the goat was to be sent" denotes hell.
That the witnesses and all who heard were "to lay their hands upon him
who was to be stoned" (Lev. 24:14), signified testification so
communicated and transferred, which being received, the man was adjudged
to death. \[5\] In the same: The man who bringeth from the herd or from
the flock a burnt-offering for a gift to Jehovah shall lay the hand on
the head of the burnt-offering; then it shall be received from him with
good pleasure, to expiate him (Lev. 1:2-4). In like manner "upon the
head of the gift that was for sacrifice" (Lev. 3:1, 2, 8, 13). In like
manner was "the priest to do if he sinned," in like manner the elders,
in like manner the whole congregation. Also the chief if he sinned. And
in like manner every soul that sinned. (Lev. 4:4, 15, 24, 29). By the
laying on of their hand upon the burnt-offering and upon the sacrifice
was signified all the worship of him who offered, namely, the
acknowledgment of sins, confession, the consequent purification, the
implantation of good and truth, thus conjunction with the Lord, all of
which were effected by communication, transfer, and reception. By
transfer and reception is meant that which is signified by "bearing
iniquities" (n. 9937, 9938). \[6\] As communications, transfers, and
receptions were signified by the laying on of hands, it may be known
what is signified by the "laying on of hands" in the following passages:
The chief came to Jesus and said, My daughter is even now dead, but come
and lay Thy hand upon her, then she shall live. Jesus entered in, and
took her hand, and the girl arose (Matt. 9:18, 19, 25). Jesus laid His
hand upon the eyes of the blind man, and he was restored (Mark 8:25).
They bring unto Jesus one that was deaf, that He should lay His hand on
him; and He, taking him from the people, put His finger into his ears,
and touched his tongue, and his hearings were opened (Mark 7:32, 33,
35). A woman was bowed down with a spirit of infirmity, and Jesus laid
hands on her, and healed her (Luke 13:11, 13). Jesus laid hands on the
sick, and healed them (Mark 6:5). \[7\] By the "laying on of the hand"
by the Lord, and also by His "touching," is here signified the
communication and reception of Divine power, as is clearly manifest in
Mark: A certain woman came behind, and touched the garment of Jesus,
saying, If I touch but His garment, I shall be healed; and immediately
she was healed of the plague and Jesus knew in Himself that power was
gone forth from Him (Mark 5:27-30). A woman touching the garment of
Jesus was healed; and Jesus said, Some one hath touched Me; for I knew
that power had gone forth from Me (Luke 8:44, 46). The whole crowd
sought to touch Jesus, because power went forth from Him, and healed all
(Luke 6:19). \[8\] From this is plain what is signified by "touching
with the hand" or "finger;" and also what in the same: Jesus came nigh
and touched the bier in which the dead man was, and the bearers stood
still. Then He said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And he that was
dead sat up, and began to speak (Luke 7:14, 15). And what by the "laying
on of the hand upon children" and "upon babes"-"upon children," in
Matthew: There were brought unto Jesus children, that He should lay His
hands upon them. Jesus said, Suffer the children, and forbid them not,
to come unto Me; for of such is the kingdom of the heavens. And He laid
His hands on them (Matt. 19:13-15); and "upon babes," in Mark: Jesus
took babes upon His arms, and put His hands upon them, and blessed them
(Mark 10:16). By the "laying on of the hand upon children" and "upon
babes" is here also signified the communication and reception of Divine
power, through which is the healing of the interiors, which is
salvation. \[9\] That such things are signified by "touching," which is
done with the hands, has its origin from the representatives in the
other life, where they who are in an unlike state of life appear removed
to a distance, but they who are in a like state appear consociated; and
in that life those who touch each other communicate the state of their
life to each other. If this is done by the hands, everything of the life
is communicated, because by the hands, as above said, from the
correspondence, is signified power, which is the active of life; thus
whatever pertains to anyone. Such representatives come forth in the
world of spirits, but they are effected by influx from heaven, where
there are perceived nothing but consociations in respect to the
affections of good and truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10024.">10024.</span></span>

And thou shalt slay the bullock before Jehovah. That this signifies
preparation for the purification of good and truth from the Lord in the
external or natural man, is evident from the signification of "slaying,"
when said of the animals that were offered for burnt-offering or for
sacrifice, as being preparation for those things which are represented
by burnt-offerings and sacrifices - that these were purification from
evils and falsities, the implantation of good and truth, and their
conjunction, may be seen above (n. 10022); and because these are from
the Divine, therefore it is said, "before Jehovah;" and from the
signification of "the bullock," as being the purification of the
external or natural man (see above, n. 9990); hence it is that by
"slaying," when said in the Word of burnt-offerings and sacrifices, is
signified all that which is meant by the burnt-offering and sacrifice
itself, because all this is then meant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10025.">10025.</span></span>

At the door of the Tent of meeting. That this signifies that there may
be conjunction of these, is evident from the signification of "the door
of the Tent of meeting," as being the conjunction of truth and good,
which is called the heavenly marriage (of which above, n. 10001). As
this is signified by "the door of the Tent of meeting," therefore it was
decreed that if the animal offered was slain elsewhere, blood should be
imputed, and that soul should be cut off from his peoples (Lev. 17:3, 4,
8, 9); the reason was that then the conjunction of good and truth, thus
the heavenly marriage, was not represented; but the conjunction of evil
and falsity, which is the infernal marriage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10026.">10026.</span></span>

And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock. That this signifies
Divine truth accommodated in the natural or external man, is evident
from the signification of "blood," as being the Divine truth that
proceeds from the Lord's Divine good (of which below); and from the
signification of "the bullock," as being the natural of man, which is to
be purified, and in which truth and good are to be implanted (see n.
9990). That mention is here first made of "blood," and that it was to be
put on the horns of the altar, and the rest of it poured out at its
base, is because by "blood" in the Word is signified the Divine truth
that proceeds from the Lord's Divine good, and all purification is
effected thereby, for truth teaches man what is good and how he should
live, and when a man knows this, then for the first time can the
affection or love of good be implanted, and thus the man be regenerated.
For knowledge must come first, before man can have faith, and live the
life of faith, which is the life of good. (That all purification from
evils and falsities is effected through the truths of faith,
consequently all regeneration, see the places cited in n. 9959.) \[2\]
They who have no knowledge of the internal sense of the Word, thus who
do not know that by "blood" is signified Divine truth, and that by this
from the Lord is effected purification, believe that man is purified by
the blood of the Lord, by which they understand His passion of the
cross. But be it known to them that no one is purified by the Lord's
passion of the cross, thus by His blood; but by a life according to His
precepts, as He Himself teaches in many places. The passion of the cross
was the last of the Lord's temptation, by which He fully glorified His
Human, as He Himself also says in Luke: Ought not Christ to suffer this,
and to enter into His glory? (Luke 24:26). For the Lord came into the
world that He might subjugate the hells and bring back all things into
order, even in the heavens, which was effected through temptations
admitted into Himself; and the passion of the cross was the last of His
temptation, by which He fully conquered the hells, and set the heavens
in order, and at the same time glorified His Human; and unless He had
done this, no man could have been saved (but see what has been
abundantly shown before on these subjects at the places cited in n.
9528, 9715, 9937, 10019); and that by "the blood of the Lord" is
signified the Divine truth that proceeds from His Divine good (n. 4735,
6378, 6978, 7317, 7326, 7850, 9127, 9393).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10027.">10027.</span></span>

And shalt put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger. That this
signifies the Divine power of the Lord from His own, is evident from the
signification of "the horns of the altar," as being the power of truth
from good (that "horns" denote power, see n. 9081, 9719-9721; and that
the "altar" denotes a representative of the Lord as to Divine good, or a
representative of Divine good in the Lord, n. 9388, 9389, 9714, 9964);
and from the signification of "finger," as being power (n. 7430). That
it denotes from His own power, or from His own, is because this was done
by Moses, and by Moses is represented the Lord as to Divine truth (n.
9372, 9806), wherefore it is said, "with thy finger." That the blood was
first to be put upon the horns of the altar, was in order that there
might be represented the very power of Divine truth from Divine good;
for all things are done by the power of Divine truth from Divine good,
and nothing is done without it (see the places cited in n. 10019).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10028.">10028.</span></span>

And all the blood thou shalt pour out at the base of the altar. That
this signifies Divine truth wholly in the sensuous, which is the
ultimate of man's life, is evident from the signification of "the
blood," as being the Divine truth from the Lord's Divine good (on which
see just above, n. 10026); and from the signification of "the base of
the altar," as being the sensuous which is the ultimate of man's life.
That the base of the altar has this signification is because the altar
was a representative of the Lord's Divine Human, wherefore its base
signifies that which is the ultimate of life in the human, and the
ultimate of life in the human is that which is called the external
sensuous, which is here meant. That the altar was the chief
representative of the Lord's Divine Human, may be seen above (n. 9388,
9389, 9714, 9964); that its base is its ultimate is evident; that this
with man is the external sensuous, and what this is, see also above (n.
9212, 9216, 9996). \[2\] How the case herein is shall be briefly told.
When a man is being purified, then first of all are learned such truths
as can be apprehended by the sensuous man, such as are the truths in the
sense of the letter of the Word; afterward are learned more interior
truths, such as are collected from the Word by those who are in
enlightenment, for these collect its interior sense from various
passages where the sense of the letter is unfolded. From these, when
known, truths still more interior are afterward drawn forth by those who
are enlightened, which truths together with the former serve the church
for doctrine, the more interior truths for doctrine to those who are men
of the internal church, the less interior for doctrine to those who are
men of the external church. Both the former and the latter men, provided
they have lived according to these truths, are taken up into heaven
among the angels, and are there imbued with angelic wisdom, which is
from truths still more interior, and finally is from inmost truths in
the third heaven. These truths, together with the former in their order,
close in the ultimate truths of the external sensuous, and are all
together there. From this it is plain that all interior truths are
together in the truths of the sense of the letter of the Word, for these
truths, as above said, are the ultimate ones. (That all interior things
are stored up in order, and are together in ultimates, see n. 9828,
9836.) From all this it is evident what is meant by Divine truth being
wholly in the sensuous, which is signified by "all the blood being
poured out at the base of the altar."

<span class="margnote"><span id="10029.">10029.</span></span>

And thou shall take all the fat. That this signifies good accommodated,
is evident from the signification of "fat" or "fatness," as being good
(see n. 5943). It is called "good accommodated," because the subject
here treated of is the purification of the external or natural man, and
the implantation of truth and good, and thus the conjunction of both
there, for these are the things signified by the sacrifices and the
burnt-offerings. Therefore by "the fat of the bullock" is here meant
good accommodated to the natural or external man, and which can be
conjoined with the truth there; for truth must be accommodated to its
good, and good to its truth, because they must be a one. Be it also
known that the truth and good in the natural or external man differ from
the truth and good in the internal man, as do what is exterior and what
is interior, or what is lower and what is higher, or what is the same,
what is posterior and what is prior. The truth in the natural is
memory-knowledge, and the good there is the delight of this, both of
which are perceptible to man while he is in the world, for when they are
thought of they are seen. But the truth in the internal man is not
memory-knowledge that is seen, but is truth implanted in its
intellectual part; and the good there also is not perceptible, because
it is implanted in the will part-both in the man's interior life, in
which truth is of faith, and good is of love. Such is the difference
between the truth and good in the internal or spiritual man, and the
truth and good in the external or natural man. The implantation and
conjunction of the latter is signified by the sacrifice from the
bullock, but the implantation and conjunction of the former, by the
burnt-offering from the ram (of which below in this chapter). From all
this it is evident what is meant by "accommodated good," which is
signified by "the fat from the bullock."

<span class="margnote"><span id="10030.">10030.</span></span>

That covereth the intestines. That this signifies which pertains to
ultimate or lowest things, is evident from the signification of "the
intestines," as being ultimate or lowest things. "The intestines" denote
ultimate or lowest things because they are the ultimate and lowest of
man's interior viscera, not only in respect to situation, but also in
respect to use. In respect to situation they are below the stomach, to
which they are appended; and in respect to use, they receive last the
things digested in man. Above them, as is known, are the stomach, liver,
pancreas, and spleen; and still further above are the heart and lungs;
and above all is the head. It is also known that the superior organs
cast their filth and refuse into the intestines, and thereby remove it,
partly by means of the stomach, partly by means of the ducts from the
liver, called the hepatic ducts, and also the cystic or biliary, partly
by means of the ducts from the pancreas, which with the rest have their
outlets into the intestine called the duodenum; from which it is now
evident why ultimate or lowest things are signified by "the intestines."
(That by the viscera in man are signified such things as are of the
spiritual world, can be seen from what has been abundantly shown at the
end of many chapters, where the correspondence of the Grand Man, which
is heaven, with all things in man, has been treated of. What in
particular corresponds to the intestines, see in n. 5392; and that the
hells correspond to the feces and excrements thence ejected, n.
5393-5396.) \[2\] As in what now follows mention is made of some parts
of the body, as the caul, liver, and kidneys, also the legs, breast,
shoulders, and head; and as the ordering of them in the sacrifices is
treated of, it shall first be shown that by man's members in general are
signified such things as are in the Grand Man, that is, in heaven; here
only those by which the statue of Nebuchadnezzar is described in Daniel:
Its head was of pure gold, its breast and arms of silver, its belly and
sides of brass, its legs of iron, and its feet part of iron and part of
clay (Dan. 2:32, 33); one who does not know that the Word of the Lord is
spiritual, believes that this was said of the kingdoms of the earth; but
in the Word the kingdoms of the earth are not treated of, but the
kingdom of God, thus heaven and the church. These are described by such
things as are on earth and in the kingdoms of earth, because worldly and
earthly things correspond to such as are in heaven; for all nature and
the whole world is a theater representative of the Lord's kingdom (see
the places cited in n. 9280), and earthly and worldly things are what
man first apprehends. \[3\] From this it can be seen that by the statue
seen by Nebuchadnezzar in a dream are not signified earthly, but
heavenly things; but what is specifically signified by the head, breast,
belly, and sides, and by the legs and feet, can be known from their
correspondence, thus from the internal sense of the Word. From
correspondence it is known that by the "head" is signified the first
state of the church; by the "breast and arms" the second, by the "belly
and side" the third, by the "legs" the fourth, and by the "feet" the
last. As the first state of the church was a state of good of love to
the Lord, it is said that "the head was of gold;" and as the second
state was a state of truth from this good, it is said that "the breast
and arms were of silver;" and as the third state was the good of love
and its truth in the external or natural man, it is said that "the belly
and sides were of brass;" and as the fourth state was the truth of
faith, it is said that "the legs were of iron;" and as the last state
was truth, which is called of faith, without good, it is said that "the
feet were part of iron and part of clay." And as such a state of the
church was the last, it is said that "out of the rock was cut a stone,
which brake in pieces and scattered all things, so that the wind carried
them away, and no place was found for them" (Dan. 2:34, 35). By this is
signified that the good of love to the Lord, the good of charity toward
the neighbor, and the good of faith, had completely disappeared,
insomuch that it was not known what they are; but only something about
the truths of faith without good, or with good which is not good, thus
which does not cohere with the truths of faith. \[4\] This good is
external good without internal, such as is the good of merit, good for
the sake of self and for the sake of the world; thus for the sake of
profit, honor, and reputation; for the sake of friendship on account of
these, or for the sake of favor; and also merely on account of the fear
of the law; and not for the sake of the good of charity, which is the
good of one's fellow-citizen the good of human society, the good of our
country, and the good of the church. \[5\] Such goods as are mentioned
above are signified by "clay," or "mire," and the truth with which this
good does not cohere is "iron." Therefore it is said: The iron, which
thou sawest mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the
seed of man, but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron doth
not mingle with clay (Dan. 2:43); "the seed of man" denotes the truth of
faith from man's own, thus truth falsified and adulterated by
application to evils from regard to self and the world. From all this it
is evident that by the members of man, from his head down to the sole of
the foot, are signified such things as belong to the church. \[6\] (That
in general the "head" signifies celestial good, which is the good of
love to the Lord; the "breast," spiritual good, which is the good of
charity toward the neighbor; and the "feet," natural good, which is the
good and truth of faith, see n. 9913, 9914; also that similar things are
signified by "gold," "silver," "brass," and "iron," n. 5658; what is
specifically signified by the "head," see n. 4938, 4939, 5328, 9913,
9914; what by "gold," n. 113, 1551, 1552, 5658, 9510, 9881; what by the
"breast," n. 4938, 4939, 5328, 6436, 9913, 9914; what by "silver," n.
1551, 5658, 6914, 6917. From this it is evident what is signified by the
"belly" and the "sides," which are below the breast; but what is
signified by "brass," see n. 425, 1551; what by the "feet," n. 2162,
3147, 3761, 4938-4952; what by "iron," n. 425, 426; and what by "clay,"
or "mire," n. 1300, 6669.) \[7\] From all this it can now be known that
by the members and viscera of man are signified such things as
correspond to those in the Grand Man, or in heaven, all of which bear
relation to the good of love and the truth of faith; and the things that
correspond to these correspond also to the same things in the church,
for the Lord's heaven on earth is the church. That there is a
correspondence of man and of all things pertaining to man with the Grand
Man, which is heaven, see what has been shown from experience itself at
the end of many chapters, at these places, n. 3624-3649, 3741-3751,
3883-3896, 4039-4051, 4218-4228, 4318-4331, 4403-4421, 4527-4533,
4622-4633, 4652-4660, 4791-4805, 4931-4953, 5050-5061, 5171-5189,
5377-5396, 5552-5573, 5711-5727, 5846-5866, 5976-5993, 6053-6058,
6189-6215, 6307-6326, 6466-6495. Also what correspondence is, n.
2987-3003, 3213-3227, 3337-3352, 3472-3485.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10031.">10031.</span></span>

And the caul upon the liver. That this signifies the interior good of
the external or natural man, is evident from the signification of "the
caul which is upon the liver," as being the interior good of the
external or natural man. That "the caul" denotes this good is because it
is all fat, and by "fat" is signified good (see above, n. 10029). That
it denotes interior good is because this fat is higher or more inward in
the body than the fat which covers the intestines (of which just above).
By "the liver" also is signified interior purification, for the liver
purifies the blood, but the intestines purify those things from which
the blood is derived. That it denotes the good of the external or
natural man, is because by the "bullock," in which is this caul, is
signified the good of innocence and of charity in the external or
natural man (n. 9990). Elsewhere by "the liver" is signified the
external good of innocence such as belongs to infants, because before
the rest of the viscera have been fully formed for their use, which is
the case when the infants are embryos, these are nourished through the
liver, for all the nutritious juice is brought there through the
placenta and the umbilical cord from the womb of the mother. This juice
corresponds to the good of innocence. \[2\] That this good is signified
by "the liver" is evident in Jeremiah: Mine eyes have been consumed by
tears, my inwards have been troubled, my liver hath been poured forth on
the earth, for the breach of the daughter of my people; the infant and
the suckling faint in the streets, they say to their mothers, Where is
grain and wine? (Lam. 2:11, 12); in this passage is described the grief
of the vastated church; grief for destroyed truth is signified by "the
eyes being consumed by tears;" grief for the destroyed truth of
innocence, by "the inwards being troubled;" and grief for the destroyed
good of innocence, by "the liver being poured forth on the earth."
Wherefore the infant and the suckling are said to "faint in the
streets," and "they say to their mothers, Where is grain and wine?" "The
daughter of the people for whose breach is this grief," denotes the
church (n. 2362, 3963, 6729); "eyes" denote the things of the internal
sight, thus the truths of faith (n. 4526, 4528, 9051); "the inwards"
denote the truths of innocence (n. 3294); "the liver" denotes the good
of innocence; for "the infants and sucklings who faint in the streets"
denote those who are in the good of innocence (n. 430, 3183, 4563,
5608); "the grain and wine" concerning which "they say to their mothers,
Where are they?" denote the good of truth and the truth of good;
"grain," the good of truth (n. 5959); "wine," the truth of good (n.
1071, 1798).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10032.">10032.</span></span>

And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them. That this signifies
the interior truth of the external or natural man, and its good, is
evident from the signification of "the kidneys," as being interior
truths (of which below); and from the signification of "fat," as being
good (of which above, n. 10029); that it denotes the good of this truth
is because it was the fat upon the kidneys. It is said "the good of this
truth," because every good has its own truth, and every truth its own
good. There are innumerable kinds of good, and every kind of good has a
truth which is of the same kind; for in the universal heaven there are
goods and truths which make the life there, and they are everywhere
various. The quality of the good which is signified by "the fat upon the
kidneys," is evident from the truths which are signified by "the
kidneys." By "the kidneys" are signified truths which explore, purify,
and correct, taking this signification from their function. This shows
what is signified by "kidneys," or "reins," in the following passages:
Jehovah trieth the reins and the heart (Jer. 11:20). Thou that triest
the hearts and the reins, O just God (Ps. 7:9). O Jehovah, explore my
reins and my heart (Ps. 26:2). O Jehovah, Thou possessest my reins (Ps.
139:13). I am He who searcheth the reins and the heart (Rev. 2:23). "To
search," and "to try, the kidneys," or "reins," denotes to explore the
truths of faith; and "to search," and "try, the heart" denotes to
explore the goods of love, for "the heart" denotes the good of love (n.
3883-3896, 7542, 9050). That the truths of faith are signified by "the
kidneys" is very evident in David: O Jehovah, Thou desirest truth in the
reins (Ps. 51:6). That by "the kidneys" is signified interior truth and
its exploration, is because by the ureters and the bladder, which go
forth from the kidneys, is signified exterior truth and its exploration,
as also its correction (n. 5381-5384).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10033.">10033.</span></span>

As the subject treated of in this chapter is the sacrifice and the
burnt-offering by which Aaron and his sons were to be inaugurated into
the priesthood, a few more words shall be said about the blood and the
fat. That all the blood of the sacrifice and of the burnt-offering was
to be poured forth at the altar, and that all the fat was to be burned
on the altar, is evident from the statutes and the laws concerning the
burnt-offerings and the sacrifices in Leviticus. That it was so done was
because the "blood" signified Divine truth, and the "fat" Divine good.
(That "blood" had this signification is evident from what was shown
concerning blood in n. 4735, 6378, 6978, 7317, 7326, 7850, 9127, 9393;
and that "fat" signified Divine good, from what was shown in n. 5943.)
\[2\] That by "blood" is signified Divine truth is evident in Ezekiel:
Gather yourselves from every side upon My sacrifice that I do sacrifice
for you, a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat
flesh and drink blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink
the blood of the princes of the earth; ye shall eat fat to satiety, and
drink blood even to drunkenness, of My sacrifice which I will sacrifice
for you; ye shall be sated upon My table with horse, with chariot, with
the mighty man, and every man of war. Thus will I put My glory among the
nations (Ezek. 39:17-22); everyone can see that by "blood" is not here
meant blood, for it is said that they should "drink the blood of the
princes of the earth, and this even to drunkenness;" and also that they
should "eat fat even to satiety;" and then that they should be "sated
with horse and with chariot." From this it is plain that something else
than blood is meant by "blood," and something else than the princes of
the earth by these "princes;" also something else than fat, and than
horse and chariot, by "fat" and "horse" and "chariot;" but what is
signified cannot be known except by means of the internal sense, which
teaches that "blood" denotes Divine truth; "the princes of the earth,"
the primary truths of the church; "fat," Divine good; a "horse," the
internal sense of the Word; and a "chariot," the very doctrine
therefrom. That "blood" denotes Divine truth is evident from the
passages above cited; also that "the princes of the earth" denote
primary truths (n. 5044); "the earth," the church (n. 9325); a "horse,"
the internal sense of the Word (n. 2760-2762); and a "chariot," doctrine
(n. 5321, 8215). \[3\] From all this it is now evident what is signified
by the words of the Lord in John: Jesus said, Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink His blood, ye shall have no life in you. He
that eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood hath eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day. For My flesh is food indeed, and My
blood is drink indeed. He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood,
abideth in Me, and I in him (John 6:53-56). (That "flesh" denotes Divine
good, see n. 3813, 7850, 9127; and that "the Son of man whose flesh they
were to eat and whose blood they were to drink" denotes the Lord as to
Divine truth from Divine good, n. 9807.) \[4\] But that "fat," or
"fatness," denotes Divine good, is evident in these passages: In this
mountain Jehovah shall make for all peoples a feast of fat things (Isa.
25:6). Attend unto Me, and eat ye good, and your soul shall be delighted
in fatness (Isa. 55:2). I will fill the soul of the priests with
fatness, and My people shall be sated with My good (Jer. 31:14). From
all this it can be seen why all the fat of the sacrifice was to be burnt
upon the altar, and why all the blood was to be poured forth at its
side. \[5\] As "blood" and "fat" signified these Divine things,
therefore the Israelitish people were wholly forbidden to eat fat and
blood, as is evident in Moses: It shall be a statute of eternity in your
generations, that ye shall eat no fat and no blood (Lev. 3:17). Ye shall
eat no fat, whether of ox, or sheep, or goat; everyone who shall eat the
fat of the beast of which an offering is made by fire unto Jehovah, the
soul that eateth it shall be cut off from his peoples (Lev. 7:23, 25).
Whosoever shall eat any blood, I will set My faces against the soul that
eateth blood, and will cut him off from the midst of his people (Lev.
17:10-14; also Deut. 12:23-25). \[6\] The reason why to eat fat and
blood was so severely forbidden, was because by it was represented the
profanation of Divine truth and Divine good; for the Israelitish and
Jewish nation was in external things separate from internal, thus in no
Divine truth and in no Divine good in respect to faith and love; but was
in external worship without these; for they were in the love of self and
of the world more than other nations, consequently in the evils that
spring from this love, which are contempt for others, enmity, hatred,
revenge, ferocity, and cruelty. Hence also it was that internal truths
were not revealed to them, for if they had been revealed, they could not
but have profaned them. (That such was the character of that nation, see
the places cited in n. 9320, 9380.) Therefore they would have
represented profanation if they had eaten blood and fat, for whatever
was instituted among them was representative of the interior things of
the church and of heaven. \[7\] From this again it is plain what is
signified by "eating fat to satiety," and by "drinking blood, the blood
of the princes of the earth, even to drunkenness," in Ezekiel 39:17-22
(of which above); namely, that when interior things were opened, then to
those who were in them, that is, in faith and in love to the Lord, would
be appropriated Divine truth and Divine good, which was done among the
nations when the Lord came into the world; wherefore also it is there
said, "Thus will I put My glory among the nations" (Ezek. 39:21). By
"glory" is signified Divine truth proceeding from the Lord, such as it
is in heaven (n. 9429); and by "nations" are signified all who are in
good (n. 1259, 1260, 1416, 1849, 4574, 6005, 8771, 9256). \[8\] This the
Lord Himself confirms when He says that "His flesh is food indeed, and
His blood is drink indeed," and that "whoso eateth His flesh, and
drinketh His blood, abideth in Him, and He in him" (John 6:55, 56); and
also in His instituting the Holy Supper, in which they were to "eat His
flesh and drink His blood" (Matt. 26:27, 28); by which is signified the
appropriation of Divine good and Divine truth from Him; and the
appropriation of Divine good and Divine truth from the Lord is possible
with those only who acknowledge the Lord's Divine, for this is the first
and essential thing itself of all things of faith in the church. For
heaven cannot be unclosed to others, because the whole heaven is in this
faith; thus the Divine truth that proceeds from the Lord's Divine good,
which is there meant by "blood," cannot be communicated to others.
Therefore let everyone within the church take heed to himself lest he
deny the Lord, and also lest he deny His Divine, for heaven is closed to
this denial, and hell is opened to it, all such being separated from
heaven, where the Divine of the Lord is all in all, because it makes
heaven. And when heaven has been closed, a memory-knowledge of the
truths of faith from the Word and the doctrine of the church is indeed
possible; but not any faith which is faith, for faith which is faith
comes from above; that is, through heaven from the Lord. \[9\] That the
Lord so spoke, namely, that He called the Divine good that proceeds from
Him His "flesh," and the Divine truth that proceeds from His Divine good
His "blood," was because the Word, which is from Him, was the Divine
that fills the universal heaven. Such a Word must exist by means of
correspondences, consequently must be representative and significative
in each and all things, for thus and no otherwise it conjoins the men of
the church with the angels in the heavens. For when men perceive the
Word according to the letter, the angels perceive it according to the
internal sense; thus instead of the Lord's "flesh" they perceive Divine
good, and instead of His "blood," Divine truth, both from the Lord. From
this what is holy flows in through the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10034.">10034.</span></span>

And shalt burn them on the altar. That this signifies from the Lord's
Divine love, is evident from the signification of "burning," as being
the kindling of the Divine love; and from the representation of the
altar, as being a representative of the Lord in respect to the Divine
good of love (see n. 9388, 9389, 9714). That "to burn" denotes the
kindling of the Divine love, is because the Divine love was signified by
the fire upon the altar (n. 6832).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10035.">10035.</span></span>

And the flesh of the bullock. That this signifies the evil of the former
loves there, is evident from the signification of "flesh," as being the
good of love, and in the opposite sense the evil of love (of which
below); and from the signification of "the bullock," as being the
external or natural (of which above). For by a "bullock" and a "calf" in
a good sense is signified the external or natural of man in respect to
the good of innocence and of charity; but in the opposite sense, the
external or natural of man in respect to the evil which is contrary to
the good of innocence and of charity; for in the Word most things have
also an opposite sense. That "the flesh of the bullock" here signifies
the evil of the former loves in the external or natural man, is because
by "flesh" is signified man's will, thus his own, for that which is of
the will is his own; and as by "flesh" is signified the will or own,
therefore by it is also signified the good of love, or the evil of love.
For in man there are two faculties called understanding and will. To the
understanding pertain truths or falsities; but to the will, goods or
evils. Thus to the understanding pertain the things of faith, and to the
will the things of love, because the things of love are perceived as
goods, and the things of faith are perceived as truths. Moreover, with
those who are in falsities and evils, falsities are of faith, and evils
are of love. \[2\] From this it can be seen what is meant by the own of
the will, which is signified by "flesh" in both senses. Be it known
further that all the own of the will of man is evil, because from
himself man loves nothing but himself and the world, and if he loves his
neighbor it is for the sake of himself. Therefore he must be
regenerated, and through regeneration receive a new will; but the will
which he receives through regeneration is not of the man, but of the
Lord with the man. When this will or will part is meant by "flesh," then
"flesh" signifies the good of love. (But see what has already been shown
concerning "flesh," and concerning own, namely, that "flesh" signifies
the Lord's own which is Divine good, and from this it signifies all the
good of love with the regenerate man, n. 3813, 7850, 9127; and that in
the opposite sense it signifies the own of the will of man, which is the
evil of love, n. 999, 3813, 8409.) (That the Lord's own denotes the
Divine good, and from this the good of love to Him and toward the
neighbor, because the Lord's own is that which gives the life of heaven
to man when he is being regenerated, see n. 1023, 1044, 1937, 1947,
3812, 5660, 5786, 8480; and that man's own is nothing but evil, n. 210,
215, 694, 874-876, 987, 1047, 3812, 4328, 5660, 5786, 8480, 8497.) That
by "the flesh of this bullock" is signified the evil of love, is evident
from what follows in this verse, namely, that the flesh, the skin, and
the dung were to be burned without the camp, because they were sin. But
what was represented by the command that the flesh of the sacrifice was
to be eaten by the priest and by the people in the holy place, will be
seen below (n. 10040).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10036.">10036.</span></span>

And its skin. That this signifies falsity in ultimates, is evident from
the signification of the "skin," or "hide," as being truth in ultimates,
and in the opposite sense falsity there. This signification of the
"skin" or "hide" is from correspondence, for those who in the Grand Man
or heaven bear relation to the skin, are those who are in the truths of
faith, and not so much in the corresponding good, and who are on the
threshold of heaven (see n. 5552-5559); hence by "skin" or "hide" in the
abstract sense is signified truth in ultimates (n. 3540, 8980). That
here by the "skin" is signified falsity in ultimates, is because by the
"flesh" is signified the evil of love (of which just above, n. 10035);
and when "flesh" signifies the evil of love, its "skin" signifies the
falsity of faith thence derived.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10037.">10037.</span></span>

And its dung. That this signifies all the other unclean things, is
evident from the signification of "dung," as being what is unclean. That
"dung" signifies what is unclean, consequently evil and falsity, for in
the spiritual sense these are unclean, is because all that is useless
and worn out of the food goes into dung and into ordure, and in the
spiritual sense "food" denotes the truth and good of faith and of love
(see n. 4792, 5147, 5293, 5340, 5342, 5576, 5915, 8562, 9003). Hence
also it is that dung, ordure, and excrement correspond to evils which
are in hell, which also in the Word is called "the draught" (in regard
to which correspondence see above, n. 954, 2755, 4948, 5394, 5395,
7161). \[2\] Hence then it is that such things in the Word signify
things infernal, as can be seen from the following passages. In Isaiah:
He that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be
called holy, everyone that is written unto life in Jerusalem, when the
Lord shall have washed away the excrement of the daughters of Zion, and
shall have washed away the bloods of Jerusalem (Isa. 4:3, 4); by "Zion"
and "Jerusalem" is signified the church, by "Zion" the church with those
who are in the good of love, and by "Jerusalem" with those who are in
truths from this good; "to wash away the excrement of the daughters of
Zion" denotes to purify from evils those in the church who are in the
good of love, and "to wash away the bloods of Jerusalem" denotes to
purify from falsities of evil those in the church who are in truths.
\[3\] In Jeremiah: They shall draw out the bones of the kings of Judah,
and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the priests, and the
bones of the prophets, and shall spread them before the sun and the
moon, and all the army of the heavens, which they had loved, and which
they had served; they shall not be gathered, nor buried; they shall be
for dung upon the faces of the earth (Jer. 8:1, 2); by these words is
described the state of those who have profaned the goods and truths of
the church, which state at that time was also represented by the drawing
out of bones from the sepulchers; "the bones of kings and of princes
drawn out from sepulchers" signify truths profaned; "the bones of
priests and of prophets" signify goods profaned; "to be spread before
the sun, the moon, and all the army of the heavens," signifies removal
from all good and truth; "not to be gathered, nor buried," signifies no
resurrection to life; "to be dung on the faces of the earth" signifies
to be nothing but infernal. Again: They shall die by deaths of malignant
diseases, so that they shall not be bewailed, neither shall they be
buried; they shall be for dung on the faces of the earth (Jer. 16:4;
25:33); by "dung on the faces of the earth" is signified the like as
above. \[4\] In Lamentations: They who did eat dainties were devastated
in the streets; they that were brought up on crimson have embraced
dunghills (Lam. 4:5); "they who did eat dainties" denote those who have
the Word and from it the knowledges of truth; "they that were brought up
on crimson" denote those who are in the knowledges of good; "to embrace
dunghills" denotes to learn and choose falsities in place of these. In
Malachi: If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay to heart, I will
send a curse upon you, and will scatter dung upon your faces, the dung
of your feasts (Mal. 2:2, 3); "to scatter dung upon the faces" denotes
to defile the interiors of life with the falsities of evil; "the dung of
feasts" denotes to defile the holy things of worship. \[5\] In Ezekiel:
The prophet was commanded to make a cake of barley with the dung of
human excrement, because thus do the sons of Israel eat their unclean
bread. But he said, Ah, Lord Jehovih, my soul hath not been polluted;
there hath not come into my mouth the flesh of abomination. Then He
answered, I give thee the excrement of an ox instead of the dung of man,
that thou mayest make thy bread with it; for I will cause them to lack
bread and water, and a man and his brother shall be desolated, and shall
pine away because of their iniquity (Ezek. 4:9, 12-17); by these things
was represented the quality of the good and truth of the church of the
Jewish nation; "a cake of barley with the dung of human excrement"
signifies the interior good of the church defiled with the evils of the
love of self; "a cake with the excrements of an ox" signifies the
external good of the church defiled with the evils of this love. \[6\]
Because these things are signified by the "cake," it is said that they
"should lack bread and water," and "should be desolated;" "bread and
water" denote good and truth; "to lack them," and "to be desolated,"
denote to be deprived of them. Because such things were signified by
"dung," "ordure," and "excrement," it is plain what is signified by
these words in Moses: There shall be a space without the camp, whither
thou shalt go forth abroad; and thou shalt have a paddle, with which
thou shalt cover thine excrement; for Jehovah God walketh in the midst
of thy camp; that thy camp may be holy, and He see not in thee the
nakedness of anything, and turn back from behind thee (Deut. 23:12-15);
this was commanded because what is unclean was represented by the
ordure; for by the camp where the sons of Israel were, was represented
heaven and the church, where the Lord is present through faith and love;
and therefore by the "space without the camp" was represented where
heaven and the church are not, thus where the Lord is not present
through faith and love. Therefore it is said that "the camp should be
holy, lest Jehovah walking in the midst of the camp should see the
nakedness of anything and should turn back." "Nakedness" denotes what is
unclean by reason of evils and falsities. (That "the camp" there
signified heaven and the church, where the Lord is, will be seen in what
now follows.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10038.">10038.</span></span>

Shalt thou burn with fire without the camp. That this signifies that
those things were to be committed to hell, and to be defiled with the
evils of the love of self, is evident from the signification of "burning
with fire," as being to consume with the evils of the love of self; for
by "burning" is signified consuming, and by "fire" the evil of the love
of self (see n. 1297, 5071, 5215, 6314, 6832, 7324, 7575, 9141, 9434);
and from the signification of "the camp," as being heaven and the
church, and in the opposite sense where heaven and the church are not,
thus hell (of which in what follows). That "to be burned with fire"
denotes to be consumed by the evils of the love of self, is because this
love consumes all the goods and truths of faith. That the love of self
does this is known to scarcely anyone at this day, and consequently
neither is it known that this love is hell with man, and that it is
meant by "hell fire." \[2\] For there are two fires of life with man;
one is the love of self, the other is love to God. They who are in the
love of self cannot be in love to God, because these loves are opposite.
They are opposite because the love of self produces all evils, which are
contempt for others in comparison with self, enmity against those who do
not favor, and finally hatreds, revenges, ferocities, cruelties; which
evils wholly resist the Divine influx, and consequently extinguish the
truths and goods of faith and of charity, for these are what flow in
from the Lord. Anyone who reflects is able to know that everyone's love
is the fire of his life; for without love there is no life, and such as
the love is such is the life; and from this it can be known that the
love of self produces evils of every kind, and that it so far produces
them as it is regarded as the end, that is, so far as it reigns. The
worst kind of the love of self is the love of ruling for the sake of
self, that is, solely for the sake of honor and self-advantage. They who
are in this love are indeed able to make a profession of faith and
charity; but they do this with the mouth, and not with the heart; nay,
the worst of them regard the things of faith and charity, thus the holy
things of the church, as means to attain their ends. But of the Lord's
Divine mercy I will speak specifically of the love of self, and its
various kinds, and the evils that spring from it, and of the state of
such in the other life. These things have been said that it may be known
what is denoted by being "burnt with fire without the camp." \[3\] That
the camp where the sons of Israel encamped represented heaven and the
church, and hence that "without the camp" denotes where heaven and the
church are not, thus hell, can be seen from what is related in the Word
about the camp and the encamping of the sons of Israel in the
wilderness, as from these words in Moses: The sons of Israel shall
encamp, every man by his own camp, and every man by his own standard,
according to their armies; and the Levites shall encamp around the
Habitation of the testimony, that there be no wrath upon the
congregation of the sons of Israel (Num. 1:52, 53; 2:2). The tribes of
Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun encamped to the east; the tribes of Reuben,
Simeon, and Gad to the south; the tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh, and
Benjamin to the west; and the tribes of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali to the
north; but the Levites in the midst of the camp (Num. 2:10). Their
encampments were so ordered that they might represent heaven and the
church (n. 9320); by the tribes also, according to which they encamped,
were represented all the goods and truths of heaven and the church in
the complex (n. 3858, 3926, 3939, 4060, 6335, 6337, 6397, 6640, 7836,
7891, 7996, 7997); hence it is said that "Jehovah dwelt in the midst of
the camp" (Num. 5:3), and that "He walketh in the midst of them, and
therefore they shall be holy" (Deut. 23:14); and in the prophetic
utterance of Balaam it is said, "when he saw Israel dwelling according
to their tribes, he said, How good are thy tabernacles, O Jacob, and thy
habitations, O Israel" (Num. 24:2, 3, 5). \[4\] As by the camp was
represented heaven and the church, it follows that by "without the camp"
was signified where heaven and the church are not, thus hell; and
therefore everyone that was unclean and also that was guilty was sent
forth thither, as can be seen from the following passages: Ye shall send
forth out of the camp every leper, and everyone that suffereth with an
issue, everyone unclean on account of a soul, from a male even to a
female, ye shall send them abroad out of the camp, that they pollute not
the camp, in the midst of which Jehovah dwelleth (Num. 5:2, 3; Lev.
13:45, 46). A man that is not clean by chance of the night shall go
abroad out of the camp, and shall not come into the midst of the camp;
when he shall wash himself in waters, and the sun hath set, he shall
enter into the camp. Thou shalt have a space without the camp, whither
thou mayest go forth abroad, and thou shall cover thine excrement with a
paddle, because Jehovah walketh in the midst of the camp; therefore the
camp shall be holy (Deut. 23:10-15). It was also commanded that persons
should be stoned "without the camp" (Lev. 24:14; Num. 15:35, 36). From
all this it is now evident that by "burning with fire the flesh, skin,
and dung of the bullock without the camp," is signified that the evils
which are signified by these things were to be committed to hell. \[5\]
The like that was represented by the camp, and without the camp, was
also represented by the land of Canaan and the lands round about it,
after that land had been distributed for inheritances among the sons of
Israel. From this it is that by the "land of Canaan," and simply by
"land," in the Word, are signified heaven and the church, and by the
"sons of Israel" those who are in heaven and the church. (That by "land"
\[or "earth"\] is signified heaven and the church, see the places cited
in n. 9325; and that by the "sons of Israel" are signified those who are
there, n. 9340.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10039.">10039.</span></span>

It is sin. That this signifies thus purified from evils and falsities,
is evident from the signification of "sin," when by it is meant
sacrifice, as being purification from evils and falsities; for in the
original tongue by "sin," where sacrifices are treated of, is meant
sacrifice for sin, and by "sacrifice" is signified purification from
evils and falsities (n. 9990, 9991). (That in the Word sacrifice for sin
is called "sin," see Leviticus 4:3, 8, 14, 20, 21, 24, 25, 29, 33, 34;
5:6, 8, 9; 16:9, 25; and elsewhere.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10040.">10040.</span></span>

As the flesh of the bullock with its skin and dung was to be burnt with
fire without the camp, it can be seen that by its "flesh" was not
signified the good of love, but the evil of love, according to what was
said of its flesh above (n. 10035), and of the camp just above (n.
10038). But that the eating of the flesh of the sacrifice was allowed,
as can be seen from the passages which follow, was because that nation,
while in worship, was in the external without the internal (see the
places cited in n. 9320, 9380); and the external without the internal is
not at all holy, because then there is only gesture of the body and
speech of the mouth, and the heart and soul are absent. Nevertheless the
external without the internal was called holy, because it represented
holy internal things. Holy internal things are all things that belong to
love and faith from the Lord to the Lord. As that nation was of this
character, they were not allowed to eat blood and fat, because by
"blood" was signified the Divine truth which is of faith, and by "fat"
the Divine good which is of love, both from the Lord (see above, n.
10033); but they were allowed to eat the flesh of the sacrifice, because
it signified what is man's own (n. 10035), and the own of that nation
was to worship external things as holy, and to make no account whatever
of internal things; which worship, except as a representative that was
holy, was idolatrous (n. 4281, 4311). Moreover, representatively "flesh"
is nothing else, seeing that its blood represented Divine truth and its
fat Divine good (n. 10033), for in this case the flesh represented
something without life and soul, which is called dead, as is the
external without the internal, according to these words in Moses: Thou
shalt not eat the blood, for the blood is the soul; than shalt not eat
the soul with the flesh (Deut. 12:23). \[2\] Worship is nearly similar
with the Gentile people of the Catholic religion, as it is called,
namely, external without internal; for it is not granted to the common
people to know the internal things of the Word, seeing that they are not
allowed to read the Word. For this reason also it has of the Lord's
Divine Providence come to pass that in the Holy Supper the bread is
given, which is "the flesh;" and not the wine, which is "the blood;" and
yet the blood is what gives life to the flesh, as the wine does to the
bread. For as bread without wine does not give nourishment to the body,
so neither does the good of love, which is signified by "bread" and by
"flesh," without the truth of faith, which is signified by "wine" and by
"blood," give nourishment to the soul. By the Divine Providence of the
Lord it has also come to pass that the priest should drink up the wine,
because by this is signified the nourishment of the soul by Divine truth
without the good of love, which is a holy external without a holy
internal. That this has come to pass by the Divine Providence of the
Lord they do not know, because they idolatrously adore external things,
and thus do not apprehend internal ones; and therefore if they had acted
differently they would have profaned holy things just like the Jews. By
drinking wine alone, is also signified alone to know Divine truth, and
not the common people, except insofar and in such a way as the priests
wish, as also is the case there. (That in the Holy Supper the flesh and
the bread denote the Divine good of the Lord's Divine love toward the
human race, and the reciprocal love of man to the Lord; and that the
blood and the wine denote the Divine truth that proceeds from the Lord's
Divine good, thus the truth of faith from the Lord to the Lord, see n.
3464, 3813, 4211, 4217, 4735, 4976, 6135, 6377, 6789, 7850, 9127.) As
regards the flesh of the sacrifices, when it was to be brought forth out
of the camp, and burned with fire, see Leviticus 4:11, 12, 21; and when
and by whom it was to be eaten, Leviticus 6:19 to the end; 7:6, 15-19;
19:5, 6; Deuteronomy 12:7, 17, 18, 27; 26:6, 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10041.">10041.</span></span>

Verses 15-18. And thou shalt take one ram, and Aaron and his sons shall
lay their hands upon the head of the ram. And thou shalt slay the ram,
and thou shalt take its blood, and sprinkle it upon the altar round
about. And thou shalt cut the ram into its pieces, and shalt wash its
intestines, and its legs, and put them upon its pieces, and upon its
head. And thou shalt burn with the whole ram upon the altar; this is a
burnt-offering unto Jehovah; an odor of rest, an offering made by fire
unto Jehovah is this. "And thou shalt take one ram," signifies the good
of innocence in the internal man; "and Aaron and his sons shall lay
their hands," signifies the communication of power; "upon the head of
the ram," signifies with the whole; "and thou shalt slay the ram,"
signifies preparation for the purification of the internal man; "and
thou shalt take its blood," signifies Divine truth; "and sprinkle it
upon the altar round about," signifies conjunction with Divine good;
"and thou shalt cut the ram into its pieces," signifies that the
interior things are to be set in order in a distinct manner; "and shalt
wash its intestines," signifies the purification of the lowest things;
"and its legs," signifies the purification of the exterior things of the
natural man; "and put them upon its pieces, and upon its head,"
signifies the setting in order of exterior things under internal and
inmost ones; "and thou shalt burn with the whole ram upon the altar,"
signifies the internal of the Lord's Divine Human united to the Divine
good of His Divine love, which was in Himself; "this is a burnt-offering
unto Jehovah," signifies the glorification of the Lord's Human; "an odor
of rest," signifies perceptivity of peace; "an offering made by fire to
Jehovah is this," signifies all from the Divine love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10042.">10042.</span></span>

And thou shalt take one ram. That this signifies the good of innocence
in the internal man, is evident from the signification of a "ram," as
being the good of innocence and of charity in the internal man (of which
in what follows). As in this chapter the sacrifices and burnt-offerings
of rams and of lambs are treated of, it must be told what was signified
by the animals in general that were offered in the sacrifices and
burnt-offerings. These animals were oxen, bullocks, he-goats, rams,
she-goats, and he-kids; also he-lambs, she-lambs, and she-kids. One who
does not know what these animals signify, cannot possibly know what is
specifically signified by the sacrifices and burnt-offerings of them. Be
it known that all animals on the earth signify such things as are in
man, which in general bear relation to the affections of his will and
the thoughts of his understanding, thus to goods and truths, for goods
are of the will, and truths are of the understanding. And as they bear
relation to goods and truths, they also bear relation to love and faith,
for all things of love are called goods, and all things of faith are
called truths. \[2\] That animals of different kinds have such a
signification has its cause in the representatives in the other life;
for in that life there appear animals of many genera and innumerable
species. Such animals there are appearances to the very life,
corresponding to the affections and thoughts that exist with the spirits
and angels. That this is so can be seen also from the prophetic visions
in the Word throughout; for all things seen by the prophets are such as
appear before the angels in heaven. From this it is that beasts are so
frequently mentioned in the Word, and by everyone of them is signified
something that bears relation to such things as are in man (of which
above). Neither is man anything but an animal in respect to his external
man, but he is distinguished from animals by the internal man, whereby
both the internal and the external man can be elevated toward heaven and
to God, and thence receive faith and love. From this it is that beasts
were employed in the sacrifices and burnt-offerings. He who does not
know this, cannot possibly know why it was commanded at one time to
offer bullocks, rams, and he-lambs; at another time oxen, she-goats, and
she-lambs; and at another he-goats, he-kids, and she-kids; for otherwise
what would be the purpose of such things? (That in the Word "beasts"
signify goods and evils with man, and also truths and falsities, see n.
142, 143, 246, 714, 715, 776, 1823, 2179, 2180, 2781, 3218, 3519, 5198,
7523, 7872, 9090; and that on this account they were employed in the
sacrifices, n. 1823, 2180, 2805, 2807, 2830.) \[3\] But as regards the
sacrifices and burnt-offerings from them, be it known: (1) that the
representative worship with the Jewish and Israelitish nation consisted
chiefly in sacrifices and burnt-offerings; (2) that the sacrifices and
burnt-offerings in general signified the regeneration of man through the
truths of faith and the goods of love from the Lord; and in the supreme
sense the glorification of the Lord's Human; (3) that everything of
worship, according to the various things of it, was represented by the
sacrifices and burnt-offerings, thus with all variety; and that for this
reason various kinds of animals were commanded. \[4\] But to take up
these points in detail: (1) That the representative worship with the
Jewish and Israelitish nation consisted chiefly in sacrifices and
burnt-offerings, is evident from the fact that they were employed for
every sin, and for every guilt; also for every consecration and
inauguration; and besides on every day, on every Sabbath, every new
moon, and every festival; and that for this reason the altar was the
most holy of all things, and all the other things of worship with that
nation depended upon these. Therefore where the abolition of
representative worship is treated of in Daniel, it is said that "the
sacrifice and oblation shall cease" (Dan. 9:27), and "the continual
sacrifice shall be removed" (Dan. 8:10-13; 11:31; 12:11). By "the
continual sacrifice" is specifically signified the sacrifice that was
offered daily, and in general all worship. But see what has already been
shown about these things, namely, that sacrifices in general signify all
representative worship (n. 923, 2165, 6905, 8680, 8936); that the altar
was the principal representative of the Lord and from this of worship
(n. 2771, 2811, 8935, 8940, 9388, 9389, 9714, 9964); that the ancients
before Eber knew nothing of sacrifices (n. 2180); that by Eber, thus
with the Hebrew nation, and from this with the posterity of Jacob,
sacrifices were instituted, and why (n. 1128, 1343, 2180, 2818); that
sacrifices were not commanded, but permitted (n. 2180). \[5\] (2) That
sacrifices and burnt-offerings in general signified the regeneration of
man through the truths of faith and the goods of love to the Lord from
the Lord, is evident from the fact that all things of worship relate to
purification from evils and falsities, to the implanting of truth and
good, and to their conjunction, thus to regeneration; for by means of
these three things man is regenerated; consequently sacrifices and
burnt-offerings were offered for every sin and for every guilt; and when
they were offered, it is said that expiation was made and that pardon
would be granted (Lev. 4:20, 26, 31, 35; 5:6, 10, 13, 16, 18; 6:7; 7:7;
10:17; 14:18, 19; 15:30, 31; 16:6, 24; 17:11). The pardon of sins,
expiation, propitiation, and redemption, are also nothing else than
purification from evils and falsities, the implantation of good and
truth, and their conjunction, thus regeneration (n. 9076, 9452-9454,
9937, 9938). Every process of regeneration is also described by the
special rituals of the several sacrifices and burnt-offerings, and it is
opened when the representatives are unfolded by means of the internal
sense (n. 10022). \[6\] That in the supreme sense the sacrifices and
burnt-offerings signify the glorification of the Lord's Human, is
because all the rituals of worship instituted with the Israelitish and
Jewish nation regarded the Lord alone; thus the sacrifices and
burnt-offerings especially regarded Him, because by them in general was
represented everything of worship, as has been shown above. Moreover,
the regeneration of man is from no other source than the Lord (n. 9506,
9715, 9486, 9487, 9809, 10019); and therefore where the regeneration of
man is treated of in the Word, in the supreme sense the glorification of
the Lord's Human is treated of; for the regeneration of man is an image
of the glorification of the Lord (n. 3138, 3212, 3296, 3490, 4402,
5688). To glorify the Human is to make it Divine, but to regenerate man
is to make him heavenly, in order that the Divine of the Lord may dwell
in him. \[7\] (3) That everything of worship, according to the various
things of it, was represented by the sacrifices and burnt-offerings,
thus with all variety, and that for this reason various kinds of animals
were commanded, is evident from the various things for which sacrifices
and burnt-offerings were made; namely, for sins by error, and for sins
not by error; for every transgression and uncleanness, whether with the
priest, or with the whole assembly, or with a prince, or with any soul;
for cleansing from leprosy; for purification after child-bearing; for
the consecration of the altar, of the Tent of meeting and of all things
therein; for the cleansing of the same when Aaron once every year
entered into the holy of holies; for the inauguration of Aaron and his
sons into the priesthood; for the consecration of the Nazirites; and in
general on the three feasts, on each of the new moons, on the Sabbaths,
and daily in the morning and between the evenings; besides the votive
and voluntary offerings. \[8\] As there were sacrifices and
burnt-offerings for such various purposes, and by them were represented
the various things of worship, therefore also the various kinds of
animals that were to be offered were commanded; namely, bullocks, oxen,
and he-goats; rams, she-goats, and he-kids; he-lambs, she-lambs, and
she-kids; and by the sacrifices and burnt-offerings from the bullock,
ox, and he-goat were represented the purification and regeneration of
the external or natural man; by those from the ram, she-goat, and he-kid
were represented the purification of the internal or spiritual man; and
by those from the he-lamb, she-lamb, and she-kid were represented the
purification or regeneration of the inmost or celestial man. (That there
are three things that are in succession with man: the celestial, the
spiritual, and the natural, see n. 9992, 10005, 10117; and that in order
to be regenerated a man must be regenerated as to things internal and
also external, see the places cited in n. 9325 at the end.) \[9\] But
what is specifically signified by the sacrifice and the burnt-offering
from a ram, which are treated of in this chapter, is evident from the
passages in the Word where sacrifices and burnt-offerings from a ram are
described, and where a ram is mentioned; from which it is plain that by
a "ram" is signified the good of innocence and of charity in the
internal man; and by the sacrifice and burnt-offering from it, the
purification and regeneration of the internal man; thus the implantation
of the good of innocence and charity therein. That this is signified by
a "ram," is evident from the following passages. In Isaiah: All the
flocks of Arabia shall be gathered together to thee, the rams of
Nebaioth shall minister to thee; they shall come up with acceptance on
Mine altar (Isa. 60:7); where the subject treated of is the Lord and His
heaven and church; "the flocks of Arabia" denote all the goods of the
internal man; "the rams of Nebaioth" denote the goods of innocence and
of charity there. (That "flocks" denote the good of the internal man,
see n. 8937, 9135; that "Arabia" denotes where good is, n. 3268; that
"Nebaioth" denotes those who are there in this good, n. 3268, 3686,
3688.) \[10\] In Ezekiel: Arabia and all the princes of Kedar, the
traders of thy hand in small cattle, and rams, and he-goats (Ezek.
27:21); speaking of Tyre, by which is signified the church where are the
knowledges of good and truth (n. 1201); "traders" denote those who have
these knowledges and communicate them (n. 2967, 4453); "small cattle"
denote the goods of love; "rams," the goods of charity; and "he-goats,"
the goods of faith. In the Word mention is made of "flocks," "small
cattle" \[pecora\], and "cattle" \[pecudes\], which in the original
tongue are distinguished by their names, and by "flocks" are signified
in general internal things; by "cattle," the same specifically, and by
"small cattle," inmost things specifically; but by "herds" are signified
external things. In Jeremiah: I will bring them down like small cattle
to the slaughter, like rams with he-goats (Jer. 51:40); by "small
cattle," "rams," and "he-goats" similar things are here signified.
\[11\] In Ezekiel: Thus said the Lord Jehovih, Behold I judge between
cattle and cattle, and between the rams and the he-goats (Ezek. 34:17);
"between cattle and cattle" denotes between those who are in the
interior things of good and of evil; "between the rams and the he-goats"
denotes between those who are in charity and thence in faith, and those
who are in the truths of faith without charity; "rams" here signify the
like as sheep, for rams are the males of sheep (that "sheep" denote
those who are in charity and from this in faith, see n. 4169, 4809; and
that "he-goats" denote those who are in truths, which are called the
truths of faith, without charity, n. 4169, 4769). Like things are
signified by the "ram" and the "he-goat" in Daniel 8; and by the "sheep"
and the "he-goats" in Matthew 25:32. \[12\] In Moses: If a soul hath
sinned through error, he shall bring his guilt to Jehovah, a ram without
blemish out of the flock (Lev. 5:15, 18; 6:6); by the sacrifices from a
ram is signified the purification of the internal man and the
implantation of the good of innocence therein; for "sin through error"
denotes sin from ignorance in which is innocence, and the innocence of
ignorance is of the internal man. \[13\] In the same: In the new moons
they were to offer two bullocks, one ram, and seven he-lambs; and
afterward a he-goat; in like manner on every day of the passover; and on
the day of the firstfruits (Num. 28:11, 15, 19, 22, 27); this was in
order that there might be represented the purification of the whole man,
as well external as internal and inmost; by the sacrifice and
burnt-offering from bullocks, the purification of the external man; from
a ram, the purification of the internal man; and from the lambs, the
purification of the inmost man. And as purification was represented, so
also was the implanting of the good of innocence, for a "bullock"
denotes the good of innocence in the external man; a "ram," in the
internal, and a "he-lamb" in the inmost, as said above; that the last of
them was a he-goat was because by a "he-goat" is signified the truth of
faith in the external man, and the truth of faith there is the ultimate
(n. 9959). As the goods and truths with man follow in this order,
therefore also the presents of the princes of Israel, when the altar and
the Tent of meeting were anointed, were a bullock, a ram, and a he-lamb
for burnt-offerings; and a he-goat for a sacrifice (Num. 7:15-17, 21-23,
27-29, 33, and following verses). From all this it can now be seen that
a "ram" signifies the good of innocence and of charity in the internal
man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10043.">10043.</span></span>

And Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands. That this signifies the
communication of power, is evident from the signification of "laying on
hands," as being the communication of power (see above, n. 10023).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10044.">10044.</span></span>

Upon the head of the ram. That this signifies with the whole, is evident
from the signification of "the head," as being the whole man, thus the
whole (see n. 10011). That "the head" denotes the whole is because it is
the highest, and therein is the inmost of man; and from what is highest
proceed all things which are beneath; as also from what is inmost
proceed all things which are without, for such is the source in both
these cases. The inmost with man is his will and understanding; these in
their beginnings are in the head, and what thence proceed are acts,
which are effects of the interior things in the body; and therefore when
will and understanding are mentioned, the whole man is meant, for from
these man is man. The acts of the body also have their all from the
will; consequently a man is not regarded from the acts of the body, or
works; but from the will in these. For this reason by "soul" in the Word
is meant the whole man, and man is called a "soul," as in Leviticus
4:27; 5:1, 4, 17; 6:2; 17:10, 15; and elsewhere. \[2\] There are two
things which signify the whole; namely, the highest, and the lowest.
That the lowest or ultimate also signifies the whole, is because all the
interior things, even from the first or highest, close in the ultimates,
and are there together (n. 9828, 9836). Hence it is that the highest,
through the ultimate, holds together in connection and in form all the
interior things which are intermediate, so that they look to one end (n.
9828). That the ultimate also signifies the whole, is evident from many
things in the Word, as that the whole man is called the "flesh" (Gen.
6:12; Num. 16:22; 27:16; Isa. 40:5; Zech. 2:13; and elsewhere). \[3\] As
the ultimates also signify all things or the whole, therefore the hair
and the beard, which are ultimate outgrowths of man, are taken for all
or the whole; as also the feet and their toes; and the fingers of the
hands. That the "hair" and "beard" are taken for all or the whole, is
evident in Isaiah: In that day shall the Lord shave with a razor by the
king of Assyria the head, the hair of the feet, and also the beard (Isa.
7:20); "the king of Assyria" denotes reasoning such as is that of those
who by means of it destroy things Divine (n. 1186); "to shave the head,
the hair of the feet, and the beard" denotes to take away the ultimates,
for when these are taken away the interior things flow asunder and
perish. On this account also a priest was forbidden to shave his head
(Lev. 21:10); and also a Nazirite whose hair was called "the
Naziriteship of God" (Num. 6:1-27; n. 6437, 9407), and is also meant by
"the crown of the head of the Nazirite of his brethren" (Gen. 49:25, 26;
Deut. 33:16). Hence also it is said that "the hairs of the head are all
numbered" (Matt. 10:30), by which is signified that all things and
everything in man is so; also that "a hair of the head shall not perish"
(Luke 21:18). \[4\] That the feet also and their toes, and the fingers
of the hands, signify all things and thus the whole, is evident in John:
Peter said, Lord, Thou shalt wash not my feet only, but also my hands
and my head. Jesus said to him, He that is washed needeth not save to be
washed as to his feet, and is wholly clean (John 13:9-10); the "feet"
denote the natural, which is the ultimate (n. 2162, 3147, 4938-4952,
9406). And in what follows in this chapter of Exodus: Thou shalt put of
the blood of the ram upon the lap of Aaron's ear, and upon the thumb of
his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot (Exod. 29:20);
denoting upon each and all things signified by the "ear," the "hand,"
and the "foot." \[5\] As the highest and the lowest, or what is the
same, the first and the last, alike signify all things and each, or the
whole with the parts, therefore the omnipotence and omniscience of the
Lord are described by His being "the First and the Last, the Beginning
and the End, the Alpha and the Omega" (Rev. 1:8, 11; 21:6; 22:13; Isa.
41:4). \[6\] That all things are held together in connection, and stand
together, from the First or Highest through the last or lowest, is thus
described in Isaiah: I am the First, and I am the Last. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[10044-1](#fn_220.md) My hand hath laid the foundation
of the earth, and My right hand hath spanned the heaven; when I call
them together, they stand together (Isa. 48:12-13); the "hand" and
"right hand" of Jehovah, or of the Lord, denote omnipotence; "the earth
of which He hath laid the foundation" denotes the ultimate or last; "the
heaven which He hath stretched out" denotes that which is between the
First and the Last; to "call them together that they may stand together"
denotes to hold together all the interior things through the ultimate in
connection and in form, so that they may look to one end. The one end to
which they are to look is "He who is the First and the Last;" that He is
the Lord, is evident in Isaiah: Thus said Jehovah, the King of Israel,
and his Redeemer, I am the First and I am the Last (Isa. 44:6); "the
King of Israel" denotes the Lord (John 18:37); and that the "Redeemer"
is the Lord is manifest. In Revelation: These things saith the First and
the Last, who was dead and hath lived again (Rev. 2:8). \[7\] That the
first holds together all things in connection through the ultimate, can
be seen from the Word, and from man. The Word in ultimates is the sense
of its letter, and the Word in its first is the Lord, and the Word in
its interior things is its internal sense, which is perceived in the
heavens, and causes those who are there to look to one end, which is the
Lord (concerning this secret, see n. 9360, 9824). \[8\] In regard to
man: Man in ultimates is the church on earth; Man in the first is the
Lord; man in the interior things is heaven, for before the Lord the
church and heaven are as one man, from which heaven is called the Grand
Man (treated of at the end of many chapters, see the places cited at the
end of n. 10030). There is a continual connection, and an influx
according to the connection, of all things from the Lord through the
heavens to the church on earth. By the heavens are meant the angels who
are there; by the church are meant men who are true men of the church;
and by Man in the first is meant the Lord as to His Divine Human. That
from the First through the last or ultimate all things are held together
in connection, and stand together, is meant by the words of the Lord
above quoted from Isaiah: I am the First and I am the Last, My hand hath
laid the foundation of the earth, and My right hand hath spanned the
heaven; when I call them together, they stand together (Isa. 48:12-13).
(That by "the earth" in the Word is meant the church, has also been
abundantly shown, see the places cited in n. 9325.) \[9\] An idea of
this subject can be had from the ultimate and the inmost with man. His
ultimate is the skin, his inmost is the heart, his intermediates or
interior things are the viscera. From the heart even to the skin through
the viscera there is a continuous connection by means of the
blood-vessels, for these proceed from the heart, and terminate in the
skin. That the skin is the ultimate that holds together the interior
things in connection is plain, for when the skin is taken away the
interior things flow asunder. From all this it can be seen whence it is
that as the highest or inmost signifies each and all things, so also
does the lowest or ultimate. \[10\] From all this also is laid open the
secret why the Lord glorified His Human even as to its ultimates. The
ultimates are called bones and flesh, and therefore the Lord said to His
disciples, who supposed that they saw a spirit: Behold My hands and My
feet that it is I Myself; feel Me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh
and bones, as ye see Me have (Luke 24:37, 39). That the Divine Itself
was the First in Him, is known, for He was conceived of Jehovah, and
that which is conceived of the father is the first of man; that the Lord
glorified even the ultimates of His Human is plain from His words above,
and also from the fact that He left nothing of His Human in the
sepulchre. (That the interior things close and rest in the ultimates,
and are there together, and that the ultimates hold together the
interior things in connection, even in spiritual things, see n. 9216,
9828; that therefore strength and power are in ultimates, n. 9836; and
that therefore holiness is in ultimates, n. 9824; and that in ultimates
revelations are made and answers given, n. 9905.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10045.">10045.</span></span>

And thou shalt slay the ram. That this signifies preparation for the
purification of the internal man, is evident from the signification of
"slaying," when said of the sacrifice or burnt-offering, as being
preparation for purification (see n. 10024); and from the signification
of "the ram," as being the internal man (see above, n. 10042).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10046.">10046.</span></span>

And thou shalt take its blood. That this signifies Divine truth, may be
seen above (n. 10026, 10033). (That all purification from evils and
falsities, and all regeneration, are effected through the Divine truth
that proceeds from the Lord, see the places cited in n. 9959.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="10047.">10047.</span></span>

And sprinkle it upon the altar round about. That this signifies
conjunction with Divine good, is evident from the signification of "the
blood that was to be sprinkled upon the altar round about," as being
Divine truth (n. 10026, 10033); and from the representation of the
altar, as being a representative of the Lord as to Divine good (n. 9388,
9389, 9714, 9964). From this it is plain that "to sprinkle the blood
upon the altar round about," denotes to unite Divine truth with Divine
good in the Lord. \[2\] The case herein is as follows. It was said above
that in this chapter the subject treated of is the glorification of the
Lord's Human, and in the representative sense the regeneration of man by
the Lord. As regards the glorification of the Lord's Human, it was
effected by the unition of Divine truth with Divine good. The Divine
good, which is Jehovah, was in the Lord as the soul from the father in
man, for He was conceived of Jehovah, and through Divine means He made
His Human Divine truth, especially through the combats of temptations;
and insofar as He united it He glorified it, that is, made it Divine.
This unition is what is signified in the supreme sense by "sprinkling
the blood round about the altar." (That when the Lord was in the world
He made His Human Divine truth and united it with the Divine good which
was in Himself, and thus glorified His Human, see the places cited in n.
9199, 9315; as also that Jehovah His father is the Divine good which was
in Him, n. 9194.) \[3\] As the Lord glorified His Human, so also He
regenerates man; for with man the Lord flows in with good through the
soul, which is through the internal way, and with truth through the
hearing and the sight, which is through the external way; and insofar as
a man desists from evils, so far the Lord conjoins the good with truth,
and the good becomes of charity toward the neighbor and of love to God,
and the truth becomes of faith. So does the Lord create the man anew, or
regenerate him; for as before said the regeneration of man is effected
by purification from evils and falsities, by the implantation of good
and truth, and by the conjunction of these. The regeneration of man, and
in the supreme sense the glorification of the Lord's Human, is what is
represented by the sacrifices and burnt-offerings (n. 10022). \[4\] Be
it known that in the burnt-offerings the blood was sprinkled upon the
altar round about; in like manner in the eucharistic sacrifices; but in
the sacrifices for guilt and for sin the blood was sprinkled at the base
of the altar. By sprinkling the blood on the altar round about was
represented the complete unition of Divine truth and Divine good, as
well in the internal as in the external man; and by sprinkling the blood
at the base of the altar was represented the unition of Divine truth and
Divine good in the external man only. \[5\] With the regenerate,
conjunction is effected in the external man, according to the words of
the Lord in John: He that is washed needeth not save to be washed as to
his feet, and is wholly clean (John 13:9, 10). "Washing" signifies
purification and regeneration (n. 3147, 9089); thus "he that is washed"
signifies one purified and regenerated; and the "feet" signify the
natural or external of man (n. 2162, 3147, 4938-4952, 9406). That in the
burnt-offerings blood was sprinkled upon the altar round about, may be
seen in Leviticus 1:5, 11; also in the eucharistic sacrifices, Leviticus
3:2, 8, 13; and that in the sacrifices for guilt and for sin the blood
was sprinkled at the base of the altar, Leviticus 4:7, 18, 25, 30, 34;
5:9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10048.">10048.</span></span>

And thou shalt cut the ram into its pieces. That this signifies that the
interior things are to be set in order in a distinct manner, is evident
from the signification of "the ram," as being the good of innocence and
of charity in the internal man (see n. 10042), here preparation for the
purification of this, which is signified by the burnt-offering from the
ram; and from the signification of "cutting into pieces," as being the
setting in order of the interior things there. That preparation for the
setting in order of the interior things is signified by cutting into
pieces, the pieces, members, and parts, is because a setting in order is
described by the intestines and legs being put upon the pieces and upon
the head, and by the "intestines" are signified lowest things, which are
called external sensuous, and by the "legs" those next higher, which are
called natural. Thus by the "pieces," which were still higher, are
signified interior things, and by the "head" inmost ones. That such
things are signified by the intestines, legs, and head, will be seen
from what follows. (That by the viscera and members of man such things
are signified in order, see n. 10030.) \[2\] As in the representative
sense by the sacrifices and burnt-offerings is meant the regeneration of
man, it shall be briefly told how the case is with the setting in order
in this. With those who are being regenerated the interior and exterior
things are set in order by the Lord for all the following states,
insomuch that things present involve things future, and when things
future become present they do the same, and this to eternity; for the
Lord foresees all, and provides all, and His foresight and providence
are to eternity, thus are eternal. For the Divine, which alone is His,
in itself is infinite, and the infinite relatively to duration is
eternal. Hence whatsoever the Lord disposes and sets in order is
eternal. This is the case with those whom the Lord regenerates. The
regeneration of man begins in the world and continues to eternity, for
when a man becomes an angel he is always being perfected. There are in
man things external, internal, and inmost; all these are disposed and
set in order together and successively for the reception to eternity of
the things that follow. But in what order the things external, interior,
and inmost are regenerated, and again in what reverse order, will of the
Lord's Divine mercy be shown in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10049.">10049.</span></span>

And shalt wash its intestines. That this signifies the purification of
the lowest things, is evident from the signification of "washing," as
being to purify (see n. 3147, 5954, 9089); the purification that was
represented by washing is purification from evils and falsities, for
these are impurities in the spiritual sense; and from the signification
of the "intestines," as being the lowest things (see above, n. 10030).
It is said that the intestines and the legs were to be washed, because
by them are signified lowest and natural things, and lowest or natural
things are more defiled with evils and falsities than the interior ones;
for those evils and falsities are in the world, and sensuous things,
which are lowest, stand forth in the world, and therefore immediately
receive what is in the world. The things which they receive are the
delights of the loves of self and of the world, together with the
delights of the senses and their fallacies. But the interior things are
not so, for these are not in the world, but in heaven, and the things
which are of the world cannot enter into those which are of heaven,
physical influx being impossible; whereas the things of heaven can enter
into those which are of the world with man. Therefore as soon as the
external man seeks to enter into the internal, which is done by means of
reasonings from the loves of self and of the world, and from the
fallacies of the senses, the internal man is closed. Thus does the Lord
provide; and therefore the purification of the internal man during man's
regeneration is effected in heaven by the Lord. Consequently, while a
man is in the world he does not perceive what is being accomplished in
his internal man during regeneration. This is what is meant by the words
of the Lord in John: The spirit bloweth where it will, and thou hearest
the voice thereof, but knowest not whence it cometh, and whither it
goeth; so is everyone that is born of the spirit (John 3:8); "the
spirit" denotes the life of charity through faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10050.">10050.</span></span>

And its legs. That this signifies the purification of the exterior
things of the natural man, is evident from the signification of "washing
the legs," as being the purification of the natural man (that "to wash"
denotes to purify, see just above, n. 10049); and from the signification
of "legs," as being the exterior things that belong to the natural man.
That "legs" have this signification is because the feet are meant at the
same time, for the legs of beasts are four and cohere with the feet, and
"feet" from correspondence signify the natural or external of man (see
n. 2162, 3147, 3761, 4938-4952). \[2\] The like is signified by "legs"
in Amos: As the shepherd hath snatched out of the mouth of the lion two
legs, or a piece of an ear, so shall the sons of Israel be rescued that
dwell in Samaria, in the corner of a bed, and at the extremity of a
couch (Amos 3:12); by "the lion" are here signified those who lay waste
the church; by the "legs," the external of the church, which also is of
the natural man; by "a piece of an ear," its perception; by "them that
dwell in Samaria," those who are in external worship; "the corner of a
bed and the extremity of a couch" denote the lowest natural, which is
the external sensuous, and its truth and good. \[3\] By the "legs" in
the description of the statue of Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel: The head
thereof was of pure gold, the breast and arms of silver, the belly and
side of brass, the legs of iron, and the feet partly of iron, partly of
clay (Dan. 2:32-33); is signified the truth of faith in the external or
natural man, which is also "iron" (n. 10030). That the legs are here
distinguished from the feet is because it is different with the legs of
man from what it is with those of beasts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_220"></span>[10044-1](ac201.htm#fr_220.md) Novissimus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10051-10100](ac202.md)
