[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac215)  [Next](ac217) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="10751.">10751.</span></span>

A CONTINUATION ABOUT THE FIFTH EARTH IN THE STARRY HEAVEN. It was
afterward granted me to speak with these spirits about their own earth,
for all spirits know about this when their natural or external memory is
opened by the Lord, because they bring this memory with them from the
world; but it is not opened except with the Lord's good pleasure. With
regard to the earth from which they were, the spirits then said that
when leave is granted they appear to the inhabitants of their earth and
speak with them as men, and that this is effected by their being let
into their natural or external memory, and consequently into thought
such as they had when they lived in the world; and that at the same time
the interior sight of the inhabitants, that is, the sight of their
spirit, is opened, and in this way the spirits appear to them. They
added that the inhabitants know not but that they are men of their
earth, and only notice that this is not the case when the spirits are
suddenly taken away from their eyes. I told them that in ancient times
it was the same on our earth, as with Abraham, Sarah, Lot, the
inhabitants of Sodom, Manoah and his wife, Joshua, Mary, Elizabeth, and
the prophets in general; and that the Lord appeared in the same way, and
that until He revealed Himself those who saw Him knew not but that He
was a man of the earth; but that now this rarely happens, lest such
things should compel men to believe; for a compulsory faith, such as
enters by means of miracles, does not cleave to the man, and also might
be an injury to those with whom faith could be implanted through the
Word in a state that is not compulsory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10752.">10752.</span></span>

The preacher who was with me did not at all believe that there are other
earths besides our own, for the reason that in the world he had thought
that the Lord was born on this earth only, and that without the Lord
there is no salvation. He was therefore reduced into a state similar to
that of these spirits when they appear in their own earth as men (of
which just above), and in this state he was let into that earth, so that
he not only saw it but also spoke with the inhabitants there. When this
was done, communication was given me also in the same way, so that I too
saw the inhabitants, and also some things upon that earth. Spirits and
angels can speak with men of any language; because their thought falls
into the ideas of the men, and thus into the words of their speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10753.">10753.</span></span>

There then appeared four kinds of men, one kind after another in
succession. First, clothed men were seen; then naked men of a human
flesh color; afterward naked men who had inflamed bodies; and finally
black men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10754.">10754.</span></span>

While the preacher was with those who were clothed, there appeared a
woman of a very beautiful countenance, clothed in a simple garment, a
tunic that hung behind in a becoming way, and was also drawn over the
arms; she also wore a beautiful head covering in the form of a garland
of flowers. Upon seeing this virgin, the preacher was very much
delighted, and spoke to her, and also took hold of her hand; but as she
perceived that he was a spirit, and was not from that earth, she betook
herself away from him. There afterward appeared to him a number of other
women on the right, who were pasturing sheep and lambs, which they were
then leading to a drinking-trough, into which water was brought through
a little channel from a lake. These were clothed in the same way, and
they held in their hands shepherds' crooks, by which they led the sheep
and lambs to drink. They said that the sheep go in the direction in
which they point with their crooks. The sheep that were seen were large,
and had woolly, broad, and lengthy tails. When the faces of the women
were seen more closely, they were full and beautiful. Men also were
seen. Their faces were of a human flesh color, as on our earth; but with
the difference that instead of being bearded, the lower part of their
face was black; and the nose was more of the color of snow than of
flesh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10755.">10755.</span></span>

Afterward the preacher was conducted further, but reluctantly, because
he was still thinking of the woman with whom he was charmed, as was
evident from there still appearing a kind of shadow of him in the former
place. He then came to those who were naked, who were seen walking
together two and two. They were husband and wife, and were girded with a
covering about the loins, and with a sort of covering about the head.
When the preacher was with these, he was brought into the state in which
he had been in the world when he wished to preach; and he then said that
he wished to preach to them the crucified Lord. But they said they did
not wish to hear such a thing, because they know not what it is, and
that they know that the Lord lives. He then said that he wished to
preach the living Lord; but this also they refused, saying that they did
not observe in his speech what is heavenly, but what is earthly, because
it was much for the sake of himself, and his own reputation and honor;
and that they could hear from the very tone of his speech whether it
came from his heart, or only from his mouth; and that because he was of
this kind he could not teach them; wherefore he was silent. When he
lived in the world he had been very impassioned, so that he could deeply
move his hearers to what is holy; but this impassioned style had been
acquired by art, and therefore was from self and the world, and not from
heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10756.">10756.</span></span>

They said further that they have a perception whether those of their
race who are naked have in them the conjugial principle; and it was
shown that they perceive this from a spiritual idea about marriage,
which being communicated to me was found to be that a likeness of the
interiors was formed by the conjunction of truth and good, thus of faith
and love, and that conjugial love comes forth from this conjunction
coming down into the body. For all things of the lower mind \[animus\]
are set forth in the body in some natural form, thus in the form of
conjugial love when the interiors of two mutually love each other, and
also from this love long to will and to think the one as the other, thus
to be together and to be conjoined in respect to the interiors of the
mind. From this the spiritual affection of their minds becomes natural
in the body, and clothes itself with the feeling of conjugial love. They
also said that there is nothing whatever of a conjugial nature between
one man and a number of wives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10757.">10757.</span></span>

Afterward the preacher came to those who also were naked, but had
inflamed bodies; and last of all to those who were black, some of whom
were naked, and some were clothed. But all these dwelt elsewhere on the
same earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10758.">10758.</span></span>

Finally I spoke to the spirits of that earth about the faith of the
inhabitants of our earth in regard to the resurrection, saying that they
cannot conceive that men come into the other life immediately after
death, and then appear as men, in face, body, arms, feet, and all the
senses external and internal; and still less that they are clothed with
garments and have places of abode and habitations; and this merely for
the reason that most of them think from the sensuous things of the body,
and therefore believe that nothing has any existence except the things
they see and touch; and also because few of them can be withdrawn from
external sensuous things to interior ones, and thus be elevated into the
light of heaven. From this it is that they cannot have any idea of a man
in connection with their soul or spirit, but only an idea as of wind,
air, or breath, of no form, in which, however, there is something vital.
This is the reason why they do not believe that they will rise again
except at the end of the world, which they call the Last Judgment, and
that then the body though crumbled into dust and dispersed to all the
winds is to be brought back and joined again to its soul or spirit.
\[2\] I added that they are permitted to believe this, because, thinking
as they do from sensuous things, they can in no other way avoid the
conception that it is impossible for their soul or spirit to live as a
man and in the human form unless it gets back that body which it carried
about in the world; and therefore unless it were said that this body
will rise again, they would at heart reject as incomprehensible the
doctrine of the resurrection and of eternal life. Nevertheless this idea
about the resurrection is attended with this useful result, that they
believe in a life after death. And from this belief it follows that when
they lie sick in bed, and do not think as before from worldly and bodily
things, thus not from sensuous ones, they then believe that they will
live immediately after their decease; and they also then speak about
heaven and about their hope of life there immediately after death, in a
way far removed from the doctrine about the Last Judgment. \[3\] I
further told them something that has occasionally excited my surprise,
namely, that when those who are in the faith speak of the life after
death, and of their friends who are either dead or dying, and do not at
the moment think about the Last Judgment, they believe that their
friends will live, or are living, as men immediately after their
decease. But the moment that there flows in the thought of the Last
Judgment, this idea is changed into a material idea about their earthly
body, that it is again to be joined with their soul. For they do not
know that in respect to his interiors every man is a spirit, and that it
is this which lives in the body, and not the body from itself; and that
the spirit of everyone is that from which the body has its human form,
consequently which is chiefly the man, and in a like form, but invisible
before the eyes of the body, yet visible before the eyes of spirits.
\[4\] And it is also from this that when the sight of a man's spirit is
opened, which is effected by the removal of the sight of the body,
angels are seen as men; as also did angels appear to the ancients of
whom we read in the Word. I have also sometimes spoken with spirits whom
I had known when they lived as men in the world, asking them whether
they wish to be clothed again with their earthly body, as they had
before thought. On hearing this they fled far away at the mere idea of
such a conjunction, being filled with amazement that in the world they
had so thought from a blind faith without any understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10759.">10759.</span></span>

The subject of the fifth earth in the starry heaven will be continued at
the end of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10760.">10760.</span></span>

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-SEVENTH. THE DOCTRINE OF CHARITY AND FAITH That which
makes heaven with man also makes the Church, for the Church is the
Lord's heaven on earth. Consequently from what has been previously said
about heaven, it is evident what the Church is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10761.">10761.</span></span>

That is called the Church where the Lord is acknowledged, and where the
Word is; for the essentials of the Church are love to the Lord from the
Lord, and faith in the Lord from the Lord; and the Word teaches how a
man must live in order that he may receive love and faith from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10762.">10762.</span></span>

The Lord's Church is internal and external; internal with those who do
the Lord's commandments from love, for these are they who love the Lord;
and external with those who do the Lord's commandments from faith, for
these are they who believe in the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10763.">10763.</span></span>

In order that the Church may exist, there must be doctrine from the
Word, because without doctrine the Word is not understood; yet doctrine
alone in a man does not make the Church in him; but a life according
thereto. From this it follows that faith alone does not make the Church;
but the life of faith which is charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10764.">10764.</span></span>

The genuine doctrine of the Church is the doctrine of charity and at the
same time of faith, and not the doctrine of faith without that of
charity; for the doctrine of charity and at the same time of faith is
the doctrine of life; but not the doctrine of faith without the doctrine
of charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10765.">10765.</span></span>

Those who are outside the Church, and yet acknowledge one God, and live
according to their religion in a kind of charity toward the neighbor,
are in communion with those who are of the Church, because no one is
condemned who believes in God, and lives well. From this it is evident
that the Lord's Church is everywhere in the whole world, although
specifically it is where the Lord is acknowledged, and where the Word
is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10766.">10766.</span></span>

Everyone in whom the Church is, is saved. But everyone in whom the
Church is not, is condemned. EXODUS 37 1. And Bezalel made the ark of
shittim wood; two cubits and a half the length thereof, and a cubit and
a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
2. And he overlaid it with pure gold, from within and from without, and
made for it a border of gold round about. 3. And he cast for it four
rings of gold upon the four corners thereof; even two rings upon the one
side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it. 4. And he made
staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold. 5. And he put the
staves into the rings upon the sides of the ark, to carry the ark. 6.
And he made a propitiatory of pure gold; two cubits and a half the
length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof. 7. And he
made two cherubs of gold, solid made he them, at the two extremities of
the propitiatory. 8. One cherub at the extremity on this side, and one
cherub at the extremity on the other side; out of the propitiatory made
he the cherubs at the two extremities thereof. 9. And the cherubs were
spreading out their wings upward, covering over with their wings upon
the propitiatory, and their faces were a man toward his brother; toward
the propitiatory were the faces of the cherubs. 10. And he made the
table of shittim wood; two cubits the length thereof, and a cubit the
breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof. 11. And he
overlaid it with pure gold, and he made for it a border of gold round
about. 12. And he made for it a closure of a handbreadth round about;
and made a border of gold for the closure thereof round about. 13. And
he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four
corners that belonged to the four feet thereof. 14. Over against the
closure were the rings, receptacles for the staves to carry the table.
15. And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold,
to carry the table. 16. And he made the vessels that were upon the
table; the little dishes thereof, and the cups thereof, and the salvers
thereof, and the little brooms thereof, with which it should be covered,
of pure gold. 17. And he made the lampstand of pure gold; solid made he
the lampstand; its shaft, and its reed, its cups, its pomegranates, and
its flowers, were from it. 18. And six reeds going out of the sides
thereof; three reeds of the lampstand out of the one side thereof, and
three reeds of the lampstand out of the other side thereof. 19. Three
almond-shaped cups in one reed, a pomegranate and a flower; and three
almond-shaped cups going out from one reed, a pomegranate and a flower;
so for the six reeds going out of the lampstand. 20. And in the
lampstand four almond-shaped cups; its pomegranates and its flowers. 21.
And a pomegranate under two reeds out of it, and a pomegranate under two
reeds out of it, and a pomegranate under two reeds out of it, for the
six reeds going out of it. 22. Their pomegranates and their reeds were
out of it; the whole of it one solid of pure gold. 23. And he made the
lamps thereof, seven; and the tongs thereof, and the basins thereof, of
pure gold. 24. Of a talent of gold made he it, and all the vessels
thereof. 25. And he made the altar of incense of shittim wood; a cubit
the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, foursquare; and two
cubits the height thereof; out of it were its horns. 26. And he overlaid
it with pure gold, its roof, and its walls round about, and its horns;
and he made for it a border of gold round about. 27. And two rings of
gold made he for it from under its border, upon the two ribs thereof,
upon its two sides, for receptacles for the staves, to carry it in them.
28. And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.
29. And he made the holy oil of anointing, and the incense of spices,
pure, with the work of the perfumer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10767.">10767.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. As in this chapter the ark, the lampstand, and the altar
of incense are treated of, and the description given of them here is
similar to that given in chapter 25, where each and all things have been
unfolded in respect to the internal sense, they are therefore here
passed by without further explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10768.">10768.</span></span>

CONTINUATION ABOUT THE FIFTH EARTH IN THE STARRY HEAVEN. In addition to
what has been related, some things were also seen on that earth itself,
which was effected by communication with the angels who were there, and
who appeared as men of the earth. For when these angels are presented to
view as men in the manner above related, they see with their eyes the
objects there exactly as do the inhabitants. But when they are not in
this state, they see nothing of the kind, but only what is in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10769.">10769.</span></span>

Their habitations were seen, which were low houses in the form of the
tents that were used by the ancients. They were drawn out to a great
length, and had windows on the sides according to the number of the
abodes or chambers into which they were divided. The roof was rounded,
and there was a door at each end. They said that they are built of
earth, and are roofed with sods; and that the windows are made of grassy
threads, so woven together that the light may shine through. Little
children were also seen there, and they said that the neighbors come to
them especially for the sake of their own little children, so that these
may be in companionship with other little children under the view and
oversight of the parents.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10770.">10770.</span></span>

There appeared also fields then whitening with the nearly ripe harvest.
The seeds or grains of this harvest were shown, which were like the
grains of Chinese wheat. Loaves of bread also were shown made from this
grain, which were small and \[formed\] in square pieces. There also
appeared grassy plains with flowers on them; and also trees that bore a
fruit like pomegranates; and also plantations that were not grapevines,
but yet bore berries from which they prepare wine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10771.">10771.</span></span>

The sun there, which to us is a star, appears there of a flame color,
about the fourth part of the size of our sun. Their year is about two
hundred days long, and the day fifteen hours, as compared with the time
of the days on our earth. The earth itself is one of the smallest in the
starry heaven, being scarcely five hundred German miles in
circumference. <span id="fr_241"></span>[10771-1](#fn_241) These things
the angels related from a comparison made with such things on our earth,
which they saw in me, or in my memory. They drew these conclusions by
means of angelic ideas, whereby the measures of spaces and of times are
at once known in the right proportion relatively to the spaces and times
elsewhere. In such matters, angelic ideas, which are spiritual,
immeasurably surpass human ideas, which are natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10772.">10772.</span></span>

A sixth earth in the starry heaven will be described at the end of the
following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10773.">10773.</span></span>

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-EIGHTH THE DOCTRINE OF CHARITY AND FAITH The
government of the Lord in the heavens and on earth is called Providence.
And as all the good which is of love, and all the truth which is of
faith, are from Him, and absolutely nothing from man, it is evident from
this that the Divine Providence of the Lord is in each and all things
that conduce to the salvation of the human race. This the Lord thus
teaches in John: I am the way, the truth, and the life (John 14:6). As
the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine, so
neither can ye, except ye abide in Me: without Me ye can do nothing
(John 15:4, 5).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10774.">10774.</span></span>

Moreover the Divine Providence of the Lord is over the veriest singulars
of man's life; for there is one only fountain of life, which is the
Lord, from whom we live and act and have our being.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10775.">10775.</span></span>

Those who think about the Divine Providence from worldly things,
conclude from these that it is only universal, and that the singulars
appertain to man. But these persons are not acquainted with the arcana
of heaven, for they form their conclusions solely from the loves of self
and of the world and their pleasures; and therefore when they see the
evil exalted to honors, and gaining wealth rather than the good; and
also that the evil succeed in accordance with their skill, they say in
their hearts that it would not be so if the Divine Providence were in
each and all things. But these persons do not consider that the Divine
Providence does not look to that which is fleeting and transitory, and
which comes to an end together with the life of man in the world; but
that it looks to that which remains to eternity, thus which has no end.
That which has no end is; but that which has an end, relatively is not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10776.">10776.</span></span>

Everyone who duly reflects is able to know that eminence and wealth in
the world are not real Divine blessings, although from the pleasure in
them men so call them; for they pass away, and likewise seduce many, and
turn them away from heaven; but that life in heaven and happiness there
are the real blessings which are from the Divine. This the Lord also
teaches in Luke: Make for yourselves treasure in the heavens that
faileth not, where thief draweth not near, nor moth destroyeth. For
where your treasure is, there will your heart be also (Luke 12:33, 34).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10777.">10777.</span></span>

The reason why the evil succeed in accordance with their skill, is that
it is according to order that everyone should do what he does from
reason and also from freedom; and therefore unless it were left to a man
to act in freedom according to his reason, and thus also unless the
consequent arts succeeded, the man could not possibly be disposed to
receive eternal life, because this is instilled when the man is in
freedom, and his reason is enlightened. For no one can be compelled to
good, because nothing compulsory cleaves to the man, for it is not his.
That becomes the man's own which is done from freedom, for that which is
from the will is done from freedom, and the will is the man himself; and
therefore unless a man is kept in the freedom to do evil also, good from
the Lord cannot be provided for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10778.">10778.</span></span>

To leave man from his freedom to do evil also, is called permission.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10779.">10779.</span></span>

To be led to happiness in the world by means of his skill, appears to
the man as if it were done from his own sagacity. Nevertheless the
Divine Providence continually accompanies by permitting and by
constantly withdrawing from evil. But to be led to happiness in heaven
is known and perceived not to be of man's own sagacity, because it is
from the Lord, and is effected from his Divine providence by disposing
and continually leading to good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10780.">10780.</span></span>

That this is the case a man cannot apprehend from the light of nature,
for from this light he does not know the laws of Divine order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10781.">10781.</span></span>

Be it known that there is providence and there is foresight. Good is
that which is provided by the Lord, but evil is that which is foreseen
by the Lord. The one must be with the other, for that which comes from
man is nothing but evil; but that which comes from the Lord is nothing
but good. EXODUS 38 1. And he made the altar of burnt-offering of
shittim wood, five cubits the length thereof, and five cubits the
breadth thereof, foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof. 2. And
he made the horns of it upon the four corners thereof, out of it were
its horns; and he overlaid it with brass. 3. And he made all the vessels
of the altar; the pans, and the shovels, and the basins, and the
fleshhooks, and the fire-tongs; all the vessels thereof made he of
brass. 4. And he made for the altar a grating, a network of brass, under
the compass of it beneath, even unto the middle of it. 5. And he cast
four rings on the four ends of the grating of brass, receptacles for the
staves. 6. And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them
with brass. 7. And he put the staves into the rings upon the sides of
the altar, to carry it in them; hollow of boards made he it. 8. And he
made the laver of brass, and its base of brass, in the view of the
ministering women who ministered at the door of the Tent of the meeting.
9. And he made the court at the corner of the south southward; the
hangings for the court of fine twined linen, a hundred cubits; 10. The
pillars thereof twenty, and their bases twenty, of brass; the hooks of
the pillars and their fillets of silver. 11. And at the corner of the
north a hundred cubits, the pillars thereof twenty, and their bases
twenty, of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.
12. And at the corner of the sea, hangings of fifty cubits, their
pillars ten, and their bases ten; the hooks of the pillars and their
fillets of silver. 13. And at the corner of the east eastward fifty
cubits. 14. The hangings fifteen cubits at the shoulder; the pillars
thereof three, and their bases three. 15. And at the other shoulder, on
this side and on that side, at the gate of the court, hangings of
fifteen cubits; the pillars thereof three, and their bases three. 16.
All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen. 17.
And their bases for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the pillars
and their fillets of silver; and their heads were overlaid with silver,
and these were furnished with fillets of silver, all the pillars of the
court. 18. And the covering for the gate of the court with the work of
the embroiderer; of blue, and crimson, and scarlet double-dyed, and fine
twined linen; and twenty cubits the length, and the height in the
breadth five cubits, over against the hangings of the court. 19. And the
pillars thereof were four, and their bases four, of brass; their hooks
of silver, and their heads and their fillets were overlaid with silver.
20. And all the pegs for the Habitation, and for the court round about,
were of brass. 21. This is the number of the things for the Habitation,
the Habitation of the Testimony, as they were numbered upon the mouth of
Moses, for the ministry of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, the son
of Aaron the priest. 22. And Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of
the tribe of Judah, made all that Jehovah commanded Moses; 23. And with
him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, a craftsman, and
a thinker, and an embroiderer in blue, and in crimson, and in scarlet
double-dyed, and in fine linen. 24. All the gold that was wrought for
the work in all the work of holiness, even the gold of the
wave-offering, was nine and twenty talents, and seven hundred and thirty
shekels, in the shekel of holiness. 25. And the silver of them that were
numbered of the assemblage was a hundred talents, and a thousand seven
hundred and seventy-five shekels, in the shekel of holiness. 26. A beka
a head, the half of a shekel in the shekel of holiness, for everyone
that passed over upon them that were numbered, from a son of twenty
years and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five
hundred and fifty \[men\]. 27. And it was \[that\] a hundred talents of
silver were for casting the bases of holiness, and the bases of the
veil; a hundred bases for the hundred talents, a talent for a base. 28.
And of the thousand seven hundred and seventy-five shekels he made hooks
for the pillars, and overlaid their heads, and adorned them with
fillets. 29. And the brass of the wave-offering was seventy talents, and
two thousand and four hundred shekels. 30. And therewith he made the
bases of the door of the Tent of meeting, and the altar of brass, and
the grating of brass for it, and all the vessels of the altar. 31. And
the bases of the court round about, and the bases of the gate of the
court, and all the pegs of the Habitation, and all the pegs of the court
round about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10782.">10782.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. As in this chapter the altar of burnt-offering, and the
court of the Tent of meeting, are treated of; and the same things have
already been similarly described in chapter 27, and have there been
unfolded, these things also are passed by without any further unfolding
in respect to the internal sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10783.">10783.</span></span>

ON A SIXTH EARTH IN THE STARRY HEAVEN. Once more was I conducted to
another earth that was in the universe outside our solar world, and this
also by means of changes of state continued for about twelve hours. In
company with me there were a number of spirits and angels from our
earth, with whom I conversed on the way or during the progression. I was
carried sometimes obliquely upward, and sometimes obliquely downward,
continually toward the south. In two places only did I see spirits, and
in one I spoke to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10784.">10784.</span></span>

On the way, or during this progression, it was given me to observe how
immense is the Lord's heaven that is for the angels. For from the
regions not inhabited it was given me to conclude that it is so immense
that if there were many myriads of earths, and in each as great a
multitude of men as in our own, still there would be room for them to
eternity, and it would never be filled. This I could conclude from a
comparison made with the extent of the heaven which is about our earth,
and for it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10785.">10785.</span></span>

When the angelic spirits who were from that earth came into view, they
accosted us, asking who we were, and what we desired. We said that we
were travelers, and that we had been conveyed thither, and that they
need not be afraid of us. For they were afraid that we were of those who
disturb them about God, about faith, and about other like things, on
account of whom they had betaken themselves into that quarter of their
earth, avoiding them wherever they could. They were asked by what those
persons disturb them. They replied, "By the idea of Three, and by the
idea of a Divinity in God without any Humanity, when yet they know and
perceive that God is one, and that He is a Man. It was then perceived
that those who disturbed them, and whom they fled from, were from our
earth. This was perceived also from the fact that those in the other
life who wander about in this way from an eagerness and delight in
traveling which they contracted in the world, are from our earth; for on
other earths there are no such travelings about. It was afterward found
that their visitors were monks who had traveled about on our globe from
a zeal for converting the Gentiles; and therefore we said that they do
well to avoid them, because their intention is not to teach, but to get
rich, and to rule; and that they first take pains to captivate the minds
of others, and then they subject them to themselves as slaves. We also
said that they do well in not suffering their own idea about the Lord to
be disturbed by such persons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10786.">10786.</span></span>

They said further that these persons also confuse them by telling them
that they ought to have faith, and to believe all that they say; and
that they reply to them that they do not know what faith is, or what it
is to believe, seeing that they perceive within themselves that the
thing is so. For they were of the Lord's celestial kingdom, where all
know from interior perception the truths which with us are called truths
of faith, because they are in enlightenment from the Lord, differently
from those who are in the Lord's spiritual kingdom. That they were of
this nature it was also given to see from the flame-like source of their
ideas. When there is discourse about truths, those who are of the Lord's
celestial kingdom say no more than Yea, yea, or Nay, nay; and they never
reason about them as to whether they are so or are not so. These are
they of whom the Lord says, "Let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay,
nay; that which is more than these is from evil." From this it is that
these spirits said that they do not know what it is to have faith, or to
believe. They consider this to be like someone telling his companion,
who sees houses or trees with his own eyes, that he ought to have faith
or believe that they are houses and trees, while he clearly sees that
such is the fact. Such are they who belong to the Lord's celestial
kingdom, and such were these angelic spirits. We told them that there
are few on our earth who have interior perception, for the reason that
in their youth they learn truths and do not practice them. For man has
two faculties, which are called the understanding and the will; and as
those who do not admit truths further than into the memory and thus a
little into the understanding, but not into the life, that is, into the
will, cannot be in any enlightenment or in interior sight from the Lord,
they say that things must be believed, or that people must have faith.
And they also reason about these things as to whether they are true or
not; nay, they do not wish them to be perceived by any interior sight or
understanding. They speak in this way because with them truths are
devoid of light from heaven, and to those who see without light from
heaven, falsities can appear as truths, and truths as falsities. From
this a blindness so great has taken possession of many there, that
although a man does not practice truths, that is, live according to
them, they nevertheless say that he can be saved by faith alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10787.">10787.</span></span>

We afterward spoke to them about the Lord, about love to Him, about love
toward the neighbor, and about regeneration, saying that to love the
Lord is to love the commandments which are from Him, that is, to live
according to them from this love; that love toward the neighbor is to
will good and from this to do good to one's fellow-citizen, to our
country, to the church, to the Lord's kingdom, not for the sake of self,
to be seen, or to have merit; but from the affection of good. With
regard to regeneration, we said that those who are being regenerated by
the Lord, and who introduce truths at once into the life, come into
interior perception about them; but that those who receive truths first
in the memory, and then in the understanding, and finally in the will,
are those who are in faith; for they act from faith, which is then
called conscience. They said that they perceived these things to be so,
consequently also what faith is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10788.">10788.</span></span>

A continuation about this sixth earth in the starry heaven will be found
at the end of the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10789.">10789.</span></span>

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-NINTH. THE DOCTRINE OF CHARITY AND FAITH There are
two kinds of things with men that must be in order, namely, the things
that belong to heaven, and the things that belong to the world. The
things that belong to heaven are called Ecclesiastical; and the things
that belong to the world are called Civil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10790.">10790.</span></span>

Order cannot be maintained in the world without overseers, who must take
note of all things that are done according to order, and that are done
contrary to order; and who must reward those who live according to
order, and punish those who live contrary to order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10791.">10791.</span></span>

If this be not done, the human race will perish. For there is born in
everyone, by inheritance, the desire to rule over others, and to possess
the goods of others. From this come enmities, envyings, hatreds,
revenges, deceits, fierce ragings, and many other evils; and therefore
unless men are kept in bonds by laws, and by rewards suited to their
loves, which are honors and gains for those who do good things; and by
punishments contrary to their loves, which are the loss of honors, of
possessions, and of life for those who do evil things, the human race
must perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10792.">10792.</span></span>

There must therefore be overseers learned in the law, wise, and
god-fearing, to keep the assemblages of men in order. Among the
overseers also there must be order, lest anyone should from caprice, or
from ignorance, permit evils that are contrary to order, and should thus
destroy it. This is guarded against when there are higher and lower
overseers, among whom there is subordination.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10793.">10793.</span></span>

Overseers over the things with man that belong to heaven, or over
ecclesiastical things, are called priests, and their office is called
the priesthood. But overseers over such things with man as belong to the
world, or over civil matters, are called magistrates, and their chief,
where such supreme powers exist, is called a king.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10794.">10794.</span></span>

As regards priests, they must teach men the way to heaven, and must also
lead them. They must teach them according to the doctrine of their
church, and they must lead them to live according to it. Priests who
teach truths and by means of them lead to the good of life, and thus to
the Lord, are good shepherds of the sheep; but those who teach, and do
not lead to the good of life, and thus to the Lord, are evil shepherds.
The latter are called by the Lord "thieves and robbers," in John
10:7-16.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10795.">10795.</span></span>

Priests must not claim for themselves any power over the souls of men,
because they do not know in what state are a man's interiors; and still
less must they claim for themselves the power of opening and closing
heaven, because this power belongs to the Lord alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10796.">10796.</span></span>

Priests must have dignity and honor on account of the holy things which
they engage in; but those of them who are wise give the honor to the
Lord, from whom come all holy things; and not to themselves. But those
of them who are not wise attribute the honor to themselves. These take
it away from the Lord. Those who attribute honor to themselves on
account of the holy things which they engage in, set honor and profit
above the salvation of souls, which they ought to have regard for. But
those who give the honor to the Lord and not to themselves, set the
salvation of souls above honor and profit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10797.">10797.</span></span>

No honor of any employment is in the person; but it is adjoined to him
according to the dignity of the thing which he administers, and that
which is adjoined is separate from the person, and also is separated
from him together with the employment. The honor that is in the person
is the honor of the wisdom and fear of the Lord \[that he displays\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="10798.">10798.</span></span>

Priests must teach the people, and lead them to the good of life by
means of truths. But they must not compel anyone, because no one can be
compelled to believe contrary to what he thinks in his heart to be true.
He who believes differently from the priest, and makes no disturbance,
must be left in peace; but he who makes a disturbance must be separated;
for this also belongs to the order for the sake of which is the
priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10799.">10799.</span></span>

As priests are overseers for the administration of the things that
belong to the Divine law and to worship, so are kings and magistrates
for the administration of the things that belong to the civil law, and
to judgment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10800.">10800.</span></span>

As the king alone cannot administer all things, therefore there are
overseers under him, to each of whom has been given the official duty of
administering what the king cannot attend to. Taken together these
overseers constitute the royalty, but the king himself is the chief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_241"></span>[10771-1](ac216.htm#fr_241) The "German mile"
here referred to is equal to 5.753 British statute miles, which would
make the circumference of this "Fifth Earth" or planet to be a little
less than 2880 American or British miles. \[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10801-10850](ac217)
