[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac216.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="10801.">10801.</span></span>

The royalty itself is not in the person, but is adjoined to the person.
The king who believes that the royalty is in his own person, and the
overseer who believes that the dignity of the overseership is in his own
person, is not wise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10802.">10802.</span></span>

The royalty consists in administering according to the laws of the
kingdom, and in judging from justice according to these laws. The king
who regards the laws as above him, consequently himself as below the
laws, is wise; but he who regards himself as above the laws,
consequently the laws as beneath him, is not wise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10803.">10803.</span></span>

The king who regards the laws as above himself, and thus himself as
beneath the laws, makes the royalty to consist in the law, and the law
rules over him; for he knows that the law is justice, and all justice
that is justice is Divine. But he who regards the laws as beneath him,
and thus himself as above them, makes the royalty to consist in himself,
and either believes himself to be the law, or the law which is justice
to be from himself; consequently he arrogates to himself that which is
Divine, and under which he must be.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10804.">10804.</span></span>

The law which is justice must be brought forward by persons in the realm
learned in the law, who are wise and god-fearing; in accordance with
which the king and his subjects must then live. The king who lives in
accordance with the law which is justice, and therein sets an example to
his subjects, is truly a king.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10805.">10805.</span></span>

A king who has absolute power, and who believes that his subjects are
such slaves that he has a right to their lives and properties, and who
exercises this power, is not a king, but a tyrant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10806.">10806.</span></span>

The king must be obeyed in accordance with the laws of the realm, nor
must he be injured in any way by word or deed, for upon this depends the
public safety. EXODUS 39 1. And from the blue, and the crimson, and the
scarlet double-dyed they made the garments of ministry, for ministering
in what is holy; and they made the garments of holiness for Aaron; as
Jehovah commanded Moses. 2. And he made the ephod of gold, of blue, and
of crimson, and of scarlet double-dyed, and of fine twined linen. 3. And
they spread out thin plates of gold, and he cut off threads to work them
in the midst of the blue, and in the midst of the crimson, and in the
midst of the scarlet double-dyed, and in the midst of the fine linen,
with the work of a thinker. 4. Shoulderpieces made they for it, joined
together; upon the two extremities of it was it joined together. 5. And
the girdle of its ephod that was upon it, it was out of it, according to
the work thereof; of gold, of blue, and of crimson, and of scarlet
double-dyed, and fine twined linen; as Jehovah commanded Moses. 6. And
they wrought the onyx stones, encompassed with settings of gold, graven
with the engravings of a signet, upon the names of the sons of Israel.
7. And he put them upon the shoulderpieces of the ephod, to be stones of
remembrance for the sons of Israel; as Jehovah commanded Moses. 8. And
he made the breastplate with the work of a thinker according to the work
of the ephod; of gold, of blue, and of crimson, and of scarlet
double-dyed, and of fine twined linen. 9. It was foursquare; doubled
made they the breastplate; a span the length thereof, and a span the
breadth thereof, doubled. 10. And they filled into it four rows of
stones: a row, a ruby, a topaz, and a carbuncle, the first row. 11. And
the second row, a chrysoprase, a sapphire, and a diamond. 12. And the
third row, a cyanus, an agate and an amethyst. 13. And the fourth row, a
tarshish, an onyx, and a jasper; they were encompassed with settings of
gold in their fillings. 14. And the stones were upon the names of the
sons of Israel, twelve, upon their names, the engravings of a signet,
everyone upon his name, for the twelve tribes. 15. And they made upon
the breastplate chains of the border, with cord-work, of pure gold. 16.
And they made two settings of gold, and two rings of gold; and they put
the two rings upon the two extremities of the breastplate. 17. And they
put the two cords of gold upon the two rings upon the extremities of the
breastplate. 18. And the two extremities of the two cords they put on
the two settings, and they put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod,
over against the faces thereof. 19. And they made two rings of gold, and
put them upon the two extremities of the breastplate, upon the edge
thereof, which was toward the side of the ephod inward. 20. And they
made two rings of gold, and put them upon the two shoulderpieces of the
ephod underneath, over against its faces, opposite the joining, above
the girdle of the ephod. 21. And they bound the breastplate by the rings
thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a thread of blue, that it might
be upon the girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate withdrew not
from upon the ephod; as Jehovah commanded Moses. 22. And he made the
robe of the ephod with the work of the weaver, all of blue. 23. And the
mouth of the robe in the midst thereof, as the mouth of a coat of mail,
with an edge for its mouth round about, that it should not be rent. 24.
And they made upon the skirts of the robe pomegranates of blue, and of
crimson, and of scarlet double-dyed, interwoven. 25. And they made bells
of pure gold, and they put the bells in the midst of the pomegranates
upon the skirts of the robe round about, in the midst of the
pomegranates; 26. A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate,
upon the skirts of the robe round about, to minister; as Jehovah
commanded Moses. 27. And they made the tunics of fine linen with the
work of the weaver for Aaron, and for his sons. 28. And the miter of
fine linen, and the ornament of the tiaras of fine linen, and the linen
breeches of fine twined linen; 29. And the belt of fine twined linen,
and of blue, and of crimson, and of scarlet double-dyed, with the work
of an embroiderer; as Jehovah commanded Moses. 30. And they made the
plate of the crown of holiness of pure gold, and they wrote upon it the
writing, with the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO JEHOVAH. 31. And
they put upon it a thread of blue, to put it upon the miter above; as
Jehovah commanded Moses. 32. And all the work of the Habitation of the
Tent of meeting was finished, and the sons of Israel did according to
all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so did they. 33. And they brought the
Habitation unto Moses, the Tent, and all its vessels, its hooks, its
planks, its bars, and its pillars, and its bases; 34. And the covering
of skins of red rams, and the covering of badgers' skins, and the veil
of the covering; 35. The ark of the Testimony, and the staves thereof,
and the propitiatory; 36. The table, all the vessels thereof, and the
bread of faces; 37. The pure lampstand, the lamps thereof, the lamps of
the setting in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for the
luminary; 38. And the altar of gold, and the oil of anointing, and the
incense of sweet spices, and the covering for the door of the tent; 39.
The altar of brass, and the grating of brass which is for it, its
staves, and all its vessels; the laver and its base; 40. The hangings of
the court, its pillars, and its bases, and the covering for the gate of
the court, the cords thereof, and the pegs thereof, and all the vessels
of the service of the Habitation, for the Tent of meeting: 41. The
garments of ministry for ministering in what is holy, the garments of
holiness for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister
in the priest's office. 42. According to all that Jehovah commanded
Moses, so did the sons of Israel all the service. 43. And Moses saw all
the work, and behold they had done it as Jehovah commanded, so had they
done; and Moses blessed them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10807.">10807.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. As the things contained in this chapter, and in fact the
things said about the garments of Aaron and of his sons in chapter 28,
have already been unfolded in respect to the internal sense, a further
explication of these things also is needless.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10808.">10808.</span></span>

CONTINUATION ABOUT THE SIXTH EARTH IN THE STARRY HEAVEN. These spirits,
with whom I now conversed, were from the northern part of their earth. I
was next conducted to others who were from the western part. These too,
wishing to search out who I was, and of what quality, at once said that
there was nothing but evil in me. They thought that in this way I should
be deterred from approaching nearer. It was perceived that this is the
first thing they say to all who come to them. But it was given me to
reply that I well know that such is the case, and that in them likewise
there is nothing but evil; for the reason that everyone is born into
evil, and therefore whatever comes of man, spirit, and angel, coming as
it does from what belongs to himself, that is, from what is his own, is
nothing but evil; because all the good that is in anyone is from the
Lord. From this they perceived that I was in the truth, and I was
admitted to speak with them; and they then showed me their idea about
evil in man, and about good from the Lord; in what manner they are kept
separate from each other. They set one near the other, almost
contiguous, but still separate, yet as it were bound in an unspeakable
manner, so that the good led the evil, and bridled it; so that it was
not allowed to act at its pleasure; and that in this way the good bent
the evil to what it desired, without the evil being aware of it. In this
manner they set forth the rule of good over evil, and at the same time
the free state in which evil is led by good to good, thus to the Lord;
for from their idea of good they had an idea of the Lord, because it is
from Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10809.">10809.</span></span>

They then asked how the Lord appears with the angels from our earth. I
said that He appears in the Sun as a Man, encompassed there with solar
fire, from which the angels in the heavens have all their light; and
that the heat which proceeds from it is Divine good, and that the light
which is from it is Divine truth, both from the Divine love, which is
the fiery appearance round the Lord in that Sun; but that that Sun is
seen only by the angels in heaven, and not by the spirits who are
beneath, because these are more remote from the reception of the good of
love and the truth of faith than are the angels who are in the heavens.
But as regards the sun of the world, it is seen by no one in the other
life, yet it appears in their idea as something that is black and not
visible, from its being opposite to the Sun of heaven, which is the
Lord. The reason why it was given them to inquire about the Lord and
about His appearance before the angels from our earth, was that it then
pleased the Lord to present Himself as present with them, and to reduce
into order the things that had been disturbed by the evil ones there
about which they had complained. It was in order that I might see these
things that I had been brought there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10810.">10810.</span></span>

There was then seen a dim cloud toward the east descending from some
height, and which as it came down gradually appeared bright, and in the
human form; and finally this form was in a flaming radiance, around
which were little stars of the same color. In this way did the Lord
present Himself before the spirits with whom I was conversing. To this
presence then were gathered from every side all the spirits who were
there; and as they came the good were separated from the evil, the good
to the right, and the evil to the left, and this at once as of their own
accord. And those who were to the right were arranged in order according
to the quality of their good, and those who were to the left according
to the quality of their evil. Those who were good were left to form a
heavenly society among themselves; but the evil were cast into the
hells. I afterward saw that the flaming radiance descended into the
lower parts of the earth there to a considerable depth, and as it did so
appeared at one time as a flaming that verged to brightness, at another
as a brightness that verged to dimness, and at another as a dimness. And
I was told by the angels that this appearance is according to the
reception of truth from good, and of falsity from evil, with those who
inhabit the lower parts of that earth; and that it was not at all
because that flaming radiance underwent such variations. They also said
that the lower parts of that earth are inhabited by both the good and
the evil; but that they are well separated, to the intent that the evil
may be directed by the Lord by means of the good. They added that the
good are by turns raised up by the Lord from thence, into heaven, and
that others succeed in their place; and so continually. As the flaming
radiance descended, the good were in the same way separated from the
evil, and all things were reduced into order. For by various arts and
cunning tricks the evil had introduced themselves there into the abodes
of the good, and had infested them; and this was the cause of that
visitation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10811.">10811.</span></span>

That cloud, which as it descended appeared gradually brighter, and in
the human form, and afterward as a flaming radiance, was an angelic
society, in the midst of which was the Lord. From this it was given to
know what is meant by the Lord's words, where He speaks in the Gospels
about the Last Judgment: that "He will come with the angels in the
clouds of heaven with glory and power."

<span class="margnote"><span id="10812.">10812.</span></span>

Afterward there were seen monkish spirits, who in the world had been
traveling monks or missionaries, as above related. And there was also
seen a crowd consisting of spirits of that earth, most of them evil,
whom they had drawn over to their party and had seduced. These were seen
at the eastern quarter of that earth, from which they drove away the
good, who as before related appeared at the north side of the earth.
That crowd, together with those who had seduced them, were gathered into
one to the number of several thousands, and were separated, and the evil
from among them were cast into the hells. It was also granted me to
converse with one spirit, a monk, and to ask him what he was doing
there. He said that he was teaching them about the Lord "What else?"
"About heaven and hell." "What else?" "About belief in all things which
I shall say." "What else?" "About the power of remitting sins and of
opening and closing heaven." He was then examined as to what he knew
about the Lord, about the truths of faith, about the remission of sins,
about the salvation of man, and about heaven and hell; and it was found
that he knew scarcely anything, and that he was in obscurity and falsity
about each and all things, and that there was nothing seated in him but
the cupidity of acquiring wealth and dominion. He had contracted this
cupidity in the world, and consequently he had it in him, and he was
therefore told that as he had traveled so far under the influence of
this cupidity, and as such was his condition in respect to doctrine, his
presence among the spirits of that earth could have no other result than
the taking away of heavenly light, and the introduction of the darkness
of hell, the effect of which would be that hell would rule in them, and
not the Lord. Moreover, in spite of his stupidity in respect to the
things that belong to heaven, he was cunning in leading people astray;
and being of such a character he was then cast into hell. In this manner
were the spirits of that earth freed from those monkish missionaries.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10813.">10813.</span></span>

Among other things, the spirits of that earth also said that those
visitors who as has been said were monkish spirits, were extremely
desirous that they should live together in a society, and not separated
and solitary. For spirits and angels dwell and live together in a like
manner as in the world, because everyone's life in the world follows
him. Those who in the world have dwelt congregated together, so dwell
there; and those who have dwelt separated into houses and families dwell
there in the same way. When these spirits lived on their earth, they
dwelt separate, household by household, family by family, and thus
nation by nation; and consequently they did not know what it is to dwell
together in a society; so that when they were told that the reason why
those visitors desired this was in order that they might command or have
dominion over them, and that otherwise they could not subject them to
themselves and make them slaves, they replied that they did not at all
know what it is to command and have dominion. That they flee at the mere
idea of command or rule, I observed from the fact that when I showed the
city in which I dwelt to one of them who accompanied us back, at the
first view of it he fled away and was seen no more. Be it known that
when it pleases the Lord, spirits and angels can see through a man's
eyes the things which are in the world; but the Lord allows this solely
with one to whom He grants to speak with spirits and angels, and to be
with them. It was granted them to see through my eyes the things which
are in the world as plainly as I myself see them, and also to hear men
speaking with me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10814.">10814.</span></span>

It was then given me to speak with the angels who were with me about
rule of various kinds, and to say that there are two kinds of rule; one
of love toward the neighbor, and the other of the love of self; and that
the rule of love toward the neighbor prevails among those who dwell
separated into houses, families, and nations; but the rule of the love
of self among those who dwell together in a society. Among those who
live separated into houses, families, and nations, it is the father of
the nation, and under him the fathers of families, and under these the
fathers of each household, who rule. He is called the father of the
nation from whom come the families, and from the families the
households. But all these rule from love like that of a father toward
his children, who teaches them how they ought to live, bestows benefits
upon them, and as far as he is able gives them of his own. Nor does it
ever enter into his mind to subject them under himself as subjects or as
servants; but he loves that they should obey him as sons obey their
father. And as this love grows as it descends (as is known), therefore
the father of the nation acts from a more interior love than the
immediate father of the sons himself. Such also is the rule in the
heavens, because such rule is of the Lord; for His rule is from His
Divine love toward the whole human race. \[2\] But the rule of the love
of self, which is opposite to the rule of love toward the neighbor,
began when man estranged himself from the Lord; because insofar as a man
does not love and worship the Lord, so far he loves and worships
himself; and so far also he loves the world more than heaven. It then
became a matter of necessity-for the sake of their safety-for the
nations with their families and households to betake themselves into a
united body, and to begin governments under various forms. For insofar
as this love increased, so far increased evils of every kind, such as
enmities, envyings, hatreds, revenges, deceits, and fierce ragings
against all who opposed them. Moreover, this love is of such a nature
that insofar as the reins are given it, it rushes on until at last all
such persons wish to rule over all in the whole world, and everyone
wishes to possess all the goods of others; and even this is not enough;
he also wishes to rule over the universal heaven; as can be seen from
the modern Babylonia. This then is the rule of the love of self; from
which the rule of love toward the neighbor differs as heaven does from
hell. \[3\] But although such is the nature of the rule of the love of
self in societies, there is nevertheless a rule of love toward the
neighbor even in kingdoms, with those who are wise from faith and love
to God, for these love the neighbor. That these also dwell in the
heavens, divided into nations, families, and households (although they
are at the same time in societies, but according to spiritual
relationships, which are those of the good of love and the truth of
faith) of the Lord's Divine mercy elsewhere. A continuation about this
sixth earth in the starry heaven will be found at the end of the
following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10815.">10815.</span></span>

CHAPTER THE FORTIETH. THE DOCTRINE OF CHARITY AND FAITH \[Here
concerning the Lord. (Reviser.)\] There is one God, who is the Creator
of the universe and the Preserver of the universe, thus who is the God
of heaven and the God of earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10816.">10816.</span></span>

There are two things which make the life of heaven with man; the truth
of faith, and the good of love. Man has this life from God, and nothing
whatever of it from man; and therefore the chief thing of the church is
to acknowledge God, to believe in God, and to love Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10817.">10817.</span></span>

Those who have been born within the church ought to acknowledge the
Lord, His Divine and His Human, and to believe in Him and love Him,
because all salvation is of the Lord. This the Lord teaches in John: He
that believeth in the Son hath eternal life; but he that believeth not
the Son shall not see life, but the anger of God abideth with him (John
3:36). This is the will of Him that sent Me, that everyone who seeth the
Son, and believeth in Him, may have eternal life; and I will raise him
up in the last day (John 6:40). Jesus said, I am the resurrection and
the life; he that believeth in Me, though he die, shall live; but
everyone that liveth and believeth in Me shall never die (John 11:25,
26).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10818.">10818.</span></span>

Wherefore those who within the church do not acknowledge the Lord and
His Divine, cannot be conjoined with God, and thus cannot have any lot
with the angels in heaven, for no one can be conjoined with God except
by the Lord and in the Lord. That no one can be conjoined with God
except by the Lord, the Lord teaches in these passages: No man hath ever
seen God; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He
hath set Him forth (John 1:18). Ye have never heard the voice of the
Father, nor seen His shape (John 5:37). No one knoweth the Father, save
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal Him (Matt.
11:27). I am the way, the truth, and the life; no one cometh unto the
Father but by Me (John 14:6). That no one can be conjoined with God
except in the Lord, the Lord also teaches in John: As the branch cannot
bear fruit of itself, unless it abide in the vine; so neither can ye,
unless ye abide in Me; for without Me ye can do nothing (John 15:4-5).
That no one can be conjoined with God except in the Lord, because the
Father is in Him, and They are one, as also He teaches in John: He that
seeth Me seeth Him that sent Me; and ye have known My Father, and from
henceforth ye have known Him; He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father;
Philip, believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in
Me? Believe Me that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me (John
12:45; 14:7-11). The Father and I are one; that ye may know, and
believe, that I am in the Father and the Father in Me (John 10:30, 38).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10819.">10819.</span></span>

As the Father is in the Lord, and the Father and the Lord are one, and
as He must be believed in, and whoso believeth in Him hath eternal life,
it is evident that the Lord is God. That the Lord is God is taught
everywhere in the Word, as in these passages: In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word. All things were
made by Him; and without Him was not anything made that was made. And
the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory,
the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father (John 1:1, 3, 14). Unto
us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be
upon His shoulder, and His name shall be called God, Hero, the Father of
Eternity, the Prince of Peace (Isa. 9:6). A virgin shall conceive, and
bring forth, and His name shall be called God with us (Isa. 7:14; Matt.
1:23). Behold the days come when I will raise unto David a righteous
Branch, who shall reign as king, and shall prosper; and this is His name
whereby they shall call Him, JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS (Jer. 23:5-6;
33:15-16).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10820.">10820.</span></span>

All those who are of the church, and are in light from heaven, see the
Divine in the Lord, and this in His Human. But those who are not in
light from heaven see nothing but the Human in the Lord, when yet the
Human and the Divine in Him are so united that they are one, as the Lord
taught in another passage in John: Father, all things that are Mine are
Thine, and all things that are Thine are Mine (John 17:10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10821.">10821.</span></span>

Those who in regard to the Divinity have an idea of three Persons,
cannot have an idea of one God. If they say one with the mouth, they
nevertheless think of three. But those who in regard to the Divinity
have an idea of three in one Person, can have an idea of one God, and
can say "one God," and also think "one God."

<span class="margnote"><span id="10822.">10822.</span></span>

Men have the idea of three in one Person when they think that the Father
is in the Lord, and that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Lord; and
then the Trine in the Lord is the Divine Itself which is called the
Father, the Divine Human which is called the Son, and the proceeding
Divine which is called the Holy Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10823.">10823.</span></span>

Every man has from his father his being of life, which is called his
soul. The derivative manifestation \[existere\] of life is that which is
called the body. Consequently the body is the likeness of its soul,
because by means of it the soul pursues its life at its pleasure. From
this it is that men are born into the likeness of their fathers, and
that families are distinguished from each other. And from this it is
evident what was the nature of the Lord's body or Human, namely, that it
was like the Divine Itself, which was the Being of His life, or the Soul
from the Father; and He therefore said: He that seeth Me seeth the
Father (John 14:9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10824.">10824.</span></span>

That the Divine and the Human of the Lord are one Person, is also in
accordance with the faith received in the whole Christian world, which
is to this effect: "Although Christ is God and Man, nevertheless He is
not two, but one Christ. Yea, He is altogether one and a single Person;
for as the body and soul are one man, so also God and Man are one
Christ." This is from the Athanasian Creed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10825.">10825.</span></span>

That the Lord was conceived of Jehovah the Father and thus was God from
conception, is known in the church, and also that He rose again with His
whole body, for He left nothing in the sepulchre. Of this He also
afterward confirmed His disciples, saying, "Behold My hands and My feet,
that it is I Myself; feel Me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones as ye see Me have" (Luke 24:39). And although He was a man in
respect to the flesh and bones, He nevertheless entered in through
closed doors; and after He had manifested Himself He again became
invisible (John 20:19, 26; Luke 24:31). It is different with every man,
for a man rises again only as to the spirit, and not as to the body; and
therefore when He said that He is not a spirit, He said that He is not
like any other man. From this it is now evident that in the Lord the
Human also is Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10826.">10826.</span></span>

Those who make the Human of the Lord like the human of any other man, do
not think about His conception from the Divine Itself, nor about His
resurrection with the whole body, nor about Him as seen when He was
transfigured, in that His face shone as the sun. Neither do they know
and apprehend that the body of everyone is a likeness or effigy of his
soul, nor that the Lord is omnipresent even in respect to the Human, for
from this is the belief in His omnipresence in the Holy Supper.
Omnipresence is Divine (Matt. 28:20).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10827.">10827.</span></span>

As all the Divine is in the Lord, He therefore has all power in the
heavens and on earth, as also He Himself says in these passages: The
Father hath given to the Son power over all flesh (John 17:2). All
things have been delivered unto Me by the Father (Matt. 11:27). All
power hath been given unto Me in heaven and on earth (Matt. 28:18).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10828.">10828.</span></span>

The Lord came into the world in order to save the human race, which
otherwise would have perished in eternal death; and He saved it by this:
that He subjugated the hells which were infesting every man that came
into the world and that went out of the world; and at the same time by
this: that He glorified His Human, for in this way He can hold the hells
in subjection to eternity. The subjugation of the hells and the
simultaneous glorification of His Human, were effected by means of
temptations admitted into His Human, and by continual victories then.
His passion on the cross was the last temptation and the full victory.
That the Lord subjugated the hells, He Himself teaches in the following
passages: Jesus said, Now is My soul troubled, Father, rescue Me from
this hour; but for this cause came I into the world. Father, glorify Thy
name. There came forth a voice from heaven, saying, I have both
glorified it, and I will glorify it again. Then Jesus said, Now is the
judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out
(John 12:27, 28, 31). Be of good cheer; I have overcome the world (John
16:33). Who is this that cometh from Edom, marching in the multitude of
his strength, great to save? Mine own arm performed salvation for Me;
therefore He became their Savior (Isa. 63:1, 5, 8; also 59:16-21). That
He glorified His Human, and that the passion of the cross was the last
temptation and the full victory through which He was glorified, He also
teaches in these passages: After Judas was gone out, Jesus said, Now
hath the Son of man been glorified, and God shall glorify Him in
Himself, and shall straightway glorify Him (John 13:31-32). Father, the
hour is come; glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee. Now,
O Father, glorify Thou Me with the glory which I had with Thee before
the world was (John 17:1, 5). Now is My soul troubled, Father, glorify
Thy name; and there came forth a voice from heaven saying, I have both
glorified it, and I will glorify it again (John 12:27, 28). Ought not
the Christ to suffer this, and to enter into His glory? (Luke 24:26).
"To glorify" denotes to make Divine. From this it is now evident that
unless the Lord had come into the world, and had become a Man, and had
in this manner freed from hell all those who believe in Him and love
Him, no mortal could have been saved. This is meant by its being said
that without the Lord there is no salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10829.">10829.</span></span>

To love the Lord is to live according to His commandments. That this is
to love the Lord, He Himself teaches in John: If ye love Me, keep My
commandments. He that hath My commandments, and keepeth them, he it is
that loveth Me. If a man love Me, he will keep My word; but he that
loveth Me not, keepeth not My words (John 14:15, 21, 23, 24). And that
those are saved who receive the Lord, and believe in Him; but not those
who are in evils and the derivative falsities, because these latter do
not receive Him and believe in Him, He teaches in John: As many as
received Him, to them gave He power to be sons of God, to them that
believe in His name; who were born, not from bloods, nor from the will
of the flesh, nor from the will of man, but from God (John 1:12, 13).
"To be born from bloods, from the will of the flesh, and from the will
of man," denotes to be in the evils of the love of self and of the
world, and in the derivative falsities. "To be born from God" denotes to
be regenerated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10830.">10830.</span></span>

When the Lord had fully glorified His Human, He then put off the human
from the mother, and put on the Human from the Father; and therefore He
was then no longer the son of Mary, but the Son of God, from Whom He
came forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10831.">10831.</span></span>

That there is a trine in the Lord, namely, the Divine Itself, the Divine
Human, and the proceeding Divine, is a secret from heaven, and is for
those who will be in the holy Jerusalem. EXODUS 40 1. And Jehovah spoke
unto Moses, saying, 2. On the first day of the month, in the first
month, shalt thou rear up the Habitation of the Tent of meeting. 3. And
thou shalt put therein the ark of the Testimony, and thou shalt cover
the veil over the ark. 4. And thou shalt bring in the table, and shalt
set in order the ordering thereof; and thou shalt bring in the
lampstand, and shalt make the lamps thereof to go up. 5. And thou shalt
set the altar of gold for incense before the ark of the Testimony, and
shalt put the covering of the door to the Habitation. 6. And thou shalt
set the altar of burnt-offering before the door of the Habitation of the
Tent of meeting. 7. And thou shalt set the laver between the Tent of
meeting and the altar, and shalt put waters therein. 8. And thou shalt
set the court round about, and shalt set, the covering of the gate of
the court. 9. And thou shalt take the oil of anointing, and anoint the
Habitation, and all that is therein, and thou shalt sanctify it, and all
the vessels thereof; and it shall be holy. 10. And thou shalt anoint the
altar of burnt-offering, and all its vessels, and shalt sanctify the
altar; and the altar shall be a holy of holies. 11. And thou shall
anoint the laver and its base, and shalt sanctify it. 12. And thou shalt
make Aaron and his sons to come near unto the door of the Tent of
meeting, and shalt wash them with waters. 13. And thou shall clothe
Aaron with the garments of holiness, and thou shall anoint him, and
sanctify him, that he may minister to Me in the priest's office. 14. And
thou shalt make his sons to come near, and shalt clothe them with
tunics. 15. And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their
father, and they shall minister to Me in the priest's office; and their
anointing shall be to them for the priesthood of an age in their
generations. 16. And Moses did according to all that Jehovah commanded
him, so did he. 17. And it came to pass in the first month, in the
second year, on the first day of the month, that the Habitation was
reared up. 18. And Moses reared up the Habitation, and set its bases,
and placed the planks thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared
up its pillars. 19. And be spread the Tent over the Habitation, and put
the covering of the Tent upon it above; as Jehovah commanded Moses. 20.
And he took and put the Testimony into the ark, and placed the staves
upon the ark, and put the propitiatory upon the ark above. 21. And he
brought the ark into the Habitation, and set the veil of the covering,
and covered over the ark of the Testimony; as Jehovah commanded Moses.
22. And he put the table in the Tent of meeting, upon the leg of the
Habitation northward, without the veil. 23. And he set in order upon it
the ordering of the bread before Jehovah; as Jehovah commanded Moses.
24. And he put the lampstand in the Tent of meeting, hard by the table,
on the leg of the Habitation toward the south. 25. And he made the lamps
go up before Jehovah; as Jehovah commanded Moses. 26. And he put the
altar of gold in the Tent of meeting before the veil; 27. And he burnt
thereon incense of spices; as Jehovah commanded Moses. 28. And he put
the covering of the door to the Habitation. 29. And he placed the altar
of burnt-offering at the door of the Habitation of the Tent of meeting,
and he made to go up upon it the burnt-offering and the meat-offering;
as Jehovah commanded Moses. 30. And he placed the laver between the Tent
of meeting and the alter, and put waters therein, to wash. 31. And Moses
and Aaron and his sons washed out of it their hands and their feet. 32.
When they entered into the Tent of meeting, and when they came near unto
the altar, they washed; as Jehovah commanded Moses. 33. And he reared up
the court round about the Habitation, and the altar, and set the
covering of the gate of the court. And Moses finished the work. 34. And
the cloud covered the Tent of meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled
the Habitation. 35. And Moses could not enter into the Tent of meeting,
because the cloud tarried upon it, and the glory of Jehovah filled the
Habitation. 36. And when the cloud went up from over the Habitation, the
sons of Israel journeyed in all their journeyings. 37. And if the cloud
went not up, then they journeyed not till the day that it went up. 38.
Because the cloud of Jehovah was upon the Habitation by day, and there
was fire in it by night, in the eyes of all the house of Israel, in all
their journeyings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10832.">10832.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS. These things also are passed by without further
explication, because they are again the same as those which have been
already described and unfolded once, except those which are mentioned at
the end of this chapter, where it is said that after Moses had finished
the work the cloud covered the Tent, and the glory of Jehovah filled the
Habitation; and also that the cloud tarried upon the Tent by day, and
that there was fire in it by night; and that the sons of Israel
journeyed whenever the cloud went up. What these things signify is also
plain from what has already been frequently stated and shown about the
cloud, about the glory of Jehovah, about the fire, and about the
journeyings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10833.">10833.</span></span>

CONTINUATION ABOUT THE SIXTH EARTH IN THE STARRY HEAVEN. I afterward
questioned those spirits about various things in the earth from which
they were; and first about their Divine worship. To this they replied
that the nations together with their families assemble every thirtieth
day at one place, and hear preachings, and that from a pulpit raised
somewhat above the ground the preacher then teaches them truths Divine
which lead to the good of life. They were asked from what source they
have a knowledge of truths Divine. They said that it is from revelation;
and with regard to revelation they stated that it takes place in the
morning, in a state midway between sleep and waking, when they are in
interior light not yet interrupted by the senses of the body, and by
worldly things; and that they then hear angels of heaven speaking about
truths Divine and a life according to them; and that when they become
awake an angel appears to them at the bedside in a white garment, who
then suddenly disappears from their eyes, and from this they know that
the things which they have heard are from heaven. In this way a vision
of Divine origin is distinguished from a vision that is not Divine; for
no angel appears in a vision that is not Divine. They added that
revelations are made to their preachers, and sometimes also to others,
in a similar way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10834.">10834.</span></span>

With respect to the sun of that earth, which to us is a star, they said
that it appears to the inhabitants of the size of the human head, of the
color of flame; that their year is two hundred days long, and that a day
is equal to nine hours of our time, which they were able to infer from
the length of the days of our earth as perceived in me; and further that
they have perpetual spring and summer, and consequently that the fields
are in bloom, and the trees bear fruit, continuously. The reason of this
is that their year is so short, being equal only to the time of
seventy-five days of our year; and where the years are so short, there
the cold does not linger in winter, nor the heat in summer, in
consequence of which the ground is constantly in a state of spring.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10835.">10835.</span></span>

In reply to a question about their houses, they said that they are low,
of wood, with a flat roof, around which is a coping sloping downward;
and that in the front part of the house dwell the husband and wife, the
children in the part adjoining, and the menservants and maidservants
behind. With respect to their food, they said that they live on fruit
and vegetables, and that they drink milk with water, and have the milk
from cows which are woolly like sheep.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10836.">10836.</span></span>

With regard to their life, they said that they go about quite naked, and
that nakedness is no shame to them; also that their interaction is with
those who are within the families.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10837.">10837.</span></span>

As regards betrothals and marriages among the inhabitants on that earth,
they related that a daughter of marriageable age is kept at home, and is
not allowed to go out until the day when she is to be married; and that
she is then conducted to a certain wedding house, whither also have been
brought a number of other young women who are marriageable; and they are
there placed behind a partition that is raised as high as the middle
part of their bodies, so that they are seen undressed merely in respect
to the breast and face; and then the young men come thither to choose
one for a wife; and when a young man sees one who is like himself, and
to whom his mind draws him, he takes her by the hand; and if she then
follows he leads her into a house that has been made ready, and she
becomes his wife. For in that earth people see from the faces of others
whether they agree in their minds, because there the face of everyone is
the index of the mind, being quite free from pretence and deception.
That all things may be done in a becoming manner, and without
lasciviousness, an old man sits behind the virgin girls, and at their
side an old woman, and they keep watch. There are a number of such
places to which the young women are led, and there are also stated times
when the young men may make their choice. For if they do not see a girl
who suits them in one place, they go away to another; and if not at that
time, they return at a subsequent time. They said further that a husband
has only one wife, and never more, because this is contrary to Divine
order.
