[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsoa21)  [Next](tsoa23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1604590467/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL4BQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Ages*, by Robert Collier, \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

### XIII

### That Old Witch—Bad Luck

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"How do you tackle your work each day?  
 Are you scared of the job you find?  
 Do you grapple the task that comes your way  
 With a confident, easy mind?  
 Do you stand right up to the work ahead  
 Or fearfully pause to view it?  
 Do you start to toil with a sense of dread  
 Or feel that you're going to do it?

"What is the thought that is in your mind?  
 Is fear ever running through it?  
 If so, just tackle the next you find  
 By thinking you're going to do it."  
                           —<span class="smallcaps">Edgar A.
Guest</span>. <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6)

</div>

</div>

<span id="img_hinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/hinit.jpg) |

<span class="smallcaps">Has</span> that old witch—bad luck—ever camped
on your doorstep? Have ill health, misfortune and worry ever seemed to
dog your footsteps?

If so, you will be interested in knowing that YOU were the procuring
cause

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

of all that trouble. For fear is merely creative thought in negative
form.

Remember back in 1920 how fine the business outlook seemed, how
everything looked rosy and life flowed along like a song? We had crops
worth ten billions of dollars. We had splendid utilities, great
railways, almost unlimited factory capacity. Everyone was busy. The
government had a billion dollars in actual money. The banks were sound.
The people were well employed. Wages were good. Prosperity was general.
*Then something happened*. A wave of fear swept over the country. The
prosperity could not last. People wouldn't pay such high prices. There
was too much inflation. What was the result?

As Job put it in the long ago, "The thing that I greatly feared has come
upon me."

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

The prosperity vanished almost over night. Failures became general.
Hundreds of thousands were thrown out of work. And all because of panic,
fear.

’Tis true that readjustments were necessary. ’Tis true that prices were
too high, that inventories were too big, that values generally were
inflated. But it wasn't necessary to burst the balloon to let out the
gas. There are orderly natural processes of readjustment that bring
things to their proper level with the least harm to anyone.

But fear—panic—knows no reason. It brings into being overnight the
things that it fears. It is the greatest torment of humanity. It is
about all there is to Hell. *Fear is, in short, the devil*. It causes
most of the sin, disaster, disease and misery of the world. It is the
only thing you can put into business which

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

won't draw dividends in either fun or dollars. If you guess right, you
don't get any satisfaction out of it.

The real cause of all sickness is fear. You image some disease in your
thought, and your body proceeds to build upon this model that you hold
before it. You have seen how fear makes the face pallid, how it first
stops the beating of the heart, then sets it going at trip-hammer pace.
Fear changes the secretions. Fear halts the digestion. Fear puts lines
and wrinkles into the face. Fear turns the hair gray.

Mind controls every function of the human body. If the thought you hold
before your subconscious mind is the fear of disease, of colds or
catarrh, of fever or indigestion, those are the images your subconscious
mind will work out in your body. For your body itself

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

is merely so much matter—an aggregation of protons and electrons, just
as the table in front of you is an aggregation of these same buttons of
force, but with a different density. Take away your mind, and your body
is just as inert, just as lifeless, just as senseless, as the table.
Every function of your body, from the beating of your heart to the
secretions in your glands, is controlled by mind. The digestion of your
food is just as much a function of your mind as the moving of your
finger. So the all-important thing is not what food you put into your
stomach, but what your mind decides shall be done with it. If your mind
feels that certain food should make you sick, it *will* make you sick.
If, on the other hand, your mind decides that though the food has no
nutritive value, there is no reason why unintelligent matter should make

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

you sick, mind will eliminate that food without harm or discomfort to
you.

Your body is just like clay in the hands of a potter. Your mind can make
of it what it will. The clay has nothing to say about what form it shall
take. Neither have your head, your heart, your lungs, your digestive
organs anything to say about how conditions shall affect them. They do
not decide whether they shall be dizzy or diseased or lame. It is mind
that makes this decision. They merely conform to it AFTER mind has
decided it. Matter has undergone any and every condition without harm,
when properly sustained by mind. And what it has done once, it can do
again.

When you understand that your muscles, your nerves, your bones have no
feeling or intelligence of their own, when you learn that they react to
conditions

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

only as mind directs that they shall react, you will never again think
or speak of any organ as imperfect, as weak or ailing. You will never
again complain of tired bodies, aching muscles, or frayed nerves. On the
contrary, you will hold steadfast to thoughts of exhaustless strength,
of super-abundant vitality, knowing that, as Shakespeare said—"There is
nothing, either good or bad, but thinking makes it so."

Never fear disaster, for the fear of it is an invitation to disaster to
come upon you. Fear being vivid, easily im-presses itself upon the
sub-conscious mind. And by so impressing itself, it brings into being
the thing that is feared. It is the Frankenstein monster that we all
create at times, and which, created, turns to rend its creator. Fear
that something you greatly prize will

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

be lost and the fear you feel with create the very means whereby you
will lose it.

Fear is the Devil. It is the ravening lion roaming the earth seeking
whom it may devour. The only safety from it is to deny it. The only
refuge is in the knowledge that it has no power other than the power you
give to it.

*He Whom a Dream Hath Possessed*

You fear debt. So your mind concentrates upon it and brings about
greater debts. You fear loss. And by visualizing that loss you bring it
about.

The only remedy for fear is to know that evil has no power—that it is a
nonentity—merely a lack of something. You fear ill health, when if you
would concentrate that same amount of thought upon good health you would
insure the very condition you fear to lose. Functional

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

disturbances are caused solely by the mind through wrong thinking. The
remedy for them is not drugs, but right thinking, for the trouble is not
in the organs but in the mind. Farnsworth in his "Practical Psychology"
tells of a man who had conceived the idea when a boy that the eating of
cherries and milk together had made him sick. He was very fond of both,
but always had to be careful not to eat them together, for whenever he
did he had been ill. Mr. Farnsworth explained to him that there was no
reason for such illness, because all milk sours anyway just as soon as
it reaches the stomach. As a matter of fact it cannot be digested until
it does sour. He then treated the man mentally for this wrong
association of ideas, and after the one treatment the man was never
troubled in this way again, though

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

he had been suffering from it for forty-five years.

If you had delirium tremens, and thought you saw pink elephants and
green alligators and yellow snakes all about you, it would be a foolish
physician that would try to cure you of snakes. Or that would prescribe
glasses to improve your eyesight, when he knew that the animals round
about you were merely distorted visions of your mind.

The indigestion that you suffer from, the colds that bother you—in
short, each and every one of your ailments—is just as much a distorted
idea of your mind as would be the snakes of delirium tremens. Banish the
idea and you banish the manifestation.

The Bible contains one continuous entreaty to cast out fear. From
beginning to end, the admonition "Fear not" is

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

insistent. Fear is the primary cause of all bodily impairment. Jesus
understood this and He knew that it could be abolished. Hence His
frequent entreaty, "Fear not, be not afraid."

Struggle there is. And struggle there will always be. But struggle is
merely wrestling with trial. We need difficulties to overcome. But there
is nothing to be afraid of. Everything is an effect of mind. Your
thought forces, concentrated upon anything, will bring that thing into
manifestation. Therefore concentrate them only upon good things, only
upon those conditions you wish to see manifested. *Think* health, power,
abundance, happiness. Drive all thoughts of poverty and disease, of fear
and worry, as far from your mind as you drive filth from your homes. For
fear and worry is the filth of the mind that causes all

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

trouble, that brings about all disease. Banish it! Banish from among
your associates any man with a negative outlook on life. Shun him as you
would the plague. Can you imagine a knocker winning anything? He is
doomed before he starts. Don't let him pull you down with him. "Fret not
thyself," says the Psalmist, "else shalt thou be moved to do evil."

That wise old Psalmist might have been writing for us today. For there
is no surer way of doing the wrong thing in business or in social life
than to fret yourself, to worry, to fume, to want action of some kind,
regardless of what it may be. Remember the Lord's admonition to the
Israelites, "*Be still*—and know that I am God."

Have you ever stood on the shore of a calm, peaceful lake and watched
the

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

reflections in it? The trees, the mountains, the clouds, the sky, all
were mirrored there—just as perfectly, as beautifully, as the objects
themselves. But try to get such a reflection from the ocean! It cannot
be done, because the ocean is always restless, always stirred up by
winds or waves or tides.

So it is with your mind. You cannot reflect the richness and plenty of
Universal Mind, you cannot mirror peace and health and happiness, if you
are constantly worried, continually stirred by waves of fear, winds of
anger, tides of toil and striving. You must relax at times. You must
give mind a chance. You must realize that, when you have done your best,
you can confidently lean back and leave the outcome to Universal Mind.

Just as wrong thinking produces discord

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

in the body, so it also brings on a diseased condition in the realm of
commerce. Experience teaches that we need to be protected more from our
fears and wrong thoughts, than from so-called evil influences external
to ourselves. We need not suffer for another man's wrong, for another's
greed, dishonesty, avarice or selfish ambition. But if we hug to
ourselves the fear that we do have to so suffer, take it into our
thought, allow it to disturb us, then we sentence ourselves. We are free
to reject every suggestion of discord, and to be governed harmoniously,
in spite of what anything or anybody may try to do to us.

Do you know why old army men would rather have soldiers of 18 or 20 than
mature men of 30 or 40? Not because they can march farther. They can't!
Not because they can carry more.

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They can't! But
because when they go to sleep at night, they really sleep. *They wipe
the slate clean!* When they awaken in the morning, they are ready for a
new day and a new world.

But an older man carries the nervous strain of one day over to the next.
He worries! With the result that at the end of a couple of months’ hard
campaigning, the older man is a nervous wreck.

And that is the trouble with most men in business. *They never wipe the
slate clean!* *They worry!* And they carry each day's worries over to
the next, with the result that some day the burden becomes more than
they can carry.

*The Bars of Fate*

Fear results from a belief that there are really two powers in this
world—

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Good and Evil.
Like light and darkness. When the fact is that Evil is no more real than
darkness. True, we lose contact with Good at times. We let the clouds of
fear and, worry come between us and the sunlight of Good and then all
seems dark. But the sun is still shining on the other side of those
clouds, and when we drive them away, we again see its light.

Realizing this, realizing that Good is ever available if we will but
turn to it confidently in our need, what is there to fear? "Fear not,
little flock," Said Jesus, "for it is the Father's good pleasure to give
you the kingdom." And again—"Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I
have is thine."

If this means anything, it means that the Father is ever available to
all of us, that we have but to call upon Him in

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

the right way and our needs will be met. It doesn't matter what those
needs may be.

If Universal Mind is the Creator of all, and if everything in the
Universe belongs to It, then your business, your work, isn't really
yours—but the "Father's." And He is just as much interested in its
success, as long as you are working in accordance with His plan, as you
can be.

Everyone will admit that Universal Mind can do anything good. Everyone
will admit that It can bring to a successful conclusion any undertaking
It may be interested in. If Mind created your business, if It inspired
your work, then It is interested in its successful conclusion.

Why not, then, call upon Mind when you have done all you know how to do

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

and yet success seems beyond your efforts. Why not put your problem up
to Mind, secure in the belief that It CAN and WILL give you any right
thing you may desire? I know that many people hesitate to pray for
material things, but if Universal Mind made them, they must have been
made for some good purpose, and as long as you intend to use them for
good, by all means ask for them.

If you can feel that your business, your work, is a good work, if you
can be sure that it is advancing the great Scheme of Things by ever so
little, you will never again fear debt or lack or limitation. For "The
earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof." Universal Mind is never
going to lack for means to carry on Its work. When Jesus needed fish and
bread, fish and bread

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

were provided in such abundance that a whole multitude was fed. When He
needed gold, the gold coin appeared in the fish's mouth. Where you are,
Mind is, and where Mind is, there is all the power, all the supply of
the universe.

You are like the owner of a power house that supplies electricity for
light and heat and power to the homes and the factories around you.
There is unlimited electricity everywhere about you, but you have got to
set your dynamo going to draw the electricity out of the air and into
your power lines, before it can be put to practical account.

Just so, there are unlimited riches all about you, but you have got to
set the dynamo of your mind to work to bring them into such form as will
make them of use to yourself and the world.

So don't worry about any present

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

lack of money or other material things. Don't try to win from others
what they have. Go where the money is! The material wealth that is in
evidence is so small compared with the possible wealth available through
the right use of mind, that it is negligible by comparison. The great
rewards are for the pioneers. Look at Carnegie; at Woolworth; at Ford!
Every year some new field of development is opened, some new world
discovered. Steam, gas, electricity, telegraphy, wireless, the
automobile, the aeroplane—each opens up possibilities of new worlds yet
to come.

A hundred years ago, people probably felt that everything had been
discovered that could be discovered. That everything was already known
that was likely ever to be known. Just as you may feel about things now.
Yet look at the tremendous

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

strides mankind has taken in the past hundred years. And they are as
nothing to what the future holds for us, once man has learned to harness
the truly unlimited powers of his subconscious mind.

There are billions of dollars worth of treasure under every square mile
of the earth's surface. There are millions of ways in which this old
world of ours can be made a better place to live. Set your mind to work
locating some of this treasure, finding some of those ways. Don't wait
for someone else to blaze the trail.

No one remembers who else was on the *Santa Maria*, but Columbus’ name
will be known forever! Carnegie is said to have made a hundred
millionaires, but he alone became almost a *billionaire!* 

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

Have you ever read Kipling's "Explorer?"

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"'There's no sense in going further—it's the edge of cultivation,'  
   So they said, and I believed it—broke my land and sowed my crop—  
 Built my barns and strung my fences in the little border station  
   Tucked away below the foothills where the trails run out and stop.

"Till a voice, as bad as Conscience, rang interminable changes  
   On one everlasting Whisper day and night repeated—so:  
 'Something hidden. Go and find it. Go and look behind the Ranges—  
   Something lost behind the Ranges. Lost and waiting for you. Go!'"

</div>

</div>

Your mind is part and parcel of Universal Mind. You have the wisdom of
all the ages to draw upon. Use it! Use it to do your work in a way it
was never done before. Use it to find new outlets

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

for your business, new methods of reaching people, new and better ways
of serving them. Use it to uncover new riches, to learn ways to make the
world a better place to live in.

Concentrate your thought upon these things, knowing that back of you is
the vast reservoir of Universal Mind, that all these things are
*already* known to It, and that you have but to make your contact for
them to be known to you.

Optimism based on such a realization is never overconfidence. It is the
joyous assurance of *absolute faith*. It is the assurance that made
Wilson for a time the outstanding leader of the world. It is the
assurance that heartened Lincoln during the black days of the Civil War.
It is the assurance that carried Hannibal and Napoleon over the Alps,
that left Alexander sighing for more worlds to

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

conquer, that enabled Cortez and his little band to conquer a nation.

Grasp this idea of the availability of Universal Mind for your daily
needs, and your vision will become enlarged, your capacity increased.
You will realize that the only limits upon you are those you put upon
yourself. There will be no such thing then as difficulties and
opposition barring your way.

*Exercise*

You feed and nourish the body daily. But few people give any thought to
nourishing that far more important part—the Mind. So let us try, each
day, to set apart a few minutes time to give the Mind a repast.

To begin with, *relax!* Stretch out comfortably on a lounge or in an
easy chair and let go of 'every muscle, loosen

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

every bit of tension, forget every thought of fear or worry. Relax
mentally and physically.

Few people know how to relax entirely. Most of us are on a continual
strain, and it is this strain that brings on physical disturbances—not
any real work we may do. Here is a little exercise that will help you to
thoroughly relax:

Recline comfortably on a lounge or bed. Stretch luxuriously first. Then
when you are settled at your ease again, lift the right leg a foot or
two. Let it drop limply. Repeat slowly twice. Do the same with the left
leg. With the right arm. With the left arm. You will find then that all
your muscles are relaxed. You can forget them and turn your thoughts to
other things.

Try to realize the unlimited power that is yours. Think back to the dawn

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

of time, when Mind first imaged from nothingness the heavens and the
earth and all that in them is. Remember that, although your mind is to
Universal Mind only as a drop of water to the ocean, this drop has all
the properties of the great ocean; one in quality although not in
quantity; your mind has all the creative power of Universal Mind.

"And God made man in His image, after His likeness." Certainly God never
manifested anything but infinite abundance, infinite supply. If you are
made in His image, there is no reason why you should ever lack for
anything of good. You can manifest abundance, too.

Round about you is the same electronic energy from which Universal Mind
formed the heavens and the earth.

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What do you wish
to form from it? What do you want most from life? Hold it in your
thought, visualize it, SEE it! Make your model clear-cut and distinct.

1\. Remember, the first thing necessary is a sincere desire,
concentrating your thought on one thing with singleness of purpose.

2\. The second is visualization—SEEING YOURSELF DOING IT—imaging the
object in the same way that Universal Mind imaged all of creation.

3\. Next is faith—BELIEVING that you HAVE this thing that you want. Not
that you are GOING to have it, mind you—but that you HAVE it.

4\. And the last is gratitude—gratitude for this thing that you have
received, gratitude for the power that enabled you to create it,
gratitude for

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

all the gifts that Mind has laid at your feet.

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"Trust in the Lord … and verily thou shalt be fed.  
"Delight thyself also in the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of
thy heart.  
"Commit thy way unto the Lord, and He shall bring it to pass."

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[339:\*](tsoa22.htm#fr_6) From “A Heap o’
Livin’.” The Reilly & Lee Co.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](tsoa23)
