[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsoa19)  [Next](tsoa21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1604590467/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL4BQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Ages*, by Robert Collier, \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

### XI

### The Law of Attraction

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

For life is the mirror of king and slave.  
  ’Tis just what you are and do;  
Then give to the world the best you have,  
  And the best will come back to you.  
                —<span class="smallcaps">Madeline Bridges</span>.

</div>

</div>

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/tinit.jpg) |

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> old adage that "He profits most who
serves best" is no mere altruism.

Look around you. What businesses are going ahead? What men are making
the big successes? Are they the ones who grab the passing dollar,
careless of what they offer in return? Or are they those who are
striving always to give a little greater value, a little more work than
they are paid for?

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

When scales are balanced evenly, a trifle of extra weight thrown into
either side overbalances the other as effectively as a ton.

In the same way, a little better value, a little extra effort, makes the
man or the business stand out from the great mass of mediocrity like a
tall man among pigmies, and brings results out of all proportion to the
additional effort involved.

It pays—not merely altruistically, but in good, hard, round dollars—to
give a little more value than seems necessary, to work a bit harder than
you are paid for. It's that extra ounce of value that counts.

For the law of attraction is service. We receive in proportion as we
give out. In fact, we usually receive in far greater proportion. "Cast
thy bread upon the

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

waters and it will return to you an hundred-fold."

Back of (everything is the immutable law of the Universe—that what you
are is but the effect. Your thoughts are the causes. The only way you
can change the effect is by first changing the cause.

People live in poverty and want because they are so wrapped up in their
sufferings that they give out thoughts only of lack and sorrow. They
expect want. They open the door of their mind only to hardship and
sickness and poverty. True—they hope for something better—but their
hopes are so drowned by their fears that they never have a chance.

You cannot receive good while expecting evil. You cannot demonstrate
plenty while looking for poverty. "Blessed is he that expecteth much,
for verily his

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

soul shall be filled." Solomon outlined the law when he said:

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"There is that scattereth, and increaseth yet more;  
 And there is that withholdeth more than is meet,  
    but it tendeth only to want.  
 The liberal soul shall be made fat;  
 And he that watereth shall be watered also himself."

</div>

</div>

The Universal Mind expresses itself largely through the individual. It
is continually seeking an outlet. It is like a vast reservoir of water,
constantly replenished by mountain sp rings. Cut a channel to it and the
water will flow in ever-increasing volume. In the same way, if you once
open up a channel of service by which the Universal Mind can express
itself through you, its gifts will flow in ever-increasing volume and
YOU will be enriched in the process.

This is the idea through which great

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

bankers are made. A foreign country needs millions for development. Its
people are hard-working, but lack the necessary implements to make their
work productive. How are they to find the money?

They go to a banker—put their problem up to him. He has not the money
himself, but he knows how and where to raise it. He sells the promise to
pay of the foreign country (their bonds, in other words) to people who
have money to invest. His is merely a service. But it is such an
invaluable service that both sides are glad to pay him liberally for it.

In the same way, by opening up a channel between universal supply and
human needs—by doing your neighbors or your friends or your customers
service—you are bound to profit yourself. And the wider you open your
channel-

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

the greater service you give or the better values you offer—the more
things are bound to flow through your channel, the more you are going to
profit thereby.

But you've got to *use* your talent if you want to profit from it. It
matters not how small your service—using it will make it greater. You
don't have to retire to a cell and pray. That is a selfish
method—selfish concern for your own soul to the exclusion of all others.
Mere self-denial or asceticism as such does no one good. You've got to
DO something, to USE the talents God has given you to make the world
better for your having been in it.

Remember the parable of the talents. You know what happened to the man
who went off and hid his talent, whereas those who made use of theirs
were given charge over many things.

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

That parable, it has always seemed to me, expresses the whole law of
life. The only right is to *use* all the forces of good. The only wrong
is to *neglect* or to abuse them.

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God. This is the first and the greatest
Commandment." Thou shalt show thy love by using to the best possible
advantage the good things (the "talents" of the par-able) that He has
placed in your hands. "And the second is like unto it. Thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyself." Thou shalt not abuse the good things that have
been provided you in such prodigality, by using them against your
neighbor. Instead, thou shalt treat him (love him) as you would be
treated by him. Thou shalt use the good about you for the advantage of
all.

If you are a banker, you've got to use

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

the money you have in order to make more money. If you are a merchant,
you've got to sell the goods you have in order to buy more goods. If you
are a doctor, you must help the patient you have in order to get more
practice. If you are a clerk, you must do your work a little better than
those around you if you want to earn more money than they. And if you
want more of the universal supply, you must use that which you have in
such a way as to make yourself of greater service to those around you.

"Whosoever shall be great among you," said Jesus, "shall be your
minister, and whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of
all." In other words, if you would be great, you must serve. And he who
serves most shall be greatest of all.

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

If you want to make more money, instead of seeking it for yourself, see
how you can make more for others. In the process you will inevitably
make more for yourself, too. We get as we give—but we must give first.

It matters not where 'you Start you may be a day laborer. But still you
can give—give a bit more of energy, of work, of thought, than you are
paid for. "Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile," said Jesus, "go
with him twain." Try to put a little extra skill into your work. Use
your mind to find some better way of doing whatever task may be set for
you. It won't be long before you are out of the common labor class.

There is no kind of work than can-not be bettered by thought. There is
no method that cannot be improved by

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

thought. So give generously of your thought to your work. Think every
minute you are at it—"Isn't there some way in which this could be done
easier, quicker, better?" Read in your spare time everything that
relates to your own work or to the job ahead of you. In these days of
magazines and books and libraries, few are the occupations that are not
thoroughly covered in some good work.

Remember in Lorimer's "Letters of a Self-Made Merchant to His Son," the
young fellow that old Gorgan Graham hired against his better judgment
and put in the "barrel gang" just to get rid of him quickly? Before the
month was out the young fellow had thought himself out of that job by
persuading the boss to get a machine that did the work at half the cost
and with a third of the

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

gang. Graham just had to raise his pay and put him higher up. But he
wouldn't stay put. No matter what the job, he always found some way it
could be done better and with fewer people. Until he reached the top of
the ladder.

There are plenty of men like that in actual life. They won't stay down.
They are as full of bounce as a cat with a small boy and a dog after it.
Thrown to the dog from an upper window, it is using the time of falling
to get set for the next jump. By the time the dog leaps for where it
hit, the cat is up the tree across the street.

The true spirit of business is the spirit of that plucky old Danish sea
captain, Peter Tordenskjold. Attacked by a Swedish frigate, after all
his crew but one had been killed and his supply of cannon balls was
exhausted, Peter boldly

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

kept up the fight, firing pewter dinner-plates and mugs from his one
remaining gun.

One of the pewter mugs hit the Swedish captain and killed him, and Peter
sailed off triumphant!

Look around YOU now. How can YOU give greater value for what you get?
How can you SERVE better? How can you make more money for your employers
or save more for your customers. Keep that thought ever in the forefront
of your mind and *you'll never need to worry about making more for
yourself!*

*A Blank Check*

There was an article by Gardner Hunting in a recent issue of "Christian
Business," that was so good that I reprint it here entire:

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

"All my life I have known in a vague way that getting money is the
result of earning it; but I have never had a perfect vision of that
truth till recently. Summed up now, the result of all my experience,
pleasant and unpleasant, is that a man gets back exactly what he gives
out, only multiplied.

"If I give to anybody service of a kind that he wants I shall get back
the benefit myself. If I give more service I shall get more benefit. If
I give a great deal more, I shall get a great deal more. But I shall get
back more than I give. Exactly as when I plant a bushel of potatoes, I
get back thirty or forty bushels, and more in proportion to the
attention I give the growing crop. If I give more to my employer than he
expects of me, he will give me a raise—and on no other condition. What
is

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

more, his giving me a raise does not depend on his fair-mindedness—he
has to give it to me or lose me, because if he does not appreciate me
somebody else will.

"But this is only part of it. If I give help to the man whose desk is
next to mine, it will come back to me multiplied, even if he apparently
is a rival. What I give to him, I give to the firm, and the firm will
value it, because it is team-work in the organization that the firm
primarily wants, not brilliant individual performance. If I have an
enemy in the organization, the same rule holds; if I give him, with the
purpose of helping him, something that will genuinely help him, I am
giving service to the organization. Great corporations appreciate the
peace-maker, for a prime requisite in their success is harmony

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

among employees. If my boss is unappreciative, the same rule holds; if I
give him more, in advance of appreciation, he cannot withhold his
appreciation and keep his own job.

"The more you think about this law, the deeper you will see it goes. It
literally hands you a blank check, signed by the Maker of Universal Law,
and leaves you to fill in the amount—and the kind—of payment you want!
Mediocre successes are those that obey this law a little way—that fill
in the check with a small amount—but that stop short of big vision in
it. If every employee would only get the idea of this law firmly fixed
in him as a principle, not subject to wavering with fluctuating moods,
the success of the organization would be miraculous. One of my fears is
apt to be that, by promoting the other fellow's

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

success, I am side-tracking my own; but the exact opposite is the truth.

"Suppose every employee would look at his own case as an exact parallel
to that of his firm. What does his firm give for the money it gets from
the public? Service! Service in advance! The better the service that is
given out, the more money comes back. What does the firm do to bring
public attention w its service? It advertises; that is part of the
service. Now, suppose that I, as an employee, begin giving my service to
the firm in advance of all hoped for payment. Suppose I advertise my
service. How do I do either? I cannot do anything constructive in that
firm's office or store or plant or premises that is not service, from
filing a letter correctly to mending the fence or pleasing a customer;
from looking up a word for the

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

stenographer, to encouraging her to look it up herself; demonstrating a
machine to a customer or encouraging him to demonstrate it himself; from
helping my immediate apparent rival to get a raise, to selling the whole
season's output. As for advertising myself, I begin advertising myself
the moment I walk into the office or the store or the shop in the
morning; I cannot help it. Everybody who looks at me sees my
advertisement. Everybody around me has my advertisement before his eyes
all day long. So has the boss—my immediate chief and the head of the
firm, no matter where they are. And if I live up to my advertising,
nobody can stop me from selling my goods—my services! The more a man
knocks me, the more he advertises me; because he calls attention to me;
and if I am delivering

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

something better than he says I am, the interested parties—my
employers—will see it, and will not be otherwise influenced by what he
says.

"More than that, I must give to every human being I come in contact
with, from my wife to the bootblack who shines my shoes; from my brother
to my sworn foe. Sometimes people will tell you to smile; but the smile
I give has got to be a real smile that lives up to its advertising. If I
go around grinning like a Cheshire cat, the Cheshire-cat grin will be
what I get back—multiplied! If I give the real thing, I'll get back the
real thing—multiplied! If anybody objects that this is a selfish view to
take, I answer him that any law of salvation from anything by anybody
that has ever been offered for any purpose, is a selfish view to take.
The only

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

unselfishness that has ever been truly taught is that of giving a lesser
thing in hope of receiving a greater.

"Now, why am I so sure of this law? How can you be sure? I have watched
it work; it works everywhere. You have only to try it, and keep on
trying it and it will prove true for you. It is not true because I say
so, nor because anybody else says so; it is just true. Theosophists call
it the law of Karma; humanitarians call it the law of Service; business
men call it the law of common sense; Jesus Christ called it the law of
Love. It rules whether I know it or not, whether I believe it or not,
whether I defy it or not. I *can't* break it! Jesus of Nazareth, without
reference to any religious idea you may have about Him, without
consideration as to whether He was or was not divine, was the greatest
business Man

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

that ever lived, and he said: 'Give and ye shall receive—good measure,
pressed down, shaken together, running over!' And this happens to be
so—not because He said it—but because it is the Truth, which we all,
whether we admit it or not, worship *as* God. No man can honestly say
that he does not put the truth supreme.

"It is the truth—the principle of giving and receiving—only there are
few men who go the limit on it. But going the limit is the way to
unlimited returns!

"What shall I give? What I have, of course. Suppose you believe in this
idea—and suppose you should start giving it out, the idea itself,
tactfully, wisely, and living it yourself in your organization. How long
do you think it will be before you are a power in that organization,
recognized as such and getting pay as

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

such? It is more valuable than all the cleverness and special
information you can possibly possess without it. What you have, give—to
everybody. If you have an idea, do not save it for your own use only;
give it. It is the best thing you have to give and therefore the thing
best to give—and therefore the thing that will bring the best back to
you. I believe that if a man would follow this principle, even to his
trade-secrets, he would profit steadily more and more; and more
certainly than he will by holding on to anything for himself. He would
never have to worry about his own affairs—because he would be working on
fundamental Law. Law never fails—and it will be easy for you to discover
what is or is not law. And if law is worth using part of the time, it is
worth using all the time.

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

"Look around you first, with an eye to seeing the truth, and then put
the thing to the test. Through both methods of investigation you will
find a blank check waiting for you to fill in with 'whatsoever you
desire,' and a new way to pray and to get what you pray for."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Three Requisites](tsoa21)
