[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsoa28)  [Next](tsoa30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1604590467/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL4BQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Ages*, by Robert Collier, \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span> <span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

### XVIII

### This One Thing I Do

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"How do you tackle your work each day?  
 Do you grapple the task that comes your way,  
   With a confident, easy mind?  
 Do you start to toil with a sense of dread  
   Or feel that you're going to do it?

"You can do as much as you think you can,  
   But you'll never accomplish more;  
 If you're afraid of yourself, young man,  
   There's little for you in store.  
 For failure comes from the inside first,  
   It's there, if we only knew it,  
 And you can win, though you face the worst,  
   If you feel that you're going to do it."  
                         —<span class="smallcaps">Edgar A.
Guest</span>. <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11)

</div>

</div>

<span id="img_hinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/hinit.jpg) |

<span class="smallcaps">How</span> did the Salvation Army get so much
favorable publicity out of the War? They were a comparatively small part
of the "Services" that catered to the boys "over there,"

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

yet they carried off the lion's share of the glory. Do you know how they
did it?

By concentrating on just one thing—DOUGHNUTS!

They served doughnuts to the boys—and they did it *well*. And that is
the basis of all success in business—to focus on one thing and do that
thing well. Better far to do one thing pre-eminently well than to dabble
in forty.

Two thousand years ago, Porcius Marcus Cato became convinced, from a
visit to the rich and flourishing City of Carthage, that Rome had in her
a rival who must be destroyed. His countrymen laughed at him. He was
practically alone in his belief. But he persisted. He concentrated all
his thought, all his faculties, to that one end. At the end of every
speech, at the end of every talk,

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

he centered his hearers’ thought on what he was trying to put over by
epitomizing his whole idea in a single sentence—"Carthage must be
destroyed!" And *Carthage was destroyed*.

If one man's concentration on a single idea could destroy a great
nation, what can you not do when you apply that same principle to the
*building* of a business?

I remember when I was first learning horsemanship, my instructor
impressed this fact upon me: "Remember that a horse is an animal of one
idea. You can teach him only one thing at a time."

Looking back, I'd say the only thing wrong with his instruction was that
he took in too Little territory. He need not have confined himself to
the horse. Most humans are the same way.

In fact, you can put ALL humans

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

into that class if you want a thing done well. For you cannot divide
your thought and do justice to any one of the different subjects you are
thinking of. You've got to do one thing at a time. The greatest success
rule I know in business—the one that should be printed over every man's
desk, is—"This One Thing I Do." Take one piece of work at a time.
Concentrate on it to the exclusion of all else. *Then finish it!* Don't
half-do it, and leave it around to clutter up your desk and interfere
with the next job. Dispose of it completely. Pass it along wherever it
is to go. Be through with it *and forget it!* Then your mind will be
clear to consider the next matter.

"The man who is perpetually hesitating which of two things he will do
first," says William Wirt, "will do

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

neither. The man who resolves, but suffers his resolution to be changed
by the first counter-suggestion of a friend—who fluctuates from plan to
plan and veers like a weather-cock to every point of the compass with
every breath of caprice that blows—can never accomplish anything real or
useful. It is only the man who first consults wisely, then resolves
firmly, and then executes his purpose with inflexible perseverance,
undismayed by those petty difficulties that daunt a weaker spirit, that
can advance to eminence in any line."

Everything in the world, even a great business, can be resolved into
atoms. And the basic principles behind the biggest business will be
found to be the same as those behind the successful running of the
corner newsstand. The whole practice of commerce is founded upon

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

them. Any man can learn them, but only the alert and energetic can apply
them. The trouble with most men is that they think they have done all
that is required of them when they have earned their salary.

Why, that's only the beginning. Up to that point, you are working for
someone else. From then on, you begin to work for yourself. Remember,
you must *give* to *get*. And it is when you give that *extra* bit of
time and attention and thought to your work that you begin to stand out
above the crowd around you.

Norval Hawkins, for many years General Manager of Sales for the Ford
Motor Company, wrote that "the greatest hunt in the Ford business right
now is the MAN hunt." And big men in every industrial line echo his
words. When it comes to a job that needs real

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

ability, they are not looking for relatives or friends or men with
"pull." They want a MAN—and they will, pay any price for the right man.

Not only that, but they always have a weather eye open for promising
material. And the thing they value most of all is INITIATIVE.

But don't try to improve the whole works at once. Concentrate on one
thing at a time. Pick some one department or some one process or some
one thing and focus all your thought upon it. Bring to bear upon it the
limitless resources of your subconscious mind. Then prepare a definite
plan for the development of that department or the improvement of that
process. Verify your facts carefully to make sure they are workable.
*Then*—and not till then—present your plan.

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

In "Thoughts on Business," you read: "Men often think of a position as
being just about so big and no bigger, when, as a matter of fact, a
position is often what one makes it. A man was making about $1,500 a
year out of a certain position and thought he was doing all that could
be done to advance the business. The employer thought otherwise, and
gave the place to another man who soon made the position worth $8,000 a
year—at exactly the same commission.

"The difference was in the man—in other words, in what the two men
thought about the work. One had a little conception of what the work
should be, and the other had a big conception of it. One thought little
thoughts, and the other thought big thoughts.

"The standards of two men may differ, not especially because one is
naturally

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

more capable than the other, but because one is familiar with big things
and the other is not. The time was when the former worked in a smaller
scope himself, but when he saw a wider view of what his work might be he
rose to the occasion and became a bigger man. It is just as easy to
think of a mountain as to think of a hill—when you turn your mind to
contemplate it. The mind is like a rubber band—you can stretch it to fit
almost anything, but it draws in to a smaller scope when you let go.

"Make it your business to know what is the best that might be in your
line of work, and stretch your mind to conceive it, and then devise some
way to attain it.

"Big things are only little things put together. I was greatly impressed
with this fact one morning as I stood watching the workmen erecting the
steel framework

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

for a tall office building. A shrill whistle rang out as a signal, a man
over at the engine pulled a lever, a chain from the derrick was lowered,
and the whistle rang out again. A man stooped down and fastened the
chain around the tenter of a steel beam, stepped back and blew the
whistle once more. Again the lever was moved at the engine, and the
steel beam soared into the air up to the sixteenth story, where it was
made fast by little bolts.

"The entire structure, great as it was, towering far above all the
neighboring buildings, was made up of pieces of steel and stone and
wood, put together according to a plan. The plan was first imagined,
then penciled, then carefully drawn, and then followed by the workmen.
It was all a combination of little things.

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

"It is encouraging to think of this when you are confronted by a big
task. *Remember that it is only a group of little tasks, any of which
you can easily do*. It is ignorance of this fact that makes men afraid
to try."

One of the most essential requisites in the accomplishment of any
important work is patience. Not the patience that sits and folds its
hands and waits—Micawber like—for something to turn up. But the patience
that never jeopardizes or upsets a plan by forcing it too soon. The man
who possesses that kind of patience can always find plenty to do in the
meantime.

Make your plan—then wait for the opportune moment to submit it. You'd be
surprised to know how carefully big men go over suggestions from
subordinates which show the least promise. One

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

of the signs of a really big man, you know, is his eagerness to learn
from everyone and anything. There is none of that "know it all" about
him that characterized the German general who was given a book
containing the strategy by which Napoleon had for fifteen years kept all
the armies of Europe at bay. "I've no time w read about bygone battles,"
he growled, thrusting the book away, "I have my own campaign to plan."

There is priceless wisdom to be found in books. As Carlyle put it—"All
that mankind has done, thought, gained or been—it is lying in matchless
preservation in the pages of books."

The truths which mankind has been laboriously learning through countless
ages, at who knows what price of sweat and toil and starvation and
blood—all are yours for the effort of reading them.

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

And in business, knowledge was never so priceless or so easily acquired.
Books and magazines are filled with the hows and whys, the rights and
wrongs of buying and selling, of manufacturing and shipping, of finance
and management. They are within the reach of anyone with the desire to
KNOW.

Nothing pays better interest than judicious reading. The man who invests
in more knowledge of his business than he needs to hold his job, is
acquiring capital with which to get a better job.

As old Gorgon Graham puts it in "The Letters of a Self-Made Merchant To
His Son"—

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

“I ain’t one of those who believe that a half knowledge of a subject is
useless, but it has been my experience that when a fellow has that half
knowledge, he finds it's the other half which would really come in
handy.

“What you know is a club for yourself, and

</div>

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

what you don't know is a meat-ax for the other fellow. That is why you
want to be on the look-out all the time for information about the
business and to nail a fact just as a sensible man nails a mosquito—the
first time it settles near him.”

</div>

The demands made upon men in business today are far greater than in any
previous generation. To meet them, you've got to use your talents to the
utmost. You've got to find in every situation that confronts you, the
best, the easiest and the quickest way of working it out. And the first
essential in doing this is to plan your work ahead.

You'd be surprised at how much more work you can get through by
carefully planning it, and then taking each bit in order and disposing
of it before starting on the next.

Another thing—once started at work, don't let down. Keep on going until
it is time to quit. You know how much

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

power it takes to start an auto that is standing motionless. But when
you get it going, you can run along in high at a fraction of the
expenditure of gas. It is the same way with your mind. We are all
mentally lazy. We hate to start using our minds. Once started, though,
it is easy to keep along on high, if only we won't let down. For the
moment we let down, we have that starting to do all over again. You can
accomplish ten times as much, with far less effort or fatigue, if you
will keep right on steadily instead of starting and stopping, and
starting and stopping again.

Volumes have been written about personal efficiency, and general
efficiency, and every other kind of efficiency in business. But boiled
down, it all comes to this:

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

1—Know what you want. <span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

2—Analyze the thing you've got to do to get it.

3—Plan your work ahead.

4—Do one thing at a time.

5—Finish that one thing and send it on its way before starting the next.

6—Once started, KEEP GOING! And when you come to some problem that
"stumps" you, give your subconscious mind a chance.

</div>

Frederick Pierce, in "Our Unconscious Mind," gives an excellent method
for solving business problems through the aid of the subconscious:

"Several years ago, I heard a successful executive tell a group of young
men how he did his work, and included in the talk was the advice to
prepare at the close of each day's business, a List of the ten most
important things for the next day. To this I would add: Run them

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

over in the mind just before going to sleep, not thoughtfully, or with
elaboration of detail, but with the sure knowledge that the deeper
centers of the mind are capable of viewing them constructively even
though conscious attention is surrendered in sleep.

"Then, if there is a particular problem which seems difficult of
solution, review its features lightly as a last game for the imaginative
unconscious to play at during the night. Do not be discouraged if no
immediate results are apparent. Remember that fiction, poetry, musical
composition, inventions, innumerable ideas, spring from the unconscious,
often in forms that give evidence of the highest constructive
elaboration.

"Give your unconscious a chance. Give it the material, and stimulate it
with keenly dwelt-on wishes along frank

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ego Maximation
lines. It is a habit which, if persisted in, will sooner or later
present you with some very valuable ideas when you least expect them."

I remember reading of another man—a genius at certain kinds of work—who,
whenever an especially difficult problem confronted him, "slept on it."
He had learned the trick as a child. Unable to learn his lessons one
evening, he had kept repeating the words to himself until he dozed in
his chair, the book still in his hands. What was his surprise, on being
awakened by his father a few minutes later to find that he knew them
perfectly! He tried it again and again on succeeding evenings, and
almost invariably it worked. Now, whenever a problem comes up that he
cannot solve, he simply stretches out on a lounge in his office,
thoroughly relaxes, *and lets his subconscious mind solve the
problem!*    

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[435:\*](tsoa29.htm#fr_11) From "A Heap o’
Livin’." The Reilly & Lee Co.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](tsoa30)
