[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsoa37)  [Next](tsoa39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1604590467/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL4BQ/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Secret of the Ages*, by Robert Collier, \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

### XXIII

### The Medicine Delusion

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"I find the medicine worse than the malady."  
                                —<span
class="smallcaps">Shakespeare</span>.

</div>

</div>

<span id="img_winit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/winit.jpg) |

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> are getting rid of the drug illusion,"
declared Dr. Woods Hutchinson, the noted medical writer of America, at a
luncheon given on June 6, 1925, by the English-Speaking Union to 700
American and Canadian doctors assembled in London, England.

"We are willing even to subscribe to the dictum of Oliver Wendell
Holmes," the doctor added, "that if 99 per cent of all drugs we possess
were thrown into the sea it would be a good thing for the human race,
but rather hard on the fishes."

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

Sir Arbuthnot Lane, Surgeon to King George, seconded Dr. Hutchinson's
re-marks. "They might say," he went on, "that he was trying to establish
a 'suicide club' for doctors. It practically came to that, because as
the public became educated in matters of health the medical profession
might disappear. It was in fact an anomaly that a medical profession
should exist. If people were healthy, there was no reason to have
doctors at all."

Twenty-five years ago, the charms of the Patent Medicine fakir and the
incantations of the Indian Medicine Man were in the heyday of their
popularity. So long as you talked about their aches and pains, their
diseases and ailments, people would buy any kind of a nostrum that an
unscrupulous fakir chose to palm off upon them. Patent medicine
manufacturers

<span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

made fabulous fortunes selling cheap whisky adulterated with burnt sugar
and water, under a hundred different names for $1.00 the bottle. You
could hardly pick up a magazine or newspaper without seeing a dozen of
their lurid ads.

The day of the Indian Medicine Man and street-corner fakir has passed.
And for a time, thanks to the crusade against them led by *Collier's*,
and backed by a number of other reputable magazines, patent medicine
manufacturers suffered an eclipse.

But they are back again today in a more respectable guise.

Pick up almost any small town paper and you will find a dozen "sovereign
remedies" for tired women or fretful children or run-down men.
Concoctions, most of them, containing just

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

enough alcohol to give you a pleasant sense of stimulation, enough burnt
sugar to color them—and a whole lot of water.

But if that were all, no great harm would be done. If the peddling of
drugs depended entirely—or even mostly—on Patent Medicine advertisers,
the end of it would soon be in sight. But it doesn't. The worst
offenders of all are the ones who, of all people, should know
better—some of the doctors.

Understand, I don't mean all of them. And I don't mean the best of them.
There are thousands of them like Dr. Woods Hutchinson who have the
courage to get up and say that medicine itself cannot cure disease. That
it never has cured disease. That Nature is the only Healer. Drugs can
give you temporary relief from pain—yes. They can cleanse

<span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —yes. But as for
*curing* anything, the drug is not made that can do it.

The principal good that the administering of a drug has is in its effect
upon the mind of the patient. Men have been taught for so many years
that drugging is the only way to cure disease, that when you give them
something, they BELIEVE they are going to be cured, and to the extent
that they believe, they ARE CURED.

The best proof of that is to let two patients suffering from the same
complaint go to two different physicians—the one a doctor of the regular
school, the other a homeopath. The regular doctor will administer a dose
containing ten thousand times as much of the mother drug as the
homeopath. In fact, there is so slight a trace of any drug in the
homeopath's prescription that it might be called

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

none at all. Yet it frequently happens that his patient will respond
just as readily to his denatured dose as the other will to his drug.

Dr. Gour, in a recent issue of *Pearson's Magazine*, said: "A few years
ago there appeared an article in the *Atlantic Monthly* written by a
young woman physician who was with the Red Cross in Russia. Immediately
following the Kerensky revolution, the Russian peasants who, for the
first time in their lives, found that they could keep what they earned,
began to think of going to doctors for ailments which had afflicted them
for years, but which they could never before afford to have treated.
Within two weeks’ time this young physician exhausted her supply of
medicine. But the rush of peasant patients continued and she was reduced
to the placebo

<span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

idea of administering colored waters with a slight amount of a single
drug—quinine, if I recall correctly. For several weeks she obtained such
wonderful results in every conceivable form of affliction that she said
her faith in specific medication was completely lost."

In a despatch from Rome to the New York *Herald-Tribune*, under date of
June 15, 1926, I read:

"Under the skeptical eyes of local doctors Don Luigi Garofalo, a priest
in the Quarto sector of Naples, alleges that he is curing all the ills
that flesh is heir to, from pneumonia to broken bones, by a practical
application of the theory derived from the text, 'Man is of dust and to
dust he shall return.' Don Luigi argues that from a homeopathic
viewpoint dust should be a curative element. So from dust taken from the
reddish

<span id="page_550">p. 550</span>

earth near Pozznoli, which contains traces of sulphur and copper, he
makes pills for the afflicted, but he contends that any other earth will
do.

"The cures, most of which have been effected by means of the red earth,
include the healing of broken limbs, tubercular cases, toothache,
internal lesions, heart diseases, mumps, paralysis and fevers."

Of course, it is not to be inferred from this that reliance can be
placed upon red earth—or any other kind of earth—to cure you of any ill.
But it shows that even so common, ordinary a thing as a bit of dirt can
be used to arouse people from the lethargic condition in which sickness
so frequently leaves them, and give them the power to help themselves.

Take another case. Your doctor prescribes regular doses of some drug.
You

<span id="page_551">p. 551</span>

take it once. It has the desired effect. You take it again. The effect
is not quite so pronounced. You keep it up—and in a short time *the drug
seems to have lost its efficacy*.

Why? The same chemical elements are there. And if you mix the same
chemical elements in a retort, you will get the same results whether you
do it once or a thousand times. Why doesn't it work the same way with
drugs and your body?

Because the strongest factor in bringing about the desired effect in the
beginning was your BELIEF—yours and that of your doctor. But as you kept
on and on, your belief began to falter, until presently it died away
altogether. You may have *hoped*, but the active belief suggestions to
your subconscious mind had stopped carrying conviction.

<span id="page_552">p. 552</span>

Dr. Richard C. Cabot, Professor of Medicine at Harvard University, in a
recent address, declared that "three-quarters of all illnesses are cured
without the victims even knowing they have had them.

"Proof of this contention is to be found in post-mortem examinations,
which time after time reveal indelible and unmistakable traces of
disease which the subject has conquered all unknowingly. Ninety per cent
of all typhoid cures itself, as does 75 per cent of all pneumonia. In
fact, out of a total of 215 diseases known to medical science, there are
only about eight or nine which doctors conquer—the rest conquer
themselves."

He went on to say that—"If nature, assisted by the proper mental and
emotional moods, is capable of curing an ulcer in three or four weeks,
why isn't

<span id="page_553">p. 553</span>

it possible for the same force to heal a similar ulcer in a few minutes,
when the curative processes have been speeded up abnormally?"

Great physicians have, on numerous occasions, maintained that there is
no science in *medicating* people. In Preventive Medicine—yes. In
Surgery. In Obstetrics. In a score of different lines that fall under
the heading of the medical profession.

But the art of drugging is little ahead of where it was in the Middle
Ages, when Egyptian mummies were in great demand among druggists and
"powdered Pharaoh" was considered the greatest remedy for any ill that
flesh was heir to.

Every day brings the discovery of some new drug, and the consequent
dictum that the remedy previously pre-

<span id="page_554">p. 554</span>

scribed was all a mistake—that it had little or no real value whatever.

One doctor says: "A medicine that will not kill you if you take an
overdose is no good." Another: "The most prominent doctors now claim
that there is not a single drug will do what it has been prescribed for
in the past."

Dr.. Douglas White, writing in *The Churchman*, sums it up thus:

"All cure of every disease is spiritual. Healing can never be imposed
from without by either the surgeon or physician; it is the living
organism which, helped by the skill of the one or the other, is enabled
to work its way back to health. The whole principle of healing in all
cases is the *vis medicatrix naturae*. And when we speak of nature, we
are only personifying the principle of life which Christians call God."

<span id="page_555">p. 555</span>

In the *Medical Record* of September 25, 1920, Dr. Joseph Byrne,
Professor of Neurology at Fordham University Medical School, said:

"At a conservative estimate it may be admitted that of all the ailments
for which relief is sought, 90% or over are self limited and tend to get
well. It may also be admitted that in over 90% of all human ailments,
the *psychic* is the dominating factor."

In other words, Mind is the Healer. Drugs can sometimes make its work
easier by removing obstructions, by killing off parasites. But the
regular use of drugs is far more likely to harm than to heal. We might
well quote to the druggists the old Hindoo proverb:

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"God gives the mango;  
   The farmer plants die seed.  
 God cures the patient;  
   The doctor takes the fees."

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_556">p. 556</span>

In the Great War, the one drug that most proved its worth was Iodine.
And what is Iodine? A *cleanser*. It killed germs. It cleansed wounds.
But it has no healing power. And no healing was expected of it. It did
all that was asked. It cauterized—cleansed—so that Nature (Mind) could
do its own healing, unobstructed.

That would seem to be the most that should be expected of any drug—kill
the germs of sickness or disease, cleanse so that Nature can the more
easily do its rebuilding. And that is where the use of drugs should
stop. Mind works best when it is interfered with least—when we throw
ourselves entirely upon it for support, rather than share the
responsibility with some outside agency.

Dr. Burnett Rae, a well-known English

<span id="page_557">p. 557</span>

specialist, addressing a large audience on the subject of "Spiritual
Healing and Medical Science," said the term "spiritual healing" was
sometimes used in a manner which seemed to imply that there was a form
of healing which was of a non-spiritual character, and that spiritual
healing was incompatible with, or opposed to, medical practice. Healing
could never be regarded as a purely physical process. He would go so far
as to say that healing was always effected through the control of the
mind, and medicinal remedies only set the machinery of the mind in
motion. We are too apt to think of medical science as concerned with
drugs or appliances and operations. *These might completely pass away
during the next twenty or fifty years*.

It is not through drugs that the medical

<span id="page_558">p. 558</span>

profession has done so much of good for the world. It is not through
drugs that they have improved the general health, cleaned up plague
spots, cut down infant mortality, lengthened the average life expectancy
of mankind by fifteen years.

It is by scotching disease at its very source. It is by getting rid of
artificially created *unwholesome* conditions, getting back to *natural
wholesome* conditions.

What is it causes typhus? Filth—an entirely unwholesome condition,
man-made. And how do doctors prevent the spread of typhus? By cleaning
up—by getting back to *natural* wholesome conditions.

What is it causes typhoid? Impure water. And its prevention is simply
the purifying of the water—getting

<span id="page_559">p. 559</span>

back to Nature's perfect, wholesome supply.

Yellow fever has been practically stamped out of existence. Typhus is
almost a forgotten plague, except in such backward places as parts of
Russia and Asia.

Malaria has been conquered. And doctors predict that in another
generation tuberculosis will be an almost forgotten malady.

How were these wonderful results brought about? Not through drugs—*but
by cleaning up!* Cleaning out swamps and filth. Purifying water.
Building drainage systems. Making everything round about as clean and
wholesome as Nature herself.

Cleanliness—Purity—Sunshine!

God gave us in abundance all that is necessary for perfect health—clean
air,

<span id="page_560">p. 560</span>

pure water, clear sunshine. All we need to do is to keep these pure and
clean, and to use all we possibly can of them. The greatest good the
medical profession has done mankind is in discovering the value of these
gifts of God and showing us how to use them.

The Chinese have long had the right idea—they pay their physicians to
keep them well, not to cure them of sickness. And the thing that made
the reputation of such men as Gorgas, Reed, Flexner, Carrel, was not
their *cure* of disease—but their *prevention* of it.

That way lies the future of medicine—bringing our surroundings back to
the *natural* wholesome conditions for which we were created. That way
lies health and happiness for all—cleanliness inside and out, clean air,
pure water, plenty of sunshine—*and right thinking!* 

<span id="page_561">p. 561</span>

In the next Chapter, I shall try to show you how you can apply the
illimitable power of Mind hopefully towards the successful treatment of
disease.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. The Gift of the Magi](tsoa39.md)
