[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsoa11)  [Next](tsoa13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1604590467/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL4BQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Ages*, by Robert Collier, \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### V

### Aladdin & Company

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"But the feeble hands and helpless,  
 Groping blindly in the darkness,  
 Touch God's right hand in that darkness,  
 And are lifted up and strengthened."  
                          —<span class="smallcaps">Longfellow</span>.

</div>

</div>

<span id="img_iinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/iinit.jpg) |

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is not always the man who struggles
hardest who gets on in the world. It is the direction as well as the
energy of struggle that counts in making progress. To get ahead—you must
swim with the tide. Men prosper and succeed who work in accord with
natural forces. A given amount of effort with these forces carries a man
faster and farther than much more effort used against the current. Those
who work blindly, regardless of these forces, make

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

life difficult for themselves and rarely prosper.

It has been estimated by wise observers that on the average something
like 90 per cent of the factors producing success or failure lie outside
a man's conscious efforts—separate from his daily round of details. To
the extent that he cooperates with the wisdom and power of Universal
Mind he is successful, well and happy. To the extent that he fails to
cooperate, he is unsuccessful, sick and miserable.

All down the ages some have been enabled to "taste and see that the Lord
is good." Prophets and Seers being blessed with the loving kindness of
God, have proclaimed a God of universal goodness, saying: "The earth is
full of the goodness of the Lord"; "Thou wilt show me the path of life;
in Thy presence is fullness of joy."

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

Now we know that this Infinite Good is not more available to one than it
is to all. We know that the only limit to it is in our capacity to
receive. If you had a problem in mathematics to work out, you would
hardly gather together the necessary figures and leave them to arrange
themselves in their proper sequence. You would know that while the
method for solving every problem has been figured out, *you* have got to
*work* it. The principles are there, but *you* have got to *apply* them.

The first essential is to understand the principle—to learn how it
works—how to use it. The second—and even more important part—is to APPLY
that understanding to the problem in hand.

In the same way, the Principle of Infinite Energy, Infinite Supply, is
ever available. But that Energy, that Supply,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

is static. You've got to make it dynamic. You've got to understand the
law. You've got to *apply* your understanding in order to solve your
problems of poverty, discord, disease.

Science shows that it is possible to accomplish any good thing. But
distrust of your ability to reach the goal desired often holds you back
and failure is the inevitable result.

Only by understanding that there is but one power—and that this power is
Mind, not circumstances or environment—is it possible to bring your real
abilities to the surface and put them to work.

Few deny that intelligence governs the universe. It matters not whether
you call this intelligence Universal Mind or Providence or God or merely
Nature. All admit Its directing power. All admit that It is a force for
good, for progress.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But few realize
that our own minds are a part of this Universal Mind in just the same
way that the rays of the sun are part of the sun.

If we will work in harmony with It, we can draw upon Universal Mind for
all power, all intelligence, in the same way that the sun's rays draw
upon their source for the heat and light they bring the earth.

It is not enough to know that you have this power. You must put it into
*practice*—not once, or twice, but *every hour and every day*. Don't be
discouraged if at first it doesn't always work. When you first studied
arithmetic, your problems did not always work out correctly, did they?
Yet you did not on that account doubt the principle of mathematics. You
knew that the fault was with your methods, not with the principle. It is
the

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

same in this. The power is there. Correctly used, it can do anything.

All will agree that the Mind which first brought the Life Principle to
this earth—which imaged the earth itself and the trees and the plants
and the animals—is all-powerful. All will agree that to solve any
problem, to meet any need, Mind has but to *realize* the need and it
will be met. What most of us do not understand or realize is that we
ourselves, being part of Universal Mind, have this same power. Just as
the drop of water from the ocean has all the properties of the great
bulk of the water in the ocean. Just as the spark of electricity has all
the properties of the thunderbolt. And having that power, we have only
to realize it and use it to get from life any good we may desire.

In the beginning all was void—space—nothingness. How did Universal Mind

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

construct the planets, the firmaments, the earth and all things on and
in it from this formless void? *By first making a mental image on which
to build*.

That is what you, too, must do. You control your destiny, your fortune,
your happiness to the exact extent to which you can think them out,
VIZUALIZE them, SEE them, and allow no vagrant thought of fear or worry
to mar their completion and beauty. The quality of your thought is the
measure of your power. Clear, forceful thought has the power of
attracting to itself everything it may need for the fruition of those
thoughts. As W. D. Wattles puts it in his "Science of Getting Rich":

"There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made and which, in
its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of
the universe. A thought

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

in this substance produces the thing that is imagined by the thought.
Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought upon
formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be created."

The connecting link between your conscious mind and the Universal is
thought, and every thought that is in harmony with progress and good,
every thought that is freighted with the right idea, can penetrate to
Universal Mind. And penetrating to it, it comes back with the power of
Universal Mind to accomplish it. You don't need to originate the ways
and means. The Universal Mind knows how to bring about any necessary
results. There is but one right way to solve any given problem. When
your human judgment is unable to decide what that one right way is, turn
to Universal Mind for guidance.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> You need never
fear the outcome, for if you heed its advice you cannot go wrong.

Always remember—your mind is but a conductor—good or poor as you make
it—for the power of Universal Mind. And thought is the connecting
energy. Use that conductor, and you will improve its conductivity.
Demand much, and you will receive the more. The Universal is not a
niggard in any of its gifts. "Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you."

That is the law of life. And the destiny of man lies not in poverty and
hardship, but in living up to his high estate in unity with Universal
Mind, with the power that governs the universe.

To look upon poverty and sickness as sent by God and therefore
inevitable, is the way of the weakling. God never sent

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

us anything but good. What is more, He has never yet failed to give to
those who would use them the means to overcome any condition not of His
making. Sickness and poverty are not of His making. They are not
evidences of virtue, but of weakness. God gave us everything in
abundance, and he expects us to manifest that abundance. If you had a
son you loved very much, and you surrounded him with good things which
he had only to exert himself in order to reach, you wouldn't like it if
he showed himself to the world half-starved, ill-kempt and clothed in
rags, merely because he was unwilling to exert himself enough to reach
for the good things you had provided. No more, in my humble opinion,
does God.

Man's principal business in life, as I see it, is to establish a contact
with Universal

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mind. It is to
acquire an understanding of this power that is in him. "With all thy
getting, get understanding," said Solomon.

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"Happy is the man that findeth [wisdom](errata.htm#4),  
 And the man that getteth understanding.  
 For the gaining of it is better than the gaining of silver.  
 And the profit thereof than fine gold.  
 She is more precious than rubies:  
 And none of the things thou canst desire are to be compared unto her.  
 Length of days is in her right hand:  
 In her left hand are riches and honor.  
 Her ways are ways of pleasantness,  
 And all her paths are peace.  
 She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her.  
 And happy is every one that retaineth her."  
                                        —*Proverbs*.

</div>

</div>

When you become conscious, even to a limited degree, of your one-ness
with Universal Mind, your ability to call upon It at will for anything
you may need, it

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

makes a different man of you. Gone are the fears, gone are the worries.
You know that your success, your health, your happiness will be measured
only by the degree to which you can impress, the fruition of your
desires upon mind.

The toil and worry, the wearisome grind and the back-breaking work, will
go in the future as in the past to those who will not use their minds.
The less they use them, the more they will sweat. And the more they work
only from the neck down, the less they will be paid and the more
hopeless their lot will become. *It is Mind that rules the world*.

But to use your mind to the best advantage doesn't mean to toil along
with the mere conscious part of it. It means hitching up your conscious
mind with the Man Inside You, with the little "Mental Brownies," as
Robert Louis Stevenson

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

called them, and then working together or a definite end. "My Brownies!
God bless them!" said Stevenson, "Who do one-half of my work for me when
I am fast asleep, and in all human likelihood do the rest for me as well
when I am wide awake and foolishly suppose that I do it myself. I had
long been wanting to write a book on man's double being. For two days I
went about racking my brains for a plot of any sort, and on the second
night I dreamt the scene in Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde at the window; and a
scene, afterward split in two, in which Hyde, pursued, took the powder
and underwent the change in the presence of his pursuer."

Many another famous writer has spoken in similar strain, and every man
who has problems to solve has had like experiences. You know how, after
you

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

have studied a problem from all angles, it sometimes seems worse jumbled
than when you started on it. Leave it then for a while—forget it—and
when you go back to it, you find your thoughts clarified, the line of
reasoning worked out, your problem solved for you. It is your little
"Mental Brownies" who have done the work for you!

The flash of genius does not originate in your own brain. Through
intense concentration you've established a circuit through your
subconscious mind with the Universal, and it is from It that the
inspiration comes. All genius, all progress, is from the same source. It
lies with you merely to learn how to establish this circuit at will so
that you can call upon It at need. It can be done.

“In the Inner Consciousness of each of us,” quotes Dumont in "The Master

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mind,” “there are
forces which act much the same as would countless tiny mental brownies
or helpers who are anxious and willing to assist us in our mental work,
if we will but have confidence and trust in them. This is a
psychological truth expressed in the terms of the old fairy tales. The
process of calling into service these Inner Consciousness helpers is
similar to that which we constantly employ to recall some forgotten fact
or name. We find that we cannot recollect some desired fact, date, or
name, and instead of racking our brains with an increased effort, we (if
we have learned the secret) pass on the matter to the Inner
Consciousness with a silent command, 'Recollect this name for me,' and
then go on with our ordinary work. After a few minutes—or it may be
hours—all of a sudden, pop! will come the missing name or fact before
us—

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

flashed from the planes of the Inner Consciousness, by the help of the
kindly workers or 'brownies' of those planes. The experience is so
common that we have ceased to wonder at it, and yet it is a wonderful
manifestation of the Inner Consciousness' workings of the mind. Stop and
think a moment, and you will see that the missing word does not present
itself accidentally, or 'just because.' There are mental processes at
work for your benefit, and when they have worked out the problem for you
they gleefully push it up from their plane on to the plane of the outer
consciousness where you may use it.

“We know of no better way of illustrating the matter than by this
fanciful figure of the 'mental brownies,' in, connection with the
illustration of the 'subconscious storehouse.' If you would learn to
take advantage of the work of these Subconscious

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

Brownies, we advise you to form a mental picture of the Subconscious
Storehouse in which is stored all sorts of knowledge that you have
placed there during your lifetime, as well as the impressions that you
have acquired by race inheritance—racial memory, in fact. The
information stored away has often been placed in the storage rooms
without any regard for systematic storing, or arrangement, and when you
wish to find something that has been stored away there a long time ago,
the exact place being forgotten, you are compelled to call to your
assistance the little brownies of the mind, which perform faithfully
your mental command, 'Recollect this for me!' These brownies are the
same little chaps that you charge with the task of waking you at four
o'clock tomorrow morning when you wish to catch an early train—and they
obey

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

you well in this work of the mental alarm-clock. These same little chaps
will also flash into your consciousness the report, 'I have an
engagement at two o'clock with Jones'—when looking at your watch you
will see that it is just a quarter before the hour of two, the time of
your engagement.

“Well then, if you will examine carefully into a subject which you wish
to master, and will pass along the results of your observations to these
Subconscious Brownies, you will find that they will work the raw
materials of thought into shape for you in a comparatively short time.
They will analyze, systematize, collate, and arrange in consecutive
order the various details of information which you have passed on to
them, and will add thereto the articles of similar information that they
will find stored away in the recesses of your memory. In this way

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

they will group together various scattered bits of knowledge that you
have forgotten. And, right here, let us say to you that you never
absolutely forget anything that you have placed in your mind. You may be
unable to recollect certain things, but they are not lost—sometime later
some associative connection will be made with some other fact, and lo I
the missing idea will be found fitted nicely into its place in the
larger idea—the work of our little brownies. Remember Thompson's
statement: 'In view of having to wait for the results of these
unconscious processes, I have proved the habit of getting together
material in advance, and then leaving the mass to digest itself until I
am ready to write about it.' This subconscious 'digestion' is really the
work of our little mental brownies.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

“There are many ways of setting the brownies to work. Nearly everyone
has had some experience, more or less, in the matter, although often it
is produced almost unconsciously, and without purpose and intent.
Perhaps the best way for the average person—or rather the majority of
persons—to get the desired results is for one to get as clear an idea of
what one really wants to know—as clear an idea or mental image of the
question you wish answered. Then after rolling it around in your
mind—mentally chewing it, as it were—giving it a high degree of
voluntary attention, you can pass it on to your Subconscious Mentality
with the mental command: *'Attend to this for me—work out the answer!'*
or some similar order. This command may be given silently, or else
spoken aloud—either will do. Speak to the Subconscious

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mentality—or its
little workers—just as you would speak to persons in your employ, kindly
but firmly. Talk to the little workers, and firmly command them to do
your work. And then forget all about the matter—throw it off your
conscious mind, and attend to your other tasks. Then in due time will
come your answer—flashed into your consciousness—perhaps not until the
very minute that you must decide upon the matter, or need the
information. You may give your brownies orders to report at such and
such a time—just as you do when you tell them to awaken you at a certain
time in the morning so as to catch the early train, or just as they
remind you of the hour of your appointment, if you have them all well
trained.”

Have you ever read the story by Richard Harding Davis of "The Man

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

Who Could Not Lose?" In it the hero is intensely interested in racing.
He has studied records and "dope" sheets until he knows the history of
every horse back-ward and forward.

The day before the big race he is reclining in an easy chair, thinking
of the morrow's race, and he drops off to sleep with that thought on his
mind. Naturally, his subconscious mind takes it up, with the result that
he dreams the exact outcome of the race.

That was mere fiction, of course, but if races were run solely on the
speed and stamina of the horses, it would be entirely possible to work
out the results in just that way. Unfortunately, other factors
frequently enter into every betting game.

But the idea behind Davis’ story is entirely right. The way to contact
with your subconscious mind, the way to get

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

the help of the "Man Inside You" in working out any problem is:

First, fill your mind with every bit of information regarding that
problem that you can lay your hands on.

Second, pick out a chair or lounge or bed where you can recline in
perfect comfort, where you can forget your body entirely.

Third, let your mind dwell upon the problem for a moment, not worrying,
not fretting, but placidly, and then turn it over to the "Man Inside
You." Say to him—"This is your problem. You can do anything. You know
the answer to everything. Work this out for me!" And utterly relax. Drop
off to sleep, if you can. At least, drop into one of those half-sleepy,
half-wakeful reveries that keep other thoughts from obtruding upon your
consciousness. Do as Aladdin did

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —summon your
[Genie](errata.htm#5), give him your Orders, then forget the matter,
secure in the knowledge that he will attend to it for you. When you
waken, *you will have the answer!*

For whatever thought, whatever problem you can get across to your
subconscious mind at the moment of dropping off to sleep, that "Man
Inside You," that Genie-of-your-Mind will work out for you.

Of course, not everyone can succeed in getting the right thought across
to the subconscious at the first or the second attempt. It requires
understanding and faith, just as the working out of problems in
mathematics requires an understanding of and faith in the principles of
mathematics. But keep on trying, and you WILL do it. And when you do,
*the results are sure*.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

If it is something that you want, VISUALIZE it first in your mind's eye,
see it in every possible detail, see yourself going through every move
it will be necessary for you to go through when your wish comes into
being. Build up a complete story, step by step, just as though you were
acting it all out. Get from it every ounce of pleasure and satisfaction
that you can. Be *thankful* for this gift that has come to you. Then
relax; go on to sleep if you can; give the "Man Inside You" a chance to
work out the consummation of your wish without interference.

When you waken, hold it all pleasurably in thought again for a few
moments. Don't let doubts and fears creep in, but go ahead, confidently,
knowing that your wish is working itself out. Know this, believe it—and
if there is nothing

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

harmful in it, IT WILL WORK OUT!

For somewhere in Universal Mind there exists the correct solution of
every problem. It matters not how stupendous and complicated, nor how
simple a problem may appear to be. There always exists the right
solution in Universal Mind. And because this solution does exist, there
also exists the ability to ascertain and to prove what that solution is.
You can know, and you can do, every right thing. Whatever it is
necessary for you to know, whatever it is necessary for you to do, you
can know and you can do, if you will but seek the help of Universal Mind
and be governed by its suggestions.

Try this method every night for a little while, and the problem does not
exist that you cannot solve.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. See Yourself Doing It](tsoa13)
