[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rom)  [Next](co2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 1 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus
Christ through the will of God, and our brother Sosthenes,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to the assembly of God which is at Corinth;
those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all
who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, both
theirs and ours:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> I always thank my God concerning you, for
the grace of God which was given you in Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> that in everything you were enriched in
him, in all speech and all knowledge;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> even as the testimony of Christ was
confirmed in you:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> so that you come behind in no gift; waiting
for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> who will also confirm you until the end,
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> God is faithful, through whom you were
called into the fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Now I beg you, brothers, through the name
of our Lord, Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing and that
there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfected together in
the same mind and in the same judgment.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For it has been reported to me concerning
you, my brothers, by those who are from Chloe's household, that there
are contentions among you.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Now I mean this, that each one of you
says, "I follow Paul," "I follow Apollos," "I follow Cephas," and, "I
follow Christ."

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for
you? Or were you baptized into the name of Paul?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I thank God that I baptized none of you,
except Crispus and Gaius,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> so that no one should say that I had
baptized you into my own name.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> (I also baptized the household of
Stephanas; besides them, I don't know whether I baptized any other.)

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the Good News--not in wisdom of words, so that the cross of
Christ wouldn't be made void.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For the word of the cross is foolishness
to those who are dying, but to us who are saved it is the power of God.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For it is written, "I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, I will bring the discernment of the discerning to
nothing."

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Where is the wise? Where is the scribe?
Where is the lawyer of this world? Hasn't God made foolish the wisdom of
this world?

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For seeing that in the wisdom of God, the
world through its wisdom didn't know God, it was God's good pleasure
through the foolishness of the preaching to save those who believe.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> For Jews ask for signs, Greeks seek after
wisdom,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> but we preach Christ crucified; a
stumbling block to Jews, and foolishness to Greeks,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> but to those who are called, both Jews
and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Because the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> For you see your calling, brothers, that
not many are wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, and not many
noble;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> but God chose the foolish things of the
world that he might put to shame those who are wise. God chose the weak
things of the world, that he might put to shame the things that are
strong;

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> and God chose the lowly things of the
world, and the things that are despised, and the things that are not,
that he might bring to nothing the things that are:

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> that no flesh should boast before God.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> But of him, you are in Christ Jesus, who
was made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification,
and redemption:

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> that, according as it is written, "He who
boasts, let him boast in the Lord."

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> When I came to you, brothers, I didn't come
with excellence of speech or of wisdom, proclaiming to you the testimony
of God.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For I determined not to know anything among
you, except Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> I was with you in weakness, in fear, and in
much trembling.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> My speech and my preaching were not in
persuasive words of human wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and
of power,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> that your faith wouldn't stand in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> We speak wisdom, however, among those who
are full grown; yet a wisdom not of this world, nor of the rulers of
this world, who are coming to nothing.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But we speak God's wisdom in a mystery, the
wisdom that has been hidden, which God foreordained before the worlds
for our glory,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> which none of the rulers of this world has
known. For had they known it, they wouldn't have crucified the Lord of
glory.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But as it is written, "Things which an eye
didn't see, and an ear didn't hear, which didn't enter into the heart of
man, these God has prepared for those who love him."

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But to us, God revealed them through the
Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, yes, the deep things of God.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For who among men knows the things of a
man, except the spirit of the man, which is in him? Even so, no one
knows the things of God, except God's Spirit.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But we received, not the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is from God, that we might know the things
that were freely given to us by God.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Which things also we speak, not in words
which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Spirit teaches, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual things.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Now the natural man doesn't receive the
things of God's Spirit, for they are foolishness to him, and he can't
know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> But he who is spiritual discerns all
things, and he himself is judged by no one.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> "For who has known the mind of the Lord,
that he should instruct him?" But we have Christ's mind.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Brothers, I couldn't speak to you as to
spiritual, but as to fleshly, as to babies in Christ.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I fed you with milk, not with meat; for you
weren't yet ready. Indeed, not even now are you ready,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> for you are still fleshly. For insofar as
there is jealousy, strife, and factions among you, aren't you fleshly,
and don't you walk in the ways of men?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For when one says, "I follow Paul," and
another, "I follow Apollos," aren't you fleshly?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Who then is Apollos, and who is Paul, but
servants through whom you believed; and each as the Lord gave to him?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I planted. Apollos watered. But God gave
the increase.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> So then neither he who plants is anything,
nor he who waters, but God who gives the increase.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Now he who plants and he who waters are the
same, but each will receive his own reward according to his own labor.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For we are God's fellow workers. You are
God's farming, God's building.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> According to the grace of God which was
given to me, as a wise master builder I laid a foundation, and another
builds on it. But let each man be careful how he builds on it.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For no one can lay any other foundation
than that which has been laid, which is Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> But if anyone builds on the foundation
with gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay, or stubble;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> each man's work will be revealed. For the
Day will declare it, because it is revealed in fire; and the fire itself
will test what sort of work each man's work is.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> If any man's work remains which he built
on it, he will receive a reward.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> If any man's work is burned, he will
suffer loss, but he himself will be saved, but as through fire.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Don't you know that you are a temple of
God, and that God's Spirit lives in you?

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> If anyone destroys the temple of God, God
will destroy him; for God's temple is holy, which you are.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Let no one deceive himself. If anyone
thinks that he is wise among you in this world, let him become a fool,
that he may become wise.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> For the wisdom of this world is
foolishness with God. For it is written, "He has taken the wise in their
craftiness."

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And again, "The Lord knows the reasoning
of the wise, that it is worthless."

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Therefore let no one boast in men. For
all things are yours,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or
the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come. All
are yours,

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> and you are Christ's, and Christ is
God's.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> So let a man think of us as Christ's
servants, and stewards of God's mysteries.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Here, moreover, it is required of stewards,
that they be found faithful.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> But with me it is a very small thing that I
should be judged by you, or by man's judgment. Yes, I don't judge my own
self.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For I know nothing against myself. Yet I am
not justified by this, but he who judges me is the Lord.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Therefore judge nothing before the time,
until the Lord comes, who will both bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and reveal the counsels of the hearts. Then each man will get
his praise from God.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Now these things, brothers, I have in a
figure transferred to myself and Apollos for your sakes, that in us you
might learn not to think beyond the things which are written, that none
of you be puffed up against one another.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For who makes you different? And what do
you have that you didn't receive? But if you did receive it, why do you
boast as if you had not received it?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> You are already filled. You have already
become rich. You have come to reign without us. Yes, and I wish that you
did reign, that we also might reign with you.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> For, I think that God has displayed us, the
apostles, last of all, like men sentenced to death. For we are made a
spectacle to the world, both to angels and men.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> We are fools for Christ's sake, but you
are wise in Christ. We are weak, but you are strong. You have honor, but
we have dishonor.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Even to this present hour we hunger,
thirst, are naked, are beaten, and have no certain dwelling place.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> We toil, working with our own hands. When
people curse us, we bless. Being persecuted, we endure.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Being defamed, we entreat. We are made as
the filth of the world, the dirt wiped off by all, even until now.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> I don't write these things to shame you,
but to admonish you as my beloved children.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For though you have ten thousand tutors
in Christ, yet not many fathers. For in Christ Jesus, I became your
father through the Good News.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> I beg you therefore, be imitators of me.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Because of this I have sent Timothy to
you, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who will remind
you of my ways which are in Christ, even as I teach everywhere in every
assembly.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Now some are puffed up, as though I were
not coming to you.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But I will come to you shortly, if the
Lord is willing. And I will know, not the word of those who are puffed
up, but the power.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> For the Kingdom of God is not in word,
but in power.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> What do you want? Shall I come to you
with a rod, or in love and a spirit of gentleness?

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> It is actually reported that there is
sexual immorality among you, and such sexual immorality as is not even
named among the Gentiles, that one has his father's wife.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> You are puffed up, and didn't rather mourn,
that he who had done this deed might be removed from among you.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For I most certainly, as being absent in
body but present in spirit, have already, as though I were present,
judged him who has done this thing.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you
being gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> are to deliver such a one to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Your boasting is not good. Don't you know
that a little yeast leavens the whole lump?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Purge out the old yeast, that you may be a
new lump, even as you are unleavened. For indeed Christ, our Passover,
has been sacrificed in our place.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Therefore let us keep the feast, not with
old yeast, neither with the yeast of malice and wickedness, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> I wrote to you in my letter to have no
company with sexual sinners;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> yet not at all meaning with the sexual
sinners of this world, or with the covetous and extortioners, or with
idolaters; for then you would have to leave the world.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But as it is, I wrote to you not to
associate with anyone who is called a brother who is a sexual sinner, or
covetous, or an idolater, or a slanderer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner. Don't even eat with such a person.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For what have I to do with also judging
those who are outside? Don't you judge those who are within?

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But those who are outside, God judges.
"Put away the wicked man from among yourselves."

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Dare any of you, having a matter against
his neighbor, go to law before the unrighteous, and not before the
saints?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Don't you know that the saints will judge
the world? And if the world is judged by you, are you unworthy to judge
the smallest matters?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Don't you know that we will judge angels?
How much more, things that pertain to this life?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> If then, you have to judge things
pertaining to this life, do you set them to judge who are of no account
in the assembly?

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> I say this to move you to shame. Isn't
there even one wise man among you who would be able to decide between
his brothers?

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But brother goes to law with brother, and
that before unbelievers!

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Therefore it is already altogether a defect
in you, that you have lawsuits one with another. Why not rather be
wronged? Why not rather be defrauded?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> No, but you yourselves do wrong, and
defraud, and that against your brothers.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Or don't you know that the unrighteous will
not inherit the Kingdom of God? Don't be deceived. Neither the sexually
immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor male prostitutes, nor
homosexuals,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards,
nor slanderers, nor extortioners, will inherit the Kingdom of God.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Such were some of you, but you were
washed. But you were sanctified. But you were justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> "All things are lawful for me," but not
all things are expedient. "All things are lawful for me," but I will not
be brought under the power of anything.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> "Foods for the belly, and the belly for
foods," but God will bring to nothing both it and them. But the body is
not for sexual immorality, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Now God raised up the Lord, and will also
raise us up by his power.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Don't you know that your bodies are
members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make
them members of a prostitute? May it never be!

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Or don't you know that he who is joined
to a prostitute is one body? For, "The two," says he, "will become one
flesh."

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But he who is joined to the Lord is one
spirit.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Flee sexual immorality! "Every sin that a
man does is outside the body," but he who commits sexual immorality sins
against his own body.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Or don't you know that your body is a
temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which you have from God? You
are not your own,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> for you were bought with a price.
Therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are God's.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now concerning the things about which you
wrote to me: it is good for a man not to touch a woman.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> But, because of sexual immoralities, let
each man have his own wife, and let each woman have her own husband.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Let the husband render to his wife the
affection owed her, and likewise also the wife to her husband.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The wife doesn't have authority over her
own body, but the husband. Likewise also the husband doesn't have
authority over his own body, but the wife.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Don't deprive one another, unless it is by
consent for a season, that you may give yourselves to fasting and
prayer, and may be together again, that Satan doesn't tempt you because
of your lack of self-control.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But this I say by way of concession, not of
commandment.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Yet I wish that all men were like me.
However each man has his own gift from God, one of this kind, and
another of that kind.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> But I say to the unmarried and to widows,
it is good for them if they remain even as I am.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> But if they don't have self-control, let
them marry. For it's better to marry than to burn.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> But to the married I command--not I, but
the Lord--that the wife not leave her husband

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> (but if she departs, let her remain
unmarried, or else be reconciled to her husband), and that the husband
not leave his wife.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But to the rest I--not the Lord--say, if
any brother has an unbelieving wife, and she is content to live with
him, let him not leave her.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> The woman who has an unbelieving husband,
and he is content to live with her, let her not leave her husband.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For the unbelieving husband is sanctified
in the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in the husband.
Otherwise your children would be unclean, but now they are holy.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Yet if the unbeliever departs, let there
be separation. The brother or the sister is not under bondage in such
cases, but God has called us in peace.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For how do you know, wife, whether you
will save your husband? Or how do you know, husband, whether you will
save your wife?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Only, as the Lord has distributed to each
man, as God has called each, so let him walk. So I command in all the
assemblies.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Was anyone called having been
circumcised? Let him not become uncircumcised. Has anyone been called in
uncircumcision? Let him not be circumcised.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Circumcision is nothing, and
uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Let each man stay in that calling in
which he was called.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Were you called being a bondservant?
Don't let that bother you, but if you get an opportunity to become free,
use it.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For he who was called in the Lord being a
bondservant is the Lord's free man. Likewise he who was called being
free is Christ's bondservant.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> You were bought with a price. Don't
become bondservants of men.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Brothers, let each man, in whatever
condition he was called, stay in that condition with God.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Now concerning virgins, I have no
commandment from the Lord, but I give my judgment as one who has
obtained mercy from the Lord to be trustworthy.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> I think that it is good therefore,
because of the distress that is on us, that it is good for a man to be
as he is.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Are you bound to a wife? Don't seek to be
freed. Are you free from a wife? Don't seek a wife.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> But if you marry, you have not sinned. If
a virgin marries, she has not sinned. Yet such will have oppression in
the flesh, and I want to spare you.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> But I say this, brothers: the time is
short, that from now on, both those who have wives may be as though they
had none;

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> and those who weep, as though they didn't
weep; and those who rejoice, as though they didn't rejoice; and those
who buy, as though they didn't possess;

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> and those who use the world, as not using
it to the fullest. For the mode of this world passes away.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> But I desire to have you to be free from
cares. He who is unmarried is concerned for the things of the Lord, how
he may please the Lord;

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> but he who is married is concerned about
the things of the world, how he may please his wife.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> There is also a difference between a wife
and a virgin. The unmarried woman cares about the things of the Lord,
that she may be holy both in body and in spirit. But she who is married
cares about the things of the world--how she may please her husband.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> This I say for your own profit; not that
I may ensnare you, but for that which is appropriate, and that you may
attend to the Lord without distraction.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> But if any man thinks that he is behaving
inappropriately toward his virgin, if she is past the flower of her age,
and if need so requires, let him do what he desires. He doesn't sin. Let
them marry.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> But he who stands steadfast in his heart,
having no necessity, but has power over his own heart, to keep his own
virgin, does well.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> So then both he who gives his own virgin
in marriage does well, and he who doesn't give her in marriage does
better.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> A wife is bound by law for as long as her
husband lives; but if the husband is dead, she is free to be married to
whoever she desires, only in the Lord.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> But she is happier if she stays as she
is, in my judgment, and I think that I also have God's Spirit.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now concerning things sacrificed to idols:
We know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds
up.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> But if anyone thinks that he knows
anything, he doesn't yet know as he ought to know.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> But if anyone loves God, the same is known
by him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Therefore concerning the eating of things
sacrificed to idols, we know that no idol is anything in the world, and
that there is no other God but one.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For though there are things that are called
"gods," whether in the heavens or on earth; as there are many "gods" and
many "lords;"

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> yet to us there is one God, the Father, of
whom are all things, and we for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through
whom are all things, and we live through him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> However, that knowledge isn't in all men.
But some, with consciousness of the idol until now, eat as of a thing
sacrificed to an idol, and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> But food will not commend us to God. For
neither, if we don't eat, are we the worse; nor, if we eat, are we the
better.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But be careful that by no means does this
liberty of yours become a stumbling block to the weak.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> For if a man sees you who have knowledge
sitting in an idol's temple, won't his conscience, if he is weak, be
emboldened to eat things sacrificed to idols?

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And through your knowledge, he who is
weak perishes, the brother for whose sake Christ died.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Thus, sinning against the brothers, and
wounding their conscience when it is weak, you sin against Christ.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Therefore, if food causes my brother to
stumble, I will eat no meat forevermore, that I don't cause my brother
to stumble.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Haven't
I seen Jesus Christ, our Lord? Aren't you my work in the Lord?

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> If to others I am not an apostle, yet at
least I am to you; for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> My defense to those who examine me is this.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Have we no right to eat and to drink?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Have we no right to take along a wife who
is a believer, even as the rest of the apostles, and the brothers of the
Lord, and Cephas?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Or have only Barnabas and I no right to not
work?

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> What soldier ever serves at his own
expense? Who plants a vineyard, and doesn't eat of its fruit? Or who
feeds a flock, and doesn't drink from the flock's milk?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Do I speak these things according to the
ways of men? Or doesn't the law also say the same thing?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For it is written in the law of Moses, "You
shall not muzzle an ox while it treads out the grain." Is it for the
oxen that God cares,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> or does he say it assuredly for our sake?
Yes, it was written for our sake, because he who plows ought to plow in
hope, and he who threshes in hope should partake of his hope.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> If we sowed to you spiritual things, is
it a great thing if we reap your fleshly things?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If others partake of this right over you,
don't we yet more? Nevertheless we did not use this right, but we bear
all things, that we may cause no hindrance to the Good News of Christ.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Don't you know that those who serve
around sacred things eat from the things of the temple, and those who
wait on the altar have their portion with the altar?

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Even so the Lord ordained that those who
proclaim the Good News should live from the Good News.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> But I have used none of these things, and
I don't write these things that it may be done so in my case; for I
would rather die, than that anyone should make my boasting void.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For if I preach the Good News, I have
nothing to boast about; for necessity is laid on me; but woe is to me,
if I don't preach the Good News.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For if I do this of my own will, I have a
reward. But if not of my own will, I have a stewardship entrusted to me.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> What then is my reward? That, when I
preach the Good News, I may present the Good News of Christ without
charge, so as not to abuse my authority in the Good News.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For though I was free from all, I brought
myself under bondage to all, that I might gain the more.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> To the Jews I became as a Jew, that I
might gain Jews; to those who are under the law, as under the law, that
I might gain those who are under the law;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> to those who are without law, as without
law (not being without law toward God, but under law toward Christ),
that I might win those who are without law.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> To the weak I became as weak, that I
might gain the weak. I have become all things to all men, that I may by
all means save some.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Now I do this for the sake of the Good
News, that I may be a joint partaker of it.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Don't you know that those who run in a
race all run, but one receives the prize? Run like that, that you may
win.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Every man who strives in the games
exercises self-control in all things. Now they do it to receive a
corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> I therefore run like that, as not
uncertainly. I fight like that, as not beating the air,

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> but I beat my body and bring it into
submission, lest by any means, after I have preached to others, I myself
should be rejected.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now I would not have you ignorant,
brothers, that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed
through the sea;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> and were all baptized into Moses in the
cloud and in the sea;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> and all ate the same spiritual food;

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> and all drank the same spiritual drink.
For they drank of a spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was
Christ.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> However with most of them, God was not
well pleased, for they were overthrown in the wilderness.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Now these things were our examples, to
the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Neither be idolaters, as some of them
were. As it is written, "The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose
up to play."

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Neither let us commit sexual immorality,
as some of them committed, and in one day twenty-three thousand fell.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Neither let us test the Lord, as some of
them tested, and perished by the serpents.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Neither grumble, as some of them also
grumbled, and perished by the destroyer.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Now all these things happened to them
by way of example, and they were written for our admonition, on whom the
ends of the ages have come.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Therefore let him who thinks he stands
be careful that he doesn't fall.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> No temptation has taken you except what
is common to man. God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted
above what you are able, but will with the temptation also make the way
of escape, that you may be able to endure it.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Therefore, my beloved, flee from
idolatry.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> I speak as to wise men. Judge what I
say.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The cup of blessing which we bless,
isn't it a sharing of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break,
isn't it a sharing of the body of Christ?

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Because there is one loaf of bread, we,
who are many, are one body; for we all partake of the one loaf of bread.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Consider Israel according to the flesh.
Don't those who eat the sacrifices participate in the altar?

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> What am I saying then? That a thing
sacrificed to idols is anything, or that an idol is anything?

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But I say that the things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons, and not to God, and I
don't desire that you would have fellowship with demons.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> You can't both drink the cup of the
Lord and the cup of demons. You can't both partake of the table of the
Lord, and of the table of demons.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Or do we provoke the Lord to jealousy?
Are we stronger than he?

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> "All things are lawful for me," but not
all things are profitable. "All things are lawful for me," but not all
things build up.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Let no one seek his own, but each one
his neighbor's good.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Whatever is sold in the butcher shop,
eat, asking no question for the sake of conscience,

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> for "the earth is the Lord's, and its
fullness."

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> But if one of those who don't believe
invites you to a meal, and you are inclined to go, eat whatever is set
before you, asking no questions for the sake of conscience.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> But if anyone says to you, "This was
offered to idols," don't eat it for the sake of the one who told you,
and for the sake of conscience. For "the earth is the Lord's, and all
its fullness."

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Conscience, I say, not your own, but
the other's conscience. For why is my liberty judged by another
conscience?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> If I partake with thankfulness, why am
I denounced for that for which I give thanks?

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Whether therefore you eat, or drink, or
whatever you do, do all to the glory of God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Give no occasions for stumbling, either
to Jews, or to Greeks, or to the assembly of God;

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> even as I also please all men in all
things, not seeking my own profit, but the profit of the many, that they
may be saved.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Be imitators of me, even as I also am of
Christ.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now I praise you, brothers, that you
remember me in all things, and hold firm the traditions, even as I
delivered them to you.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But I would have you know that the head
of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and the
head of Christ is God.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Every man praying or prophesying, having
his head covered, dishonors his head.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> But every woman praying or prophesying
with her head unveiled dishonors her head. For it is one and the same
thing as if she were shaved.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> For if a woman is not covered, let her
also be shorn. But if it is shameful for a woman to be shorn or shaved,
let her be covered.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> For a man indeed ought not to have his
head covered, because he is the image and glory of God, but the woman is
the glory of the man.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> For man is not from woman, but woman from
man;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> for neither was man created for the
woman, but woman for the man.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For this cause the woman ought to have
authority on her head, because of the angels.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Nevertheless, neither is the woman
independent of the man, nor the man independent of the woman, in the
Lord.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> For as woman came from man, so a man
also comes through a woman; but all things are from God.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Judge for yourselves. Is it appropriate
that a woman pray to God unveiled?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Doesn't even nature itself teach you
that if a man has long hair, it is a dishonor to him?

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> But if a woman has long hair, it is a
glory to her, for her hair is given to her for a covering.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But if any man seems to be contentious,
we have no such custom, neither do God's assemblies.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> But in giving you this command, I don't
praise you, that you come together not for the better but for the worse.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> For first of all, when you come
together in the assembly, I hear that divisions exist among you, and I
partly believe it.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> For there also must be factions among
you, that those who are approved may be revealed among you.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> When therefore you assemble yourselves
together, it is not the Lord's supper that you eat.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> For in your eating each one takes his
own supper first. One is hungry, and another is drunken.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> What, don't you have houses to eat and
to drink in? Or do you despise God's assembly, and put them to shame who
don't have? What shall I tell you? Shall I praise you? In this I don't
praise you.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> For I received from the Lord that which
also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night in which he
was betrayed took bread.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> When he had given thanks, he broke it,
and said, "Take, eat. This is my body, which is broken for you. Do this
in memory of me."

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> In the same way he also took the cup,
after supper, saying, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do
this, as often as you drink, in memory of me."

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> For as often as you eat this bread and
drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Therefore whoever eats this bread or
drinks the Lord's cup in a way unworthy of the Lord will be guilty of
the body and the blood of the Lord.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> But let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> For he who eats and drinks in an
unworthy way eats and drinks judgment to himself, if he doesn't discern
the Lord's body.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For this cause many among you are weak
and sickly, and not a few sleep.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> For if we discerned ourselves, we
wouldn't be judged.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> But when we are judged, we are punished
by the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Therefore, my brothers, when you come
together to eat, wait for one another.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> But if anyone is hungry, let him eat at
home, lest your coming together be for judgment. The rest I will set in
order whenever I come.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now concerning spiritual things,
brothers, I don't want you to be ignorant.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> You know that when you were heathen, you
were led away to those mute idols, however you might be led.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Therefore I make known to you that no man
speaking by God's Spirit says, "Jesus is accursed." No one can say,
"Jesus is Lord," but by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Now there are various kinds of gifts, but
the same Spirit.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> There are various kinds of service, and
the same Lord.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> There are various kinds of workings, but
the same God, who works all things in all.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But to each one is given the
manifestation of the Spirit for the profit of all.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For to one is given through the Spirit
the word of wisdom, and to another the word of knowledge, according to
the same Spirit;

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> to another faith, by the same Spirit; and
to another gifts of healings, by the same Spirit;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> and to another workings of miracles;
and to another prophecy; and to another discerning of spirits; to
another different kinds of languages; and to another the interpretation
of languages.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> But the one and the same Spirit works
all of these, distributing to each one separately as he desires.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For as the body is one, and has many
members, and all the members of the body, being many, are one body; so
also is Christ.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> For in one Spirit we were all baptized
into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bond or free; and were
all given to drink into one Spirit.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> For the body is not one member, but
many.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> If the foot would say, "Because I'm not
the hand, I'm not part of the body," it is not therefore not part of the
body.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> If the ear would say, "Because I'm not
the eye, I'm not part of the body," it's not therefore not part of the
body.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> If the whole body were an eye, where
would the hearing be? If the whole were hearing, where would the
smelling be?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> But now God has set the members, each
one of them, in the body, just as he desired.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> If they were all one member, where
would the body be?

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> But now they are many members, but one
body.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> The eye can't tell the hand, "I have no
need for you," or again the head to the feet, "I have no need for you."

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> No, much rather, those members of the
body which seem to be weaker are necessary.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Those parts of the body which we think
to be less honorable, on those we bestow more abundant honor; and our
unpresentable parts have more abundant propriety;

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> whereas our presentable parts have no
such need. But God composed the body together, giving more abundant
honor to the inferior part,

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> that there should be no division in the
body, but that the members should have the same care for one another.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> When one member suffers, all the
members suffer with it. Or when one member is honored, all the members
rejoice with it.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Now you are the body of Christ, and
members individually.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> God has set some in the assembly: first
apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then miracle workers, then
gifts of healings, helps, governments, and various kinds of languages.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are
all teachers? Are all miracle workers?

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Do all have gifts of healings? Do all
speak with various languages? Do all interpret?

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> But earnestly desire the best gifts.
Moreover, I show a most excellent way to you.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> If I speak with the languages of men and
of angels, but don't have love, I have become sounding brass, or a
clanging cymbal.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> If I have the gift of prophecy, and know
all mysteries and all knowledge; and if I have all faith, so as to
remove mountains, but don't have love, I am nothing.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> If I dole out all my goods to feed the
poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but don't have love, it
profits me nothing.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Love is patient and is kind; love doesn't
envy. Love doesn't brag, is not proud,

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> doesn't behave itself inappropriately,
doesn't seek its own way, is not provoked, takes no account of evil;

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> doesn't rejoice in unrighteousness, but
rejoices with the truth;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> bears all things, believes all things,
hopes all things, endures all things.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Love never fails. But where there are
prophecies, they will be done away with. Where there are various
languages, they will cease. Where there is knowledge, it will be done
away with.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For we know in part, and we prophesy in
part;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> but when that which is complete has
come, then that which is partial will be done away with.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> When I was a child, I spoke as a child,
I felt as a child, I thought as a child. Now that I have become a man, I
have put away childish things.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> For now we see in a mirror, dimly, but
then face to face. Now I know in part, but then I will know fully, even
as I was also fully known.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> But now faith, hope, and love
remain--these three. The greatest of these is love.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Follow after love, and earnestly desire
spiritual gifts, but especially that you may prophesy.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For he who speaks in another language
speaks not to men, but to God; for no one understands; but in the Spirit
he speaks mysteries.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> But he who prophesies speaks to men for
their edification, exhortation, and consolation.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> He who speaks in another language edifies
himself, but he who prophesies edifies the assembly.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Now I desire to have you all speak with
other languages, but rather that you would prophesy. For he is greater
who prophesies than he who speaks with other languages, unless he
interprets, that the assembly may be built up.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But now, brothers, if I come to you
speaking with other languages, what would I profit you, unless I speak
to you either by way of revelation, or of knowledge, or of prophesying,
or of teaching?

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Even things without life, giving a voice,
whether pipe or harp, if they didn't give a distinction in the sounds,
how would it be known what is piped or harped?

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> For if the trumpet gave an uncertain
sound, who would prepare himself for war?

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> So also you, unless you uttered by the
tongue words easy to understand, how would it be known what is spoken?
For you would be speaking into the air.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> There are, it may be, so many kinds of
sounds in the world, and none of them is without meaning.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> If then I don't know the meaning of the
sound, I would be to him who speaks a foreigner, and he who speaks would
be a foreigner to me.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So also you, since you are zealous for
spiritual gifts, seek that you may abound to the building up of the
assembly.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Therefore let him who speaks in another
language pray that he may interpret.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> For if I pray in another language, my
spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> What is it then? I will pray with the
spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. I will sing with
the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Otherwise if you bless with the spirit,
how will he who fills the place of the unlearned say the "Amen" at your
giving of thanks, seeing he doesn't know what you say?

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> For you most certainly give thanks
well, but the other person is not built up.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> I thank my God, I speak with other
languages more than you all.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> However in the assembly I would rather
speak five words with my understanding, that I might instruct others
also, than ten thousand words in another language.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Brothers, don't be children in
thoughts, yet in malice be babies, but in thoughts be mature.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> In the law it is written, "By men of
strange languages and by the lips of strangers I will speak to this
people. Not even thus will they hear me, says the Lord."

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Therefore other languages are for a
sign, not to those who believe, but to the unbelieving; but prophesying
is for a sign, not to the unbelieving, but to those who believe.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> If therefore the whole assembly is
assembled together and all speak with other languages, and unlearned or
unbelieving people come in, won't they say that you are crazy?

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> But if all prophesy, and someone
unbelieving or unlearned comes in, he is reproved by all, and he is
judged by all.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And thus the secrets of his heart are
revealed. So he will fall down on his face and worship God, declaring
that God is among you indeed.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> What is it then, brothers? When you
come together, each one of you has a psalm, has a teaching, has a
revelation, has another language, has an interpretation. Let all things
be done to build each other up.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> If any man speaks in another language,
let it be two, or at the most three, and in turn; and let one interpret.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> But if there is no interpreter, let him
keep silent in the assembly, and let him speak to himself, and to God.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Let the prophets speak, two or three,
and let the others discern.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> But if a revelation is made to another
sitting by, let the first keep silent.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> For you all can prophesy one by one,
that all may learn, and all may be exhorted.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> The spirits of the prophets are subject
to the prophets,

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> for God is not a God of confusion, but
of peace. As in all the assemblies of the saints,

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> let your wives keep silent in the
assemblies, for it has not been permitted for them to speak; but let
them be in subjection, as the law also says.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> If they desire to learn anything, let
them ask their own husbands at home, for it is shameful for a woman to
chatter in the assembly.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> What? Was it from you that the word of
God went out? Or did it come to you alone?

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> If any man thinks himself to be a
prophet, or spiritual, let him recognize the things which I write to
you, that they are the commandment of the Lord.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> But if anyone is ignorant, let him be
ignorant.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> Therefore, brothers, desire earnestly
to prophesy, and don't forbid speaking with other languages.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> Let all things be done decently and in
order.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now I declare to you, brothers, the Good
News which I preached to you, which also you received, in which you also
stand,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> by which also you are saved, if you hold
firmly the word which I preached to you--unless you believed in vain.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For I delivered to you first of all that
which I also received: that Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures,

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> that he was buried, that he was raised on
the third day according to the Scriptures,

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> and that he appeared to Cephas, then to
the twelve.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Then he appeared to over five hundred
brothers at once, most of whom remain until now, but some have also
fallen asleep.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Then he appeared to James, then to all
the apostles,

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> and last of all, as to the child born at
the wrong time, he appeared to me also.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> For I am the least of the apostles, who
is not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the assembly
of God.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> But by the grace of God I am what I am.
His grace which was bestowed on me was not futile, but I worked more
than all of them; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Whether then it is I or they, so we
preach, and so you believed.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Now if Christ is preached, that he has
been raised from the dead, how do some among you say that there is no
resurrection of the dead?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> But if there is no resurrection of the
dead, neither has Christ been raised.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> If Christ has not been raised, then our
preaching is in vain, and your faith also is in vain.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Yes, we are found false witnesses of
God, because we testified about God that he raised up Christ, whom he
didn't raise up, if it is so that the dead are not raised.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> For if the dead aren't raised, neither
has Christ been raised.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> If Christ has not been raised, your
faith is vain; you are still in your sins.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Then they also who are fallen asleep in
Christ have perished.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> If we have only hoped in Christ in this
life, we are of all men most pitiable.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> But now Christ has been raised from the
dead. He became the first fruits of those who are asleep.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> For since death came by man, the
resurrection of the dead also came by man.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> For as in Adam all die, so also in
Christ all will be made alive.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But each in his own order: Christ the
first fruits, then those who are Christ's, at his coming.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Then the end comes, when he will
deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father; when he will have
abolished all rule and all authority and power.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> For he must reign until he has put all
his enemies under his feet.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> The last enemy that will be abolished
is death.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> For, "He put all things in subjection
under his feet." But when he says, "All things are put in subjection,"
it is evident that he is excepted who subjected all things to him.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> When all things have been subjected to
him, then the Son will also himself be subjected to him who subjected
all things to him, that God may be all in all.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Or else what will they do who are
baptized for the dead? If the dead aren't raised at all, why then are
they baptized for the dead?

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Why do we also stand in jeopardy every
hour?

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> I affirm, by the boasting in you which
I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> If I fought with animals at Ephesus for
human purposes, what does it profit me? If the dead are not raised, then
"let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Don't be deceived! "Evil companionships
corrupt good morals."

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> Wake up righteously, and don't sin, for
some have no knowledge of God. I say this to your shame.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> But someone will say, "How are the dead
raised?" and, "With what kind of body do they come?"

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> You foolish one, that which you
yourself sow is not made alive unless it dies.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> That which you sow, you don't sow the
body that will be, but a bare grain, maybe of wheat, or of some other
kind.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> But God gives it a body even as it
pleased him, and to each seed a body of its own.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> All flesh is not the same flesh, but
there is one flesh of men, another flesh of animals, another of fish,
and another of birds.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> There are also celestial bodies, and
terrestrial bodies; but the glory of the celestial differs from that of
the terrestrial.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> There is one glory of the sun, another
glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differs
from another star in glory.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> So also is the resurrection of the
dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption.

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in
glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power.

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> It is sown a natural body; it is raised
a spiritual body. There is a natural body and there is also a spiritual
body.

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> So also it is written, "The first man,
Adam, became a living soul." The last Adam became a life-giving spirit.

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> However that which is spiritual isn't
first, but that which is natural, then that which is spiritual.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> The first man is of the earth, made of
dust. The second man is the Lord from heaven.

<span id="an_15:48">15:48</span> As is the one made of dust, such are
those who are also made of dust; and as is the heavenly, such are they
also that are heavenly.

<span id="an_15:49">15:49</span> As we have borne the image of those
made of dust, let's also bear the image of the heavenly.

<span id="an_15:50">15:50</span> Now I say this, brothers, that flesh
and blood can't inherit the Kingdom of God; neither does corruption
inherit incorruption.

<span id="an_15:51">15:51</span> Behold, I tell you a mystery. We will
not all sleep, but we will all be changed,

<span id="an_15:52">15:52</span> in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will
be raised incorruptible, and we will be changed.

<span id="an_15:53">15:53</span> For this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.

<span id="an_15:54">15:54</span> But when this corruptible will have put
on incorruption, and this mortal will have put on immortality, then what
is written will happen: "Death is swallowed up in victory."

<span id="an_15:55">15:55</span> "Death, where is your sting? Hades,
where is your victory?"

<span id="an_15:56">15:56</span> The sting of death is sin, and the
power of sin is the law.

<span id="an_15:57">15:57</span> But thanks be to God, who gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:58">15:58</span> Therefore, my beloved brothers, be
steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the Lord's work, because you
know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Now concerning the collection for the
saints, as I commanded the assemblies of Galatia, you do likewise.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> On the first day of the week, let each
one of you save, as he may prosper, that no collections be made when I
come.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> When I arrive, I will send whoever you
approve with letters to carry your gracious gift to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> If it is appropriate for me to go also,
they will go with me.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> But I will come to you when I have passed
through Macedonia, for I am passing through Macedonia.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> But with you it may be that I will stay,
or even winter, that you may send me on my journey wherever I go.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> For I do not wish to see you now in
passing, but I hope to stay a while with you, if the Lord permits.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> But I will stay at Ephesus until
Pentecost,

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> for a great and effective door has opened
to me, and there are many adversaries.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Now if Timothy comes, see that he is
with you without fear, for he does the work of the Lord, as I also do.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Therefore let no one despise him. But
set him forward on his journey in peace, that he may come to me; for I
expect him with the brothers.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Now concerning Apollos, the brother, I
strongly urged him to come to you with the brothers; and it was not at
all his desire to come now; but he will come when he has an opportunity.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Watch! Stand firm in the faith! Be
courageous! Be strong!

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Let all that you do be done in love.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Now I beg you, brothers (you know the
house of Stephanas, that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they
have set themselves to serve the saints),

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> that you also be in subjection to such,
and to everyone who helps in the work and labors.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas,
Fortunatus, and Achaicus; for that which was lacking on your part, they
supplied.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> For they refreshed my spirit and yours.
Therefore acknowledge those who are like that.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> The assemblies of Asia greet you.
Aquila and Priscilla greet you much in the Lord, together with the
assembly that is in their house.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> All the brothers greet you. Greet one
another with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> This greeting is by me, Paul, with my
own hand.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> If any man doesn't love the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be accursed. Come, Lord!

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be
with you.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> My love to all of you in Christ Jesus.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians](co2)
