[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](num)  [Next](jos) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Deuteronomy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> These are the words which Moses spoke to
all Israel beyond the Jordan in the wilderness, in the Arabah over
against Suph, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and
Dizahab.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> It is eleven days' \[journey\] from Horeb
by the way of Mount Seir to Kadesh Barnea.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> It happened in the fortieth year, in the
eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spoke to the
children of Israel, according to all that Yahweh had given him in
commandment to them;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> after he had struck Sihon the king of the
Amorites, who lived in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, who lived in
Ashtaroth, at Edrei.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab,
began Moses to declare this law, saying,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> "Yahweh our God spoke to us in Horeb,
saying, You have lived long enough in this mountain:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> turn, and take your journey, and go to the
hill country of the Amorites, and to all \[the places\] near there, in
the Arabah, in the hill country, and in the lowland, and in the South,
and by the seashore, the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as
the great river, the river Euphrates.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Behold, I have set the land before you: go
in and possess the land which Yahweh swore to your fathers, to Abraham,
to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them and to their seed after them."

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> I spoke to you at that time, saying, "I am
not able to bear you myself alone:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Yahweh your God has multiplied you, and
behold, you are this day as the stars of the sky for multitude.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Yahweh, the God of your fathers, make you
a thousand times as many as you are, and bless you, as he has promised
you!

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> How can I myself alone bear your
encumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Take wise men of understanding and well
known according to your tribes, and I will make them heads over you."

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> You answered me, and said, "The thing
which you have spoken is good \[for us\] to do."

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So I took the heads of your tribes, wise
men, and known, and made them heads over you, captains of thousands, and
captains of hundreds, and captains of fifties, and captains of tens, and
officers, according to your tribes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> I commanded your judges at that time,
saying, Hear \[the causes\] between your brothers, and judge righteously
between a man and his brother, and the foreigner who is living with him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> You shall not show partiality in
judgment; you shall hear the small and the great alike; you shall not be
afraid of the face of man; for the judgment is God's: and the cause that
is too hard for you, you shall bring to me, and I will hear it.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> I commanded you at that time all the
things which you should do.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> We traveled from Horeb, and went through
all that great and terrible wilderness which you saw, by the way to the
hill country of the Amorites, as Yahweh our God commanded us; and we
came to Kadesh Barnea.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> I said to you, "You have come to the hill
country of the Amorites, which Yahweh our God gives to us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Behold, Yahweh your God has set the land
before you: go up, take possession, as Yahweh, the God of your fathers,
has spoken to you; don't be afraid, neither be dismayed."

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> You came near to me everyone of you, and
said, "Let us send men before us, that they may search the land for us,
and bring us word again of the way by which we must go up, and the
cities to which we shall come."

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> The thing pleased me well; and I took
twelve men of you, one man for every tribe:

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> and they turned and went up into the hill
country, and came to the valley of Eshcol, and spied it out.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> They took of the fruit of the land in
their hands, and brought it down to us, and brought us word again, and
said, "It is a good land which Yahweh our God gives to us."

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Yet you wouldn't go up, but rebelled
against the commandment of Yahweh your God:

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> and you murmured in your tents, and said,
"Because Yahweh hated us, he has brought us forth out of the land of
Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Where are we going up? our brothers have
made our heart to melt, saying, 'The people are greater and taller than
we; the cities are great and fortified up to the sky; and moreover we
have seen the sons of the Anakim there.'"

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Then I said to you, "Don't dread, neither
be afraid of them.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Yahweh your God who goes before you, he
will fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before
your eyes,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> and in the wilderness, where you have
seen how that Yahweh your God bore you, as a man does bear his son, in
all the way that you went, until you came to this place."

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> Yet in this thing you didn't believe
Yahweh your God,

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> who went before you in the way, to seek
you out a place to pitch your tents in, in fire by night, to show you by
what way you should go, and in the cloud by day.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> Yahweh heard the voice of your words, and
was angry, and swore, saying,

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> "Surely not one of these men of this evil
generation shall see the good land, which I swore to give to your
fathers,

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> except Caleb the son of Jephunneh: he
shall see it; and to him will I give the land that he has trodden on,
and to his children, because he has wholly followed Yahweh."

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> Also Yahweh was angry with me for your
sakes, saying, "You also shall not go in there:

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Joshua the son of Nun, who stands before
you, he shall go in there: encourage you him; for he shall cause Israel
to inherit it.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> Moreover your little ones, whom you said
should be a prey, and your children, who this day have no knowledge of
good or evil, they shall go in there, and to them will I give it, and
they shall possess it.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> But as for you, turn, and take your
journey into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea."

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Then you answered and said to me, "We
have sinned against Yahweh, we will go up and fight, according to all
that Yahweh our God commanded us." Every man of you put on his weapons
of war, and presumed to go up into the hill country.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> Yahweh said to me, "Tell them, 'Don't go
up, neither fight; for I am not among you; lest you be struck before
your enemies.'"

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> So I spoke to you, and you didn't listen;
but you rebelled against the commandment of Yahweh, and were
presumptuous, and went up into the hill country.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> The Amorites, who lived in that hill
country, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and beat you
down in Seir, even to Hormah.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> You returned and wept before Yahweh; but
Yahweh didn't listen to your voice, nor gave ear to you.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> So you stayed in Kadesh many days,
according to the days that you stayed \[there\].

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then we turned, and took our journey into
the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea, as Yahweh spoke to me; and we
encircled Mount Seir many days.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Yahweh spoke to me, saying,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> "You have encircled this mountain long
enough. Turn northward.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Command the people, saying, 'You are to
pass through the border of your brothers the children of Esau, who dwell
in Seir; and they will be afraid of you: take good heed to yourselves
therefore;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> don't contend with them; for I will not
give you of their land, no, not so much as for the sole of the foot to
tread on; because I have given Mount Seir to Esau for a possession.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> You shall purchase food of them for money,
that you may eat; and you shall also buy water of them for money, that
you may drink.'"

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For Yahweh your God has blessed you in all
the work of your hand; he has known your walking through this great
wilderness: these forty years Yahweh your God has been with you; you
have lacked nothing.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> So we passed by from our brothers the
children of Esau, who dwell in Seir, from the way of the Arabah from
Elath and from Ezion Geber. We turned and passed by the way of the
wilderness of Moab.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Yahweh said to me, "Don't bother Moab,
neither contend with them in battle; for I will not give you of his land
for a possession; because I have given Ar to the children of Lot for a
possession."

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> (The Emim lived therein before, a people
great, and many, and tall, as the Anakim:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> these also are accounted Rephaim, as the
Anakim; but the Moabites call them Emim.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The Horites also lived in Seir before,
but the children of Esau succeeded them; and they destroyed them from
before them, and lived in their place; as Israel did to the land of his
possession, which Yahweh gave to them.)

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> "Now rise up, and cross over the brook
Zered." We went over the brook Zered.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The days in which we came from Kadesh
Barnea, until we were come over the brook Zered, were thirty-eight
years; until all the generation of the men of war were consumed from the
midst of the camp, as Yahweh swore to them.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Moreover the hand of Yahweh was against
them, to destroy them from the midst of the camp, until they were
consumed.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> So it happened, when all the men of war
were consumed and dead from among the people,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> that Yahweh spoke to me, saying,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> "You are this day to pass over Ar, the
border of Moab:

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and when you come near over against the
children of Ammon, don't bother them, nor contend with them; for I will
not give you of the land of the children of Ammon for a possession;
because I have given it to the children of Lot for a possession."

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> (That also is accounted a land of
Rephaim: Rephaim lived therein before; but the Ammonites call them
Zamzummim,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> a people great, and many, and tall, as
the Anakim; but Yahweh destroyed them before them; and they succeeded
them, and lived in their place;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> as he did for the children of Esau, who
dwell in Seir, when he destroyed the Horites from before them; and they
succeeded them, and lived in their place even to this day:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and the Avvim, who lived in villages as
far as Gaza, the Caphtorim, who came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed
them, and lived in their place.)

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> "Rise up, take your journey, and pass
over the valley of the Arnon: behold, I have given into your hand Sihon
the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land; begin to possess it, and
contend with him in battle.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> This day will I begin to put the dread of
you and the fear of you on the peoples who are under the whole sky, who
shall hear the report of you, and shall tremble, and be in anguish
because of you."

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> I sent messengers out of the wilderness
of Kedemoth to Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> "Let me pass through your land: I will go
along by the highway, I will turn neither to the right hand nor to the
left.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> You shall sell me food for money, that I
may eat; and give me water for money, that I may drink: only let me pass
through on my feet,

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> as the children of Esau who dwell in
Seir, and the Moabites who dwell in Ar, did to me; until I shall pass
over the Jordan into the land which Yahweh our God gives us."

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let
us pass by him; for Yahweh your God hardened his spirit, and made his
heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into your hand, as at this
day.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> Yahweh said to me, "Behold, I have begun
to deliver up Sihon and his land before you: begin to possess, that you
may inherit his land."

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> Then Sihon came out against us, he and
all his people, to battle at Jahaz.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> Yahweh our God delivered him up before
us; and we struck him, and his sons, and all his people.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> We took all his cities at that time, and
utterly destroyed every inhabited city, with the women and the little
ones; we left none remaining:

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> only the livestock we took for a prey to
ourselves, with the spoil of the cities which we had taken.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> From Aroer, which is on the edge of the
valley of the Arnon, and \[from\] the city that is in the valley, even
to Gilead, there was not a city too high for us; Yahweh our God
delivered up all before us:

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> only to the land of the children of Ammon
you didn't come near; all the side of the river Jabbok, and the cities
of the hill country, and wherever Yahweh our God forbade us.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then we turned, and went up the way to
Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his
people, to battle at Edrei.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Yahweh said to me, "Don't fear him; for I
have delivered him, and all his people, and his land, into your hand;
and you shall do to him as you did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who
lived at Heshbon."

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> So Yahweh our God delivered into our hand
Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his people: and we struck him until
none was left to him remaining.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> We took all his cities at that time; there
was not a city which we didn't take from them; sixty cities, all the
region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> All these were cities fortified with high
walls, gates, and bars; besides the unwalled towns a great many.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> We utterly destroyed them, as we did to
Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying every inhabited city, with the
women and the little ones.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But all the livestock, and the spoil of the
cities, we took for a prey to ourselves.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> We took the land at that time out of the
hand of the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, from
the valley of the Arnon to Mount Hermon;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> (\[which\] Hermon the Sidonians call
Sirion, and the Amorites call it Senir;)

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> all the cities of the plain, and all
Gilead, and all Bashan, to Salecah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of
Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> (For only Og king of Bashan remained of
the remnant of the Rephaim; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron;
isn't it in Rabbah of the children of Ammon? nine cubits was its length,
and four cubits its breadth, after the cubit of a man.)

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> This land we took in possession at that
time: from Aroer, which is by the valley of the Arnon, and half the hill
country of Gilead, and its cities, gave I to the Reubenites and to the
Gadites:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan,
the kingdom of Og, gave I to the half-tribe of Manasseh; all the region
of Argob, even all Bashan. (The same is called the land of Rephaim.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Jair the son of Manasseh took all the
region of Argob, to the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites,
and called them, even Bashan, after his own name, Havvoth Jair, to this
day.)

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> I gave Gilead to Machir.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> To the Reubenites and to the Gadites I
gave from Gilead even to the valley of the Arnon, the middle of the
valley, and the border \[of it\], even to the river Jabbok, which is the
border of the children of Ammon;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> the Arabah also, and the Jordan and the
border \[of it\], from Chinnereth even to the sea of the Arabah, the
Salt Sea, under the slopes of Pisgah eastward.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I commanded you at that time, saying,
"Yahweh your God has given you this land to possess it: you shall pass
over armed before your brothers the children of Israel, all the men of
valor.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But your wives, and your little ones, and
your livestock, (I know that you have much livestock), shall live in
your cities which I have given you,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> until Yahweh gives rest to your brothers,
as to you, and they also possess the land which Yahweh your God gives
them beyond the Jordan: then you shall return every man to his
possession, which I have given you."

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> I commanded Joshua at that time, saying,
"Your eyes have seen all that Yahweh your God has done to these two
kings: so shall Yahweh do to all the kingdoms where you go over.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> You shall not fear them; for Yahweh your
God, he it is who fights for you."

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> I begged Yahweh at that time, saying,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> "Lord Yahweh, you have begun to show your
servant your greatness, and your strong hand: for what god is there in
heaven or in earth, that can do according to your works, and according
to your mighty acts?

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Please let me go over and see the good
land that is beyond the Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon."

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> But Yahweh was angry with me for your
sakes, and didn't listen to me; and Yahweh said to me, "Let it suffice
you; speak no more to me of this matter.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Go up to the top of Pisgah, and lift up
your eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and see
with your eyes: for you shall not go over this Jordan.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> But commission Joshua, and encourage him,
and strengthen him; for he shall go over before this people, and he
shall cause them to inherit the land which you shall see."

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> So we stayed in the valley over against
Beth Peor.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now, Israel, listen to the statutes and to
the ordinances, which I teach you, to do them; that you may live, and go
in and possess the land which Yahweh, the God of your fathers, gives
you.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> You shall not add to the word which I
command you, neither shall you diminish from it, that you may keep the
commandments of Yahweh your God which I command you.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Your eyes have seen what Yahweh did because
of Baal Peor; for all the men who followed Baal Peor, Yahweh your God
has destroyed them from the midst of you.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But you who did cling to Yahweh your God
are all alive this day.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Behold, I have taught you statutes and
ordinances, even as Yahweh my God commanded me, that you should do so in
the midst of the land where you go in to possess it.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Keep therefore and do them; for this is
your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the peoples, who
shall hear all these statutes, and say, "Surely this great nation is a
wise and understanding people."

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For what great nation is there, that has a
god so near to them, as Yahweh our God is whenever we call on him?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> What great nation is there, that has
statutes and ordinances so righteous as all this law, which I set before
you this day?

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Only take heed to yourself, and keep your
soul diligently, lest you forget the things which your eyes saw, and
lest they depart from your heart all the days of your life; but make
them known to your children and your children's children;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> the day that you stood before Yahweh your
God in Horeb, when Yahweh said to me, "Assemble me the people, and I
will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the
days that they live on the earth, and that they may teach their
children."

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> You came near and stood under the
mountain; and the mountain burned with fire to the heart of the sky,
with darkness, cloud, and thick darkness.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Yahweh spoke to you out of the midst of
the fire: you heard the voice of words, but you saw no form; only \[you
heard\] a voice.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> He declared to you his covenant, which he
commanded you to perform, even the ten commandments; and he wrote them
on two tables of stone.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Yahweh commanded me at that time to teach
you statutes and ordinances, that you might do them in the land where
you go over to possess it.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Take therefore good heed to yourselves;
for you saw no kind of form on the day that Yahweh spoke to you in Horeb
out of the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Lest you corrupt yourselves, and make
yourself an engraved image in the form of any figure, the likeness of
male or female,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> the likeness of any animal that is on the
earth, the likeness of any winged bird that flies in the sky,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> the likeness of anything that creeps on
the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the water under the
earth;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and lest you lift up your eyes to the
sky, and when you see the sun and the moon and the stars, even all the
army of the sky, you are drawn away and worship them, and serve them,
which Yahweh your God has allotted to all the peoples under the whole
sky.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But Yahweh has taken you, and brought you
forth out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be to him a people of
inheritance, as at this day.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Furthermore Yahweh was angry with me for
your sakes, and swore that I should not go over the Jordan, and that I
should not go in to that good land, which Yahweh your God gives you for
an inheritance:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> but I must die in this land, I must not
go over the Jordan; but you shall go over, and possess that good land.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Take heed to yourselves, lest you forget
the covenant of Yahweh your God, which he made with you, and make you an
engraved image in the form of anything which Yahweh your God has
forbidden you.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For Yahweh your God is a devouring fire,
a jealous God.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> When you shall father children, and
children's children, and you shall have been long in the land, and shall
corrupt yourselves, and make an engraved image in the form of anything,
and shall do that which is evil in the sight of Yahweh your God, to
provoke him to anger;

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> I call heaven and earth to witness
against you this day, that you shall soon utterly perish from off the
land whereunto you go over the Jordan to possess it; you shall not
prolong your days on it, but shall utterly be destroyed.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Yahweh will scatter you among the
peoples, and you shall be left few in number among the nations, where
Yahweh shall lead you away.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> There you shall serve gods, the work of
men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor
smell.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But from there you shall seek Yahweh your
God, and you shall find him, when you search after him with all your
heart and with all your soul.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> When you are in oppression, and all these
things are come on you, in the latter days you shall return to Yahweh
your God, and listen to his voice:

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> for Yahweh your God is a merciful God; he
will not fail you, neither destroy you, nor forget the covenant of your
fathers which he swore to them.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> For ask now of the days that are past,
which were before you, since the day that God created man on the earth,
and from the one end of the sky to the other, whether there has been
\[any such thing\] as this great thing is, or has been heard like it?

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> Did ever a people hear the voice of God
speaking out of the midst of the fire, as you have heard, and live?

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Or has God tried to go and take him a
nation from the midst of \[another\] nation, by trials, by signs, and by
wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by an outstretched arm,
and by great terrors, according to all that Yahweh your God did for you
in Egypt before your eyes?

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> It was shown to you so that you might
know that Yahweh is God. There is no one else besides him.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> Out of heaven he made you to hear his
voice, that he might instruct you: and on earth he made you to see his
great fire; and you heard his words out of the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> Because he loved your fathers, therefore
he chose their seed after them, and brought you out with his presence,
with his great power, out of Egypt;

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> to drive out nations from before you
greater and mightier than you, to bring you in, to give you their land
for an inheritance, as at this day.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> Know therefore this day, and lay it to
your heart, that Yahweh he is God in heaven above and on the earth
beneath; there is none else.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> You shall keep his statutes, and his
commandments, which I command you this day, that it may go well with
you, and with your children after you, and that you may prolong your
days in the land, which Yahweh your God gives you, forever.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Then Moses set apart three cities beyond
the Jordan toward the sunrise;

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> that the manslayer might flee there, who
kills his neighbor unawares, and didn't hate him in time past; and that
fleeing to one of these cities he might live:

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> \[namely\], Bezer in the wilderness, in
the plain country, for the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, for the
Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, for the Manassites.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> This is the law which Moses set before
the children of Israel:

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> these are the testimonies, and the
statutes, and the ordinances, which Moses spoke to the children of
Israel, when they came forth out of Egypt,

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> beyond the Jordan, in the valley over
against Beth Peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived
at Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel struck, when they came
forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> They took his land in possession, and the
land of Og king of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, who were
beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise;

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> from Aroer, which is on the edge of the
valley of the Arnon, even to Mount Sion (the same is Hermon),

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> and all the Arabah beyond the Jordan
eastward, even to the sea of the Arabah, under the slopes of Pisgah.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Moses called to all Israel, and said to
them, Hear, Israel, the statutes and the ordinances which I speak in
your ears this day, that you may learn them, and observe to do them.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Yahweh our God made a covenant with us in
Horeb.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Yahweh didn't make this covenant with our
fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Yahweh spoke with you face to face on the
mountain out of the midst of the fire,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> (I stood between Yahweh and you at that
time, to show you the word of Yahweh: for you were afraid because of the
fire, and didn't go up onto the mountain;) saying,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> "I am Yahweh your God, who brought you out
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> "You shall have no other gods before me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> "You shall not make an engraved image for
yourself, \[nor\] any likeness \[of anything\] that is in heaven above,
or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the
earth:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> you shall not bow down yourself to them,
nor serve them; for I, Yahweh, your God, am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers on the children, and on the third and on the
fourth generation of those who hate me;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and showing loving kindness to thousands
of those who love me and keep my commandments.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> "You shall not take the name of Yahweh
your God in vain: for Yahweh will not hold him guiltless who takes his
name in vain.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> "Observe the Sabbath day, to keep it
holy, as Yahweh your God commanded you.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> You shall labor six days, and do all your
work;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> but the seventh day is a Sabbath to
Yahweh your God, in which you shall not do any work, you, nor your son,
nor your daughter, nor your male servant, nor your female servant, nor
your ox, nor your donkey, nor any of your livestock, nor your stranger
who is within your gates; that your male servant and your female servant
may rest as well as you.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> You shall remember that you were a
servant in the land of Egypt, and Yahweh your God brought you out of
there by a mighty hand and by an outstretched arm: therefore Yahweh your
God commanded you to keep the Sabbath day.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> "Honor your father and your mother, as
Yahweh your God commanded you; that your days may be long, and that it
may go well with you, in the land which Yahweh your God gives you.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> "You shall not murder.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> "Neither shall you commit adultery.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> "Neither shall you steal.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> "Neither shall you give false testimony
against your neighbor.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> "Neither shall you covet your neighbor's
wife; neither shall you desire your neighbor's house, his field, or his
male servant, or his female servant, his ox, or his donkey, or anything
that is your neighbor's."

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> These words Yahweh spoke to all your
assembly on the mountain out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and
of the thick darkness, with a great voice: and he added no more. He
wrote them on two tables of stone, and gave them to me.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> It happened, when you heard the voice out
of the midst of the darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire,
that you came near to me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your
elders;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> and you said, "Behold, Yahweh our God has
shown us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of
the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God does speak with
man, and he lives.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Now therefore why should we die? For this
great fire will consume us: if we hear the voice of Yahweh our God any
more, then we shall die.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For who is there of all flesh, that has
heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire,
as we have, and lived?

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Go near, and hear all that Yahweh our God
shall say: and tell us all that Yahweh our God shall tell you; and we
will hear it, and do it."

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Yahweh heard the voice of your words,
when you spoke to me; and Yahweh said to me, "I have heard the voice of
the words of this people, which they have spoken to you: they have well
said all that they have spoken.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Oh that there were such a heart in them,
that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it
might be well with them, and with their children forever!

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> "Go tell them, Return to your tents.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> But as for you, stand here by me, and I
will tell you all the commandment, and the statutes, and the ordinances,
which you shall teach them, that they may do them in the land which I
give them to possess it."

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> You shall observe to do therefore as
Yahweh your God has commanded you: you shall not turn aside to the right
hand or to the left.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> You shall walk in all the way which
Yahweh your God has commanded you, that you may live, and that it may be
well with you, and that you may prolong your days in the land which you
shall possess.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now this is the commandment, the statutes,
and the ordinances, which Yahweh your God commanded to teach you, that
you might do them in the land where you go over to possess it;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> that you might fear Yahweh your God, to
keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command you, you,
and your son, and your son's son, all the days of your life; and that
your days may be prolonged.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Hear therefore, Israel, and observe to do
it; that it may be well with you, and that you may increase mightily, as
Yahweh, the God of your fathers, has promised to you, in a land flowing
with milk and honey.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Hear, Israel: Yahweh is our God; Yahweh is
one:

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and you shall love Yahweh your God with all
your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> These words, which I command you this day,
shall be on your heart;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and you shall teach them diligently to your
children, and shall talk of them when you sit in your house, and when
you walk by the way, and when you lie down, and when you rise up.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> You shall bind them for a sign on your
hand, and they shall be for symbols between your eyes.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> You shall write them on the door posts of
your house, and on your gates.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> It shall be, when Yahweh your God shall
bring you into the land which he swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob, to give you, great and goodly cities, which you
didn't build,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and houses full of all good things, which
you didn't fill, and cisterns dug out, which you didn't dig, vineyards
and olive trees, which you didn't plant, and you shall eat and be full;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> then beware lest you forget Yahweh, who
brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> You shall fear Yahweh your God; and you
shall serve him, and shall swear by his name.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> You shall not go after other gods, of the
gods of the peoples who are around you;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> for Yahweh your God in the midst of you
is a jealous God; lest the anger of Yahweh your God be kindled against
you, and he destroy you from off the face of the earth.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> You shall not tempt Yahweh your God, as
you tempted him in Massah.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> You shall diligently keep the
commandments of Yahweh your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes,
which he has commanded you.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> You shall do that which is right and good
in the sight of Yahweh; that it may be well with you, and that you may
go in and possess the good land which Yahweh swore to your fathers,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> to thrust out all your enemies from
before you, as Yahweh has spoken.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> When your son asks you in time to come,
saying, "What do the testimonies, the statutes, and the ordinances,
which Yahweh our God has commanded you mean?"

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> then you shall tell your son, "We were
Pharaoh's bondservants in Egypt: and Yahweh brought us out of Egypt with
a mighty hand;

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> and Yahweh showed great and awesome signs
and wonders on Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on all his house, before our eyes;

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> and he brought us out from there, that he
might bring us in, to give us the land which he swore to our fathers.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Yahweh commanded us to do all these
statutes, to fear Yahweh our God, for our good always, that he might
preserve us alive, as at this day.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> It shall be righteousness to us, if we
observe to do all this commandment before Yahweh our God, as he has
commanded us."

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When Yahweh your God shall bring you into
the land where you go to possess it, and shall cast out many nations
before you, the Hittite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and the
Canaanite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, seven
nations greater and mightier than you;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and when Yahweh your God shall deliver them
up before you, and you shall strike them; then you shall utterly destroy
them: you shall make no covenant with them, nor show mercy to them;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> neither shall you make marriages with them;
your daughter you shall not give to his son, nor shall you take his
daughter for your son.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For he will turn away your son from
following me, that they may serve other gods: so the anger of Yahweh
would be kindled against you, and he would destroy you quickly.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> But you shall deal with them like this: you
shall break down their altars, and dash their pillars in pieces, and cut
down their Asherim, and burn their engraved images with fire.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For you are a holy people to Yahweh your
God: Yahweh your God has chosen you to be a people for his own
possession, above all peoples who are on the face of the earth.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Yahweh didn't set his love on you, nor
choose you, because you were more in number than any people; for you
were the fewest of all peoples:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> but because Yahweh loves you, and because
he would keep the oath which he swore to your fathers, has Yahweh
brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of
bondage, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Know therefore that Yahweh your God, he is
God, the faithful God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness with them
who love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and repays those who hate him to their
face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him who hates him, he
will repay him to his face.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> You shall therefore keep the commandment,
and the statutes, and the ordinances, which I command you this day, to
do them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> It shall happen, because you listen to
these ordinances, and keep and do them, that Yahweh your God will keep
with you the covenant and the loving kindness which he swore to your
fathers:

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> and he will love you, and bless you, and
multiply you; he will also bless the fruit of your body and the fruit of
your ground, your grain and your new wine and your oil, the increase of
your livestock and the young of your flock, in the land which he swore
to your fathers to give you.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> You shall be blessed above all peoples:
there shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your
livestock.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Yahweh will take away from you all
sickness; and none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which you know, he
will put on you, but will lay them on all those who hate you.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> You shall consume all the peoples whom
Yahweh your God shall deliver to you; your eye shall not pity them:
neither shall you serve their gods; for that will be a snare to you.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> If you shall say in your heart, "These
nations are more than I; how can I dispossess them?"

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> you shall not be afraid of them: you
shall well remember what Yahweh your God did to Pharaoh, and to all
Egypt;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> the great trials which your eyes saw, and
the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the outstretched
arm, by which Yahweh your God brought you out: so shall Yahweh your God
do to all the peoples of whom you are afraid.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Moreover Yahweh your God will send the
hornet among them, until those who are left, and hide themselves, perish
from before you.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> You shall not be scared of them; for
Yahweh your God is in the midst of you, a great and awesome God.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Yahweh your God will cast out those
nations before you by little and little: you may not consume them at
once, lest the animals of the field increase on you.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But Yahweh your God will deliver them up
before you, and will confuse them with a great confusion, until they be
destroyed.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> He will deliver their kings into your
hand, and you shall make their name to perish from under the sky: no man
shall be able to stand before you, until you have destroyed them.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> You shall burn the engraved images of
their gods with fire. You shall not covet the silver or the gold that is
on them, nor take it for yourself, lest you be snared in it; for it is
an abomination to Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> You shall not bring an abomination into
your house, and become a devoted thing like it. You shall utterly detest
it, and you shall utterly abhor it; for it is a devoted thing.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> You shall observe to do all the commandment
which I command you this day, that you may live, and multiply, and go in
and possess the land which Yahweh swore to your fathers.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> You shall remember all the way which Yahweh
your God has led you these forty years in the wilderness, that he might
humble you, to prove you, to know what was in your heart, whether you
would keep his commandments, or not.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> He humbled you, and allowed you to hunger,
and fed you with manna, which you didn't know, neither did your fathers
know; that he might make you know that man does not live by bread only,
but by everything that proceeds out of the mouth of Yahweh does man
live.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Your clothing didn't grow old on you,
neither did your foot swell, these forty years.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> You shall consider in your heart that as a
man chastens his son, so Yahweh your God chastens you.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> You shall keep the commandments of Yahweh
your God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For Yahweh your God brings you into a good
land, a land of brooks of water, of springs, and underground water
flowing into valleys and hills;

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> a land of wheat and barley, and vines and
fig trees and pomegranates; a land of olive trees and honey;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> a land in which you shall eat bread without
scarceness, you shall not lack anything in it; a land whose stones are
iron, and out of whose hills you may dig copper.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> You shall eat and be full, and you shall
bless Yahweh your God for the good land which he has given you.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Beware lest you forget Yahweh your God,
in not keeping his commandments, and his ordinances, and his statutes,
which I command you this day:

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> lest, when you have eaten and are full,
and have built goodly houses, and lived therein;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> and when your herds and your flocks
multiply, and your silver and your gold is multiplied, and all that you
have is multiplied;

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> then your heart be lifted up, and you
forget Yahweh your God, who brought you forth out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of bondage;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> who led you through the great and
terrible wilderness, \[in which were\] fiery serpents and scorpions, and
thirsty ground where there was no water; who brought you forth water out
of the rock of flint;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> who fed you in the wilderness with manna,
which your fathers didn't know; that he might humble you, and that he
might prove you, to do you good at your latter end:

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> and \[lest\] you say in your heart, "My
power and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth."

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But you shall remember Yahweh your God,
for it is he who gives you power to get wealth; that he may establish
his covenant which he swore to your fathers, as at this day.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> It shall be, if you shall forget Yahweh
your God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I
testify against you this day that you shall surely perish.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> As the nations that Yahweh makes to
perish before you, so you shall perish; because you wouldn't listen to
the voice of Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Hear, Israel: you are to pass over the
Jordan this day, to go in to dispossess nations greater and mightier
than yourself, cities great and fortified up to the sky,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> a people great and tall, the sons of the
Anakim, whom you know, and of whom you have heard say, "Who can stand
before the sons of Anak?"

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Know therefore this day, that Yahweh your
God is he who goes over before you as a devouring fire; he will destroy
them, and he will bring them down before you: so you shall drive them
out, and make them to perish quickly, as Yahweh has spoken to you.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Don't say in your heart, after Yahweh your
God has thrust them out from before you, saying, "For my righteousness
Yahweh has brought me in to possess this land;" because Yahweh drives
them out before you because of the wickedness of these nations.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Not for your righteousness, or for the
uprightness of your heart, do you go in to possess their land; but for
the wickedness of these nations Yahweh your God does drive them out from
before you, and that he may establish the word which Yahweh swore to
your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Know therefore, that Yahweh your God
doesn't give you this good land to possess it for your righteousness;
for you are a stiff-necked people.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Remember, don't forget, how you provoked
Yahweh your God to wrath in the wilderness: from the day that you went
forth out of the land of Egypt, until you came to this place, you have
been rebellious against Yahweh.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Also in Horeb you provoked Yahweh to wrath,
and Yahweh was angry with you to destroy you.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> When I was gone up onto the mountain to
receive the tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant which
Yahweh made with you, then I stayed on the mountain forty days and forty
nights; I did neither eat bread nor drink water.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Yahweh delivered to me the two tables of
stone written with the finger of God; and on them \[was written\]
according to all the words, which Yahweh spoke with you on the mountain
out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> It came to pass at the end of forty days
and forty nights, that Yahweh gave me the two tables of stone, even the
tables of the covenant.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Yahweh said to me, "Arise, get down
quickly from here; for your people whom you have brought forth out of
Egypt have corrupted themselves; they have quickly turned aside out of
the way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image."

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Furthermore Yahweh spoke to me, saying,
"I have seen this people, and behold, it is a stiff-necked people:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> let me alone, that I may destroy them,
and blot out their name from under the sky; and I will make of you a
nation mightier and greater than they."

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> So I turned and came down from the
mountain, and the mountain was burning with fire: and the two tables of
the covenant were in my two hands.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> I looked, and behold, you had sinned
against Yahweh your God; you had made yourselves a molten calf: you had
turned aside quickly out of the way which Yahweh had commanded you.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> I took hold of the two tables, and cast
them out of my two hands, and broke them before your eyes.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> I fell down before Yahweh, as at the
first, forty days and forty nights; I did neither eat bread nor drink
water; because of all your sin which you sinned, in doing that which was
evil in the sight of Yahweh, to provoke him to anger.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For I was afraid of the anger and hot
displeasure, with which Yahweh was angry against you to destroy you. But
Yahweh listened to me that time also.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Yahweh was very angry with Aaron to
destroy him: and I prayed for Aaron also at the same time.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> I took your sin, the calf which you had
made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, grinding it very small,
until it was as fine as dust: and I cast its dust into the brook that
descended out of the mountain.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> At Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibroth
Hattaavah, you provoked Yahweh to wrath.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> When Yahweh sent you from Kadesh Barnea,
saying, "Go up and possess the land which I have given you;" then you
rebelled against the commandment of Yahweh your God, and you didn't
believe him, nor listen to his voice.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> You have been rebellious against Yahweh
from the day that I knew you.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> So I fell down before Yahweh the forty
days and forty nights that I fell down, because Yahweh had said he would
destroy you.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> I prayed to Yahweh, and said, "Lord
Yahweh, don't destroy your people and your inheritance, that you have
redeemed through your greatness, that you have brought forth out of
Egypt with a mighty hand.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Remember your servants, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob; don't look to the stubbornness of this people, nor to their
wickedness, nor to their sin,

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> lest the land you brought us out from
say, 'Because Yahweh was not able to bring them into the land which he
promised to them, and because he hated them, he has brought them out to
kill them in the wilderness.'

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Yet they are your people and your
inheritance, which you brought out by your great power and by your
outstretched arm."

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> At that time Yahweh said to me, "Cut two
tables of stone like the first, and come up to me onto the mountain, and
make an ark of wood.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> I will write on the tables the words that
were on the first tables which you broke, and you shall put them in the
ark."

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> So I made an ark of acacia wood, and cut
two tables of stone like the first, and went up onto the mountain,
having the two tables in my hand.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> He wrote on the tables, according to the
first writing, the ten commandments, which Yahweh spoke to you on the
mountain out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and
Yahweh gave them to me.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> I turned and came down from the mountain,
and put the tables in the ark which I had made; and there they are as
Yahweh commanded me.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> (The children of Israel traveled from
Beeroth Bene Jaakan to Moserah. There Aaron died, and there he was
buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his
place.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> From there they traveled to Gudgodah; and
from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of brooks of water.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> At that time Yahweh set apart the tribe
of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of Yahweh, to stand before
Yahweh to minister to him, and to bless in his name, to this day.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Therefore Levi has no portion nor
inheritance with his brothers; Yahweh is his inheritance, according as
Yahweh your God spoke to him.)

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> I stayed on the mountain, as at the
first time, forty days and forty nights: and Yahweh listened to me that
time also; Yahweh would not destroy you.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Yahweh said to me, "Arise, take your
journey before the people; and they shall go in and possess the land,
which I swore to their fathers to give to them."

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Now, Israel, what does Yahweh your God
require of you, but to fear Yahweh your God, to walk in all his ways,
and to love him, and to serve Yahweh your God with all your heart and
with all your soul,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> to keep the commandments of Yahweh, and
his statutes, which I command you this day for your good?

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Behold, to Yahweh your God belongs
heaven and the heaven of heavens, the earth, with all that is therein.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Only Yahweh had a delight in your
fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even you above
all peoples, as at this day.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Circumcise therefore the foreskin of
your heart, and be no more stiff-necked.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For Yahweh your God, he is God of gods,
and Lord of lords, the great God, the mighty, and the awesome, who
doesn't respect persons, nor takes reward.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> He does execute justice for the
fatherless and widow, and loves the foreigner, in giving him food and
clothing.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Therefore love the foreigner; for you
were foreigners in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> You shall fear Yahweh your God; you
shall serve him; and you shall cling to him, and you shall swear by his
name.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> He is your praise, and he is your God,
who has done for you these great and awesome things, which your eyes
have seen.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Your fathers went down into Egypt with
seventy persons; and now Yahweh your God has made you as the stars of
the sky for multitude.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Therefore you shall love Yahweh your God,
and keep his instructions, and his statutes, and his ordinances, and his
commandments, always.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Know this day: for I don't speak with
your children who have not known, and who have not seen the chastisement
of Yahweh your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his outstretched
arm,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and his signs, and his works, which he
did in the midst of Egypt to Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and to all his
land;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> and what he did to the army of Egypt, to
their horses, and to their chariots; how he made the water of the Red
Sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and how Yahweh has
destroyed them to this day;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and what he did to you in the wilderness,
until you came to this place;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and what he did to Dathan and Abiram, the
sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben; how the earth opened its mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and every
living thing that followed them, in the midst of all Israel:

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> but your eyes have seen all the great
work of Yahweh which he did.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Therefore you shall keep all the
commandment which I command you this day, that you may be strong, and go
in and possess the land, where you go over to possess it;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> and that you may prolong your days in the
land, which Yahweh swore to your fathers to give to them and to their
seed, a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For the land, where you go in to
possess it, isn't as the land of Egypt, that you came out from, where
you sowed your seed, and watered it with your foot, as a garden of
herbs;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> but the land, where you go over to
possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, \[and\] drinks water of the
rain of the sky,

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> a land which Yahweh your God cares for:
the eyes of Yahweh your God are always on it, from the beginning of the
year even to the end of the year.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> It shall happen, if you shall listen
diligently to my commandments which I command you this day, to love
Yahweh your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your
soul,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> that I will give the rain of your land
in its season, the former rain and the latter rain, that you may gather
in your grain, and your new wine, and your oil.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> I will give grass in your fields for
your livestock, and you shall eat and be full.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Take heed to yourselves, lest your
heart be deceived, and you turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship
them;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and the anger of Yahweh be kindled
against you, and he shut up the sky, so that there shall be no rain, and
the land shall not yield its fruit; and you perish quickly from off the
good land which Yahweh gives you.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Therefore you shall lay up these my
words in your heart and in your soul; and you shall bind them for a sign
on your hand, and they shall be for symbols between your eyes.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> You shall teach them your children,
talking of them, when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the
way, and when you lie down, and when you rise up.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> You shall write them on the door posts
of your house, and on your gates;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> that your days may be multiplied, and
the days of your children, in the land which Yahweh swore to your
fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> For if you shall diligently keep all
this commandment which I command you, to do it, to love Yahweh your God,
to walk in all his ways, and to cling to him;

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> then will Yahweh drive out all these
nations from before you, and you shall dispossess nations greater and
mightier than yourselves.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Every place whereon the sole of your
foot shall tread shall be yours: from the wilderness, and Lebanon, from
the river, the river Euphrates, even to the hinder sea shall be your
border.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> No man shall be able to stand before
you: Yahweh your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you on
all the land that you shall tread on, as he has spoken to you.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Behold, I set before you this day a
blessing and a curse:

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> the blessing, if you shall listen to
the commandments of Yahweh your God, which I command you this day;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and the curse, if you shall not listen
to the commandments of Yahweh your God, but turn aside out of the way
which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which you have not
known.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> It shall happen, when Yahweh your God
shall bring you into the land where you go to possess it, that you shall
set the blessing on Mount Gerizim, and the curse on Mount Ebal.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Aren't they beyond the Jordan, behind
the way of the going down of the sun, in the land of the Canaanites who
dwell in the Arabah, over against Gilgal, beside the oaks of Moreh?

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> For you are to pass over the Jordan to
go in to possess the land which Yahweh your God gives you, and you shall
possess it, and dwell therein.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> You shall observe to do all the
statutes and the ordinances which I set before you this day.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> These are the statutes and the ordinances
which you shall observe to do in the land which Yahweh, the God of your
fathers, has given you to possess it, all the days that you live on the
earth.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> You shall surely destroy all the places
in which the nations that you shall dispossess served their gods, on the
high mountains, and on the hills, and under every green tree:

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and you shall break down their altars,
and dash in pieces their pillars, and burn their Asherim with fire; and
you shall cut down the engraved images of their gods; and you shall
destroy their name out of that place.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> You shall not do so to Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> But to the place which Yahweh your God
shall choose out of all your tribes, to put his name there, even to his
habitation you shall seek, and there you shall come;

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and there you shall bring your burnt
offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and the wave offering
of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and the
firstborn of your herd and of your flock:

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and there you shall eat before Yahweh
your God, and you shall rejoice in all that you put your hand to, you
and your households, in which Yahweh your God has blessed you.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> You shall not do after all the things
that we do here this day, every man whatever is right in his own eyes;

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> for you haven't yet come to the rest and
to the inheritance, which Yahweh your God gives you.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> But when you go over the Jordan, and
dwell in the land which Yahweh your God causes you to inherit, and he
gives you rest from all your enemies around you, so that you dwell in
safety;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> then it shall happen that to the place
which Yahweh your God shall choose, to cause his name to dwell there,
there you shall bring all that I command you: your burnt offerings, and
your sacrifices, your tithes, and the wave offering of your hand, and
all your choice vows which you vow to Yahweh.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> You shall rejoice before Yahweh your
God, you, and your sons, and your daughters, and your male servants, and
your female servants, and the Levite who is within your gates, because
he has no portion nor inheritance with you.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Take heed to yourself that you don't
offer your burnt offerings in every place that you see;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> but in the place which Yahweh shall
choose in one of your tribes, there you shall offer your burnt
offerings, and there you shall do all that I command you.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Notwithstanding, you may kill and eat
flesh within all your gates, after all the desire of your soul,
according to the blessing of Yahweh your God which he has given you: the
unclean and the clean may eat of it, as of the gazelle, and as of the
hart.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Only you shall not eat the blood; you
shall pour it out on the earth as water.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> You may not eat within your gates the
tithe of your grain, or of your new wine, or of your oil, or the
firstborn of your herd or of your flock, nor any of your vows which you
vow, nor your freewill offerings, nor the wave offering of your hand;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> but you shall eat them before Yahweh
your God in the place which Yahweh your God shall choose, you, and your
son, and your daughter, and your male servant, and your female servant,
and the Levite who is within your gates: and you shall rejoice before
Yahweh your God in all that you put your hand to.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Take heed to yourself that you don't
forsake the Levite as long as you live in your land.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> When Yahweh your God shall enlarge your
border, as he has promised you, and you shall say, "I want to eat meat,"
because your soul desires to eat meat; you may eat meat, after all the
desire of your soul.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> If the place which Yahweh your God
shall choose, to put his name there, is too far from you, then you shall
kill of your herd and of your flock, which Yahweh has given you, as I
have commanded you; and you may eat within your gates, after all the
desire of your soul.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Even as the gazelle and as the hart is
eaten, so you shall eat of it: the unclean and the clean may eat of it
alike.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Only be sure that you don't eat the
blood: for the blood is the life; and you shall not eat the life with
the flesh.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> You shall not eat it; you shall pour it
out on the earth as water.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> You shall not eat it; that it may go
well with you, and with your children after you, when you shall do that
which is right in the eyes of Yahweh.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Only your holy things which you have,
and your vows, you shall take, and go to the place which Yahweh shall
choose:

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> and you shall offer your burnt
offerings, the flesh and the blood, on the altar of Yahweh your God; and
the blood of your sacrifices shall be poured out on the altar of Yahweh
your God; and you shall eat the flesh.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Observe and hear all these words which
I command you, that it may go well with you, and with your children
after you forever, when you do that which is good and right in the eyes
of Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> When Yahweh your God shall cut off the
nations from before you, where you go in to dispossess them, and you
dispossess them, and dwell in their land;

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> take heed to yourself that you not be
ensnared to follow them, after that they are destroyed from before you;
and that you not inquire after their gods, saying, "How do these nations
serve their gods? I will do likewise."

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> You shall not do so to Yahweh your God:
for every abomination to Yahweh, which he hates, have they done to their
gods; for even their sons and their daughters do they burn in the fire
to their gods.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> Whatever thing I command you, that you
shall observe to do: you shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> If there arise in the midst of you a
prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and he give you a sign or a wonder,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and the sign or the wonder come to pass,
of which he spoke to you, saying, "Let us go after other gods" (which
you have not known) "and let us serve them;"

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> you shall not listen to the words of that
prophet, or to that dreamer of dreams: for Yahweh your God proves you,
to know whether you love Yahweh your God with all your heart and with
all your soul.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> You shall walk after Yahweh your God, and
fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and you shall
serve him, and cling to him.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> That prophet, or that dreamer of dreams,
shall be put to death, because he has spoken rebellion against Yahweh
your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out
of the house of bondage, to draw you aside out of the way which Yahweh
your God commanded you to walk in. So you shall put away the evil from
the midst of you.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> If your brother, the son of your mother,
or your son, or your daughter, or the wife of your bosom, or your
friend, who is as your own soul, entice you secretly, saying, "Let us go
and serve other gods," which you have not known, you, nor your fathers;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> of the gods of the peoples who are around
you, near to you, or far off from you, from the one end of the earth
even to the other end of the earth;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> you shall not consent to him, nor listen
to him; neither shall your eye pity him, neither shall you spare,
neither shall you conceal him:

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> but you shall surely kill him; your hand
shall be first on him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of
all the people.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> You shall stone him to death with
stones, because he has sought to draw you away from Yahweh your God, who
brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> All Israel shall hear, and fear, and
shall not do any more such wickedness as this is in the midst of you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> If you shall hear tell concerning one
of your cities, which Yahweh your God gives you to dwell there, saying,

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Certain base fellows are gone out from
the midst of you, and have drawn away the inhabitants of their city,
saying, "Let us go and serve other gods," which you have not known;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> then you shall inquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing
certain, that such abomination is done in the midst of you,

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> you shall surely strike the inhabitants
of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all
that is therein and its livestock, with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> You shall gather all its spoil into the
midst of its street, and shall burn with fire the city, and all its
spoil every whit, to Yahweh your God: and it shall be a heap forever; it
shall not be built again.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Nothing of the devoted thing shall
cling to your hand; that Yahweh may turn from the fierceness of his
anger, and show you mercy, and have compassion on you, and multiply you,
as he has sworn to your fathers;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> when you shall listen to the voice of
Yahweh your God, to keep all his commandments which I command you this
day, to do that which is right in the eyes of Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> You are the children of Yahweh your God:
you shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes
for the dead.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For you are a holy people to Yahweh your
God, and Yahweh has chosen you to be a people for his own possession,
above all peoples who are on the face of the earth.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> You shall not eat any abominable thing.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> These are the animals which you may eat:
the ox, the sheep, and the goat,

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> the hart, and the gazelle, and the
roebuck, and the wild goat, and the ibex, and the antelope, and the
chamois.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Every animal that parts the hoof, and has
the hoof cloven in two, \[and\] chews the cud, among the animals, that
may you eat.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Nevertheless these you shall not eat of
them that chew the cud, or of those who have the hoof cloven: the camel,
and the hare, and the rabbit; because they chew the cud but don't part
the hoof, they are unclean to you.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The pig, because it has a split hoof but
doesn't chew the cud, is unclean to you: of their flesh you shall not
eat, and their carcasses you shall not touch.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> These you may eat of all that are in the
waters: whatever has fins and scales may you eat;

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> and whatever doesn't have fins and
scales you shall not eat; it is unclean to you.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Of all clean birds you may eat.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> But these are they of which you shall
not eat: the eagle, and the vulture, and the osprey,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> and the red kite, and the falcon, and
the kite after its kind,

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and every raven after its kind,

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and the ostrich, and the owl, and the
seagull, and the hawk after its kind,

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> the little owl, and the great owl, and
the horned owl,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> and the pelican, and the vulture, and
the cormorant,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> and the stork, and the heron after its
kind, and the hoopoe, and the bat.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> All winged creeping things are unclean
to you: they shall not be eaten.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Of all clean birds you may eat.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> You shall not eat of anything that dies
of itself: you may give it to the foreigner living among you who is
within your gates, that he may eat it; or you may sell it to a
foreigner: for you are a holy people to Yahweh your God. You shall not
boil a young goat in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> You shall surely tithe all the increase
of your seed, that which comes forth from the field year by year.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> You shall eat before Yahweh your God,
in the place which he shall choose, to cause his name to dwell there,
the tithe of your grain, of your new wine, and of your oil, and the
firstborn of your herd and of your flock; that you may learn to fear
Yahweh your God always.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> If the way is too long for you, so that
you are not able to carry it, because the place is too far from you,
which Yahweh your God shall choose, to set his name there, when Yahweh
your God shall bless you;

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> then you shall turn it into money, and
bind up the money in your hand, and shall go to the place which Yahweh
your God shall choose:

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and you shall bestow the money for
whatever your soul desires, for cattle, or for sheep, or for wine, or
for strong drink, or for whatever your soul asks of you; and you shall
eat there before Yahweh your God, and you shall rejoice, you and your
household.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> The Levite who is within your gates,
you shall not forsake him; for he has no portion nor inheritance with
you.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> At the end of every three years you
shall bring forth all the tithe of your increase in the same year, and
shall lay it up within your gates:

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> and the Levite, because he has no
portion nor inheritance with you, and the foreigner living among you,
and the fatherless, and the widow, who are within your gates, shall
come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that Yahweh your God may bless you
in all the work of your hand which you do.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> At the end of every seven years you shall
make a release.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> This is the way of the release: every
creditor shall release that which he has lent to his neighbor; he shall
not exact it of his neighbor and his brother; because Yahweh's release
has been proclaimed.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Of a foreigner you may exact it: but
whatever of your is with your brother your hand shall release.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> However there shall be no poor with you;
(for Yahweh will surely bless you in the land which Yahweh your God
gives you for an inheritance to possess it;)

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> if only you diligently listen to the
voice of Yahweh your God, to observe to do all this commandment which I
command you this day.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> For Yahweh your God will bless you, as he
promised you: and you shall lend to many nations, but you shall not
borrow; and you shall rule over many nations, but they shall not rule
over you.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> If a poor man, one of your brothers, is
with you within any of your gates in your land which Yahweh your God
gives you, you shall not harden your heart, nor shut your hand from your
poor brother;

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> but you shall surely open your hand to
him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need \[in that\] which
he wants.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Beware that there not be a base thought
in your heart, saying, "The seventh year, the year of release, is at
hand;" and your eye be evil against your poor brother, and you give him
nothing; and he cry to Yahweh against you, and it be sin to you.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> You shall surely give him, and your
heart shall not be grieved when you give to him; because that for this
thing Yahweh your God will bless you in all your work, and in all that
you put your hand to.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> For the poor will never cease out of
the land: therefore I command you, saying, You shall surely open your
hand to your brother, to your needy, and to your poor, in your land.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> If your brother, a Hebrew man, or a
Hebrew woman, is sold to you, and serves you six years; then in the
seventh year you shall let him go free from you.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> When you let him go free from you, you
shall not let him go empty:

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> you shall furnish him liberally out of
your flock, and out of your threshing floor, and out of your winepress;
as Yahweh your God has blessed you, you shall give to him.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> You shall remember that you were a
bondservant in the land of Egypt, and Yahweh your God redeemed you:
therefore I command you this thing today.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> It shall be, if he tells you, "I will
not go out from you;" because he loves you and your house, because he is
well with you;

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> then you shall take an awl, and thrust
it through his ear to the door, and he shall be your servant forever.
Also to your female servant you shall do likewise.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> It shall not seem hard to you, when you
let him go free from you; for to the double of the hire of a hireling
has he served you six years: and Yahweh your God will bless you in all
that you do.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> All the firstborn males that are born
of your herd and of your flock you shall sanctify to Yahweh your God:
you shall do no work with the firstborn of your herd, nor shear the
firstborn of your flock.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> You shall eat it before Yahweh your God
year by year in the place which Yahweh shall choose, you and your
household.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> If it have any blemish, \[as if it be\]
lame or blind, any ill blemish whatever, you shall not sacrifice it to
Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> You shall eat it within your gates: the
unclean and the clean \[shall eat it\] alike, as the gazelle, and as the
hart.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Only you shall not eat its blood; you
shall pour it out on the ground as water.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Observe the month of Abib, and keep the
Passover to Yahweh your God; for in the month of Abib Yahweh your God
brought you forth out of Egypt by night.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> You shall sacrifice the Passover to
Yahweh your God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which Yahweh
shall choose, to cause his name to dwell there.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> You shall eat no leavened bread with it.
You shall eat unleavened bread with it seven days, even the bread of
affliction; for you came forth out of the land of Egypt in haste: that
you may remember the day when you came forth out of the land of Egypt
all the days of your life.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> No yeast shall be seen with you in all
your borders seven days; neither shall any of the flesh, which you
sacrifice the first day at evening, remain all night until the morning.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> You may not sacrifice the Passover within
any of your gates, which Yahweh your God gives you;

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> but at the place which Yahweh your God
shall choose, to cause his name to dwell in, there you shall sacrifice
the Passover at evening, at the going down of the sun, at the season
that you came forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> You shall roast and eat it in the place
which Yahweh your God shall choose: and you shall turn in the morning,
and go to your tents.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Six days you shall eat unleavened bread;
and on the seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to Yahweh your God;
you shall do no work \[therein\].

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> You shall count for yourselves seven
weeks: from the time you begin to put the sickle to the standing grain
you shall begin to number seven weeks.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> You shall keep the feast of weeks to
Yahweh your God with a tribute of a freewill offering of your hand,
which you shall give, according as Yahweh your God blesses you:

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> and you shall rejoice before Yahweh
your God, you, and your son, and your daughter, and your male servant,
and your female servant, and the Levite who is within your gates, and
the foreigner, and the fatherless, and the widow, who are in the midst
of you, in the place which Yahweh your God shall choose, to cause his
name to dwell there.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> You shall remember that you were a
bondservant in Egypt: and you shall observe and do these statutes.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> You shall keep the feast of tents seven
days, after that you have gathered in from your threshing floor and from
your winepress:

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> and you shall rejoice in your feast,
you, and your son, and your daughter, and your male servant, and your
female servant, and the Levite, and the foreigner, and the fatherless,
and the widow, who are within your gates.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> You shall keep a feast to Yahweh your
God seven days in the place which Yahweh shall choose; because Yahweh
your God will bless you in all your increase, and in all the work of
your hands, and you shall be altogether joyful.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Three times in a year shall all your
males appear before Yahweh your God in the place which he shall choose:
in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the
feast of tents; and they shall not appear before Yahweh empty:

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> every man shall give as he is able,
according to the blessing of Yahweh your God which he has given you.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> You shall make judges and officers in
all your gates, which Yahweh your God gives you, according to your
tribes; and they shall judge the people with righteous judgment.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> You shall not wrest justice: you shall
not respect persons; neither shall you take a bribe; for a bribe does
blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> You shall follow that which is
altogether just, that you may live, and inherit the land which Yahweh
your God gives you.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> You shall not plant for yourselves an
Asherah of any kind of tree beside the altar of Yahweh your God, which
you shall make for yourselves.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Neither shall you set yourself up a
pillar; which Yahweh your God hates.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> You shall not sacrifice to Yahweh your
God an ox, or a sheep, in which is a blemish, \[or\] anything evil; for
that is an abomination to Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> If there be found in the midst of you,
within any of your gates which Yahweh your God gives you, man or woman,
who does that which is evil in the sight of Yahweh your God, in
transgressing his covenant,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and has gone and served other gods, and
worshiped them, or the sun, or the moon, or any of the army of the sky,
which I have not commanded;

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> and it be told you, and you have heard of
it, then you shall inquire diligently; and behold, if it be true, and
the thing certain, that such abomination is done in Israel,

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> then you shall bring forth that man or
that woman, who has done this evil thing, to your gates, even the man or
the woman; and you shall stone them to death with stones.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> At the mouth of two witnesses, or three
witnesses, shall he who is to die be put to death; at the mouth of one
witness he shall not be put to death.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> The hand of the witnesses shall be first
on him to put him to death, and afterward the hand of all the people. So
you shall put away the evil from the midst of you.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> If there arises a matter too hard for you
in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between
stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within your gates; then
you shall arise, and go up to the place which Yahweh your God shall
choose;

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> and you shall come to the priests the
Levites, and to the judge who shall be in those days: and you shall
inquire; and they shall show you the sentence of judgment.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> You shall do according to the tenor of
the sentence which they shall show you from that place which Yahweh
shall choose; and you shall observe to do according to all that they
shall teach you:

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> according to the tenor of the law which
they shall teach you, and according to the judgment which they shall
tell you, you shall do; you shall not turn aside from the sentence which
they shall show you, to the right hand, nor to the left.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> The man who does presumptuously, in not
listening to the priest who stands to minister there before Yahweh your
God, or to the judge, even that man shall die: and you shall put away
the evil from Israel.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> All the people shall hear, and fear,
and do no more presumptuously.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> When you are come to the land which
Yahweh your God gives you, and shall possess it, and shall dwell
therein, and shall say, "I will set a king over me, like all the nations
that are around me;"

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> you shall surely set him king over
yourselves, whom Yahweh your God shall choose: one from among your
brothers you shall set king over you; you may not put a foreigner over
you, who is not your brother.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Only he shall not multiply horses to
himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he may
multiply horses; because Yahweh has said to you, "You shall not go back
that way again."

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Neither shall he multiply wives to
himself, that his heart not turn away: neither shall he greatly multiply
to himself silver and gold.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> It shall be, when he sits on the throne
of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book,
out of \[that which is\] before the priests the Levites:

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> and it shall be with him, and he shall
read therein all the days of his life; that he may learn to fear Yahweh
his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do
them;

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> that his heart not be lifted up above
his brothers, and that he not turn aside from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he and his children, in the midst of Israel.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The priests the Levites, \[even\] all the
tribe of Levi, shall have no portion nor inheritance with Israel: they
shall eat the offerings of Yahweh made by fire, and his inheritance.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> They shall have no inheritance among
their brothers: Yahweh is their inheritance, as he has spoken to them.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> This shall be the priests' due from the
people, from those who offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep,
that they shall give to the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and
the maw.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The first fruits of your grain, of your
new wine, and of your oil, and the first of the fleece of your sheep,
you shall give him.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For Yahweh your God has chosen him out of
all your tribes, to stand to minister in the name of Yahweh, him and his
sons for ever.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> If a Levite comes from any of your gates
out of all Israel, where he lives as a foreigner, and comes with all the
desire of his soul to the place which Yahweh shall choose;

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> then he shall minister in the name of
Yahweh his God, as all his brothers the Levites do, who stand there
before Yahweh.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> They shall have like portions to eat,
besides that which comes of the sale of his patrimony.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> When you are come into the land which
Yahweh your God gives you, you shall not learn to do after the
abominations of those nations.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> There shall not be found with you
anyone who makes his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, one
who uses divination, one who practices sorcery, or an enchanter, or a
sorcerer,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> or a charmer, or a consulter with a
familiar spirit, or a wizard, or a necromancer.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> For whoever does these things is an
abomination to Yahweh: and because of these abominations Yahweh your God
does drive them out from before you.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> You shall be perfect with Yahweh your
God.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> For these nations, that you shall
dispossess, listen to those who practice sorcery, and to diviners; but
as for you, Yahweh your God has not allowed you so to do.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Yahweh your God will raise up to you a
prophet from the midst of you, of your brothers, like me. You shall
listen to him.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> This is according to all that you
desired of Yahweh your God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying,
"Let me not hear again the voice of Yahweh my God, neither let me see
this great fire any more, that I not die."

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Yahweh said to me, "They have well said
that which they have spoken.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> I will raise them up a prophet from
among their brothers, like you; and I will put my words in his mouth,
and he shall speak to them all that I shall command him.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> It shall happen, that whoever will not
listen to my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of
him.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> But the prophet, who shall speak a word
presumptuously in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or
who shall speak in the name of other gods, that same prophet shall die."

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> If you say in your heart, "How shall we
know the word which Yahweh has not spoken?"

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> when a prophet speaks in the name of
Yahweh, if the thing doesn't follow, nor happen, that is the thing which
Yahweh has not spoken: the prophet has spoken it presumptuously, you
shall not be afraid of him.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> When Yahweh your God shall cut off the
nations, whose land Yahweh your God gives you, and you succeed them, and
dwell in their cities, and in their houses;

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> you shall set apart three cities for you
in the midst of your land, which Yahweh your God gives you to possess
it.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> You shall prepare you the way, and divide
the borders of your land, which Yahweh your God causes you to inherit,
into three parts, that every manslayer may flee there.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> This is the case of the manslayer, that
shall flee there and live: whoever kills his neighbor unawares, and
didn't hate him in time past;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> as when a man goes into the forest with
his neighbor to chop wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the axe to
cut down the tree, and the head slips from the handle, and lights on his
neighbor, so that he dies; he shall flee to one of these cities and
live:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> lest the avenger of blood pursue the
manslayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and strike him mortally; whereas he was not worthy of death,
inasmuch as he didn't hate him in time past.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Therefore I command you, saying, You
shall set apart three cities for yourselves.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> If Yahweh your God enlarges your border,
as he has sworn to your fathers, and gives you all the land which he
promised to give to your fathers;

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> if you keep all this commandment to do
it, which I command you this day, to love Yahweh your God, and to walk
ever in his ways; then you shall add three cities more for yourselves,
besides these three:

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> that innocent blood not be shed in the
midst of your land, which Yahweh your God gives you for an inheritance,
and so blood be on you.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> But if any man hates his neighbor, and
lies in wait for him, and rises up against him, and strikes him mortally
so that he dies, and he flees into one of these cities;

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> then the elders of his city shall send
and bring him there, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Your eye shall not pity him, but you
shall put away the innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with
you.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> You shall not remove your neighbor's
landmark, which they of old time have set, in your inheritance which you
shall inherit, in the land that Yahweh your God gives you to possess it.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> One witness shall not rise up against a
man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sins: at the
mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall a
matter be established.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> If an unrighteous witness rise up
against any man to testify against him of wrongdoing,

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> then both the men, between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before Yahweh, before the priests and the
judges who shall be in those days;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> and the judges shall make diligent
inquisition: and, behold, if the witness is a false witness, and has
testified falsely against his brother;

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> then you shall do to him as he had
thought to do to his brother: so you shall put away the evil from the
midst of you.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Those who remain shall hear, and fear,
and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil in the midst of you.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Your eyes shall not pity; life \[shall
go\] for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> When you go forth to battle against your
enemies, and see horses, and chariots, \[and\] a people more than you,
you shall not be afraid of them; for Yahweh your God is with you, who
brought you up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> It shall be, when you draw near to the
battle, that the priest shall approach and speak to the people,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> and shall tell them, "Hear, Israel, you
draw near this day to battle against your enemies: don't let your heart
faint; don't be afraid, nor tremble, neither be scared of them;

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> for Yahweh your God is he who goes with
you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you."

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> The officers shall speak to the people,
saying, "What man is there who has built a new house, and has not
dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man dedicate it.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> What man is there who has planted a
vineyard, and has not used its fruit? Let him go and return to his
house, lest he die in the battle, and another man use its fruit.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> What man is there who has pledged to be
married a wife, and has not taken her? Let him go and return to his
house, lest he die in the battle, and another man take her."

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> The officers shall speak further to the
people, and they shall say, "What man is there who is fearful and
fainthearted? Let him go and return to his house, lest his brother's
heart melt as his heart."

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> It shall be, when the officers have made
an end of speaking to the people, that they shall appoint captains of
armies at the head of the people.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> When you draw near to a city to fight
against it, then proclaim peace to it.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> It shall be, if it makes you answer of
peace, and opens to you, then it shall be, that all the people who are
found therein shall become tributary to you, and shall serve you.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> If it will make no peace with you, but
will make war against you, then you shall besiege it:

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> and when Yahweh your God delivers it
into your hand, you shall strike every male of it with the edge of the
sword:

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> but the women, and the little ones, and
the livestock, and all that is in the city, even all its spoil, you
shall take for a prey to yourself; and you shall eat the spoil of your
enemies, which Yahweh your God has given you.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Thus you shall do to all the cities
which are very far off from you, which are not of the cities of these
nations.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> But of the cities of these peoples,
that Yahweh your God gives you for an inheritance, you shall save alive
nothing that breathes;

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> but you shall utterly destroy them: the
Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite,
and the Jebusite; as Yahweh your God has commanded you;

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> that they not teach you to do after all
their abominations, which they have done to their gods; so would you sin
against Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> When you shall besiege a city a long
time, in making war against it to take it, you shall not destroy its
trees by wielding an axe against them; for you may eat of them, and you
shall not cut them down; for is the tree of the field man, that it
should be besieged of you?

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Only the trees of which you know that
they are not trees for food, you shall destroy and cut them down; and
you shall build bulwarks against the city that makes war with you, until
it fall.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> If one be found slain in the land which
Yahweh your God gives you to possess it, lying in the field, and it
isn't known who has struck him;

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> then your elders and your judges shall
come forth, and they shall measure to the cities which are around him
who is slain:

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and it shall be, that the city which is
nearest to the slain man, even the elders of that city shall take a
heifer of the herd, which hasn't been worked with, and which has not
drawn in the yoke;

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> and the elders of that city shall bring
down the heifer to a valley with running water, which is neither plowed
nor sown, and shall break the heifer's neck there in the valley.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> The priests the sons of Levi shall come
near; for them Yahweh your God has chosen to minister to him, and to
bless in the name of Yahweh; and according to their word shall every
controversy and every stroke be.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> All the elders of that city, who are
nearest to the slain man, shall wash their hands over the heifer whose
neck was broken in the valley;

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> and they shall answer and say, "Our hands
have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Forgive, Yahweh, your people Israel, whom
you have redeemed, and don't allow innocent blood \[to remain\] in the
midst of your people Israel." The blood shall be forgiven them.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> So you shall put away the innocent blood
from the midst of you, when you shall do that which is right in the eyes
of Yahweh.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> When you go forth to battle against
your enemies, and Yahweh your God delivers them into your hands, and you
carry them away captive,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> and see among the captives a beautiful
woman, and you have a desire to her, and would take her to you as wife;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> then you shall bring her home to your
house; and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails;

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> and she shall put the clothing of her
captivity from off her, and shall remain in your house, and bewail her
father and her mother a full month: and after that you shall go in to
her, and be her husband, and she shall be your wife.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> It shall be, if you have no delight in
her, then you shall let her go where she will; but you shall not sell
her at all for money, you shall not deal with her as a slave, because
you have humbled her.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> If a man have two wives, the one
beloved, and the other hated, and they have borne him children, both the
beloved and the hated; and if the firstborn son be hers who was hated;

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> then it shall be, in the day that he
causes his sons to inherit that which he has, that he may not make the
son of the beloved the firstborn before the son of the hated, who is the
firstborn:

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> but he shall acknowledge the firstborn,
the son of the hated, by giving him a double portion of all that he has;
for he is the beginning of his strength; the right of the firstborn is
his.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> If a man have a stubborn and rebellious
son, who will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his
mother, and, though they chasten him, will not listen to them;

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> then shall his father and his mother
lay hold on him, and bring him out to the elders of his city, and to the
gate of his place;

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> and they shall tell the elders of his
city, "This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our
voice; he is a glutton, and a drunkard."

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> All the men of his city shall stone him
to death with stones: so you shall put away the evil from the midst of
you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> If a man have committed a sin worthy of
death, and he be put to death, and you hang him on a tree;

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> his body shall not remain all night on
the tree, but you shall surely bury him the same day; for he who is
hanged is accursed of God; that you don't defile your land which Yahweh
your God gives you for an inheritance.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> You shall not see your brother's ox or
his sheep go astray, and hide yourself from them: you shall surely bring
them again to your brother.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> If your brother isn't near to you, or if
you don't know him, then you shall bring it home to your house, and it
shall be with you until your brother seek after it, and you shall
restore it to him.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> So you shall do with his donkey; and so
you shall do with his garment; and so you shall do with every lost thing
of your brother's, which he has lost, and you have found: you may not
hide yourself.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> You shall not see your brother's donkey
or his ox fallen down by the way, and hide yourself from them: you shall
surely help him to lift them up again.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> A woman shall not wear men's clothing,
neither shall a man put on women's clothing; for whoever does these
things is an abomination to Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If a bird's nest chance to be before you
in the way, in any tree or on the ground, with young ones or eggs, and
the hen sitting on the young, or on the eggs, you shall not take the hen
with the young:

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> you shall surely let the hen go, but the
young you may take to yourself; that it may be well with you, and that
you may prolong your days.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> When you build a new house, then you
shall make a battlement for your roof, that you don't bring blood on
your house, if any man fall from there.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> You shall not sow your vineyard with two
kinds of seed, lest the whole fruit be forfeited, the seed which you
have sown, and the increase of the vineyard.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> You shall not plow with an ox and a
donkey together.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> You shall not wear a mixed stuff, wool
and linen together.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> You shall make yourselves fringes on
the four borders of your cloak, with which you cover yourself.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> If any man takes a wife, and goes in to
her, and hates her,

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> and accuses her of shameful things, and
brings up an evil name on her, and says, "I took this woman, and when I
came near to her, I didn't find in her the tokens of virginity;"

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> then shall the father of the young
lady, and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the young
lady's virginity to the elders of the city in the gate;

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> and the young lady's father shall tell
the elders, "I gave my daughter to this man to wife, and he hates her;

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> and behold, he has accused her of
shameful things, saying, 'I didn't find in your daughter the tokens of
virginity;' and yet these are the tokens of my daughter's virginity."
They shall spread the cloth before the elders of the city.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> The elders of that city shall take the
man and chastise him;

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> and they shall fine him one hundred
\[shekels\] of silver, and give them to the father of the young lady,
because he has brought up an evil name on a virgin of Israel: and she
shall be his wife; he may not put her away all his days.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> But if this thing be true, that the
tokens of virginity were not found in the young lady;

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> then they shall bring out the young
lady to the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall
stone her to death with stones, because she has done folly in Israel, to
play the prostitute in her father's house: so you shall put away the
evil from the midst of you.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> If a man be found lying with a woman
married to a husband, then they shall both of them die, the man who lay
with the woman, and the woman: so you shall put away the evil from
Israel.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If there is a young lady who is a
virgin pledged to be married to a husband, and a man find her in the
city, and lie with her;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> then you shall bring them both out to
the gate of that city, and you shall stone them to death with stones;
the lady, because she didn't cry, being in the city; and the man,
because he has humbled his neighbor's wife: so you shall put away the
evil from the midst of you.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> But if the man find the lady who is
pledged to be married in the field, and the man force her, and lie with
her; then the man only who lay with her shall die:

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> but to the lady you shall do nothing;
there is in the lady no sin worthy of death: for as when a man rises
against his neighbor, and kills him, even so is this matter;

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> for he found her in the field, the
pledged to be married lady cried, and there was none to save her.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> If a man find a lady who is a virgin,
who is not pledged to be married, and lay hold on her, and lie with her,
and they be found;

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> then the man who lay with her shall
give to the lady's father fifty \[shekels\] of silver, and she shall be
his wife, because he has humbled her; he may not put her away all his
days.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> A man shall not take his father's wife,
and shall not uncover his father's skirt.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> He who is wounded in the stones, or has
his privy member cut off, shall not enter into the assembly of Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> A bastard shall not enter into the
assembly of Yahweh; even to the tenth generation shall none of his enter
into the assembly of Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter
into the assembly of Yahweh; even to the tenth generation shall none
belonging to them enter into the assembly of Yahweh forever:

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> because they didn't meet you with bread
and with water in the way, when you came forth out of Egypt, and because
they hired against you Balaam the son of Beor from Pethor of
Mesopotamia, to curse you.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Nevertheless Yahweh your God wouldn't
listen to Balaam; but Yahweh your God turned the curse into a blessing
to you, because Yahweh your God loved you.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> You shall not seek their peace nor their
prosperity all your days forever.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> You shall not abhor an Edomite; for he is
your brother: you shall not abhor an Egyptian, because you lived as a
foreigner in his land.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> The children of the third generation who
are born to them shall enter into the assembly of Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> When you go forth in camp against your
enemies, then you shall keep yourselves from every evil thing.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> If there is among you any man who is
not clean by reason of that which happens him by night, then shall he go
outside of the camp. He shall not come within the camp:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> but it shall be, when evening comes on,
he shall bathe himself in water; and when the sun is down, he shall come
within the camp.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> You shall have a place also outside of
the camp, where you shall go forth abroad:

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> and you shall have a paddle among your
weapons; and it shall be, when you sit down abroad, you shall dig
therewith, and shall turn back and cover that which comes from you:

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> for Yahweh your God walks in the midst
of your camp, to deliver you, and to give up your enemies before you;
therefore your camp shall be holy, that he may not see an unclean thing
in you, and turn away from you.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> You shall not deliver to his master a
servant who is escaped from his master to you:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> he shall dwell with you, in the midst
of you, in the place which he shall choose within one of your gates,
where it pleases him best: you shall not oppress him.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> There shall be no prostitute of the
daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a sodomite of the sons of
Israel.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> You shall not bring the hire of a
prostitute, or the wages of a dog, into the house of Yahweh your God for
any vow: for even both these are an abomination to Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> You shall not lend on interest to your
brother; interest of money, interest of food, interest of anything that
is lent on interest:

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> to a foreigner you may lend on
interest; but to your brother you shall not lend on interest, that
Yahweh your God may bless you in all that you put your hand to, in the
land where you go in to possess it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> When you shall vow a vow to Yahweh your
God, you shall not be slack to pay it: for Yahweh your God will surely
require it of you; and it would be sin in you.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if you shall forbear to vow, it
shall be no sin in you.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> That which is gone out of your lips you
shall observe and do; according as you have vowed to Yahweh your God, a
freewill offering, which you have promised with your mouth.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> When you come into your neighbor's
vineyard, then you may eat of grapes your fill at your own pleasure; but
you shall not put any in your vessel.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> When you come into your neighbor's
standing grain, then you may pluck the ears with your hand; but you
shall not move a sickle to your neighbor's standing grain.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> When a man takes a wife, and marries her,
then it shall be, if she find no favor in his eyes, because he has found
some unseemly thing in her, that he shall write her a bill of divorce,
and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> When she is departed out of his house,
she may go and be another man's \[wife\].

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> If the latter husband hate her, and write
her a bill of divorce, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his
house; or if the latter husband die, who took her to be his wife;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> her former husband, who sent her away,
may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for
that is abomination before Yahweh: and you shall not cause the land to
sin, which Yahweh your God gives you for an inheritance.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> When a man takes a new wife, he shall not
go out in the army, neither shall he be assigned any business: he shall
be free at home one year, and shall cheer his wife whom he has taken.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> No man shall take the mill or the upper
millstone to pledge; for he takes \[a man's\] life to pledge.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> If a man be found stealing any of his
brothers of the children of Israel, and he deal with him as a slave, or
sell him; then that thief shall die: so you shall put away the evil from
the midst of you.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that
you observe diligently, and do according to all that the priests the
Levites shall teach you: as I commanded them, so you shall observe to
do.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Remember what Yahweh your God did to
Miriam, by the way as you came forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> When you do lend your neighbor any kind
of loan, you shall not go into his house to get his pledge.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> You shall stand outside, and the man to
whom you do lend shall bring forth the pledge outside to you.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> If he be a poor man, you shall not
sleep with his pledge;

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> you shall surely restore to him the
pledge when the sun goes down, that he may sleep in his garment, and
bless you: and it shall be righteousness to you before Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> You shall not oppress a hired servant
who is poor and needy, whether he be of your brothers, or of your
foreigners who are in your land within your gates:

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> in his day you shall give him his hire,
neither shall the sun go down on it; for he is poor, and sets his heart
on it: lest he cry against you to Yahweh, and it be sin to you.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> The fathers shall not be put to death
for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the
fathers: every man shall be put to death for his own sin.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> You shall not wrest the justice \[due\]
to the foreigner, \[or\] to the fatherless, nor take the widow's
clothing to pledge;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> but you shall remember that you were a
bondservant in Egypt, and Yahweh your God redeemed you there: therefore
I command you to do this thing.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> When you reap your harvest in your
field, and have forgot a sheaf in the field, you shall not go again to
get it: it shall be for the foreigner, for the fatherless, and for the
widow; that Yahweh your God may bless you in all the work of your hands.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> When you beat your olive tree, you
shall not go over the boughs again: it shall be for the foreigner, for
the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> When you gather \[the grapes of\] your
vineyard, you shall not glean it after yourselves: it shall be for the
foreigner, for the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> You shall remember that you were a
bondservant in the land of Egypt: therefore I command you to do this
thing.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> If there be a controversy between men,
and they come to judgment, and \[the judges\] judge them; then they
shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked;

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> and it shall be, if the wicked man be
worthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to
be beaten before his face, according to his wickedness, by number.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Forty stripes he may give him, he shall
not exceed; lest, if he should exceed, and beat him above these with
many stripes, then your brother should seem vile to you.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> You shall not muzzle the ox when he
treads out \[the grain\].

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> If brothers dwell together, and one of
them die, and have no son, the wife of the dead shall not be married
outside to a stranger: her husband's brother shall go in to her, and
take her to him as wife, and perform the duty of a husband's brother to
her.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> It shall be, that the firstborn whom she
bears shall succeed in the name of his brother who is dead, that his
name not be blotted out of Israel.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> If the man doesn't want to take his
brother's wife, then his brother's wife shall go up to the gate to the
elders, and say, "My husband's brother refuses to raise up to his
brother a name in Israel; he will not perform the duty of a husband's
brother to me."

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Then the elders of his city shall call
him, and speak to him: and if he stand, and say, "I don't want to take
her;"

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> then his brother's wife shall come to him
in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and
spit in his face; and she shall answer and say, "So shall it be done to
the man who does not build up his brother's house."

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> His name shall be called in Israel, The
house of him who has his shoe untied.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> When men strive together one with
another, and the wife of the one draws near to deliver her husband out
of the hand of him who strikes him, and puts forth her hand, and takes
him by the secrets;

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> then you shall cut off her hand, your
eye shall have no pity.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> You shall not have in your bag diverse
weights, a great and a small.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> You shall not have in your house
diverse measures, a great and a small.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> You shall have a perfect and just
weight. You shall have a perfect and just measure, that your days may be
long in the land which Yahweh your God gives you.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> For all who do such things, \[even\]
all who do unrighteously, are an abomination to Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Remember what Amalek did to you by the
way as you came forth out of Egypt;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> how he met you by the way, and struck
the hindmost of you, all who were feeble behind you, when you were faint
and weary; and he didn't fear God.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Therefore it shall be, when Yahweh your
God has given you rest from all your enemies all around, in the land
which Yahweh your God gives you for an inheritance to possess it, that
you shall blot out the memory of Amalek from under the sky; you shall
not forget.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> It shall be, when you are come in to the
land which Yahweh your God gives you for an inheritance, and possess it,
and dwell therein,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> that you shall take of the first of all
the fruit of the ground, which you shall bring in from your land that
Yahweh your God gives you; and you shall put it in a basket, and shall
go to the place which Yahweh your God shall choose, to cause his name to
dwell there.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> You shall come to the priest who shall be
in those days, and tell him, "I profess this day to Yahweh your God,
that I am come to the land which Yahweh swore to our fathers to give
us."

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> The priest shall take the basket out of
your hand, and set it down before the altar of Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> You shall answer and say before Yahweh
your God, "A Syrian ready to perish was my father; and he went down into
Egypt, and lived there, few in number; and he became there a nation,
great, mighty, and populous.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> The Egyptians dealt ill with us, and
afflicted us, and laid on us hard bondage:

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> and we cried to Yahweh, the God of our
fathers, and Yahweh heard our voice, and saw our affliction, and our
toil, and our oppression;

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> and Yahweh brought us forth out of Egypt
with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terror,
and with signs, and with wonders;

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> and he has brought us into this place,
and has given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Now, behold, I have brought the first
of the fruit of the ground, which you, Yahweh, have given me." You shall
set it down before Yahweh your God, and worship before Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> You shall rejoice in all the good which
Yahweh your God has given to you, and to your house, you, and the
Levite, and the foreigner who is in the midst of you.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> When you have made an end of tithing
all the tithe of your increase in the third year, which is the year of
tithing, then you shall give it to the Levite, to the foreigner, to the
fatherless, and to the widow, that they may eat within your gates, and
be filled.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> You shall say before Yahweh your God,
"I have put away the holy things out of my house, and also have given
them to the Levite, and to the foreigner, to the fatherless, and to the
widow, according to all your commandment which you have commanded me: I
have not transgressed any of your commandments, neither have I forgotten
them:

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> I have not eaten of it in my mourning,
neither have I put away of it, being unclean, nor given of it for the
dead: I have listened to the voice of Yahweh my God; I have done
according to all that you have commanded me.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Look down from your holy habitation,
from heaven, and bless your people Israel, and the ground which you have
given us, as you swore to our fathers, a land flowing with milk and
honey."

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> This day Yahweh your God commands you
to do these statutes and ordinances: you shall therefore keep and do
them with all your heart, and with all your soul.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> You have declared Yahweh this day to be
your God, and that you would walk in his ways, and keep his statutes,
and his commandments, and his ordinances, and listen to his voice:

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> and Yahweh has declared you this day to
be a people for his own possession, as he has promised you, and that you
should keep all his commandments;

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> and to make you high above all nations
that he has made, in praise, and in name, and in honor; and that you may
be a holy people to Yahweh your God, as he has spoken.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Moses and the elders of Israel commanded
the people, saying, "Keep all the commandment which I command you this
day.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> It shall be on the day when you shall
pass over the Jordan to the land which Yahweh your God gives you, that
you shall set yourself up great stones, and plaster them with plaster:

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and you shall write on them all the words
of this law, when you have passed over; that you may go in to the land
which Yahweh your God gives you, a land flowing with milk and honey, as
Yahweh, the God of your fathers, has promised you.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> It shall be, when you have passed over
the Jordan, that you shall set up these stones, which I command you this
day, in Mount Ebal, and you shall plaster them with plaster.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> There you shall build an altar to Yahweh
your God, an altar of stones: you shall lift up no iron \[tool\] on
them.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> You shall build the altar of Yahweh your
God of uncut stones; and you shall offer burnt offerings thereon to
Yahweh your God:

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> and you shall sacrifice peace offerings,
and shall eat there; and you shall rejoice before Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> You shall write on the stones all the
words of this law very plainly."

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Moses and the priests the Levites spoke
to all Israel, saying, "Keep silence, and listen, Israel: this day you
have become the people of Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> You shall therefore obey the voice of
Yahweh your God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I
command you this day."

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> Moses commanded the people the same
day, saying,

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> "These shall stand on Mount Gerizim to
bless the people, when you have passed over the Jordan: Simeon, and
Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> These shall stand on Mount Ebal for the
curse: Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> The Levites shall answer, and tell all
the men of Israel with a loud voice,

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> 'Cursed is the man who makes an
engraved or molten image, an abomination to Yahweh, the work of the
hands of the craftsman, and sets it up in secret.' All the people shall
answer and say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> 'Cursed is he who sets light by his
father or his mother.' All the people shall say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> 'Cursed is he who removes his
neighbor's landmark.' All the people shall say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> 'Cursed is he who makes the blind to
wander out of the way.' All the people shall say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> 'Cursed is he who wrests the justice
\[due\] to the foreigner, fatherless, and widow.' All the people shall
say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> 'Cursed is he who lies with his
father's wife, because he has uncovered his father's skirt.' All the
people shall say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> 'Cursed is he who lies with any kind of
animal.' All the people shall say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> 'Cursed is he who lies with his sister,
the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother.' All the
people shall say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> 'Cursed is he who lies with his
mother-in-law.' All the people shall say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> 'Cursed is he who strikes his neighbor
in secret.' All the people shall say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> 'Cursed is he who takes a bribe to kill
an innocent person.' All the people shall say, 'Amen.'

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> 'Cursed is he who doesn't confirm the
words of this law to do them.' All the people shall say, 'Amen.'"

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> It shall happen, if you shall listen
diligently to the voice of Yahweh your God, to observe to do all his
commandments which I command you this day, that Yahweh your God will set
you on high above all the nations of the earth:

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> and all these blessings shall come on
you, and overtake you, if you shall listen to the voice of Yahweh your
God.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> You shall be blessed in the city, and you
shall be blessed in the field.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> You shall be blessed in the fruit of your
body, the fruit of your ground, the fruit of your animals, the increase
of your livestock, and the young of your flock.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Your basket and your kneading trough
shall be blessed.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> You shall be blessed when you come in,
and you shall be blessed when you go out.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Yahweh will cause your enemies who rise
up against you to be struck before you. They will come out against you
one way, and will flee before you seven ways.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> Yahweh will command the blessing on you
in your barns, and in all that you put your hand to; and he will bless
you in the land which Yahweh your God gives you.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Yahweh will establish you for a holy
people to himself, as he has sworn to you; if you shall keep the
commandments of Yahweh your God, and walk in his ways.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> All the peoples of the earth shall see
that you are called by the name of Yahweh; and they shall be afraid of
you.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Yahweh will make you plenteous for
good, in the fruit of your body, and in the fruit of your livestock, and
in the fruit of your ground, in the land which Yahweh swore to your
fathers to give you.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Yahweh will open to you his good
treasure in the sky, to give the rain of your land in its season, and to
bless all the work of your hand: and you shall lend to many nations, and
you shall not borrow.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Yahweh will make you the head, and not
the tail; and you shall be above only, and you shall not be beneath; if
you shall listen to the commandments of Yahweh your God, which I command
you this day, to observe and to do \[them\],

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> and shall not turn aside from any of
the words which I command you this day, to the right hand, or to the
left, to go after other gods to serve them.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> But it shall come to pass, if you will
not listen to the voice of Yahweh your God, to observe to do all his
commandments and his statutes which I command you this day, that all
these curses shall come on you, and overtake you.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> You shall be cursed in the city, and
you shall be cursed in the field.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Your basket and your kneading trough
shall be cursed.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> The fruit of your body, the fruit of
your ground, the increase of your livestock, and the young of your flock
shall be cursed.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> You shall be cursed when you come in,
and you shall be cursed when you go out.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Yahweh will send on you cursing,
confusion, and rebuke, in all that you put your hand to do, until you
are destroyed, and until you perish quickly; because of the evil of your
doings, by which you have forsaken me.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> Yahweh will make the pestilence cling
to you, until he has consumed you from off the land, where you go in to
possess it.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Yahweh will strike you with
consumption, and with fever, and with inflammation, and with fiery heat,
and with the sword, and with blight, and with mildew; and they shall
pursue you until you perish.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> Your sky that is over your head shall
be brass, and the earth that is under you shall be iron.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Yahweh will make the rain of your land
powder and dust: from the sky shall it come down on you, until you are
destroyed.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Yahweh will cause you to be struck
before your enemies; you shall go out one way against them, and shall
flee seven ways before them: and you shall be tossed back and forth
among all the kingdoms of the earth.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Your dead body shall be food to all
birds of the sky, and to the animals of the earth; and there shall be
none to frighten them away.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Yahweh will strike you with the boil of
Egypt, and with the tumors, and with the scurvy, and with the itch, of
which you can not be healed.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Yahweh will strike you with madness,
and with blindness, and with astonishment of heart;

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> and you shall grope at noonday, as the
blind gropes in darkness, and you shall not prosper in your ways: and
you shall be only oppressed and robbed always, and there shall be none
to save you.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> You shall betroth a wife, and another
man shall lie with her: you shall build a house, and you shall not dwell
therein: you shall plant a vineyard, and shall not use its fruit.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Your ox shall be slain before your
eyes, and you shall not eat of it: your donkey shall be violently taken
away from before your face, and shall not be restored to you: your sheep
shall be given to your enemies, and you shall have none to save you.

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> Your sons and your daughters shall be
given to another people; and your eyes shall look, and fail with longing
for them all the day: and there shall be nothing in the power of your
hand.

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> The fruit of your ground, and all your
labors, shall a nation which you don't know eat up; and you shall be
only oppressed and crushed always;

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> so that you shall be mad for the sight
of your eyes which you shall see.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> Yahweh will strike you in the knees,
and in the legs, with a sore boil, of which you can not be healed, from
the sole of your foot to the crown of your head.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> Yahweh will bring you, and your king
whom you shall set over you, to a nation that you have not known, you
nor your fathers; and there you shall serve other gods, wood and stone.

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> You shall become an astonishment, a
proverb, and a byword, among all the peoples where Yahweh shall lead you
away.

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> You shall carry much seed out into the
field, and shall gather little in; for the locust shall consume it.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> You shall plant vineyards and dress
them, but you shall neither drink of the wine, nor gather \[the
grapes\]; for the worm shall eat them.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> You shall have olive trees throughout
all your borders, but you shall not anoint yourself with the oil; for
your olive shall cast \[its fruit\].

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> You shall father sons and daughters,
but they shall not be yours; for they shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> All your trees and the fruit of your
ground shall the locust possess.

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> The foreigner who is in the midst of
you shall mount up above you higher and higher; and you shall come down
lower and lower.

<span id="an_28:44">28:44</span> He shall lend to you, and you shall not
lend to him: he shall be the head, and you shall be the tail.

<span id="an_28:45">28:45</span> All these curses shall come on you, and
shall pursue you, and overtake you, until you are destroyed; because you
didn't listen to the voice of Yahweh your God, to keep his commandments
and his statutes which he commanded you:

<span id="an_28:46">28:46</span> and they shall be on you for a sign and
for a wonder, and on your seed forever.

<span id="an_28:47">28:47</span> Because you didn't serve Yahweh your
God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, by reason of the
abundance of all things;

<span id="an_28:48">28:48</span> therefore you shall serve your enemies
whom Yahweh shall send against you, in hunger, and in thirst, and in
nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron on
your neck, until he has destroyed you.

<span id="an_28:49">28:49</span> Yahweh will bring a nation against you
from far, from the end of the earth, as the eagle flies; a nation whose
language you shall not understand;

<span id="an_28:50">28:50</span> a nation of fierce facial expressions,
that shall not respect the person of the old, nor show favor to the
young,

<span id="an_28:51">28:51</span> and shall eat the fruit of your
livestock, and the fruit of your ground, until you are destroyed; that
also shall not leave you grain, new wine, or oil, the increase of your
livestock, or the young of your flock, until they have caused you to
perish.

<span id="an_28:52">28:52</span> They shall besiege you in all your
gates, until your high and fortified walls come down, in which you
trusted, throughout all your land; and they shall besiege you in all
your gates throughout all your land, which Yahweh your God has given
you.

<span id="an_28:53">28:53</span> You shall eat the fruit of your own
body, the flesh of your sons and of your daughters, whom Yahweh your God
has given you, in the siege and in the distress with which your enemies
shall distress you.

<span id="an_28:54">28:54</span> The man who is tender among you, and
very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the
wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children whom he has
remaining;

<span id="an_28:55">28:55</span> so that he will not give to any of them
of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat, because he has nothing
left him, in the siege and in the distress with which your enemy shall
distress you in all your gates.

<span id="an_28:56">28:56</span> The tender and delicate woman among
you, who would not adventure to set the sole of her foot on the ground
for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the
husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,

<span id="an_28:57">28:57</span> and toward her young one who comes out
from between her feet, and toward her children whom she shall bear; for
she shall eat them for want of all things secretly, in the siege and in
the distress with which your enemy shall distress you in your gates.

<span id="an_28:58">28:58</span> If you will not observe to do all the
words of this law that are written in this book, that you may fear this
glorious and fearful name, YAHWEH YOUR GOD;

<span id="an_28:59">28:59</span> then Yahweh will make your plagues
wonderful, and the plagues of your seed, even great plagues, and of long
continuance, and severe sicknesses, and of long continuance.

<span id="an_28:60">28:60</span> He will bring on you again all the
diseases of Egypt, which you were afraid of; and they shall cling to
you.

<span id="an_28:61">28:61</span> Also every sickness, and every plague,
which is not written in the book of this law, Yahweh will bring them on
you, until you are destroyed.

<span id="an_28:62">28:62</span> You shall be left few in number,
whereas you were as the stars of the sky for multitude; because you
didn't listen to the voice of Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_28:63">28:63</span> It shall happen that as Yahweh rejoiced
over you to do you good, and to multiply you, so Yahweh will rejoice
over you to cause you to perish, and to destroy you; and you shall be
plucked from off the land where you go in to possess it.

<span id="an_28:64">28:64</span> Yahweh will scatter you among all
peoples, from the one end of the earth even to the other end of the
earth; and there you shall serve other gods, which you have not known,
you nor your fathers, even wood and stone.

<span id="an_28:65">28:65</span> Among these nations you shall find no
ease, and there shall be no rest for the sole of your foot: but Yahweh
will give you there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and pining
of soul;

<span id="an_28:66">28:66</span> and your life shall hang in doubt
before you; and you shall fear night and day, and shall have no
assurance of your life.

<span id="an_28:67">28:67</span> In the morning you shall say, "I wish
it were evening!" and at evening you shall say, "I wish it were
morning!" for the fear of your heart which you shall fear, and for the
sight of your eyes which you shall see.

<span id="an_28:68">28:68</span> Yahweh will bring you into Egypt again
with ships, by the way of which I said to you, You shall see it no more
again: and there you shall sell yourselves to your enemies for
bondservants and for bondmaids, and no man shall buy you.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> These are the words of the covenant which
Yahweh commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land
of Moab, besides the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Moses called to all Israel, and said to
them, You have seen all that Yahweh did before your eyes in the land of
Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> the great trials which your eyes saw, the
signs, and those great wonders:

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> but Yahweh has not given you a heart to
know, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, to this day.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> I have led you forty years in the
wilderness: your clothes have not grown old on you, and your shoes have
not grown old on your feet.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> You have not eaten bread, neither have
you drunk wine or strong drink; that you may know that I am Yahweh your
God.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When you came to this place, Sihon the
king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against us to
battle, and we struck them:

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> and we took their land, and gave it for
an inheritance to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the
half-tribe of the Manassites.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Keep therefore the words of this
covenant, and do them, that you may prosper in all that you do.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> You stand this day all of you before
Yahweh your God; your heads, your tribes, your elders, and your
officers, even all the men of Israel,

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> your little ones, your wives, and your
foreigner who is in the midst of your camps, from the one who cuts your
wood to the one who draws your water;

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> that you may enter into the covenant of
Yahweh your God, and into his oath, which Yahweh your God makes with you
this day;

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> that he may establish you this day to
himself for a people, and that he may be to you a God, as he spoke to
you, and as he swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> Neither with you only do I make this
covenant and this oath,

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> but with him who stands here with us
this day before Yahweh our God, and also with him who is not here with
us this day

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> (for you know how we lived in the land
of Egypt, and how we came through the midst of the nations through which
you passed;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> and you have seen their abominations,
and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among
them);

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> lest there should be among you man, or
woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turns away this day from Yahweh
our God, to go to serve the gods of those nations; lest there should be
among you a root that bears gall and wormwood;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> and it happen, when he hears the words
of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, "I shall have
peace, though I walk in the stubbornness of my heart, to destroy the
moist with the dry."

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Yahweh will not pardon him, but then
the anger of Yahweh and his jealousy will smoke against that man, and
all the curse that is written in this book shall lie on him, and Yahweh
will blot out his name from under the sky.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Yahweh will set him apart to evil out
of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant
that is written in this book of the law.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> The generation to come, your children
who shall rise up after you, and the foreigner who shall come from a far
land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and the
sicknesses with which Yahweh has made it sick;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> \[and that\] the whole land of it is
sulfur, and salt, \[and\] a burning, \[that\] it is not sown, nor bears,
nor any grass grows therein, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah,
Admah and Zeboiim, which Yahweh overthrew in his anger, and in his
wrath:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> even all the nations shall say, "Why
has Yahweh done thus to this land? What does the heat of this great
anger mean?"

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> Then men shall say, "Because they
forsook the covenant of Yahweh, the God of their fathers, which he made
with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> and went and served other gods, and
worshiped them, gods that they didn't know, and that he had not given to
them:

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> therefore the anger of Yahweh was
kindled against this land, to bring on it all the curse that is written
in this book;

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> and Yahweh rooted them out of their
land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them
into another land, as at this day."

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> The secret things belong to Yahweh our
God; but the things that are revealed belong to us and to our children
forever, that we may do all the words of this law.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> It shall happen, when all these things
have come on you, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before
you, and you shall call them to mind among all the nations, where Yahweh
your God has driven you,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> and shall return to Yahweh your God, and
shall obey his voice according to all that I command you this day, you
and your children, with all your heart, and with all your soul;

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> that then Yahweh your God will turn your
captivity, and have compassion on you, and will return and gather you
from all the peoples, where Yahweh your God has scattered you.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> If \[any of\] your outcasts are in the
uttermost parts of the heavens, from there will Yahweh your God gather
you, and from there he will bring you back:

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> and Yahweh your God will bring you into
the land which your fathers possessed, and you shall possess it; and he
will do you good, and multiply you above your fathers.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Yahweh your God will circumcise your
heart, and the heart of your seed, to love Yahweh your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul, that you may live.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Yahweh your God will put all these curses
on your enemies, and on those who hate you, who persecuted you.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> You shall return and obey the voice of
Yahweh, and do all his commandments which I command you this day.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> Yahweh your God will make you plenteous
in all the work of your hand, in the fruit of your body, and in the
fruit of your livestock, and in the fruit of your ground, for good: for
Yahweh will again rejoice over you for good, as he rejoiced over your
fathers;

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> if you shall obey the voice of Yahweh
your God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which are written in
this book of the law; if you turn to Yahweh your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For this commandment which I command
you this day, it is not too hard for you, neither is it far off.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> It is not in heaven, that you should
say, "Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it to us, and make us
to hear it, that we may do it?"

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Neither is it beyond the sea, that you
should say, "Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it to us, and
make us to hear it, that we may do it?"

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> But the word is very near to you, in
your mouth, and in your heart, that you may do it.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Behold, I have set before you this day
life and good, and death and evil;

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> in that I command you this day to love
Yahweh your God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and
his statutes and his ordinances, that you may live and multiply, and
that Yahweh your God may bless you in the land where you go in to
possess it.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> But if your heart turns away, and you
will not hear, but shall be drawn away, and worship other gods, and
serve them;

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> I denounce to you this day, that you
shall surely perish; you shall not prolong your days in the land, where
you pass over the Jordan to go in to possess it.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> I call heaven and earth to witness
against you this day, that I have set before you life and death, the
blessing and the curse: therefore choose life, that you may live, you
and your seed;

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> to love Yahweh your God, to obey his
voice, and to cling to him; for he is your life, and the length of your
days; that you may dwell in the land which Yahweh swore to your fathers,
to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Moses went and spoke these words to all
Israel.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> He said to them, "I am one hundred twenty
years old this day; I can no more go out and come in: and Yahweh has
said to me, 'You shall not go over this Jordan.'

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Yahweh your God, he will go over before
you; he will destroy these nations from before you, and you shall
dispossess them: \[and\] Joshua, he shall go over before you, as Yahweh
has spoken.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Yahweh will do to them as he did to Sihon
and to Og, the kings of the Amorites, and to their land; whom he
destroyed.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Yahweh will deliver them up before you,
and you shall do to them according to all the commandment which I have
commanded you.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Be strong and courageous, don't be
afraid, nor be scared of them: for Yahweh your God, he it is who does go
with you; he will not fail you, nor forsake you."

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Moses called to Joshua, and said to him
in the sight of all Israel, "Be strong and courageous: for you shall go
with this people into the land which Yahweh has sworn to their fathers
to give them; and you shall cause them to inherit it.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Yahweh, he it is who does go before you;
he will be with you, he will not fail you, neither forsake you: don't be
afraid, neither be dismayed."

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Moses wrote this law, and delivered it to
the priests the sons of Levi, who bore the ark of the covenant of
Yahweh, and to all the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Moses commanded them, saying, "At the
end of \[every\] seven years, in the set time of the year of release, in
the feast of tents,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> when all Israel is come to appear
before Yahweh your God in the place which he shall choose, you shall
read this law before all Israel in their hearing.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> Assemble the people, the men and the
women and the little ones, and your foreigner who is within your gates,
that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear Yahweh your God,
and observe to do all the words of this law;

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> and that their children, who have not
known, may hear, and learn to fear Yahweh your God, as long as you live
in the land where you go over the Jordan to possess it."

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Behold, your
days approach that you must die: call Joshua, and present yourselves in
the Tent of Meeting, that I may commission him." Moses and Joshua went,
and presented themselves in the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Yahweh appeared in the Tent in a pillar
of cloud: and the pillar of cloud stood over the door of the Tent.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Behold, you
shall sleep with your fathers; and this people will rise up, and play
the prostitute after the strange gods of the land, where they go to be
among them, and will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made
with them.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Then my anger shall be kindled against
them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from
them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall come
on them; so that they will say in that day, 'Haven't these evils come on
us because our God is not among us?'

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> I will surely hide my face in that day
for all the evil which they shall have worked, in that they are turned
to other gods.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> "Now therefore write this song for
yourselves, and teach it to the children of Israel: put it in their
mouths, that this song may be a witness for me against the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> For when I shall have brought them into
the land which I swore to their fathers, flowing with milk and honey,
and they shall have eaten and filled themselves, and grown fat; then
will they turn to other gods, and serve them, and despise me, and break
my covenant.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> It shall happen, when many evils and
troubles are come on them, that this song shall testify before them as a
witness; for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed:
for I know their imagination which they frame this day, before I have
brought them into the land which I swore."

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> So Moses wrote this song the same day,
and taught it the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> He commissioned Joshua the son of Nun,
and said, "Be strong and courageous; for you shall bring the children of
Israel into the land which I swore to them: and I will be with you."

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> It happened, when Moses had made an end
of writing the words of this law in a book, until they were finished,

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> that Moses commanded the Levites, who
bore the ark of the covenant of Yahweh, saying,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> "Take this book of the law, and put it
by the side of the ark of the covenant of Yahweh your God, that it may
be there for a witness against you.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> For I know your rebellion, and your
stiff neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, you have
been rebellious against Yahweh; and how much more after my death?

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Assemble to me all the elders of your
tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in their ears,
and call heaven and earth to witness against them.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> For I know that after my death you will
utterly corrupt yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have
commanded you; and evil will happen to you in the latter days; because
you will do that which is evil in the sight of Yahweh, to provoke him to
anger through the work of your hands."

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Moses spoke in the ears of all the
assembly of Israel the words of this song, until they were finished.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Give ear, you heavens, and I will speak.
Let the earth hear the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> My doctrine shall drop as the rain. My
speech shall condense as the dew, as the small rain on the tender grass,
as the showers on the herb.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> For I will proclaim the name of Yahweh.
Ascribe greatness to our God!

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> The Rock, his work is perfect, for all
his ways are justice: a God of faithfulness and without iniquity, just
and right is he.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> They have dealt corruptly with him,
\[they are\] not his children, \[it is\] their blemish. \[They are\] a
perverse and crooked generation.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> Do you thus requite Yahweh, foolish
people and unwise? Isn't he your father who has bought you? He has made
you, and established you.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Remember the days of old. Consider the
years of many generations. Ask your father, and he will show you; your
elders, and they will tell you.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> When the Most High gave to the nations
their inheritance, when he separated the children of men, he set the
bounds of the peoples according to the number of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> For Yahweh's portion is his people. Jacob
is the lot of his inheritance.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> He found him in a desert land, in the
waste howling wilderness. He surrounded him. He cared for him. He kept
him as the apple of his eye.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> As an eagle that stirs up her nest,
that flutters over her young, he spread abroad his wings, he took them,
he bore them on his feathers.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Yahweh alone led him. There was no
foreign god with him.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> He made him ride on the high places of
the earth. He ate the increase of the field. He caused him to suck honey
out of the rock, oil out of the flinty rock;

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Butter of the herd, and milk of the
flock, with fat of lambs, rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats, with
the finest of the wheat. Of the blood of the grape you drank wine.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> But Jeshurun grew fat, and kicked. You
have grown fat. You have grown thick. You have become sleek. Then he
forsook God who made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his
salvation.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> They moved him to jealousy with strange
\[gods\]. They provoked him to anger with abominations.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> They sacrificed to demons, \[which
were\] no God, to gods that they didn't know, to new \[gods\] that came
up of late, which your fathers didn't dread.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Of the Rock who became your father, you
are unmindful, and have forgotten God who gave you birth.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Yahweh saw \[it\], and abhorred
\[them\], because of the provocation of his sons and his daughters.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> He said, "I will hide my face from
them. I will see what their end shall be; for they are a very perverse
generation, children in whom is no faithfulness.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> They have moved me to jealousy with
that which is not God. They have provoked me to anger with their
vanities. I will move them to jealousy with those who are not a people.
I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For a fire is kindled in my anger,
Burns to the lowest Sheol, Devours the earth with its increase, and sets
the foundations of the mountains on fire.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> "I will heap evils on them. I will
spend my arrows on them.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> \[They shall be\] wasted with hunger,
and devoured with burning heat and bitter destruction. I will send the
teeth of animals on them, With the poison of crawling things of the
dust.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> Outside the sword shall bereave, and in
the rooms, terror; on both young man and virgin, The nursing infant with
the gray-haired man.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> I said, I would scatter them afar. I
would make the memory of them to cease from among men;

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> were it not that I feared the
provocation of the enemy, lest their adversaries should judge wrongly,
lest they should say, 'Our hand is exalted, Yahweh has not done all
this.'"

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> For they are a nation void of counsel.
There is no understanding in them.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> Oh that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end!

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> How could one chase a thousand, and two
put ten thousand to flight, unless their Rock had sold them, and Yahweh
had delivered them up?

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> For their rock is not as our Rock, even
our enemies themselves being judges.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For their vine is of the vine of Sodom,
of the fields of Gomorrah. Their grapes are grapes of gall, Their
clusters are bitter.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> Their wine is the poison of serpents,
The cruel venom of asps.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> "Isn't this laid up in store with me,
sealed up among my treasures?

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> Vengeance is mine, and recompense, at
the time when their foot slides; for the day of their calamity is at
hand. The things that are to come on them shall make haste."

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> For Yahweh will judge his people, and
have compassion on his servants, when he sees that \[their\] power is
gone, There is none \[remaining\], shut up or left at large.

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> He will say, "Where are their gods, The
rock in which they took refuge;

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> Which ate the fat of their sacrifices,
And drank the wine of their drink offering? Let them rise up and help
you! Let them be your protection.

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> "See now that I, even I, am he, There
is no god with me. I kill, and I make alive. I wound, and I heal. There
is no one who can deliver out of my hand.

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> For I lift up my hand to heaven, And
say, As I live forever,

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> if I whet my glittering sword, My hand
take hold on judgment; I will render vengeance to my adversaries, and
will recompense those who hate me.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> I will make my arrows drunk with blood.
My sword shall devour flesh with the blood of the slain and the
captives, from the head of the leaders of the enemy."

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> Rejoice, you nations, \[with\] his
people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants. He will render
vengeance to his adversaries, And will make expiation for his land, for
his people.

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> Moses came and spoke all the words of
this song in the ears of the people, he and Joshua the son of Nun.

<span id="an_32:45">32:45</span> Moses made an end of speaking all these
words to all Israel;

<span id="an_32:46">32:46</span> He said to them, "Set your heart to all
the words which I testify to you this day, which you shall command your
children to observe to do, \[even\] all the words of this law.

<span id="an_32:47">32:47</span> For it is no vain thing for you;
because it is your life, and through this thing you shall prolong your
days in the land, where you go over the Jordan to possess it."

<span id="an_32:48">32:48</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses that same day,
saying,

<span id="an_32:49">32:49</span> "Go up into this mountain of Abarim, to
Mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, that is over against Jericho;
and see the land of Canaan, which I give to the children of Israel for a
possession;

<span id="an_32:50">32:50</span> and die on the mountain where you go
up, and be gathered to your people, as Aaron your brother died on Mount
Hor, and was gathered to his people:

<span id="an_32:51">32:51</span> because you trespassed against me in
the midst of the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah of Kadesh,
in the wilderness of Zin; because you didn't sanctify me in the midst of
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:52">32:52</span> For you shall see the land before you;
but you shall not go there into the land which I give the children of
Israel."

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> This is the blessing, with which Moses
the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> He said, "Yahweh came from Sinai, And
rose from Seir to them. He shone forth from Mount Paran. He came from
the ten thousands of holy ones. At his right hand was a fiery law for
them.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Yes, he loves the people. All his saints
are in your hand. They sat down at your feet; \[Everyone\] shall receive
of your words.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Moses commanded us a law, An inheritance
for the assembly of Jacob.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> He was king in Jeshurun, When the heads
of the people were gathered, All the tribes of Israel together.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> "Let Reuben live, and not die; Nor let
his men be few."

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> This is \[the blessing\] of Judah: and he
said, "Hear, Yahweh, the voice of Judah. Bring him in to his people.
With his hands he contended for himself. You shall be a help against his
adversaries."

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> Of Levi he said, "Your Thummim and your
Urim are with your godly one, whom you proved at Massah, with whom you
strove at the waters of Meribah;

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> who said of his father, and of his
mother, 'I have not seen him;' Neither did he acknowledge his brothers,
Nor did he know his own children: For they have observed your word, and
keep your covenant.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> They shall teach Jacob your ordinances,
and Israel your law. They shall put incense before you, and whole burnt
offering on your altar.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Yahweh, bless his substance. Accept the
work of his hands. Strike through the hips of those who rise up against
him, of those who hate him, that they not rise again."

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Of Benjamin he said, "The beloved of
Yahweh shall dwell in safety by him. He covers him all the day long. He
dwells between his shoulders."

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Of Joseph he said, "His land is blessed
by Yahweh, for the precious things of the heavens, for the dew, for the
deep that couches beneath,

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> for the precious things of the fruits
of the sun, for the precious things of the growth of the moons,

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> for the chief things of the ancient
mountains, for the precious things of the everlasting hills,

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> for the precious things of the earth
and its fullness, the good will of him who lived in the bush. Let \[the
blessing\] come on the head of Joseph, On the crown of the head of him
who was separate from his brothers.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> The firstborn of his herd, majesty is
his. His horns are the horns of the wild ox. With them he shall push the
peoples all of them, \[even\] the ends of the earth: They are the ten
thousands of Ephraim. They are the thousands of Manasseh."

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> Of Zebulun he said, "Rejoice, Zebulun,
in your going out; and Issachar, in your tents.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> They shall call the peoples to the
mountain. There they will offer sacrifices of righteousness, for they
shall draw out the abundance of the seas, the hidden treasures of the
sand."

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Of Gad he said, "He who enlarges Gad is
blessed. He dwells as a lioness, and tears the arm, yes, the crown of
the head.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> He provided the first part for himself,
for there was the lawgiver's portion reserved. He came \[with\] the
heads of the people. He executed the righteousness of Yahweh, His
ordinances with Israel."

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> Of Dan he said, "Dan is a lion's cub
that leaps out of Bashan."

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> Of Naphtali he said, "Naphtali,
satisfied with favor, full of the blessing of Yahweh, Possess the west
and the south."

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Of Asher he said, "Asher is blessed
with children. Let him be acceptable to his brothers. Let him dip his
foot in oil.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Your bars shall be iron and brass. As
your days, so your strength will be.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> "There is none like God, Jeshurun, who
rides on the heavens for your help, In his excellency on the skies.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> The eternal God is \[your\] dwelling
place. Underneath are the everlasting arms. He thrust out the enemy from
before you, and said, 'Destroy!'

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> Israel dwells in safety; the fountain
of Jacob alone, In a land of grain and new wine. Yes, his heavens drop
down dew.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> You are happy, Israel. Who is like you,
a people saved by Yahweh, the shield of your help, the sword of your
excellency! Your enemies shall submit themselves to you. You shall tread
on their high places."

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Moses went up from the plains of Moab to
Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. Yahweh
showed him all the land of Gilead, to Dan,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> and all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim
and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, to the hinder sea,

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> and the South, and the Plain of the
valley of Jericho the city of palm trees, to Zoar.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Yahweh said to him, "This is the land
which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, 'I will give
it to your seed.' I have caused you to see it with your eyes, but you
shall not go over there."

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> So Moses the servant of Yahweh died there
in the land of Moab, according to the word of Yahweh.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> He buried him in the valley in the land
of Moab over against Beth Peor: but no man knows of his tomb to this
day.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Moses was one hundred twenty years old
when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> The children of Israel wept for Moses in
the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days of weeping in the mourning
for Moses were ended.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> Joshua the son of Nun was full of the
spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands on him: and the children
of Israel listened to him, and did as Yahweh commanded Moses.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> There has not arisen a prophet since in
Israel like Moses, whom Yahweh knew face to face,

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> in all the signs and the wonders, which
Yahweh sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his
servants, and to all his land,

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> and in all the mighty hand, and in all
the great terror, which Moses worked in the sight of all Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua](jos)
