[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gal)  [Next](phi) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Ephesians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through
the will of God, to the saints who are at Ephesus, and the faithful in
Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the
heavenly places in Christ;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> even as he chose us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we would be holy and without blemish
before him in love;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> having predestined us for adoption as
children through Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure
of his desire,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> to the praise of the glory of his grace, by
which he freely bestowed favor on us in the Beloved,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> in whom we have our redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his
grace,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> which he made to abound toward us in all
wisdom and prudence,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> making known to us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure which he purposed in him

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> to an administration of the fullness of
the times, to sum up all things in Christ, the things in the heavens,
and the things on the earth, in him;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> in whom also we were assigned an
inheritance, having been foreordained according to the purpose of him
who works all things after the counsel of his will;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> to the end that we should be to the
praise of his glory, we who had before hoped in Christ:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> in whom you also, having heard the word
of the truth, the Good News of your salvation--in whom, having also
believed, you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> who is a pledge of our inheritance, to
the redemption of God's own possession, to the praise of his glory.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For this cause I also, having heard of
the faith in the Lord Jesus which is among you, and the love which you
have toward all the saints,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> don't cease to give thanks for you,
making mention of you in my prayers,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of him;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> having the eyes of your hearts
enlightened, that you may know what is the hope of his calling, and what
are the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> and what is the exceeding greatness of
his power toward us who believe, according to that working of the
strength of his might

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> which he worked in Christ, when he raised
him from the dead, and made him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly
places,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> far above all rule, and authority, and
power, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this age,
but also in that which is to come.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> He put all things in subjection under his
feet, and gave him to be head over all things for the assembly,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> which is his body, the fullness of him
who fills all in all.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> You were made alive when you were dead in
transgressions and sins,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> in which you once walked according to the
course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air,
the spirit who now works in the children of disobedience;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> among whom we also all once lived in the
lust of our flesh, doing the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and
were by nature children of wrath, even as the rest.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> But God, being rich in mercy, for his great
love with which he loved us,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> even when we were dead through our
trespasses, made us alive together with Christ (by grace you have been
saved),

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and raised us up with him, and made us to
sit with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> that in the ages to come he might show the
exceeding riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> for by grace you have been saved through
faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> not of works, that no one would boast.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared before that we would
walk in them.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Therefore remember that once you, the
Gentiles in the flesh, who are called "uncircumcision" by that which is
called "circumcision," (in the flesh, made by hands);

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> that you were at that time separate from
Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from
the covenants of the promise, having no hope and without God in the
world.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But now in Christ Jesus you who once were
far off are made near in the blood of Christ.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For he is our peace, who made both one,
and broke down the middle wall of partition,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> having abolished in the flesh the
hostility, the law of commandments contained in ordinances, that he
might create in himself one new man of the two, making peace;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and might reconcile them both in one body
to God through the cross, having killed the hostility thereby.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> He came and preached peace to you who
were far off and to those who were near.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For through him we both have our access
in one Spirit to the Father.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> So then you are no longer strangers and
foreigners, but you are fellow citizens with the saints, and of the
household of God,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> being built on the foundation of the
apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief cornerstone;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> in whom the whole building, fitted
together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> in whom you also are built together for a
habitation of God in the Spirit.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For this cause I, Paul, am the prisoner of
Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> if it is so that you have heard of the
administration of that grace of God which was given me toward you;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> how that by revelation the mystery was made
known to me, as I wrote before in few words,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> by which, when you read, you can perceive
my understanding in the mystery of Christ;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> which in other generations was not made
known to the children of men, as it has now been revealed to his holy
apostles and prophets in the Spirit;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> that the Gentiles are fellow heirs, and
fellow members of the body, and fellow partakers of his promise in
Christ Jesus through the Good News,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> of which I was made a servant, according to
the gift of that grace of God which was given me according to the
working of his power.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> To me, the very least of all saints, was
this grace given, to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> and to make all men see what is the
administration of the mystery which for ages has been hidden in God, who
created all things through Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> to the intent that now through the
assembly the manifold wisdom of God might be made known to the
principalities and the powers in the heavenly places,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> according to the eternal purpose which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> in whom we have boldness and access in
confidence through our faith in him.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Therefore I ask that you may not lose
heart at my troubles for you, which are your glory.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For this cause, I bow my knees to the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> from whom every family in heaven and on
earth is named,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> that he would grant you, according to the
riches of his glory, that you may be strengthened with power through his
Spirit in the inward man;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> that Christ may dwell in your hearts
through faith; to the end that you, being rooted and grounded in love,

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> may be strengthened to comprehend with
all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> and to know Christ's love which surpasses
knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Now to him who is able to do exceedingly
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that
works in us,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> to him be the glory in the assembly and
in Christ Jesus to all generations forever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beg
you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> with all lowliness and humility, with
patience, bearing with one another in love;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> being eager to keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> There is one body, and one Spirit, even as
you also were called in one hope of your calling;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> one Lord, one faith, one baptism,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> one God and Father of all, who is over all,
and through all, and in us all.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But to each one of us was the grace given
according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Therefore he says, "When he ascended on
high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men."

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Now this, "He ascended," what is it but
that he also first descended into the lower parts of the earth?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> He who descended is the one who also
ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> He gave some to be apostles; and some,
prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, shepherds and teachers;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> for the perfecting of the saints, to the
work of serving, to the building up of the body of Christ;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> until we all attain to the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a full grown man, to
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> that we may no longer be children, tossed
back and forth and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
trickery of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> but speaking truth in love, we may grow
up in all things into him, who is the head, Christ;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> from whom all the body, being fitted and
knit together through that which every joint supplies, according to the
working in measure of each individual part, makes the body increase to
the building up of itself in love.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> This I say therefore, and testify in the
Lord, that you no longer walk as the rest of the Gentiles also walk, in
the futility of their mind,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> being darkened in their understanding,
alienated from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in
them, because of the hardening of their hearts;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> who having become callous gave themselves
up to lust, to work all uncleanness with greediness.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But you did not learn Christ that way;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> if indeed you heard him, and were taught
in him, even as truth is in Jesus:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> that you put away, as concerning your
former way of life, the old man, that grows corrupt after the lusts of
deceit;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> and that you be renewed in the spirit of
your mind,

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> and put on the new man, who in the
likeness of God has been created in righteousness and holiness of truth.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Therefore, putting away falsehood, speak
truth each one with his neighbor. For we are members of one another.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> "Be angry, and don't sin." Don't let the
sun go down on your wrath,

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> neither give place to the devil.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Let him who stole steal no more; but
rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good,
that he may have something to give to him who has need.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Let no corrupt speech proceed out of your
mouth, but such as is good for building up as the need may be, that it
may give grace to those who hear.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> Don't grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in
whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Let all bitterness, wrath, anger, outcry,
and slander, be put away from you, with all malice.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And be kind to one another,
tenderhearted, forgiving each other, just as God also in Christ forgave
you.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Be therefore imitators of God, as beloved
children.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Walk in love, even as Christ also loved
you, and gave himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for
a sweet-smelling fragrance.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But sexual immorality, and all uncleanness,
or covetousness, let it not even be mentioned among you, as becomes
saints;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> nor filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor
jesting, which are not appropriate; but rather giving of thanks.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Know this for sure, that no sexually
immoral person, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an
idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and God.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Let no one deceive you with empty words.
For because of these things, the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Therefore don't be partakers with them.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For you were once darkness, but are now
light in the Lord. Walk as children of light,

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> for the fruit of the Spirit is in all
goodness and righteousness and truth,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> proving what is well pleasing to the
Lord.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather even reprove them.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For the things which are done by them in
secret, it is a shame even to speak of.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But all things, when they are reproved,
are revealed by the light, for everything that reveals is light.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Therefore he says, "Awake, you who sleep,
and arise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you."

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Therefore watch carefully how you walk,
not as unwise, but as wise;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> redeeming the time, because the days are
evil.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Therefore don't be foolish, but
understand what the will of the Lord is.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Don't be drunken with wine, in which is
dissipation, but be filled with the Spirit,

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> speaking to one another in psalms, hymns,
and spiritual songs; singing, and making melody in your heart to the
Lord;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> giving thanks always concerning all
things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God, even the Father;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> subjecting yourselves one to another in
the fear of Christ.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Wives, be subject to your own husbands,
as to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For the husband is the head of the wife,
and Christ also is the head of the assembly, being himself the savior of
the body.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> But as the assembly is subject to Christ,
so let the wives also be to their own husbands in everything.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ
also loved the assembly, and gave himself up for it;

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> that he might sanctify it, having
cleansed it by the washing of water with the word,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> that he might present the assembly to
himself gloriously, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but
that it should be holy and without blemish.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Even so husbands also ought to love their
own wives as their own bodies. He who loves his own wife loves himself.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> For no man ever hated his own flesh; but
nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord also does the assembly;

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> because we are members of his body, of
his flesh and bones.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> "For this cause a man will leave his
father and mother, and will be joined to his wife. The two will become
one flesh."

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> This mystery is great, but I speak
concerning Christ and of the assembly.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Nevertheless each of you must also love
his own wife even as himself; and let the wife see that she respects her
husband.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Children, obey your parents in the Lord,
for this is right.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> "Honor your father and mother," which is
the first commandment with a promise:

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> "that it may be well with you, and you may
live long on the earth."

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> You fathers, don't provoke your children to
wrath, but nurture them in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Servants, be obedient to those who
according to the flesh are your masters, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of your heart, as to Christ;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> not in the way of service only when eyes
are on you, as men pleasers; but as servants of Christ, doing the will
of God from the heart;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> with good will doing service, as to the
Lord, and not to men;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> knowing that whatever good thing each one
does, he will receive the same again from the Lord, whether he is bound
or free.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> You masters, do the same things to them,
and give up threatening, knowing that he who is both their Master and
yours is in heaven, and there is no partiality with him.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in
the strength of his might.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Put on the whole armor of God, that you
may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For our wrestling is not against flesh
and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against
the world's rulers of the darkness of this age, and against the
spiritual forces of wickedness in the heavenly places.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Therefore, put on the whole armor of God,
that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all,
to stand.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Stand therefore, having the utility belt
of truth buckled around your waist, and having put on the breastplate of
righteousness,

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> and having fitted your feet with the
preparation of the Good News of peace;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> above all, taking up the shield of faith,
with which you will be able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil
one.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And take the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> with all prayer and requests, praying at
all times in the Spirit, and being watchful to this end in all
perseverance and requests for all the saints:

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> on my behalf, that utterance may be given
to me in opening my mouth, to make known with boldness the mystery of
the Good News,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> for which I am an ambassador in chains;
that in it I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> But that you also may know my affairs,
how I am doing, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful servant in
the Lord, will make known to you all things;

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> whom I have sent to you for this very
purpose, that you may know our state, and that he may comfort your
hearts.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Peace be to the brothers, and love with
faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Grace be with all those who love our Lord
Jesus Christ with incorruptible love. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians](phi)
