[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bar)  [Next](aza) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Epistle of Jeremiah

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> A copy of a letter, which Jeremiah sent to
those who were to be led as captives into Babylon by the king of the
Babylonians, to testify to them, as it was commanded him by God.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> "Because of the sins which you have
committed before God, you shall be led away as captives into Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar king of the Babylonians.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> So, when you come to Babylon, you shall
remain there many years and for a long season, namely, seven
generations; and after that I will bring you peaceably away from there.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Now you will see in Babylon gods of silver
and of gold and of wood, borne upon shoulders, which cause the nations
to fear.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Beware, therefore, that you in no way
become like these strangers, nor associate with them, when you see the
multitude before them and behind them, worshipping them.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But you, say in your hearts, 'O Lord, we
must worship you.'

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For my angel is with you, and I myself am
caring for your souls.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> "'As for their tongue, it is polished by
the workman, and they themselves are gilded and overlain with silver;
yet they are only false and cannot speak.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And taking gold, as if for a virgin who
loves to put herself on display, they make crowns for the heads of their
gods.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Sometimes also the priests steal gold and
silver from their gods and bestow it upon themselves.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Yes, they will give from it to the common
harlots; and they cover them, gods of silver and gods of gold and wood,
with garments as if they were men.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Yet these gods cannot save themselves
from rust and moth, though they be covered with purple attire.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> They wipe their faces because of the dust
of the temple, when there is much upon them.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And he, who cannot put to death one that
offends him, holds a scepter as though he were a judge of the country.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> He has also in his right hand a dagger
and an ax, but he cannot deliver himself from war and thieves.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Since they are known not to be gods,
therefore fear them not.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For, just as a vessel which a man uses is
worth nothing when it is broken, so also it is with their gods; when
they are set up in the temple, their eyes are full of dust through the
feet of those who enter.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And, just as the doors are made secure on
every side of him who offends the king, as one committed to suffer
death, so also do the priests secure their temples with doors, with
locks and bars, lest their gods be spoiled by robbers.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> They light candles for them, yes, more
than for themselves, though they cannot see a single one.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> They are like one of the beams of the
temple, yet they say their hearts are gnawed upon by things creeping out
of the earth; and when they and their clothes are eaten, they feel
nothing.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Their faces are blacked by the smoke
which comes out of the temple.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Upon their bodies and heads sit bats,
swallows, and birds, and the cats also.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> By this you may know that they are no
gods, therefore fear them not.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Notwithstanding the gold which is around
them to make them beautiful, and except that they wipe off the rust,
they will not shine, because not even when they were molten did they
feel it.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> These things wherein there is no breath
are bought for a most high price.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Having no feet, they are borne upon
shoulders, and in this way they declare to men that they are worth
nothing.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> "'Even those who serve them are ashamed,
for if they fall to the ground at any time, they cannot rise up again of
themselves; neither, if one sets them upright, can they move of
themselves; neither, if they are bowed down, can they make themselves
straight; yet they set gifts before them as before dead men.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> As for the things which are sacrificed to
them, their priests sell and abuse; in the same way their wives store up
part of it in salt; but to the poor and powerless they give none of it.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Menstruous women and women in childbed
eat their sacrifices; by these things you may know that they are no
gods; fear them not.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> For how can they be called gods? Is it
because women set meat before the gods of silver, gold, and wood,

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> and the priests sit in their temples,
having their clothes torn, and their heads and beards shaven, and
nothing upon their heads?

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> They roar and cry before their gods, as
men do at the feast when one is dead.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> The priests also take off their garments,
and clothe their wives and children.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> "'Whether one does evil or good to them,
they are not able to repay it; neither can they set up a king or put him
down.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> In the same way, they can neither give
riches nor money; though a man might make a vow to them and not keep it,
they will not require it.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> They can save no man from death, nor
deliver the weak from the mighty.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> They cannot restore a blind man to his
sight, nor help any man in his distress.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> They can show no mercy to the widow, nor
do good to the fatherless.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> Their gods of wood, which are overlaid
with gold and silver, are like the stones which are hewn out of the
mountain; those who worship them shall be confounded.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> Why then would a man think and say that
they are gods, when even the Chaldeans themselves dishonor them?

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> Who, if they saw someone mute and unable
to speak, would bring him and entreat Bel, so that he may speak, as if
he were able to understand.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> Yet they cannot understand this
themselves, and so leave them, for they have no knowledge.

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> The women also, sitting in the ways with
cords around themselves, burn bran for perfume; but if any of them,
drawn by someone who passes by, should lie with him, she reproaches her
peer, because she was not thought as worthy as herself, nor her cord
broken.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> Whatsoever is done among them is false;
so then, how can it be thought or said that they are gods?

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> "'They are made by carpenters and
goldsmiths; they can be nothing other than what the workmen will have
them be.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> And they themselves who made them can
never continue long; why then would the things which are made by them be
gods?

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> For they left lies and reproaches for
those who would succeed them.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> For when any war or plague comes upon
them, the priests consult among themselves, as to where they may be
hidden with them.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> Why then cannot men perceive that they
are no gods, who can neither save themselves from war, nor from plague?

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> For, seeing they are only wood, overlaid
with silver and gold, it shall be known hereafter that they are false;

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> and it shall manifestly appear to all
nations and kings that they are no gods, but are the works of men's
hands, and that there is no work of God in them.

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> Who then will not know that they are no
gods?

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> For they can neither set up a king in the
land, nor give rain to men.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> They can neither judge their own case,
nor redress a wrong; they are unable because they are like crows,
between heaven and earth.

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> When it happens that fire falls upon the
house of gods of wood, overlaid with gold or silver, their priests will
flee away and escape; but they themselves shall be burned asunder like
beams.

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> Moreover they cannot withstand any king
or enemies; so how then can it be thought or said that they are gods?

<span id="an_6:57">6:57</span> Neither are those gods of wood, overlain
with silver or gold, able to escape from thieves or robbers.

<span id="an_6:58">6:58</span> Whose gold and silver and garments
wherewith they are clothed, those who are strong take it, and go away
with all; neither are they able to help themselves.

<span id="an_6:59">6:59</span> "'Therefore it is better to be a king who
displays his power, or else a profitable vessel in a house, which the
owner shall have use of, than such false gods, or to be a door in an
house, to keep such things therein, than such false gods, or a pillar of
wood in a palace, than such false gods.

<span id="an_6:60">6:60</span> For sun, moon, and stars, being bright
and sent to perform their duties, are obedient.

<span id="an_6:61">6:61</span> In the same way, the lightning, when it
breaks forth, is easy to be seen; and in the same way the wind blows in
every country.

<span id="an_6:62">6:62</span> And when God commands the clouds to go
over the whole world, they do as they are directed.

<span id="an_6:63">6:63</span> And the fire, sent from above to consume
hills and woods, does as it is commanded; but these are like them
neither in appearance nor in power.

<span id="an_6:64">6:64</span> Therefore, it is neither to be supposed
nor said that they are gods, since they are able neither to judge cases,
nor to do good to men.

<span id="an_6:65">6:65</span> Knowing therefore that they are no gods,
do not fear them,

<span id="an_6:66">6:66</span> for they can neither curse nor bless
kings;

<span id="an_6:67">6:67</span> neither can they show signs in the
heavens among the heathen, nor shine as the sun, nor give light as the
moon.

<span id="an_6:68">6:68</span> The beasts are better than they, for they
can get under a cover and help themselves.

<span id="an_6:69">6:69</span> It is then by no means manifest to us
that they are gods, therefore do not fear them.

<span id="an_6:70">6:70</span> For as a scarecrow in a garden of
cucumbers keeps nothing, so are their gods of wood, overlain with silver
and gold.

<span id="an_6:71">6:71</span> And likewise their gods of wood, overlain
with silver and gold, are like a white thorn in an orchard, which every
bird sits upon; and also like a dead body, which is cast into the dark.

<span id="an_6:72">6:72</span> And you shall know them to be no gods by
the bright purple that rots upon them, and they themselves afterward
shall be eaten and shall be a reproach in the country.

<span id="an_6:73">6:73</span> Better, therefore, is the just man who
has no idols, for he shall be far from reproach.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prayer of Azariah](aza)
