[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jon)  [Next](nah) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Micah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of Yahweh that came to Micah the
Morashtite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah,
which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear, you peoples, all of you. Listen, O
earth, and all that is therein: and let the Lord Yahweh be witness
against you, the Lord from his holy temple.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> For, behold, Yahweh comes forth out of his
place, and will come down and tread on the high places of the earth.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> The mountains melt under him, and the
valleys split apart, like wax before the fire, like waters that are
poured down a steep place.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> "All this is for the disobedience of Jacob,
and for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the disobedience of
Jacob? Isn't it Samaria? And what are the high places of Judah? Aren't
they Jerusalem?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Therefore I will make Samaria like a rubble
heap of the field, like places for planting vineyards; and I will pour
down its stones into the valley, and I will uncover its foundations.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> All her idols will be beaten to pieces, and
all her temple gifts will be burned with fire, and all her images I will
destroy; for of the hire of a prostitute has she gathered them, and to
the hire of a prostitute shall they return."

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For this I will lament and wail; I will go
stripped and naked; I will howl like the jackals, and moan like the
daughters of owls.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For her wounds are incurable; for it has
come even to Judah. It reaches to the gate of my people, even to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Don't tell it in Gath. Don't weep at all.
At Beth Ophrah I have rolled myself in the dust.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Pass on, inhabitant of Shaphir, in
nakedness and shame. The inhabitant of Zaanan won't come out. The
wailing of Beth Ezel will take from you his protection.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For the inhabitant of Maroth waits
anxiously for good, because evil has come down from Yahweh to the gate
of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Harness the chariot to the swift steed,
inhabitant of Lachish. She was the beginning of sin to the daughter of
Zion; For the transgressions of Israel were found in you.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Therefore you will give a parting gift to
Moresheth Gath. The houses of Achzib will be a deceitful thing to the
kings of Israel.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> I will yet bring to you, inhabitant of
Mareshah. He who is the glory of Israel will come to Adullam.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Shave your heads, and cut off your hair
for the children of your delight. Enlarge your baldness like the
vulture; for they have gone into captivity from you!

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Woe to those who devise iniquity and work
evil on their beds! When the morning is light, they practice it, because
it is in the power of their hand.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> They covet fields, and seize them; and
houses, and take them away: and they oppress a man and his house, even a
man and his heritage.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh: "Behold, I am
planning against these people a disaster, from which you will not remove
your necks, neither will you walk haughtily; for it is an evil time.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> In that day they will take up a parable
against you, and lament with a doleful lamentation, saying, 'We are
utterly ruined! My people's possession is divided up. Indeed he takes it
from me and assigns our fields to traitors!'"

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Therefore you will have no one who divides
the land by lot in the assembly of Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> "Don't prophesy!" They prophesy. "Don't
prophesy about these things. Disgrace won't overtake us."

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Shall it be said, O house of Jacob: "Is the
Spirit of Yahweh angry? Are these his doings? Don't my words do good to
him who walks blamelessly?"

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But lately my people have risen up as an
enemy. You strip the robe and clothing from those who pass by without a
care, returning from battle.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> You drive the women of my people out from
their pleasant houses; from their young children you take away my
blessing forever.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Arise, and depart! For this is not your
resting place, because of uncleanness that destroys, even with a
grievous destruction.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> If a man walking in a spirit of falsehood
lies: "I will prophesy to you of wine and of strong drink;" he would be
the prophet of this people.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I will surely assemble, Jacob, all of
you; I will surely gather the remnant of Israel; I will put them
together as the sheep of Bozrah, as a flock in the midst of their
pasture; they will swarm with people.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> He who breaks open the way goes up before
them. They break through the gate, and go out. And their king passes on
before them, with Yahweh at their head.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> I said, "Please listen, you heads of Jacob,
and rulers of the house of Israel: Isn't it for you to know justice?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> You who hate the good, and love the evil;
who tear off their skin, and their flesh from off their bones;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> who also eat the flesh of my people, and
flay their skin from off them, and break their bones, and chop them in
pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then they will cry to Yahweh, but he will
not answer them. Yes, he will hide his face from them at that time,
because they made their deeds evil."

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Thus says Yahweh concerning the prophets
who lead my people astray; for those who feed their teeth, they
proclaim, "Peace!" and whoever doesn't provide for their mouths, they
prepare war against him:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> "Therefore night is over you, with no
vision, and it is dark to you, that you may not divine; and the sun will
go down on the prophets, and the day will be black over them.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> The seers shall be disappointed, and the
diviners confounded. Yes, they shall all cover their lips; for there is
no answer from God."

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But as for me, I am full of power by the
Spirit of Yahweh, and of judgment, and of might, to declare to Jacob his
disobedience, and to Israel his sin.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Please listen to this, you heads of the
house of Jacob, and rulers of the house of Israel, who abhor justice,
and pervert all equity.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> They build up Zion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Her leaders judge for bribes, and her
priests teach for a price, and her prophets of it tell fortunes for
money: yet they lean on Yahweh, and say, "Isn't Yahweh in the midst of
us? No disaster will come on us."

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Therefore Zion for your sake will be
plowed like a field, and Jerusalem will become heaps of rubble, and the
mountain of the temple like the high places of a forest.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But in the latter days, it will happen that
the mountain of Yahweh's temple will be established on the top of the
mountains, and it will be exalted above the hills; and peoples will
stream to it.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Many nations will go and say, "Come, and
let us go up to the mountain of Yahweh, and to the house of the God of
Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths."
For out of Zion will go forth the law, and the word of Yahweh from
Jerusalem;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and he will judge between many peoples, and
will decide concerning strong nations afar off. They will beat their
swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation will
not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war any more.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But they will sit every man under his vine
and under his fig tree; and no one will make them afraid: For the mouth
of Yahweh of Armies has spoken.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Indeed all the nations may walk in the name
of their gods; but we will walk in the name of Yahweh our God forever
and ever.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> "In that day," says Yahweh, "I will
assemble that which is lame, and I will gather that which is driven
away, and that which I have afflicted;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> and I will make that which was lame a
remnant, and that which was cast far off a strong nation: and Yahweh
will reign over them on Mount Zion from then on, even forever."

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> You, tower of the flock, the hill of the
daughter of Zion, to you it will come, yes, the former dominion will
come, the kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Now why do you cry out aloud? Is there no
king in you? Has your counselor perished, that pains have taken hold of
you as of a woman in travail?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Be in pain, and labor to bring forth,
daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail; for now you will go forth out
of the city, and will dwell in the field, and will come even to Babylon.
There you will be rescued. There Yahweh will redeem you from the hand of
your enemies.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Now many nations have assembled against
you, that say, "Let her be defiled, and let our eye gloat over Zion."

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> But they don't know the thoughts of
Yahweh, neither do they understand his counsel; for he has gathered them
like the sheaves to the threshing floor.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Arise and thresh, daughter of Zion; for I
will make your horn iron, and I will make your hoofs brass; and you will
beat in pieces many peoples: and I will devote their gain to Yahweh, and
their substance to the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now you shall gather yourself in troops,
daughter of troops. He has laid siege against us. They will strike the
judge of Israel with a rod on the cheek.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> But you, Bethlehem Ephrathah, being small
among the clans of Judah, out of you one will come forth to me that is
to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth are from of old, from
everlasting.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Therefore he will abandon them until the
time that she who is in labor gives birth. Then the rest of his brothers
will return to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> He shall stand, and shall shepherd in the
strength of Yahweh, in the majesty of the name of Yahweh his God: and
they will live, for then he will be great to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> He will be our peace when Assyria invades
our land, and when he marches through our fortresses, then we will raise
against him seven shepherds, and eight leaders of men.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> They will rule the land of Assyria with the
sword, and the land of Nimrod in its gates. He will deliver us from the
Assyrian, when he invades our land, and when he marches within our
border.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The remnant of Jacob will be in the midst
of many peoples, like dew from Yahweh, like showers on the grass, that
don't wait for man, nor wait for the sons of men.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> The remnant of Jacob will be among the
nations, in the midst of many peoples, like a lion among the animals of
the forest, like a young lion among the flocks of sheep; who, if he goes
through, treads down and tears in pieces, and there is no one to
deliver.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Let your hand be lifted up above your
adversaries, and let all of your enemies be cut off.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> "It will happen in that day," says
Yahweh, "That I will cut off your horses out of the midst of you, and
will destroy your chariots.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> I will cut off the cities of your land,
and will tear down all your strongholds.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> I will destroy witchcraft from your hand;
and you shall have no soothsayers.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> I will cut off your engraved images and
your pillars out of your midst; and you shall no more worship the work
of your hands.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I will uproot your Asherim out of your
midst; and I will destroy your cities.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> I will execute vengeance in anger, and
wrath on the nations that didn't listen."

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Listen now to what Yahweh says: "Arise,
plead your case before the mountains, and let the hills hear what you
have to say.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Hear, you mountains, Yahweh's controversy,
and you enduring foundations of the earth; for Yahweh has a controversy
with his people, and he will contend with Israel.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> My people, what have I done to you? How
have I burdened you? Answer me!

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For I brought you up out of the land of
Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house of bondage. I sent before you
Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> My people, remember now what Balak king of
Moab devised, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from Shittim
to Gilgal, that you may know the righteous acts of Yahweh."

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> How shall I come before Yahweh, and bow
myself before the exalted God? Shall I come before him with burnt
offerings, with calves a year old?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Will Yahweh be pleased with thousands of
rams? With tens of thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn
for my disobedience? The fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> He has shown you, O man, what is good. What
does Yahweh require of you, but to act justly, to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with your God?

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Yahweh's voice calls to the city, and
wisdom sees your name: "Listen to the rod, and he who appointed it.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Are there yet treasures of wickedness in
the house of the wicked, and a short ephah that is accursed?

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Shall I be pure with dishonest scales,
and with a bag of deceitful weights?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Her rich men are full of violence, her
inhabitants speak lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their speech.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Therefore I also have struck you with a
grievous wound. I have made you desolate because of your sins.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> You shall eat, but not be satisfied. Your
humiliation will be in your midst. You will store up, but not save; and
that which you save I will give up to the sword.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> You will sow, but won't reap. You will
tread the olives, but won't anoint yourself with oil; and crush grapes,
but won't drink the wine.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> For the statutes of Omri are kept, and
all the works of the house of Ahab. You walk in their counsels, that I
may make you a ruin, and her inhabitants a hissing; And you will bear
the reproach of my people."

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Misery is mine! Indeed, I am like one who
gathers the summer fruits, as gleanings of the vineyard: There is no
cluster of grapes to eat. My soul desires to eat the early fig.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> The godly man has perished out of the
earth, and there is no one upright among men. They all lie in wait for
blood; every man hunts his brother with a net.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Their hands are on that which is evil to do
it diligently. The ruler and judge ask for a bribe; and the powerful man
dictates the evil desire of his soul. Thus they conspire together.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The best of them is like a brier. The most
upright is worse than a thorn hedge. The day of your watchmen, even your
visitation, has come; now is the time of their confusion.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Don't trust in a neighbor. Don't put
confidence in a friend. With the woman lying in your embrace, be careful
of the words of your mouth!

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For the son dishonors the father, the
daughter rises up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law; a man's enemies are the men of his own house.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> But as for me, I will look to Yahweh. I
will wait for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Don't rejoice against me, my enemy. When I
fall, I will arise. When I sit in darkness, Yahweh will be a light to
me.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I will bear the indignation of Yahweh,
because I have sinned against him, until he pleads my case, and executes
judgment for me. He will bring me forth to the light. I will see his
righteousness.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Then my enemy will see it, and shame will
cover her who said to me, where is Yahweh your God? Then my enemy will
see me and will cover her shame. Now she will be trodden down like the
mire of the streets.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> A day to build your walls-- In that day,
he will extend your boundary.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> In that day they will come to you from
Assyria and the cities of Egypt, and from Egypt even to the River, and
from sea to sea, and mountain to mountain.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Yet the land will be desolate because of
those who dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Shepherd your people with your staff, the
flock of your heritage, who dwell by themselves in a forest, in the
midst of fertile pasture land, let them feed; in Bashan and Gilead, as
in the days of old.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> "As in the days of your coming forth out
of the land of Egypt, I will show them marvelous things."

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> The nations will see and be ashamed of
all their might. They will lay their hand on their mouth. Their ears
will be deaf.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> They will lick the dust like a serpent.
Like crawling things of the earth they shall come trembling out of their
dens. They will come with fear to Yahweh our God, and will be afraid
because of you.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Who is a God like you, who pardons
iniquity, and passes over the disobedience of the remnant of his
heritage? He doesn't retain his anger forever, because he delights in
loving kindness.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> He will again have compassion on us. He
will tread our iniquities under foot; and you will cast all their sins
into the depths of the sea.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> You will give truth to Jacob, and mercy
to Abraham, as you have sworn to our fathers from the days of old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum](nah)
