[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jam)  [Next](pe2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 1 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the
chosen ones who are living as foreigners in the Dispersion in Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, that you may obey Jesus Christ
and be sprinkled with his blood: Grace to you and peace be multiplied.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy became our father again
to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> to an incorruptible and undefiled
inheritance that doesn't fade away, reserved in Heaven for you,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> who by the power of God are guarded through
faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Wherein you greatly rejoice, though now for
a little while, if need be, you have been put to grief in various
trials,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> that the proof of your faith, which is more
precious than gold that perishes even though it is tested by fire, may
be found to result in praise, glory, and honor at the revelation of
Jesus Christ--

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> whom not having known you love; in whom,
though now you don't see him, yet believing, you rejoice greatly with
joy unspeakable and full of glory--

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> receiving the result of your faith, the
salvation of your souls.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Concerning this salvation, the prophets
sought and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that would
come to you,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> searching for who or what kind of time
the Spirit of Christ, which was in them, pointed to, when he predicted
the sufferings of Christ, and the glories that would follow them.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> To them it was revealed, that not to
themselves, but to you, they ministered these things, which now have
been announced to you through those who preached the Good News to you by
the Holy Spirit sent out from heaven; which things angels desire to look
into.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Therefore, prepare your minds for action,
be sober and set your hope fully on the grace that will be brought to
you at the revelation of Jesus Christ--

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> as children of obedience, not conforming
yourselves according to your former lusts as in your ignorance,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> but just as he who called you is holy,
you yourselves also be holy in all of your behavior;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> because it is written, "You shall be
holy; for I am holy."

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> If you call on him as Father, who without
respect of persons judges according to each man's work, pass the time of
your living as foreigners here in reverent fear:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> knowing that you were redeemed, not with
corruptible things, with silver or gold, from the useless way of life
handed down from your fathers,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> but with precious blood, as of a
faultless and pure lamb, the blood of Christ;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> who was foreknown indeed before the
foundation of the world, but was revealed at the end of times for your
sake,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> who through him are believers in God, who
raised him from the dead, and gave him glory; so that your faith and
hope might be in God.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Seeing you have purified your souls in
your obedience to the truth through the Spirit in sincere brotherly
affection, love one another from the heart fervently:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> having been born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through the word of God, which
lives and remains forever.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> For, "All flesh is like grass, and all of
man's glory like the flower in the grass. The grass withers, and its
flower falls;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> but the Lord's word endures forever."
This is the word of Good News which was preached to you.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Putting away therefore all wickedness, all
deceit, hypocrisies, envies, and all evil speaking,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> as newborn babies, long for the pure milk
of the Word, that you may grow thereby,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> if indeed you have tasted that the Lord is
gracious:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> coming to him, a living stone, rejected
indeed by men, but chosen by God, precious.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> You also, as living stones, are built up as
a spiritual house, to be a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Because it is contained in Scripture,
"Behold, I lay in Zion a chief cornerstone, chosen, and precious: He who
believes in him will not be disappointed."

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For you who believe therefore is the honor,
but for those who are disobedient, "The stone which the builders
rejected, has become the chief cornerstone,"

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and, "a stone of stumbling, and a rock of
offense." For they stumble at the word, being disobedient, to which also
they were appointed.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But you are a chosen race, a royal
priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God's own possession, that you
may proclaim the excellence of him who called you out of darkness into
his marvelous light:

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> who in time past were no people, but now
are God's people, who had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained
mercy.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Beloved, I beg you as foreigners and
pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> having good behavior among the nations,
so in that of which they speak against you as evildoers, they may by
your good works, which they see, glorify God in the day of visitation.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Therefore subject yourselves to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether to the king, as supreme;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> or to governors, as sent by him for
vengeance on evildoers and for praise to those who do well.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For this is the will of God, that by
well-doing you should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> as free, and not using your freedom for a
cloak of wickedness, but as bondservants of God.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear
God. Honor the king.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Servants, be in subjection to your
masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
wicked.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For it is commendable if someone endures
pain, suffering unjustly, because of conscience toward God.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For what glory is it if, when you sin,
you patiently endure beating? But if, when you do well, you patiently
endure suffering, this is commendable with God.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For to this you were called, because
Christ also suffered for us, leaving you an example, that you should
follow his steps,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> who did not sin, "neither was deceit
found in his mouth."

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Who, when he was cursed, didn't curse
back. When he suffered, didn't threaten, but committed himself to him
who judges righteously;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> who his own self bore our sins in his
body on the tree, that we, having died to sins, might live to
righteousness; by whose stripes you were healed.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For you were going astray like sheep; but
now have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> In the same way, wives, be in subjection to
your own husbands; so that, even if any don't obey the Word, they may be
won by the behavior of their wives without a word;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> seeing your pure behavior in fear.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let your beauty be not just the outward
adorning of braiding the hair, and of wearing jewels of gold, or of
putting on fine clothing;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> but in the hidden person of the heart, in
the incorruptible adornment of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is in
the sight of God very precious.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this is how the holy women before, who
hoped in God also adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own
husbands:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord,
whose children you now are, if you do well, and are not put in fear by
any terror.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> You husbands, in the same way, live with
your wives according to knowledge, giving honor to the woman, as to the
weaker vessel, as being also joint heirs of the grace of life; that your
prayers may not be hindered.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Finally, be all like-minded, compassionate,
loving as brothers, tenderhearted, courteous,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> not rendering evil for evil, or insult for
insult; but instead blessing; knowing that to this were you called, that
you may inherit a blessing.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For, "He who would love life, and see
good days, let him keep his tongue from evil, and his lips from speaking
deceit.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Let him turn away from evil, and do good.
Let him seek peace, and pursue it.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> For the eyes of the Lord are on the
righteous, and his ears open to their prayer; but the face of the Lord
is against those who do evil."

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Now who is he who will harm you, if you
become imitators of that which is good?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But even if you should suffer for
righteousness' sake, you are blessed. "Don't fear what they fear,
neither be troubled."

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts;
and always be ready to give an answer to everyone who asks you a reason
concerning the hope that is in you, with humility and fear:

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> having a good conscience; that, while you
are spoken against as evildoers, they may be disappointed who curse your
good way of life in Christ.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For it is better, if it is God's will,
that you suffer for doing well than for doing evil.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Because Christ also suffered for sins
once, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring you to God;
being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit;

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> in which he also went and preached to the
spirits in prison,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> who before were disobedient, when God
waited patiently in the days of Noah, while the ship was being built. In
it, few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> This is a symbol of baptism, which now
saves you--not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
answer of a good conscience toward God, through the resurrection of
Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> who is at the right hand of God, having
gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being made subject
to him.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Forasmuch then as Christ suffered for us in
the flesh, arm yourselves also with the same mind; for he who has
suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> that you no longer should live the rest of
your time in the flesh for the lusts of men, but for the will of God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For we have spent enough of our past time
doing the desire of the Gentiles, and having walked in lewdness, lusts,
drunken binges, orgies, carousings, and abominable idolatries.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> They think it is strange that you don't run
with them into the same excess of riot, blaspheming:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> who will give account to him who is ready
to judge the living and the dead.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For to this end the Good News was preached
even to the dead, that they might be judged indeed as men in the flesh,
but live as to God in the spirit.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But the end of all things is near.
Therefore be of sound mind, self-controlled, and sober in prayer.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And above all things be earnest in your
love among yourselves, for love covers a multitude of sins.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Be hospitable to one another without
grumbling.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> As each has received a gift, employ it in
serving one another, as good managers of the grace of God in its various
forms.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> If anyone speaks, let it be as it were
the very words of God. If anyone serves, let it be as of the strength
which God supplies, that in all things God may be glorified through
Jesus Christ, to whom belong the glory and the dominion forever and
ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Beloved, don't be astonished at the fiery
trial which has come upon you, to test you, as though a strange thing
happened to you.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But because you are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, rejoice; that at the revelation of his glory you also may
rejoice with exceeding joy.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> If you are insulted for the name of
Christ, you are blessed; because the Spirit of glory and of God rests on
you. On their part he is blasphemed, but on your part he is glorified.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For let none of you suffer as a murderer,
or a thief, or an evil doer, or a meddler in other men's matters.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> But if one of you suffers for being a
Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God in this
matter.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For the time has come for judgment to
begin with the household of God. If it begins first with us, what will
happen to those who don't obey the Good News of God?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> "If it is hard for the righteous to be
saved, what will happen to the ungodly and the sinner?"

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Therefore let them also who suffer
according to the will of God in doing good entrust their souls to him,
as to a faithful Creator.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> I exhort the elders among you, as a fellow
elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and who will also
share in the glory that will be revealed.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Shepherd the flock of God which is among
you, exercising the oversight, not under compulsion, but voluntarily,
not for dishonest gain, but willingly;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> neither as lording it over those entrusted
to you, but making yourselves examples to the flock.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> When the chief Shepherd is revealed, you
will receive the crown of glory that doesn't fade away.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Likewise, you younger ones, be subject to
the elder. Yes, all of you clothe yourselves with humility, to subject
yourselves to one another; for "God resists the proud, but gives grace
to the humble."

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Humble yourselves therefore under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> casting all your worries on him, because he
cares for you.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Be sober and self-controlled. Be watchful.
Your adversary, the devil, walks around like a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Withstand him steadfast in your faith,
knowing that your brothers who are in the world are undergoing the same
sufferings.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> But may the God of all grace, who called
you to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after you have suffered a
little while, perfect, establish, strengthen, and settle you.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> To him be the glory and the power forever
and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Through Silvanus, our faithful brother,
as I consider him, I have written to you briefly, exhorting, and
testifying that this is the true grace of God in which you stand.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> She who is in Babylon, chosen together
with you, greets you; and so does Mark, my son.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Greet one another with a kiss of love.
Peace be to you all who are in Christ Jesus. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter](pe2)
