[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe1)  [Next](jo1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 2 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus
Christ, to those who have obtained a like precious faith with us in the
righteousness of our God and Savior, Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace be multiplied in the
knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> seeing that his divine power has granted to
us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge
of him who called us by his own glory and virtue;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> by which he has granted to us his precious
and exceedingly great promises; that through these you may become
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped from the corruption that
is in the world by lust.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Yes, and for this very cause adding on your
part all diligence, in your faith supply moral excellence; and in moral
excellence, knowledge;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> and in knowledge, self-control; and in
self-control patience; and in patience godliness;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and in godliness brotherly affection; and
in brotherly affection, love.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For if these things are yours and abound,
they make you to be not idle nor unfruitful to the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For he who lacks these things is blind,
seeing only what is near, having forgotten the cleansing from his old
sins.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Therefore, brothers, be more diligent to
make your calling and election sure. For if you do these things, you
will never stumble.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For thus you will be richly supplied with
the entrance into the eternal Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Therefore I will not be negligent to
remind you of these things, though you know them, and are established in
the present truth.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> I think it right, as long as I am in this
tent, to stir you up by reminding you;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> knowing that the putting off of my tent
comes swiftly, even as our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Yes, I will make every effort that you
may always be able to remember these things even after my departure.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For we did not follow cunningly devised
fables, when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For he received from God the Father honor
and glory, when the voice came to him from the Majestic Glory, "This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> We heard this voice come out of heaven
when we were with him on the holy mountain.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> We have the more sure word of prophecy;
and you do well that you heed it, as to a lamp shining in a dark place,
until the day dawns, and the morning star arises in your hearts:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> knowing this first, that no prophecy of
Scripture is of private interpretation.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For no prophecy ever came by the will of
man: but holy men of God spoke, being moved by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But false prophets also arose among the
people, as false teachers will also be among you, who will secretly
bring in destructive heresies, denying even the Master who bought them,
bringing on themselves swift destruction.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Many will follow their immoral ways, and as
a result, the way of the truth will be maligned.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> In covetousness they will exploit you with
deceptive words: whose sentence now from of old doesn't linger, and
their destruction will not slumber.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For if God didn't spare angels when they
sinned, but cast them down to Tartarus, and committed them to pits of
darkness, to be reserved for judgment;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> and didn't spare the ancient world, but
preserved Noah with seven others, a preacher of righteousness, when he
brought a flood on the world of the ungodly;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and turning the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them to destruction, having made them an
example to those who would live ungodly;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> and delivered righteous Lot, who was very
distressed by the lustful life of the wicked

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> (for that righteous man dwelling among
them, was tormented in his righteous soul from day to day with seeing
and hearing lawless deeds):

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out
of temptation and to keep the unrighteous under punishment for the day
of judgment;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> but chiefly those who walk after the
flesh in the lust of defilement, and despise authority. Daring,
self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignitaries;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> whereas angels, though greater in might
and power, don't bring a railing judgment against them before the Lord.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But these, as unreasoning creatures, born
natural animals to be taken and destroyed, speaking evil in matters
about which they are ignorant, will in their destroying surely be
destroyed,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> receiving the wages of unrighteousness;
people who count it pleasure to revel in the daytime, spots and
blemishes, reveling in their deceit while they feast with you;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> having eyes full of adultery, and who
can't cease from sin; enticing unsettled souls; having a heart trained
in greed; children of cursing;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> forsaking the right way, they went
astray, having followed the way of Balaam the son of Beor, who loved the
wages of wrongdoing;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> but he was rebuked for his own
disobedience. A mute donkey spoke with a man's voice and stopped the
madness of the prophet.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> These are wells without water, clouds
driven by a storm; for whom the blackness of darkness has been reserved
forever.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For, uttering great swelling words of
emptiness, they entice in the lusts of the flesh, by licentiousness,
those who are indeed escaping from those who live in error;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> promising them liberty, while they
themselves are bondservants of corruption; for a man is brought into
bondage by whoever overcomes him.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For if, after they have escaped the
defilement of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, they are again entangled in it and overcome, the last
state has become worse for them than the first.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For it would be better for them not to
have known the way of righteousness, than, after knowing it, to turn
back from the holy commandment delivered to them.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But it has happened to them according to
the true proverb, "The dog turns to his own vomit again," and "the sow
that has washed to wallowing in the mire."

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> This is now, beloved, the second letter
that I have written to you; and in both of them I stir up your sincere
mind by reminding you;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> that you should remember the words which
were spoken before by the holy prophets, and the commandments of us, the
apostles of the Lord and Savior:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> knowing this first, that in the last days
mockers will come, walking after their own lusts,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and saying, "Where is the promise of his
coming? For, from the day that the fathers fell asleep, all things
continue as they were from the beginning of the creation."

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this they willfully forget, that there
were heavens from of old, and an earth formed out of water and amid
water, by the word of God;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> by which means the world that then was,
being overflowed with water, perished.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the heavens that now are, and the
earth, by the same word have been stored up for fire, being reserved
against the day of judgment and destruction of ungodly men.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But don't forget this one thing, beloved,
that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years
as one day.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> The Lord is not slow concerning his
promise, as some count slowness; but is patient with us, not wishing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night; in which the heavens will pass away with a great
noise, and the elements will be dissolved with fervent heat, and the
earth and the works that are in it will be burned up.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Therefore since all these things will be
destroyed like this, what kind of people ought you to be in holy living
and godliness,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> looking for and earnestly desiring the
coming of the day of God, which will cause the burning heavens to be
dissolved, and the elements will melt with fervent heat?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But, according to his promise, we look
for new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness dwells.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Therefore, beloved, seeing that you look
for these things, be diligent to be found in peace, without blemish and
blameless in his sight.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Regard the patience of our Lord as
salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the
wisdom given to him, wrote to you;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> as also in all of his letters, speaking
in them of these things. In those, there are some things that are hard
to understand, which the ignorant and unsettled twist, as they also do
to the other Scriptures, to their own destruction.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> You therefore, beloved, knowing these
things beforehand, beware, lest being carried away with the error of the
wicked, you fall from your own steadfastness.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But grow in the grace and knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be the glory both now and
forever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John](jo1)
