[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](act)  [Next](co1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Romans

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to
be an apostle, set apart for the Good News of God,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> which he promised before through his
prophets in the holy Scriptures,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> concerning his Son, who was born of the
seed of David according to the flesh,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who was declared to be the Son of God with
power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the
dead, Jesus Christ our Lord,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> through whom we received grace and
apostleship, for obedience of faith among all the nations, for his
name's sake;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> among whom you are also called to belong to
Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> to all who are in Rome, beloved of God,
called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ
for all of you, that your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole
world.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For God is my witness, whom I serve in my
spirit in the Good News of his Son, how unceasingly I make mention of
you always in my prayers,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> requesting, if by any means now at last I
may be prospered by the will of God to come to you.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For I long to see you, that I may impart
to you some spiritual gift, to the end that you may be established;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> that is, that I with you may be
encouraged in you, each of us by the other's faith, both yours and mine.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Now I don't desire to have you unaware,
brothers, that I often planned to come to you, and was hindered so far,
that I might have some fruit among you also, even as among the rest of
the Gentiles.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I am debtor both to Greeks and to
foreigners, both to the wise and to the foolish.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So, as much as is in me, I am eager to
preach the Good News to you also who are in Rome.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For I am not ashamed of the Good News of
Christ, for it is the power of God for salvation for everyone who
believes; for the Jew first, and also for the Greek.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For in it is revealed God's righteousness
from faith to faith. As it is written, "But the righteous shall live by
faith."

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who suppress
the truth in unrighteousness,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> because that which is known of God is
revealed in them, for God revealed it to them.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For the invisible things of him since the
creation of the world are clearly seen, being perceived through the
things that are made, even his everlasting power and divinity; that they
may be without excuse.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Because, knowing God, they didn't glorify
him as God, neither gave thanks, but became vain in their reasoning, and
their senseless heart was darkened.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> and traded the glory of the incorruptible
God for the likeness of an image of corruptible man, and of birds, and
four-footed animals, and creeping things.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Therefore God also gave them up in the
lusts of their hearts to uncleanness, that their bodies should be
dishonored among themselves,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> who exchanged the truth of God for a lie,
and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is
blessed forever. Amen.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> For this reason, God gave them up to vile
passions. For their women changed the natural function into that which
is against nature.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Likewise also the men, leaving the
natural function of the woman, burned in their lust toward one another,
men doing what is inappropriate with men, and receiving in themselves
the due penalty of their error.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Even as they refused to have God in their
knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do those things
which are not fitting;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> being filled with all unrighteousness,
sexual immorality, wickedness, covetousness, malice; full of envy,
murder, strife, deceit, evil habits, secret slanderers,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> backbiters, hateful to God, insolent,
haughty, boastful, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> without understanding, covenant breakers,
without natural affection, unforgiving, unmerciful;

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> who, knowing the ordinance of God, that
those who practice such things are worthy of death, not only do the
same, but also approve of those who practice them.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Therefore you are without excuse, O man,
whoever you are who judge. For in that which you judge another, you
condemn yourself. For you who judge practice the same things.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> We know that the judgment of God is
according to truth against those who practice such things.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Do you think this, O man who judges those
who practice such things, and do the same, that you will escape the
judgment of God?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Or do you despise the riches of his
goodness, forbearance, and patience, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads you to repentance?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But according to your hardness and
unrepentant heart you are treasuring up for yourself wrath in the day of
wrath, revelation, and of the righteous judgment of God;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who "will pay back to everyone according to
their works:"

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> to those who by patience in well-doing seek
for glory, honor, and incorruptibility, eternal life;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> but to those who are self-seeking, and
don't obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, will be wrath and
indignation,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> oppression and anguish, on every soul of
man who works evil, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But glory, honor, and peace go to every
man who works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For there is no partiality with God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For as many as have sinned without law
will also perish without the law. As many as have sinned under the law
will be judged by the law.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For it isn't the hearers of the law who
are righteous before God, but the doers of the law will be justified

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> (for when Gentiles who don't have the law
do by nature the things of the law, these, not having the law, are a law
to themselves,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> in that they show the work of the law
written in their hearts, their conscience testifying with them, and
their thoughts among themselves accusing or else excusing them)

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> in the day when God will judge the
secrets of men, according to my Good News, by Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Indeed you bear the name of a Jew, and
rest on the law, and glory in God,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and know his will, and approve the things
that are excellent, being instructed out of the law,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and are confident that you yourself are a
guide of the blind, a light to those who are in darkness,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> a corrector of the foolish, a teacher of
babies, having in the law the form of knowledge and of the truth.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> You therefore who teach another, don't
you teach yourself? You who preach that a man shouldn't steal, do you
steal?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> You who say a man shouldn't commit
adultery. Do you commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob
temples?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> You who glory in the law, through your
disobedience of the law do you dishonor God?

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> For "the name of God is blasphemed among
the Gentiles because of you," just as it is written.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For circumcision indeed profits, if you
are a doer of the law, but if you are a transgressor of the law, your
circumcision has become uncircumcision.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> If therefore the uncircumcised keep the
ordinances of the law, won't his uncircumcision be accounted as
circumcision?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Won't the uncircumcision which is by
nature, if it fulfills the law, judge you, who with the letter and
circumcision are a transgressor of the law?

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> For he is not a Jew who is one outwardly,
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh;

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit not in the letter;
whose praise is not from men, but from God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then what advantage does the Jew have? Or
what is the profit of circumcision?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Much in every way! Because first of all,
they were entrusted with the oracles of God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For what if some were without faith? Will
their lack of faith nullify the faithfulness of God?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> May it never be! Yes, let God be found
true, but every man a liar. As it is written, "That you might be
justified in your words, and might prevail when you come into judgment."

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But if our unrighteousness commends the
righteousness of God, what will we say? Is God unrighteous who inflicts
wrath? I speak like men do.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> May it never be! For then how will God
judge the world?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For if the truth of God through my lie
abounded to his glory, why am I also still judged as a sinner?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Why not (as we are slanderously reported,
and as some affirm that we say), "Let us do evil, that good may come?"
Those who say so are justly condemned.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What then? Are we better than they? No, in
no way. For we previously warned both Jews and Greeks, that they are all
under sin.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> As it is written, "There is no one
righteous; no, not one.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> There is no one who understands. There is
no one who seeks after God.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> They have all turned aside. They have
together become unprofitable. There is no one who does good, no, not, so
much as one."

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> "Their throat is an open tomb. With their
tongues they have used deceit." "The poison of vipers is under their
lips;"

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> "whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness."

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> "Their feet are swift to shed blood.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Destruction and misery are in their ways.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The way of peace, they haven't known."

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> "There is no fear of God before their
eyes."

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Now we know that whatever things the law
says, it speaks to those who are under the law, that every mouth may be
closed, and all the world may be brought under the judgment of God.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Because by the works of the law, no flesh
will be justified in his sight. For through the law comes the knowledge
of sin.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But now apart from the law, a
righteousness of God has been revealed, being testified by the law and
the prophets;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> even the righteousness of God through
faith in Jesus Christ to all and on all those who believe. For there is
no distinction,

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> for all have sinned, and fall short of
the glory of God;

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> being justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> whom God set forth to be an atoning
sacrifice, through faith in his blood, for a demonstration of his
righteousness through the passing over of prior sins, in God's
forbearance;

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> to demonstrate his righteousness at this
present time; that he might himself be just, and the justifier of him
who has faith in Jesus.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Where then is the boasting? It is
excluded. By what kind of law? Of works? No, but by a law of faith.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> We maintain therefore that a man is
justified by faith apart from the works of the law.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Or is God the God of Jews only? Isn't he
the God of Gentiles also? Yes, of Gentiles also,

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> since indeed there is one God who will
justify the circumcised by faith, and the uncircumcised through faith.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Do we then nullify the law through faith?
May it never be! No, we establish the law.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> What then will we say that Abraham, our
forefather, has found according to the flesh?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For if Abraham was justified by works, he
has something to boast about, but not toward God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For what does the Scripture say? "Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness."

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Now to him who works, the reward is not
counted as grace, but as something owed.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But to him who doesn't work, but believes
in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for
righteousness.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Even as David also pronounces blessing on
the man to whom God counts righteousness apart from works,

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> "Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, whose sins are covered.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Blessed is the man whom the Lord will by no
means charge with sin."

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Is this blessing then pronounced on the
circumcised, or on the uncircumcised also? For we say that faith was
accounted to Abraham for righteousness.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How then was it counted? When he was in
circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> He received the sign of circumcision, a
seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had while he was in
uncircumcision, that he might be the father of all those who believe,
though they might be in uncircumcision, that righteousness might also be
accounted to them.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> He is the father of circumcision to those
who not only are of the circumcision, but who also walk in the steps of
that faith of our father Abraham, which he had in uncircumcision.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For the promise to Abraham and to his
seed that he should be heir of the world wasn't through the law, but
through the righteousness of faith.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if those who are of the law are
heirs, faith is made void, and the promise is made of no effect.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For the law works wrath, for where there
is no law, neither is there disobedience.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For this cause it is of faith, that it
may be according to grace, to the end that the promise may be sure to
all the seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to that also
which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> As it is written, "I have made you a
father of many nations." This is in the presence of him whom he
believed: God, who gives life to the dead, and calls the things that are
not, as though they were.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Who in hope believed against hope, to the
end that he might become a father of many nations, according to that
which had been spoken, "So will your seed be."

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Without being weakened in faith, he
didn't consider his own body, already having been worn out, (he being
about a hundred years old), and the deadness of Sarah's womb.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Yet, looking to the promise of God, he
didn't waver through unbelief, but grew strong through faith, giving
glory to God,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and being fully assured that what he had
promised, he was also able to perform.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Therefore it also was "reckoned to him
for righteousness."

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Now it was not written that it was
accounted to him for his sake alone,

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> but for our sake also, to whom it will be
accounted, who believe in him who raised Jesus, our Lord, from the dead,

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> who was delivered up for our trespasses,
and was raised for our justification.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Being therefore justified by faith, we have
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> through whom we also have our access by
faith into this grace in which we stand. We rejoice in hope of the glory
of God.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Not only this, but we also rejoice in our
sufferings, knowing that suffering works perseverance;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and perseverance, proven character; and
proven character, hope:

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> and hope doesn't disappoint us, because
God's love has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit
who was given to us.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For while we were yet weak, at the right
time Christ died for the ungodly.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For one will hardly die for a righteous
man. Yet perhaps for a righteous person someone would even dare to die.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But God commends his own love toward us, in
that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Much more then, being now justified by his
blood, we will be saved from God's wrath through him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For if, while we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more, being
reconciled, we will be saved by his life.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Not only so, but we also rejoice in God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the
reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Therefore, as sin entered into the world
through one man, and death through sin; and so death passed to all men,
because all sinned.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For until the law, sin was in the world;
but sin is not charged when there is no law.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Nevertheless death reigned from Adam
until Moses, even over those whose sins weren't like Adam's
disobedience, who is a foreshadowing of him who was to come.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But the free gift isn't like the
trespass. For if by the trespass of the one the many died, much more did
the grace of God, and the gift by the grace of the one man, Jesus
Christ, abound to the many.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> The gift is not as through one who
sinned: for the judgment came by one to condemnation, but the free gift
came of many trespasses to justification.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For if by the trespass of the one, death
reigned through the one; so much more will those who receive the
abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life
through the one, Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> So then as through one trespass, all men
were condemned; even so through one act of righteousness, all men were
justified to life.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> For as through the one man's disobedience
many were made sinners, even so through the obedience of the one, many
will be made righteous.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> The law came in besides, that the
trespass might abound; but where sin abounded, grace abounded more
exceedingly;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> that as sin reigned in death, even so
grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> What shall we say then? Shall we continue
in sin, that grace may abound?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> May it never be! We who died to sin, how
could we live in it any longer?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Or don't you know that all we who were
baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> We were buried therefore with him through
baptism to death, that just like Christ was raised from the dead through
the glory of the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For if we have become united with him in
the likeness of his death, we will also be part of his resurrection;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> knowing this, that our old man was
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be done away with, so
that we would no longer be in bondage to sin.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For he who has died has been freed from
sin.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But if we died with Christ, we believe that
we will also live with him;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> knowing that Christ, being raised from the
dead, dies no more. Death no more has dominion over him!

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For the death that he died, he died to
sin one time; but the life that he lives, he lives to God.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Thus consider yourselves also to be dead
to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Therefore don't let sin reign in your
mortal body, that you should obey it in its lusts.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Neither present your members to sin as
instruments of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God, as alive
from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness to God.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For sin will not have dominion over you.
For you are not under law, but under grace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> What then? Shall we sin, because we are
not under law, but under grace? May it never be!

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Don't you know that to whom you present
yourselves as servants to obedience, his servants you are whom you obey;
whether of sin to death, or of obedience to righteousness?

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But thanks be to God, that, whereas you
were bondservants of sin, you became obedient from the heart to that
form of teaching whereunto you were delivered.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Being made free from sin, you became
bondservants of righteousness.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> I speak in human terms because of the
weakness of your flesh, for as you presented your members as servants to
uncleanness and to wickedness upon wickedness, even so now present your
members as servants to righteousness for sanctification.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For when you were servants of sin, you
were free in regard to righteousness.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> What fruit then did you have at that time
in the things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of those things
is death.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> But now, being made free from sin, and
having become servants of God, you have your fruit of sanctification,
and the result of eternal life.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the wages of sin is death, but the
free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Or don't you know, brothers (for I speak to
men who know the law), that the law has dominion over a man for as long
as he lives?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For the woman that has a husband is bound
by law to the husband while he lives, but if the husband dies, she is
discharged from the law of the husband.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So then if, while the husband lives, she is
joined to another man, she would be called an adulteress. But if the
husband dies, she is free from the law, so that she is no adulteress,
though she is joined to another man.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Therefore, my brothers, you also were made
dead to the law through the body of Christ, that you would be joined to
another, to him who was raised from the dead, that we might bring forth
fruit to God.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For when we were in the flesh, the sinful
passions which were through the law, worked in our members to bring
forth fruit to death.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But now we have been discharged from the
law, having died to that in which we were held; so that we serve in
newness of the spirit, and not in oldness of the letter.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> What shall we say then? Is the law sin? May
it never be! However, I wouldn't have known sin, except through the law.
For I wouldn't have known coveting, unless the law had said, "You shall
not covet."

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> But sin, finding occasion through the
commandment, produced in me all kinds of coveting. For apart from the
law, sin is dead.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I was alive apart from the law once, but
when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> The commandment, which was for life, this
I found to be for death;

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> for sin, finding occasion through the
commandment, deceived me, and through it killed me.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Therefore the law indeed is holy, and the
commandment holy, and righteous, and good.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Did then that which is good become death
to me? May it never be! But sin, that it might be shown to be sin, by
working death to me through that which is good; that through the
commandment sin might become exceeding sinful.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For we know that the law is spiritual,
but I am fleshly, sold under sin.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> For I don't know what I am doing. For I
don't practice what I desire to do; but what I hate, that I do.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> But if what I don't desire, that I do, I
consent to the law that it is good.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> So now it is no more I that do it, but
sin which dwells in me.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> For I know that in me, that is, in my
flesh, dwells no good thing. For desire is present with me, but I don't
find it doing that which is good.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For the good which I desire, I don't do;
but the evil which I don't desire, that I practice.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> But if what I don't desire, that I do, it
is no more I that do it, but sin which dwells in me.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I find then the law, that, to me, while I
desire to do good, evil is present.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For I delight in God's law after the
inward man,

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> but I see a different law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity under
the law of sin which is in my members.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> What a wretched man I am! Who will
deliver me out of the body of this death?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> I thank God through Jesus Christ, our
Lord! So then with the mind, I myself serve God's law, but with the
flesh, the sin's law.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> There is therefore now no condemnation to
those who are in Christ Jesus, who don't walk according to the flesh,
but according to the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus made me free from the law of sin and of death.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For what the law couldn't do, in that it
was weak through the flesh, God did, sending his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh;

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> that the ordinance of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For those who live according to the flesh
set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according
to the Spirit, the things of the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For the mind of the flesh is death, but the
mind of the Spirit is life and peace;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> because the mind of the flesh is hostile
towards God; for it is not subject to God's law, neither indeed can it
be.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Those who are in the flesh can't please
God.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But you are not in the flesh but in the
Spirit, if it is so that the Spirit of God dwells in you. But if any man
doesn't have the Spirit of Christ, he is not his.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> If Christ is in you, the body is dead
because of sin, but the spirit is alive because of righteousness.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> But if the Spirit of him who raised up
Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised up Christ Jesus from
the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit
who dwells in you.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to
the flesh, to live after the flesh.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> For if you live after the flesh, you must
die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you
will live.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, these are children of God.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> For you didn't receive the spirit of
bondage again to fear, but you received the Spirit of adoption, by whom
we cry, "Abba! Father!"

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The Spirit himself testifies with our
spirit that we are children of God;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> and if children, then heirs; heirs of
God, and joint heirs with Christ; if indeed we suffer with him, that we
may also be glorified with him.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For I consider that the sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which
will be revealed toward us.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> For the creation waits with eager
expectation for the children of God to be revealed.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> For the creation was subjected to vanity,
not of its own will, but because of him who subjected it, in hope

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> that the creation itself also will be
delivered from the bondage of decay into the liberty of the glory of the
children of God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> For we know that the whole creation
groans and travails in pain together until now.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> Not only so, but ourselves also, who have
the first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within
ourselves, waiting for adoption, the redemption of our body.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> For we were saved in hope, but hope that
is seen is not hope. For who hopes for that which he sees?

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> But if we hope for that which we don't
see, we wait for it with patience.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> In the same way, the Spirit also helps
our weaknesses, for we don't know how to pray as we ought. But the
Spirit himself makes intercession for us with groanings which can't be
uttered.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> He who searches the hearts knows what is
on the Spirit's mind, because he makes intercession for the saints
according to God.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> We know that all things work together for
good for those who love God, to those who are called according to his
purpose.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> For whom he foreknew, he also predestined
to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn
among many brothers.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Whom he predestined, those he also
called. Whom he called, those he also justified. Whom he justified,
those he also glorified.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> What then shall we say about these
things? If God is for us, who can be against us?

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> He who didn't spare his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how would he not also with him freely give
us all things?

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Who could bring a charge against God's
chosen ones? It is God who justifies.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Who is he who condemns? It is Christ who
died, yes rather, who was raised from the dead, who is at the right hand
of God, who also makes intercession for us.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Could oppression, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword?

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> Even as it is written, "For your sake we
are killed all day long. We were accounted as sheep for the slaughter."

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> No, in all these things, we are more than
conquerors through him who loved us.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor powers,

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> nor height, nor depth, nor any other
created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> I tell the truth in Christ. I am not lying,
my conscience testifying with me in the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> that I have great sorrow and unceasing pain
in my heart.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> For I could wish that I myself were
accursed from Christ for my brothers' sake, my relatives according to
the flesh,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> who are Israelites; whose is the adoption,
the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the service, and the
promises;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> of whom are the fathers, and from whom is
Christ as concerning the flesh, who is over all, God, blessed forever.
Amen.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But it is not as though the word of God has
come to nothing. For they are not all Israel, that are of Israel.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Neither, because they are Abraham's seed,
are they all children. But, "In Isaac will your seed be called."

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> That is, it is not the children of the
flesh who are children of God, but the children of the promise are
counted as a seed.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For this is a word of promise, "At the
appointed time I will come, and Sarah will have a son."

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Not only so, but Rebecca also conceived
by one, by our father Isaac.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For being not yet born, neither having
done anything good or bad, that the purpose of God according to election
might stand, not of works, but of him who calls,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> it was said to her, "The elder will serve
the younger."

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Even as it is written, "Jacob I loved,
but Esau I hated."

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> What shall we say then? Is there
unrighteousness with God? May it never be!

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> For he said to Moses, "I will have mercy
on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have
compassion."

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> So then it is not of him who wills, nor
of him who runs, but of God who has mercy.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, "For
this very purpose I caused you to be raised up, that I might show in you
my power, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth."

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> So then, he has mercy on whom he desires,
and he hardens whom he desires.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> You will say then to me, "Why does he
still find fault? For who withstands his will?"

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> But indeed, O man, who are you to reply
against God? Will the thing formed ask him who formed it, "Why did you
make me like this?"

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Or hasn't the potter a right over the
clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel for honor, and
another for dishonor?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> What if God, willing to show his wrath,
and to make his power known, endured with much patience vessels of wrath
made for destruction,

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> and that he might make known the riches
of his glory on vessels of mercy, which he prepared beforehand for
glory,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> us, whom he also called, not from the
Jews only, but also from the Gentiles?

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> As he says also in Hosea, "I will call
them 'my people,' which were not my people; and her 'beloved,' who was
not beloved."

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> "It will be that in the place where it
was said to them, 'You are not my people,' There they will be called
'children of the living God.'"

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Isaiah cries concerning Israel, "If the
number of the children of Israel are as the sand of the sea, it is the
remnant who will be saved;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> for He will finish the work and cut it
short in righteousness, because the LORD will make a short work upon the
earth."

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> As Isaiah has said before, "Unless the
Lord of Armies had left us a seed, we would have become like Sodom, and
would have been made like Gomorrah."

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> What shall we say then? That the
Gentiles, who didn't follow after righteousness, attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith;

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> but Israel, following after a law of
righteousness, didn't arrive at the law of righteousness.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Why? Because they didn't seek it by
faith, but as it were by works of the law. They stumbled over the
stumbling stone;

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> even as it is written, "Behold, I lay in
Zion a stumbling stone and a rock of offense; and no one who believes in
him will be disappointed."

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Brothers, my heart's desire and my prayer
to God is for Israel, that they may be saved.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For I testify about them that they have a
zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and seeking to establish their own righteousness, they
didn't subject themselves to the righteousness of God.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For Christ is the fulfillment of the law
for righteousness to everyone who believes.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> For Moses writes about the righteousness
of the law, "The one who does them will live by them."

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But the righteousness which is of faith
says this, "Don't say in your heart, 'Who will ascend into heaven?'
(that is, to bring Christ down);

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> or, 'Who will descend into the abyss?'
(that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.)"

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But what does it say? "The word is near
you, in your mouth, and in your heart;" that is, the word of faith,
which we preach:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> that if you will confess with your mouth
that Jesus is Lord, and believe in your heart that God raised him from
the dead, you will be saved.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> For with the heart, one believes unto
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> For the Scripture says, "Whoever
believes in him will not be disappointed."

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For there is no distinction between Jew
and Greek; for the same Lord is Lord of all, and is rich to all who call
on him.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For, "Whoever will call on the name of
the Lord will be saved."

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> How then will they call on him in whom
they have not believed? How will they believe in him whom they have not
heard? How will they hear without a preacher?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And how will they preach unless they
are sent? As it is written: "How beautiful are the feet of those who
preach the Good News of peace, who bring glad tidings of good things!"

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> But they didn't all listen to the glad
news. For Isaiah says, "Lord, who has believed our report?"

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> So faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> But I say, didn't they hear? Yes, most
certainly, "Their sound went out into all the earth, their words to the
ends of the world."

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But I ask, didn't Israel know? First
Moses says, "I will provoke you to jealousy with that which is no
nation, with a nation void of understanding I will make you angry."

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Isaiah is very bold, and says, "I was
found by those who didn't seek me. I was revealed to those who didn't
ask for me."

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> But as to Israel he says, "All day long
I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and contrary people."

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> I ask then, did God reject his people?
May it never be! For I also am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of
the tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> God didn't reject his people, which he
foreknew. Or don't you know what the Scripture says about Elijah? How he
pleads with God against Israel:

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> "Lord, they have killed your prophets,
they have broken down your altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my
life."

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But how does God answer him? "I have
reserved for myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to
Baal."

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Even so then at this present time also
there is a remnant according to the election of grace.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And if by grace, then it is no longer of
works; otherwise grace is no longer grace. But if it is of works, it is
no longer grace; otherwise work is no longer work.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> What then? That which Israel seeks for,
that he didn't obtain, but the chosen ones obtained it, and the rest
were hardened.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> According as it is written, "God gave
them a spirit of stupor, eyes that they should not see, and ears that
they should not hear, to this very day."

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> David says, "Let their table be made a
snare, and a trap, a stumbling block, and a retribution to them.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Let their eyes be darkened, that they
may not see. Bow down their back always."

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> I ask then, did they stumble that they
might fall? May it never be! But by their fall salvation has come to the
Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Now if their fall is the riches of the
world, and their loss the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their
fullness?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For I speak to you who are Gentiles.
Since then as I am an apostle to Gentiles, I glorify my ministry;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> if by any means I may provoke to
jealousy those who are my flesh, and may save some of them.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For if the rejection of them is the
reconciling of the world, what would their acceptance be, but life from
the dead?

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> If the first fruit is holy, so is the
lump. If the root is holy, so are the branches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> But if some of the branches were broken
off, and you, being a wild olive, were grafted in among them, and became
partaker with them of the root and of the richness of the olive tree;

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> don't boast over the branches. But if
you boast, it is not you who support the root, but the root supports
you.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> You will say then, "Branches were
broken off, that I might be grafted in."

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> True; by their unbelief they were
broken off, and you stand by your faith. Don't be conceited, but fear;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> for if God didn't spare the natural
branches, neither will he spare you.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> See then the goodness and severity of
God. Toward those who fell, severity; but toward you, goodness, if you
continue in his goodness; otherwise you also will be cut off.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> They also, if they don't continue in
their unbelief, will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in
again.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For if you were cut out of that which
is by nature a wild olive tree, and were grafted contrary to nature into
a good olive tree, how much more will these, which are the natural
branches, be grafted into their own olive tree?

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> For I don't desire you to be ignorant,
brothers, of this mystery, so that you won't be wise in your own
conceits, that a partial hardening has happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles has come in,

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and so all Israel will be saved. Even
as it is written, "There will come out of Zion the Deliverer, and he
will turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> This is my covenant to them, when I
will take away their sins."

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Concerning the Good News, they are
enemies for your sake. But concerning the election, they are beloved for
the fathers' sake.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> For the gifts and the calling of God
are irrevocable.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For as you in time past were
disobedient to God, but now have obtained mercy by their disobedience,

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> even so these also have now been
disobedient, that by the mercy shown to you they may also obtain mercy.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> For God has shut up all to
disobedience, that he might have mercy on all.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Oh the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and
his ways past tracing out!

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> "For who has known the mind of the
Lord? Or who has been his counselor?"

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> "Or who has first given to him, and it
will be repaid to him again?"

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> For of him, and through him, and to
him, are all things. To him be the glory for ever! Amen.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Therefore I urge you, brothers, by the
mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, which is your spiritual service.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Don't be conformed to this world, but be
transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may prove what is
the good, well-pleasing, and perfect will of God.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For I say, through the grace that was
given me, to every man who is among you, not to think of himself more
highly than he ought to think; but to think reasonably, as God has
apportioned to each person a measure of faith.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> For even as we have many members in one
body, and all the members don't have the same function,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> so we, who are many, are one body in
Christ, and individually members one of another.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Having gifts differing according to the
grace that was given to us, if prophecy, let us prophesy according to
the proportion of our faith;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> or service, let us give ourselves to
service; or he who teaches, to his teaching;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> or he who exhorts, to his exhorting: he
who gives, let him do it with liberality; he who rules, with diligence;
he who shows mercy, with cheerfulness.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Let love be without hypocrisy. Abhor that
which is evil. Cling to that which is good.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> In love of the brothers be tenderly
affectionate one to another; in honor preferring one another;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> not lagging in diligence; fervent in
spirit; serving the Lord;

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> rejoicing in hope; enduring in
troubles; continuing steadfastly in prayer;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> contributing to the needs of the
saints; given to hospitality.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Bless those who persecute you; bless,
and don't curse.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Rejoice with those who rejoice. Weep
with those who weep.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Be of the same mind one toward another.
Don't set your mind on high things, but associate with the humble. Don't
be wise in your own conceits.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Repay no one evil for evil. Respect
what is honorable in the sight of all men.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> If it is possible, as much as it is up
to you, be at peace with all men.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Don't seek revenge yourselves, beloved,
but give place to God's wrath. For it is written, "Vengeance belongs to
me; I will repay, says the Lord."

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Therefore "If your enemy is hungry,
feed him. If he is thirsty, give him a drink; for in doing so, you will
heap coals of fire on his head."

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Don't be overcome by evil, but overcome
evil with good.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Let every soul be in subjection to the
higher authorities, for there is no authority except from God, and those
who exist are ordained by God.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Therefore he who resists the authority,
withstands the ordinance of God; and those who withstand will receive to
themselves judgment.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> For rulers are not a terror to the good
work, but to the evil. Do you desire to have no fear of the authority?
Do that which is good, and you will have praise from the same,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> for he is a servant of God to you for
good. But if you do that which is evil, be afraid, for he doesn't bear
the sword in vain; for he is a servant of God, an avenger for wrath to
him who does evil.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Therefore you need to be in subjection,
not only because of the wrath, but also for conscience' sake.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For this reason you also pay taxes, for
they are servants of God's service, attending continually on this very
thing.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Give therefore to everyone what you owe:
taxes to whom taxes are due; customs to whom customs; respect to whom
respect; honor to whom honor.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Owe no one anything, except to love one
another; for he who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For the commandments, "You shall not
commit adultery," "You shall not murder," "You shall not steal," "You
shall not give false testimony," "You shall not covet," and whatever
other commandments there are, are all summed up in this saying, namely,
"You shall love your neighbor as yourself."

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Love doesn't harm a neighbor. Love
therefore is the fulfillment of the law.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Do this, knowing the time, that it is
already time for you to awaken out of sleep, for salvation is now nearer
to us than when we first believed.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The night is far gone, and the day is
near. Let's therefore throw off the works of darkness, and let's put on
the armor of light.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Let us walk properly, as in the day;
not in reveling and drunkenness, not in sexual promiscuity and lustful
acts, and not in strife and jealousy.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make no provision for the flesh, for its lusts.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now accept one who is weak in faith, but
not for disputes over opinions.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> One man has faith to eat all things, but
he who is weak eats only vegetables.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Don't let him who eats despise him who
doesn't eat. Don't let him who doesn't eat judge him who eats, for God
has accepted him.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who are you who judge another's servant?
To his own lord he stands or falls. Yes, he will be made to stand, for
God has power to make him stand.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> One man esteems one day as more
important. Another esteems every day alike. Let each man be fully
assured in his own mind.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He who observes the day, observes it to
the Lord; and he who does not observe the day, to the Lord he does not
observe it. He who eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks. He
who doesn't eat, to the Lord he doesn't eat, and gives God thanks.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For none of us lives to himself, and none
dies to himself.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> For if we live, we live to the Lord. Or
if we die, we die to the Lord. If therefore we live or die, we are the
Lord's.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> For to this end Christ died, rose, and
lived again, that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But you, why do you judge your brother?
Or you again, why do you despise your brother? For we will all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> For it is written, "'As I live,' says
the Lord, 'to me every knee will bow. Every tongue will confess to
God.'"

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So then each one of us will give
account of himself to God.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Therefore let's not judge one another
any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block in
his brother's way, or an occasion for falling.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I know, and am persuaded in the Lord
Jesus, that nothing is unclean of itself; except that to him who
considers anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Yet if because of food your brother is
grieved, you walk no longer in love. Don't destroy with your food him
for whom Christ died.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Then don't let your good be slandered,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> for the Kingdom of God is not eating
and drinking, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> For he who serves Christ in these
things is acceptable to God and approved by men.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> So then, let us follow after things
which make for peace, and things by which we may build one another up.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Don't overthrow God's work for food's
sake. All things indeed are clean, however it is evil for that man who
creates a stumbling block by eating.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> It is good to not eat meat, drink wine,
nor do anything by which your brother stumbles, is offended, or is made
weak.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Do you have faith? Have it to yourself
before God. Happy is he who doesn't judge himself in that which he
approves.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> But he who doubts is condemned if he
eats, because it isn't of faith; and whatever is not of faith is sin.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> Now to him who is able to establish you
according to my Good News and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according
to the revelation of the mystery which has been kept secret through long
ages,

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> but now is revealed, and by the
Scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the eternal
God, is made known for obedience of faith to all the nations;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> to the only wise God, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be the glory forever! Amen.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now we who are strong ought to bear the
weaknesses of the weak, and not to please ourselves.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Let each one of us please his neighbor
for that which is good, to be building him up.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For even Christ didn't please himself.
But, as it is written, "The reproaches of those who reproached you fell
on me."

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For whatever things were written before
were written for our learning, that through patience and through
encouragement of the Scriptures we might have hope.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Now the God of patience and of
encouragement grant you to be of the same mind one with another
according to Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> that with one accord you may with one
mouth glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Therefore accept one another, even as
Christ also accepted you, to the glory of God.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Now I say that Christ has been made a
servant of the circumcision for the truth of God, that he might confirm
the promises given to the fathers,

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and that the Gentiles might glorify God
for his mercy. As it is written, "Therefore will I give praise to you
among the Gentiles, and sing to your name."

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Again he says, "Rejoice, you Gentiles,
with his people."

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Again, "Praise the Lord, all you
Gentiles! Let all the peoples praise him."

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Again, Isaiah says, "There will be the
root of Jesse, he who arises to rule over the Gentiles; in him the
Gentiles will hope."

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Now may the God of hope fill you with
all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope, in the
power of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> I myself am also persuaded about you,
my brothers, that you yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all
knowledge, able also to admonish others.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> But I write the more boldly to you in
part, as reminding you, because of the grace that was given to me by
God,

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> that I should be a servant of Christ
Jesus to the Gentiles, serving as a priest the Good News of God, that
the offering up of the Gentiles might be made acceptable, sanctified by
the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I have therefore my boasting in Christ
Jesus in things pertaining to God.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> For I will not dare to speak of any
things except those which Christ worked through me, for the obedience of
the Gentiles, by word and deed,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> in the power of signs and wonders, in
the power of God's Spirit; so that from Jerusalem, and around as far as
to Illyricum, I have fully preached the Good News of Christ;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> yes, making it my aim to preach the
Good News, not where Christ was already named, that I might not build on
another's foundation.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But, as it is written, "They will see,
to whom no news of him came. They who haven't heard will understand."

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Therefore also I was hindered these
many times from coming to you,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> but now, no longer having any place in
these regions, and having these many years a longing to come to you,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> whenever I journey to Spain, I will
come to you. For I hope to see you on my journey, and to be helped on my
way there by you, if first I may enjoy your company for a while.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But now, I say, I am going to
Jerusalem, serving the saints.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> For it has been the good pleasure of
Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor among
the saints who are at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> Yes, it has been their good pleasure,
and they are their debtors. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers
of their spiritual things, they owe it to them also to serve them in
fleshly things.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> When therefore I have accomplished
this, and have sealed to them this fruit, I will go on by way of you to
Spain.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> I know that, when I come to you, I will
come in the fullness of the blessing of the Good News of Christ.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Now I beg you, brothers, by our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, that you strive together
with me in your prayers to God for me,

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> that I may be delivered from those who
are disobedient in Judea, and that my service which I have for Jerusalem
may be acceptable to the saints;

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> that I may come to you in joy through
the will of God, and together with you, find rest.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Now the God of peace be with you all.
Amen.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> I commend to you Phoebe, our sister, who
is a servant of the assembly that is at Cenchreae,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> that you receive her in the Lord, in a
way worthy of the saints, and that you assist her in whatever matter she
may need from you, for she herself also has been a helper of many, and
of my own self.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow
workers in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> who for my life, laid down their own
necks; to whom not only I give thanks, but also all the assemblies of
the Gentiles.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Greet the assembly that is in their
house. Greet Epaenetus, my beloved, who is the first fruits of Achaia to
Christ.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Greet Mary, who labored much for us.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Greet Andronicus and Junia, my relatives
and my fellow prisoners, who are notable among the apostles, who also
were in Christ before me.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Greet Amplias, my beloved in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in
Christ, and Stachys, my beloved.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Greet Apelles, the approved in Christ.
Greet those who are of the household of Aristobulus.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Greet Herodion, my kinsman. Greet them
of the household of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who labor
in the Lord. Greet Persis, the beloved, who labored much in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Greet Rufus, the chosen in the Lord,
and his mother and mine.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes,
Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers who are with them.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and
his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Greet one another with a holy kiss. The
assemblies of Christ greet you.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Now I beg you, brothers, look out for
those who are causing the divisions and occasions of stumbling, contrary
to the doctrine which you learned, and turn away from them.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> For those who are such don't serve our
Lord, Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by their smooth and
flattering speech, they deceive the hearts of the innocent.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> For your obedience has become known to
all. I rejoice therefore over you. But I desire to have you wise in that
which is good, but innocent in that which is evil.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And the God of peace will quickly crush
Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you,
as do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my relatives.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> I, Tertius, who write the letter, greet
you in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> Gaius, my host and host of the whole
assembly, greets you. Erastus, the treasurer of the city, greets you, as
does Quartus, the brother.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians](co1)
