[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jdg)  [Next](sa1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Ruth

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> It happened in the days when the judges
judged, that there was a famine in the land. A certain man of Bethlehem
Judah went to live in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two
sons.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The name of the man was Elimelech, and the
name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion,
Ephrathites of Bethlehem Judah. They came into the country of Moab, and
continued there.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Elimelech, Naomi's husband, died; and she
was left, and her two sons.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> They took them wives of the women of Moab;
the name of the one was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they
lived there about ten years.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Mahlon and Chilion both died, and the woman
was bereaved of her two children and of her husband.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Then she arose with her daughters-in-law,
that she might return from the country of Moab: for she had heard in the
country of Moab how that Yahweh had visited his people in giving them
bread.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> She went forth out of the place where she
was, and her two daughters-in-law with her; and they went on the way to
return to the land of Judah.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law,
"Go, return each of you to her mother's house: Yahweh deal kindly with
you, as you have dealt with the dead, and with me.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Yahweh grant you that you may find rest,
each of you in the house of her husband." Then she kissed them, and they
lifted up their voice, and wept.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> They said to her, "No, but we will return
with you to your people."

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Naomi said, "Go back, my daughters. Why
do you want to go with me? Do I still have sons in my womb, that they
may be your husbands?

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Go back, my daughters, go your way; for I
am too old to have a husband. If I should say, 'I have hope,' if I
should even have a husband tonight, and should also bear sons;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> would you then wait until they were
grown? Would you then refrain from having husbands? No, my daughters,
for it grieves me much for your sakes, for the hand of Yahweh has gone
out against me."

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> They lifted up their voice, and wept
again: and Orpah kissed her mother-in-law, but Ruth joined with her.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> She said, "Behold, your sister-in-law has
gone back to her people, and to her god. Follow your sister-in-law."

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Ruth said, "Don't entreat me to leave
you, and to return from following after you, for where you go, I will
go; and where you lodge, I will lodge; your people shall be my people,
and your God my God;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> where you die, will I die, and there will
I be buried. Yahweh do so to me, and more also, if anything but death
part you and me."

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> When she saw that she was steadfastly
minded to go with her, she left off speaking to her.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So they two went until they came to
Bethlehem. It happened, when they were come to Bethlehem, that all the
city was moved about them, and \[the women\] said, "Is this Naomi?"

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> She said to them, "Don't call me Naomi.
Call me Mara; for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> I went out full, and Yahweh has brought
me home again empty; why do you call me Naomi, since Yahweh has
testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me?"

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> So Naomi returned, and Ruth the
Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, with her, who returned out of the
country of Moab: and they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of barley
harvest.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a
mighty man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech, and his name was Boaz.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi, "Let me
now go to the field, and glean among the ears of grain after him in
whose sight I shall find favor." She said to her, "Go, my daughter."

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> She went, and came and gleaned in the field
after the reapers: and she happened to come to the portion of the field
belonging to Boaz, who was of the family of Elimelech.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said
to the reapers, "Yahweh be with you." They answered him, "Yahweh bless
you."

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Then Boaz said to his servant who was set
over the reapers, "Whose young lady is this?"

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The servant who was set over the reapers
answered, "It is the Moabite lady who came back with Naomi out of the
country of Moab.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> She said, 'Please let me glean and gather
after the reapers among the sheaves.' So she came, and has continued
even from the morning until now, except that she stayed a little in the
house."

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Then Boaz said to Ruth, "Listen, my
daughter. Don't go to glean in another field, and don't go from here,
but stay here close to my maidens.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Let your eyes be on the field that they
reap, and go after them. Haven't I commanded the young men not to touch
you? When you are thirsty, go to the vessels, and drink from that which
the young men have drawn."

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Then she fell on her face, and bowed
herself to the ground, and said to him, "Why have I found favor in your
sight, that you should take knowledge of me, since I am a foreigner?"

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Boaz answered her, "It has fully been
shown me, all that you have done to your mother-in-law since the death
of your husband; and how you have left your father and your mother, and
the land of your birth, and have come to a people that you didn't know
before.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> May Yahweh repay your work, and a full
reward be given you from Yahweh, the God of Israel, under whose wings
you have come to take refuge."

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then she said, "Let me find favor in your
sight, my lord, because you have comforted me, and because you have
spoken kindly to your handmaid, though I am not as one of your
handmaidens."

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> At meal time Boaz said to her, "Come
here, and eat of the bread, and dip your morsel in the vinegar." She sat
beside the reapers, and they reached her parched grain, and she ate, and
was satisfied, and left some of it.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> When she had risen up to glean, Boaz
commanded his young men, saying, "Let her glean even among the sheaves,
and don't reproach her.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Also pull out some for her from the
bundles, and leave it, and let her glean, and don't rebuke her."

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> So she gleaned in the field until
evening; and she beat out that which she had gleaned, and it was about
an ephah of barley.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> She took it up, and went into the city;
and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth
and gave to her that which she had left after she was sufficed.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Her mother-in-law said to her, "Where
have you gleaned today? Where have you worked? Blessed be he who noticed
you." She showed her mother-in-law with whom she had worked, and said,
"The man's name with whom I worked today is Boaz."

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Naomi said to her daughter-in-law,
"Blessed be he of Yahweh, who has not left off his kindness to the
living and to the dead." Naomi said to her, "The man is a close relative
to us, one of our near kinsmen."

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Ruth the Moabitess said, "Yes, he said to
me, 'You shall stay close to my young men, until they have ended all my
harvest.'"

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Naomi said to Ruth her daughter-in-law,
"It is good, my daughter, that you go out with his maidens, and that
they not meet you in any other field."

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> So she stayed close to the maidens of
Boaz, to glean to the end of barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and
she lived with her mother-in-law.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Naomi her mother-in-law said to her, "My
daughter, shall I not seek rest for you, that it may be well with you?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Now isn't Boaz our kinsman, with whose
maidens you were? Behold, he winnows barley tonight in the threshing
floor.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Therefore wash yourself, anoint yourself,
get dressed, and go down to the threshing floor, but don't make yourself
known to the man until he has finished eating and drinking.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> It shall be, when he lies down, that you
shall mark the place where he shall lie, and you shall go in, and
uncover his feet, and lay down; then he will tell you what you shall
do."

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> She said to her, "All that you say I will
do."

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> She went down to the threshing floor, and
did according to all that her mother-in-law told her.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> When Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his
heart was merry, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of grain.
She came softly, uncovered his feet, and laid her down.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> It happened at midnight, that the man was
startled and turned himself; and behold, a woman lay at his feet.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> He said, "Who are you?" She answered, "I am
Ruth your handmaid. Therefore spread your skirt over your handmaid; for
you are a near kinsman."

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> He said, "Blessed are you by Yahweh, my
daughter. You have shown more kindness in the latter end than at the
beginning, inasmuch as you didn't follow young men, whether poor or
rich.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Now, my daughter, don't be afraid; I will
do to you all that you say; for all the city of my people does know that
you are a worthy woman.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Now it is true that I am a near kinsman;
however there is a kinsman nearer than I.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Stay this night, and it shall be in the
morning, that if he will perform for you the part of a kinsman, well;
let him do the kinsman's part. But if he will not do the part of a
kinsman for you, then will I do the part of a kinsman for you, as Yahweh
lives. Lie down until the morning."

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> She lay at his feet until the morning.
She rose up before one could discern another. For he said, "Let it not
be known that the woman came to the threshing floor."

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> He said, "Bring the mantle that is on
you, and hold it." She held it; and he measured six \[measures\] of
barley, and laid it on her; and he went into the city.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> When she came to her mother-in-law, she
said, "How did it go, my daughter?" She told her all that the man had
done to her.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> She said, "He gave me these six
\[measures\] of barley; for he said, 'Don't go empty to your
mother-in-law.'"

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Then she said, "Sit still, my daughter,
until you know how the matter will fall; for the man will not rest,
until he has finished the thing this day."

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now Boaz went up to the gate, and sat down
there. Behold, the near kinsman of whom Boaz spoke came by; to whom he
said, "Come over here, friend, and sit down!" He turned aside, and sat
down.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> He took ten men of the elders of the city,
and said, "Sit down here." They sat down.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> He said to the near kinsman, "Naomi, who
has come back out of the country of Moab, is selling the parcel of land,
which was our brother Elimelech's.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> I thought to disclose it to you, saying,
'Buy it before those who sit here, and before the elders of my people.'
If you will redeem it, redeem it; but if you will not redeem it, then
tell me, that I may know. For there is no one to redeem it besides you;
and I am after you." He said, "I will redeem it."

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then Boaz said, "On the day you buy the
field from the hand of Naomi, you must buy it also from Ruth the
Moabitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead on his
inheritance."

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> The near kinsman said, "I can't redeem it
for myself, lest I mar my own inheritance. Take my right of redemption
for yourself; for I can't redeem it."

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Now this was \[the custom\] in former time
in Israel concerning redeeming and concerning exchanging, to confirm all
things: a man took off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbor; and this
was the \[way of\] attestation in Israel.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> So the near kinsman said to Boaz, "Buy it
for yourself." He took off his shoe.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Boaz said to the elders, and to all the
people, "You are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was
Elimelech's, and all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, from the hand of
Naomi.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of
Mahlon, I have purchased to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead
on his inheritance, that the name of the dead not be cut off from among
his brothers, and from the gate of his place. You are witnesses this
day."

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> All the people who were in the gate, and
the elders, said, "We are witnesses. May Yahweh make the woman who has
come into your house like Rachel and like Leah, which two built the
house of Israel; and treat you worthily in Ephrathah, and be famous in
Bethlehem.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Let your house be like the house of
Perez, whom Tamar bore to Judah, of the seed which Yahweh shall give you
of this young woman."

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> So Boaz took Ruth, and she became his
wife; and he went in to her, and Yahweh gave her conception, and she
bore a son.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> The women said to Naomi, "Blessed be
Yahweh, who has not left you this day without a near kinsman; and let
his name be famous in Israel.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> He shall be to you a restorer of life,
and sustain you in your old age, for your daughter-in-law, who loves
you, who is better to you than seven sons, has borne him."

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Naomi took the child, and laid it in her
bosom, and became nurse to it.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> The women, her neighbors, gave him a
name, saying, "There is a son born to Naomi;" and they named him Obed.
He is the father of Jesse, the father of David.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Now this is the history of the
generations of Perez: Perez became the father of Hezron,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and Hezron became the father of Ram, and
Ram became the father of Amminadab,

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and Amminadab became the father of
Nahshon, and Nahshon became the father of Salmon,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and Salmon became the father of Boaz, and
Boaz became the father of Obed,

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> and Obed became the father of Jesse, and
Jesse became the father of David.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Samuel](sa1)
