[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](col)  [Next](th2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 1 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, to the
assembly of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> We always give thanks to God for all of
you, mentioning you in our prayers,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> remembering without ceasing your work of
faith and labor of love and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ,
before our God and Father.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> We know, brothers loved by God, that you
are chosen,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and that our Good News came to you not in
word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and with much
assurance. You know what kind of men we showed ourselves to be among you
for your sake.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> You became imitators of us, and of the
Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy
Spirit,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> so that you became an example to all who
believe in Macedonia and in Achaia.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For from you the word of the Lord has been
declared, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your
faith toward God has gone out; so that we need not to say anything.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For they themselves report concerning us
what kind of a reception we had from you; and how you turned to God from
idols, to serve a living and true God,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom
he raised from the dead--Jesus, who delivers us from the wrath to come.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For you yourselves know, brothers, our
visit to you wasn't in vain,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> but having suffered before and been
shamefully treated, as you know, at Philippi, we grew bold in our God to
tell you the Good News of God in much conflict.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For our exhortation is not of error, nor of
uncleanness, nor in deception.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> But even as we have been approved by God to
be entrusted with the Good News, so we speak; not as pleasing men, but
God, who tests our hearts.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For neither were we at any time found using
words of flattery, as you know, nor a cloak of covetousness (God is
witness),

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> nor seeking glory from men (neither from
you nor from others), when we might have claimed authority as apostles
of Christ.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But we were gentle among you, like a
nursing mother cherishes her own children.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Even so, affectionately longing for you, we
were well pleased to impart to you, not the Good News of God only, but
also our own souls, because you had become very dear to us.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For you remember, brothers, our labor and
travail; for working night and day, that we might not burden any of you,
we preached to you the Good News of God.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> You are witnesses with God, how holy,
righteously, and blamelessly we behaved ourselves toward you who
believe.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> As you know, we exhorted, comforted, and
implored every one of you, as a father does his own children,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> to the end that you should walk worthily
of God, who calls you into his own Kingdom and glory.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For this cause we also thank God without
ceasing, that, when you received from us the word of the message of God,
you accepted it not as the word of men, but, as it is in truth, the word
of God, which also works in you who believe.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For you, brothers, became imitators of
the assemblies of God which are in Judea in Christ Jesus; for you also
suffered the same things from your own countrymen, even as they did from
the Jews;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> who killed both the Lord Jesus and their
own prophets, and drove us out, and didn't please God, and are contrary
to all men;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles
that they may be saved; to fill up their sins always. But wrath has come
on them to the uttermost.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But we, brothers, being bereaved of you
for a short season, in presence, not in heart, tried even harder to see
your face with great desire,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> because we wanted to come to you--indeed,
I, Paul, once and again--but Satan hindered us.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? Isn't it even you, before our Lord Jesus at his coming?

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For you are our glory and our joy.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Therefore, when we couldn't stand it any
longer, we thought it good to be left behind at Athens alone,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and sent Timothy, our brother and God's
servant in the Good News of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you
concerning your faith;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> that no one be moved by these afflictions.
For you know that we are appointed to this task.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For most certainly, when we were with you,
we told you beforehand that we are to suffer affliction, even as it
happened, and you know.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this cause I also, when I couldn't
stand it any longer, sent that I might know your faith, for fear that by
any means the tempter had tempted you, and our labor would have been in
vain.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But when Timothy came just now to us from
you, and brought us glad news of your faith and love, and that you have
good memories of us always, longing to see us, even as we also long to
see you;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> for this cause, brothers, we were comforted
over you in all our distress and affliction through your faith.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For now we live, if you stand fast in the
Lord.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For what thanksgiving can we render again
to God for you, for all the joy with which we rejoice for your sakes
before our God;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> night and day praying exceedingly that we
may see your face, and may perfect that which is lacking in your faith?

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Now may our God and Father himself, and
our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way to you;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and the Lord make you to increase and
abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we also
do toward you,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> to the end he may establish your hearts
blameless in holiness before our God and Father, at the coming of our
Lord Jesus with all his saints.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Finally then, brothers, we beg and exhort
you in the Lord Jesus, that as you received from us how you ought to
walk and to please God, that you abound more and more.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For you know what instructions we gave you
through the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For this is the will of God: your
sanctification, that you abstain from sexual immorality,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> that each one of you know how to possess
himself of his own vessel in sanctification and honor,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> not in the passion of lust, even as the
Gentiles who don't know God;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> that no one should take advantage of and
wrong a brother or sister in this matter; because the Lord is an avenger
in all these things, as also we forewarned you and testified.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For God called us not for uncleanness, but
in sanctification.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Therefore he who rejects this doesn't
reject man, but God, who has also given his Holy Spirit to you.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> But concerning brotherly love, you have no
need that one write to you. For you yourselves are taught by God to love
one another,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> for indeed you do it toward all the
brothers who are in all Macedonia. But we exhort you, brothers, that you
abound more and more;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and that you make it your ambition to
lead a quiet life, and to do your own business, and to work with your
own hands, even as we instructed you;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> that you may walk properly toward those
who are outside, and may have need of nothing.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But we don't want you to be ignorant,
brothers, concerning those who have fallen asleep, so that you don't
grieve like the rest, who have no hope.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if we believe that Jesus died and
rose again, even so God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep
in Jesus.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For this we tell you by the word of the
Lord, that we who are alive, who are left to the coming of the Lord,
will in no way precede those who have fallen asleep.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For the Lord himself will descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with God's
trumpet. The dead in Christ will rise first,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> then we who are alive, who are left, will
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air. So we will be with the Lord forever.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Therefore comfort one another with these
words.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But concerning the times and the seasons,
brothers, you have no need that anything be written to you.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For you yourselves know well that the day
of the Lord comes like a thief in the night.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For when they are saying, "Peace and
safety," then sudden destruction will come on them, like birth pains on
a pregnant woman; and they will in no way escape.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But you, brothers, aren't in darkness, that
the day should overtake you like a thief.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> You are all children of light, and children
of the day. We don't belong to the night, nor to darkness,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> so then let's not sleep, as the rest do,
but let's watch and be sober.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For those who sleep, sleep in the night,
and those who are drunk are drunk in the night.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But let us, since we belong to the day, be
sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and, for a helmet,
the hope of salvation.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For God didn't appoint us to wrath, but to
the obtaining of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> who died for us, that, whether we wake or
sleep, we should live together with him.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Therefore exhort one another, and build
each other up, even as you also do.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But we beg you, brothers, to know those
who labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and to respect and honor them in love for
their work's sake. Be at peace among yourselves.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> We exhort you, brothers, admonish the
disorderly, encourage the fainthearted, support the weak, be patient
toward all.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> See that no one returns evil for evil to
anyone, but always follow after that which is good, for one another, and
for all.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Rejoice always.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Pray without ceasing.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> In everything give thanks, for this is
the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Don't quench the Spirit.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Don't despise prophesies.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Test all things, and hold firmly that
which is good.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Abstain from every form of evil.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> May the God of peace himself sanctify you
completely. May your whole spirit, soul, and body be preserved blameless
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> He who calls you is faithful, who will
also do it.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Brothers, pray for us.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> I solemnly command you by the Lord that
this letter be read to all the holy brothers.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians](th2)
