[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rpdi21)  [Next](rpdi23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Religious Practices of the Diegueño Indians*, by T.T. Waterman,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

### CEREMONIAL NUMBERS.

A prominent element in all ritualism, whether of the primitive or
civilized variety, is the consciousness of a sacred or ceremonial
number. The exact implication of the term "ceremonial number" is
illustrated by what we know of the special significance among Hebrews of
the number seven: or among Christians, especially Roman Catholics, of
the number three. A corresponding usage is apparent in all the religious
practices of the Diegueño. The author can say, however, what every
reader of the foregoing pages has seen for himself, that more or less
confusion exists. The Diegueño themselves are unconscious of any rule.
Nor does their mythology reflect any definite feeling in the matter. In
the absence of direct testimony, however, we can derive certain
conclusions from the rituals themselves. Ceremonial actions and gestures
are repeated usually either three or four times. The frequent "growling
or groaning sound accompanied by blowing," and the exclamation "mwau,"
are repeated usually thrice, and only occasionally four times. In the
latter case, the third repetition is felt by the people to be "doubled."
"The last one is just for winding up," is the way one informant put it.
In the Ho<span class="sc">r</span><span class="sc">l</span>oi dance the
saucer of tobacco is raised three times; and many other instances could
be quoted. Six sometimes occurs, appearing to be however a duplication
of three. Two and also seven do not appear. Five was observed by the
writer only once. The ceremonial number varies therefore between three
and four, and of these, while the feeling is not very definite, three is
much the more usual.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobacco](rpdi23)
