[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rpdi07)  [Next](rpdi09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Religious Practices of the Diegueño Indians*, by T.T. Waterman,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE GROUND-PAINTING.

Several variations in this ground-painting have come to light in the
Diegueño country, but all such are of one general type. All alike are
quite different from anything reported among the Luiseño. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[62](#fn_67) The painting (pl.
[24](rpdi27.htm#img_pl24), [25](rpdi27.htm#img_pl25)), which is some
fifteen or eighteen feet in diameter, is a map or diagram of the world
as known to the Diegueño. It is said to have been made inside of the
kwusitcnyawa, or house where the ceremonial

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

objects were preserved. In form it is a circle, representing the visible
limits of the earth—in other words, the horizon. This circle marks the
place where the sky, amai, touches, or seems to touch, the ground. The
circle is, therefore, itself called amai. It is made in white powdered
soapstone. The name and meaning of this circle are identical wherever
the Diegueño were questioned. <span id="fr_68"></span>[63](#fn_68)

Across the circle stretches a broad white line from east to west, also
made in white powder. This represents the Milky Way, called amai
xatatku<span class="sc">r</span><span class="sc">l</span>,
sky-its-backbone. This feature is also constant wherever the painting
was described to the writer.

<span id="img_fig02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Figure
2.Ceremonial wand from Mesa Grande. Length 23 inches. Peabody Museum of
Archaeology and Ethnology, No. 4-66454.](tn/fig02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig02.jpg)  
Figure 2.—Ceremonial wand from Mesa Grande. Length 23 inches. Peabody
Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, No. 4-66454.  
</span>

The other heavenly bodies are indicated here and there *within* the
circle, since they are all situated centrally to the visible horizon.
The sun, inyau, and the full moon, xa<span class="sc">l</span>ya, are
represented as disks. They are made in the red oxide of iron from the
mineral springs. The sun is considered to "make" the large circle, amai,
and is therefore drawn near the circumference. Its precise location with
reference to other objects in the circle seems to have varied among
different villages. The full moon was placed in the center, near the
Milky Way. The new moon, xa<span class="sc">l</span>ya-xai, is drawn in
the northern half of the great circle, near the eastern end of the Milky
Way. The last quarter, xa<span class="sc">l</span>ya-inyo, is drawn in
the southern half of the circle, on the other side of the Milky Way and
opposite to the first quarter. The first and last quarters are
represented as crescents, one of them reversed. Like the sun, the moons
and all the other heavenly bodies are made in red oxide of iron.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

All the constellations recognized by the Diegueño were represented in
the painting. Those mentioned to the writer were xatca, the Pleiades;
amu, Mountain Sheep; <span id="fr_69"></span>[64](#fn_69) sai<span
class="it">r</span>, Buzzard; <span id="fr_70"></span>[65](#fn_70) and
watun, Shooting. <span id="fr_71"></span>[66](#fn_71) Each star of these
constellations was represented as a small disk of iron rust. The
following scheme was followed in the orientation of these constellations
in the painting: Xatca and amu, the Pleiades and Mountain Sheep, are
said to accompany each other in the heavens. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[67](#fn_72) The Pleiades are drawn, as they appear in
the heavens, in the southern half of the great circle, near the eastern
end of the Milky Way. Amu is drawn just east of xatca. Similarly, watun
(Scorpio?) points always directly at sai<span class="it">r</span>
(Altair?). These two constellations are drawn together in the northern
half of the painting, opposite xatca and amu.

The principal mountains on earth are also represented in the painting.
The painting is all in one plane by necessity. These mountains therefore
appear scattered in among the stars as the sacred diagram is actually
made on the ground. The identity of these mountains seems to vary for
the different villages which at various times have made the painting.
That is, the local topography around each village was reflected in the
painting. At Santa Ysabel they drew Mount San Jacinto, the islands of
Santa Catalina and San Clemente, which are considered to be mountains
out on the ocean, and a mountain called nyapuxaua, <span
id="fr_73"></span>[68](#fn_73) whose location is vaguely indicated as
southward on the desert. Santa Catalina they must have learned about
from the Luiseño

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

at Agua Caliente, who lived almost in the same valley as themselves, and
with whom intercourse was easy. The people at Mesa Grande also drew four
mountains. These were San Bernardino, represented in the northern part
of the circle, and the three Cuyamaca peaks in the southern part. San
Bernardino is easily identified, since it is called "white-top." It is
the only mountain in southern California with a snow cap. The Cuyamacas
are plainly visible to the south from the vicinity of Mesa Grande. At
Los Conejos rancheria the people seem to have represented six
mountains, <span id="fr_74"></span>[69](#fn_74) which could not be
identified by the present writer in terms of the modern geography of the
region. One of them, however, called moon-rock mountain, wixa<span
class="sc">l</span>ya, because of a crescent-shaped crag near its
summit, was pointed out at a distance of twelve or fourteen miles from
the reservation. No rivers or lakes were represented in the
ground-painting, since there are none in the Diegueño country.

All the creatures associated with the awik cult are represented in the
painting. These correspond to the "Chungichnish animals" of the Luiseño.
They are Coyote, Wolf, Bear, Black Spider (Tarantula), and Raven. Such
animals as the skunk, wildcat, and raccoon, and such birds as the crane
and owl were never drawn. The awik creatures are represented each by a
conventional symbol consisting of a line bent at a right angle. In
addition to these creatures, several species of snake are drawn. The
most important in significance are the two varieties of rattlesnake, the
light-colored and the dark-colored, awi ni<span class="sc">l</span>, and
awi axwat. Mention is also made, in the description of the painting, of
the gopher-snake, awiyuk, grass-snake or blue garter, xawitai, and red
racer, xi<span class="sc">l</span>kai<span class="it">r</span>. These
snakes were drawn as sinuous lines, made in different colored seeds. The
rattlesnake is considered to be beyond all others the medium through
which falls punishment for ceremonial offenses. The two rattlesnakes,
said to correspond to two actual varieties found in the region, are
accordingly drawn with particular attention to detail. They are very
large, said by some to reach clear across the painting. The
"diamond-back" pattern is put in with the

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

utmost care. The eyes are represented by pieces of haliotis shell.

The toloache mortars, kalmo, which each village possesses are set inside
of the painting in a row near the eastern edge. Each mortar has its
pestle, xanokai, inside it. The rattlesnakes are so arranged that their
heads just touch the mortars. The boys are instructed that mankind is
typified by these mortars. The great snakes are drawn with the heads
just touching them to indicate that when people are careless, the snake
is always waiting to destroy them.

According to some accounts, a small excavation three or four inches in
diameter, is made in the sand-painting. The boys are made to stand over
this hole, one by one, and spit into it. If they miss, it is a sign that
they will not live long. In some villages lumps of sage-seed and salt
are placed in the boys’ mouths, in order to induce a flow of saliva.
When the significance of the different figures has been explained, and
after the spitting is done, in case that feature is present, the dirt is
shoved in over the painting, obliterating it, so that no one else may
see it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[300:62](rpdi08.htm#fr_67) DuBois, op. cit., pp.
87, 179.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[301:63](rpdi08.htm#fr_68) At Mesa Grande, Santa
Ysabel, Capitan Grande, Los Conejos, Inyaxa, and Campo.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[302:64](rpdi08.htm#fr_69) In Mojave, amo,
mountain sheep, is the three stars of Orion.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[302:65](rpdi08.htm#fr_70) Cf. Luiseño:
Yungavish, buzzard, the star Altair. DuBois, p. 162.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[302:66](rpdi08.htm#fr_71) Cf. *ibid*., 165,
note 304: "It is said that with the Diegueños Scorpio is a boy with bow
and arrows." "Orion is called Mu in Manzanita Diegueño, Emu at Mesa
Grande." The present writer's information among the Diegueño seemed to
make watun the three large stars of Orion, but the Mohave and Luiseño
parallels and Miss DuBois’ statements make it appear probable that amu
is Orion and watun Scorpio.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[302:67](rpdi08.htm#fr_72) *Ibid*., 163:
"Hulaish is Orion and Chehaiyam the Pleiades. These two are always named
together."

<span id="fn_73"></span>[302:68](rpdi08.htm#fr_73) This mountain is said
to be half dark-colored earth and half light-colored. It is related that
when mankind were first created, the Mexicans, pinyai, were made of
earth from the light-colored side, the Indians from that of the
dark-colored side.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[303:69](rpdi08.htm#fr_74) Called awai, hu<span
class="sc">l</span>kokwis, xamatai, hipokwiskwi, wixa<span
class="sc">l</span>ya, and wiki´naūn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion of the Boys’ Ceremony](rpdi09)
