[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rpdi24)  [Next](rpdi26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Religious Practices of the Diegueño Indians*, by T.T. Waterman,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CREATION MYTH.

In the beginning there was no earth or land. There was nothing except
salt water. This covered everything like a big sea. Two brothers lived
under this water. The oldest one was Tcaipakomat. <span
id="fr_164"></span>[148](#fn_162)

Both of them kept their eyes closed, for the salt would blind them. The
oldest brother after awhile went up on top of the salt water and looked
around. He could see nothing but water. Soon the younger brother too
came up. He opened his eyes on the way and the salt water blinded him.
When he got to the top he could see nothing at all, so he went back.
When the elder brother saw

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

that there was nothing, he made first of all little red ants, miskiluwi
(or ciracir). They filled the water up thick with their bodies and so
made land. Then Tcaipakomat caused certain black birds with flat bills,
xanyi<span class="sc">l</span>, to come into being. There was no sun or
light when he made these birds. So they were lost and could not find
their roost. So Tcaipakomat took three kinds of clay, red, yellow, and
black, and made a round, flat object. This he took in his hand and threw
up against the sky. It stuck there. It began to give a dim light. We
call it the moon now, ha<span class="sc">l</span>ya. The light was so
poor that they could not see very far. So Tcaipakomat was not satisfied,
for he had it in mind to make people. He took some more clay and made
another round, flat object and tossed that up against the other side of
the sky. It also stuck there. It made everything light. It is the sun,
inyau. Then he took a light-colored piece of clay, mutakwic, and split
it up part way. He made a man of it. That is the way he made man. Then
he took a rib <span id="fr_165"></span>[149](#fn_163) from the man and
made a woman. This woman was Sinyaxau, First Woman. <span
id="fr_166"></span>[150](#fn_164) The children of this man and this
woman were people, ipai. They lived in the east at a great mountain
called Wikami. <span id="fr_167"></span>[151](#fn_165) If you go there
now you will hear all kinds of singing in all languages. If you put your
ear to the ground you will hear the sound of dancing. This is caused by
the spirits of all the dead people. They go back there when they die and
dance just as they do here. That is the place where everything was
created first.

A big snake lived out in the ocean over in the west. He was called
Maihaiowit. <span id="fr_168"></span>[152](#fn_166) He was the same as
Tcaipakomat but had taken another form. This big snake had swallowed all
learning. All the arts were inside his body—singing, dancing,
basket-making, and all the others. The place where the snake lived was

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

called Wicuwul (Coronado Islands?) The people at this time at Wikami
wished to have an Image Ceremony. They had made a w<span
class="it">o</span>keruk, ceremonial house, but did not know what else
to do. They could neither dance nor make speeches. One man knew more
than the others. He told them they ought to do more than just build the
house, so that the people who came after them would have something to
do. So they made up their minds to send to Maihaiowit and ask him to
give them the dances. Another sea monster, Xami<span
class="sc">l</span>kotat, was going to swallow everyone who tried to go
out to Maihaiowit. So the people said the man who went had better change
himself into a bubble.

So the man who had first spoken about the matter changed himself into a
bubble. The monster swallowed him anyway. When he found himself down
inside he first went north, but he could find no way out. Then he went
south, east, and west but could find no way out. Then he reached his
hand toward the north—he was a wonderful medicine-man—and got a blue
flint, awi-haxwa. He broke this so as to get a sharp edge. Then he cut a
hole through the monster and got out. Then he went on and on till he got
to the place where Maihaiowit lived. The snake had a big circular house,
with the door in the top. The man went in there. When the snake saw him
he called out:

Mamapitc inyawa maxap meyo (Who-are-you my-house hole comes-in?)

The man answered:

Inyatc eyon enuwi (I it-is, Uncle) .

"Tell me what you want," said the snake.

"I came over from Wikami," said the man. "They are trying to make a
wukeruk ceremony there, but they don't know how to sing or dance."

"All right," said the snake, "I will come and teach them. You go ahead
and I will come slowly."

So the man went back. The monster came after him reaching from mountain
to mountain. He left a great white streak over the country where he went
along. You can still see it. The people at Wikami were expecting him, so
they cleared a space. He came travelling fast as a snake travels. He
went to the wukeruk. First he put his head in. Then he began slowly
pulling

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

his length in after him. He coiled and coiled, but there was no end to
his length. After he had been coiling a long time the people became
afraid at his size. So they threw fire on top of the house and burned
him. When they put the fire on him he burst. All the learning inside of
him came flying out. It was scattered all around. Each tribe got some
one thing. That is the reason one tribe knows the wildcat dance and
another the wukeruk and a third are good at peon. Some people got to be
witches or medicine-men (kwusiyai), and orators, but not many.

The head of Maihaiowit was burned to a cinder. The rest of his body went
back west. It did not go very far. In the Colorado river there is a
great, white ridge of rock. That is his body. A black mountain near by
is his head. The people go to the white rock and make spearheads.

After the house was burned up, the people were not satisfied, so they
scattered in all directions. The people who went south were the oldest.
They are called Akwa<span class="sc">l</span>, Kwiliyeu, and Axwat. The
rocks were still soft when the people scattered abroad over the earth.
Wherever one of them stepped he left a footprint. The hollows around in
all the rocks are where they set down their loads when they
rested. <span id="fr_169"></span>[152a](#fn_167)

 

Even a hasty reading of this myth makes evident its dissimilarity with
the ordinary Luiseño and Mohave accounts of creation. It may be well to
add in this place that a systematic comparison of the narratives in
detail confirms the impression of dissimilarity conveyed at first blush
by the general structure and underlying idea of the story. <span
id="fr_170"></span>[153](#fn_168) A certain external relation between
the myth outlined above and the Mohave story <span
id="fr_171"></span>[154](#fn_169) is of course apparent. The mountain
Wikami, for instance in the

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

present story, and the monster Maihaiowit, correspond to the Mohave
"Avikwame" and the monster "Humasareha." This relationship does not seem
to extend down into the story-elements proper.

It is of course impossible to determine at this time, either from the
myth just quoted or from other versions, just what elements enter
properly into the Diegueño myth. All the evidence extant, however,
points quite unmistakably to the conclusion that as far as the mythology
of Creation is concerned, the Diegueño are thoroughly independent of the
Shoshonean peoples north of them.

It must be noted in passing that the "meteor" or electric fireball,
Diegueño Tcaup or Kwiyaxoma<span class="it">r</span> (Cuyahomarr),
Luiseño Takwish, Mohave Kwayu, is also prominent in all the mythologies
of the Mission area. <span id="fr_172"></span>[155](#fn_170) As a
corollary to the theme discussed just above, it is to be observed that
the Diegueño give this subject, too, a characteristic treatment of their
own. The physical phenomenon which is the basis of the stories is
apparently the same everywhere, namely, ball-lightning. A certain
confusion has arisen in this regard, owing to the use in various papers
of the word "meteor" to describe the manifestation. The presence of this
word in the literature of the subject is in all likelihood to be charged
to a loose employment of the term, in the first place, by uneducated
native informants. The being described in the myths is widely thought to
be accompanied by thunderings, to have a "bright" or "beaming"
appearance, and to fly about close to the surface of the ground. These
traits unmistakably characterize ball-lightning rather than
meteors. <span id="fr_173"></span>[156](#fn_171) The terrific action of
the electric fireball would, at least in the mind of the present writer,
account in part for the terror in which the being is held by all the
Mission peoples. However this may be, the Luiseño and Mohave "cannibal
meteor" stories offer almost no similarity (outside of concerning the
same subject) to the corresponding Diegueño tale. This being, who as we
have seen is

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

the culture hero of the Diegueño, is apparently regarded as a malevolent
demon among the Luiseño and Mohave.

It is perhaps too early to say that the Diegueño have no myths other
than the Chaup and Creation stories. We may safely conclude however that
these two are by far the most important types of myth. It is also safe
to say concerning Diegueño mythology that while it seems to be
restricted in scope, its affiliations are to be sought, not among the
mythology of the Shoshoneans as has at times been suggested, but among
that of the peoples, related linguistically to the Diegueño, who live to
the south and east.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_162"></span>[338:148](rpdi25.htm#fr_164) Miss DuBois gives
Tuchaipa as the elder and Yokomat or Yokomatis as the younger, but says
(Journ. Am. Folk-Lore, XXI, 229, 1908; and Congr. Intern. American., XV,
Quebec, II, 131, 1906) that the two names are sometimes given in one:
Chaipakomat.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[339:149](rpdi25.htm#fr_165) This may be an
original element and not a gloss from the Biblical myth. The informant
is a "bronco" (unbaptized) Indian, who has never been under the
influence of the missionaries.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[339:150](rpdi25.htm#fr_166) From siny, woman,
and axau, first; apparently the same as Miss DuBois’ Sinyohauch (Journ.
Am. Folk-Lore, XVII, 222, 1904), in which the final ch is guttural.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[339:151](rpdi25.htm#fr_167) Cf. present
series, VIII, 123, 1908; Journ. Am. Folk-Lore, XIX, 315, 1906; Am.
Anthropologist, n.s. VII, 627, 1905.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[339:152](rpdi25.htm#fr_168) Journ. Am.
Folk-Lore, XIX, 315, 1906; XXI, 235, 1908; Am. Anthr., n.s., VII, 627,
1905.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[341:152a](rpdi25.htm#fr_169) A full account of
the Yuma creation story has been contributed by Mr. John P. Harrington
to the Journal of American Folk-Lore, XXI, 324, 1908. The relationship
between the above schematic account and Mr. Harrington's full version of
the Yuma story is at once evident.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[341:153](rpdi25.htm#fr_170) See Am. Anthr.,
n.s. XI, 41-55, 1909. Thirteen prominent story elements are there chosen
for study. Of these, it develops that the Mohave and Luiseño myths have
nine in common. The Diegueño story, on the other hand, has only three
elements in common with the Luiseño, and but two in common with the
Mohave. This is quite insignificant, since any two totally unrelated
mythologies might to this limited extent be similar.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[341:154](rpdi25.htm#fr_171) Journ. Am.
Folk-Lore, XIX, 314, 1906.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[342:155](rpdi25.htm#fr_172) *Ibid*., 316.
*Ibid*., XVII, 217, 1904. *Ibid*., XIX, 147, 1906.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[342:156](rpdi25.htm#fr_173) The present writer
has never met the word "meteor" in this connection among native
informants, and has found the being in question identified both in
Luiseño and Diegueño territory with the electric fireball.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](rpdi26)
