[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rpdi13)  [Next](rpdi15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Religious Practices of the Diegueño Indians*, by T.T. Waterman,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

### CONCLUSION OF THE FEATHER CEREMONY.

While the Tapakwirp is in progress, the old dancers gather in a second
enclosure at some distance from the assemblage. After the conclusion of
the dance they appear one by one and come part of the way to the
dance-circle. Each one imitates as far as he can the actions and manner
of the dead man. Amid great wailing and crying on the part of the
spectators he then returns to the small inclosure. After all have done
this, the entire company of dancers appear, crawling on their hands and
knees. As they crawl they make animal noises. Each one is painted with
the footprint of the animal about which he dreamed when he took the
toloache. Every man imitates as far as he can the sound which his
particular animal is in the habit of making. Continuing this crawling
posture, the dancers advance to the dance-circle and seat themselves
about its edge. When they are seated the dead person's headplume, talo,
is set upright in the center. At a signal the company then move their
hands together with a solemn gesture to the left, and then to the right,
each time with a long-drawn grunting sound. Then they toss their hands
upward twice with an expulsion of the breath each time, finishing with
two quick gestures and two expulsions of the breath.

This ceremony, called the otcam, is intended to keep the dead person
from coming back; or, as one informant put it, "to make him done with
this world." <span id="fr_93"></span>[87](#fn_93) The dead person's
plume is then buried in the center of the circle, the company grunting
three times, and at the third time shoving in the dirt from all sides.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_93"></span>[311:87](rpdi14.htm#fr_93) The Luiseño term
*unish matakish* (DuBois, op. cit., p. 92) applied to a corresponding
ceremony has a similar meaning. Unish is not recognized at the present
time. Matakish or matakihish is a verbal noun from the causative stem of
mati, "send away". The meaning of the term is "the causing to send one
thing away"; "to loosen or untie it".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Image-Burning](rpdi15)
