[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18054)  [Next](sbe18056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLVIII.

1\. The forty-seventh question is that which you ask thus: How is a
liking for the desirableness, joy, and pleasure *arising* from the
sacred ceremony (ya*z*i*s*n) friendly to Aûha*r*ma*zd*, the
archangels <span id="fr_584"></span>[2](#fn_581), and the guardian
spirits of the righteous <span id="fr_585"></span>[3](#fn_582); in what
manner is the perfection of him by whom the ceremony is ordered and the
people of the country then exalted by them; and how *and* in what manner
does it become the vexation, defeat, anguish, *and* discomfort of the
evil spirit, the demons, *and* the fiends? 2. How is the purpose of the
ceremony, what is the ceremony, where is the place <span
id="fr_586"></span>[4](#fn_583) when they shall perform *it*, what is
good when they shall

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

perform *it, and* how *is it* good when they shall perform *it?* 

3\. The reply is this, that the great satisfaction of Aûha*r*ma*zd* and
the archangels *arising* from the sacred ceremony is in the purity of
its formulary (nîrang), *and* also in this, that *it* is completely
fulfilling his own blessed commands; because he ordered that entire
goodness for the complete procedure of those of the good religion
(bûndakŏ hitdînakânakîh), *as* the recompense and full allotment of the
sure upholder of religion *among* those who rightly recite *it*. 4. From
the performance of the ceremonial of the sacred beings are the
propitiation of the good spirits, the destruction (drû*g*i*s*nŏ) of
violence, the increase of digestiveness, the growth of plants, the
prosperity of the world, *and* also the proper progress of living
beings, even until the movement of the renovation *of the universe and*
the immortality of the creatures arise therefrom. 5. It became *so*, it
is expressly said, because the sacred beings are great; and unitedly
opposing it the demons are particularly undesirous *of it*, and owing to
it their defeat *and* vexation are severe; its *consecrated* cup
(tâ*s*tîkŏ) <span id="fr_587"></span>[1](#fn_584) also becomes the
express preservation of the ceremony.

6\. And its purpose enquired about is this, that religion is transmitted
clearly to the intelligent, that is, *it is* not the wisdom whose
comprehension *exists* in worldly beings; and as, moreover, even that
which is not understood by worldly wisdom is really the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

creature of the spirits, that also which is the spiritual formulary
(nîrang) is for making *it* intelligible to worldly beings through the
body <span id="fr_588"></span>[1](#fn_585). 7. That religion which is
comprehensible by the world *and* authoritative (nikê*z*akŏ) is rightly
connected with that which worldly beings are quite able to understand
through worldly wisdom; and the understanding about its evidence as to
that which is spiritual *and* powerful, apart from the worldly evidence
of superiors (a*v*arîkânŏ), is the right way of the intelligent. 8. That
proper (kânŏ) purpose--in which, more-over, the ceremonial, owing to
timely memory for its own completion, is unique--is this unique
exhibition of purity in the pure glorifying of the heavenly angels, as
is commanded; just as the purpose of the ceremonial of a season-festival
*being* before the season-festival, *and* of maintaining (dârân) the
exposure of the body of a jackal (*s*akhâl) <span
id="fr_589"></span>[2](#fn_586) *or* a man, is to make the body clean
from the corrupting (nasû*s*îkŏ) pollution <span
id="fr_590"></span>[3](#fn_587), *and* also from outward contamination.

9\. That also which might be written, as to the much retribution
appointed as regards washing the limbs outside with clean moisture from
clean

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

animals <span id="fr_591"></span>[1](#fn_588) *and* plants, and then
completely washing the body with the purifying water streaming forth; as
to the clean scents among those which they rightly perceive, and making
the body *and* clothing <span id="fr_592"></span>[2](#fn_589)
sweet-scented; *and* as to the putting on of the white and proper
garment of Vohûman <span id="fr_593"></span>[3](#fn_590), and supposing
the power <span id="fr_594"></span>[4](#fn_591) of avarice *to be* the
sight of distress, is *all* superfluous. 10. *But it* is needful still
as regards these *matters*, that is, while *engaged* in the ceremonial
*it is* not to be hurried owing to any hunger *or* thirst, owing to
liability of punishment for religious practices <span
id="fr_595"></span>[5](#fn_592), *or* even owing to deficiency <span
id="fr_596"></span>[6](#fn_593) of vacant space. 11. And before the
ceremonial *one* is to eat at the appropriate time, and such food, too,
as is preparable and *only* moderately troublesome (navâs); and any of
that which *one has* to perform aloud in leaving the heavenly-minded,
yet moderate, duty in the abode of fires <span
id="fr_597"></span>[7](#fn_594)--which is perpetual light--is proper,
pertaining to good works, and good for him, and thereby lodging in
*him*. 12. And they, that is,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

the gloomy ones <span id="fr_598"></span>[1](#fn_595), thereby see the
service (yasâk) for them themselves is short; *and* good are
*they* <span id="fr_599"></span>[2](#fn_596) who come into the world
glorified by praise.

13\. The position of the *ceremony*-holders <span
id="fr_600"></span>[3](#fn_597) themselves, that is, the position of the
officiating priest (zôtŏ) *and* his co-operators, is the Aûrvês <span
id="fr_601"></span>[4](#fn_598) place; and, if *it be* the precinct
(dargasîh) of prayers <span id="fr_602"></span>[5](#fn_599), *one*
should wash *it* over (madam pasâyâ*d*) *with* the water of
purification, to make *it* clean. 14. The apparatus of the ceremonial,
*together* with its own man, who is a solemnizer, and the two creatures
*which* are solid <span id="fr_603"></span>[6](#fn_600) out of these
four: fire, metal, water, and plants, just as *one has* to bring *them*
together in readiness, the stone Aûrvês, the stone *and* mortar
Khân <span id="fr_604"></span>[7](#fn_601), *and* the Hôm-mortar <span
id="fr_605"></span>[8](#fn_602) (hâvanîh), cups, *and* crescent-shaped
(mâh-rûpŏ) stands <span id="fr_606"></span>[9](#fn_603) set upon *it*,
are *all* ceremoniously washed (pâ*d*yâ*v*înî*d*) with the water of
purification. 15. The

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

bright fire on the clean fire-stand (âtî*s*tŏ) <span
id="fr_607"></span>[1](#fn_604) is increased by the dry firewood
delivered *to it* purified, *and one* is to put upon *it at* appropriate
times the wholesome perfumes of *various* kinds of plants; and the water
of purification, which is ritualistically produced <span
id="fr_608"></span>[2](#fn_605) by *reciting* the words of revelation,
is in the clean metal cups. 16. The well-grown Hôm <span
id="fr_609"></span>[3](#fn_606) through which the world is possessed of
creatures <span id="fr_610"></span>[4](#fn_607), the Hôm through which
the production of Zaratû*s*t occurred <span
id="fr_611"></span>[5](#fn_608), is a symbol of the white Gôkerânô <span
id="fr_612"></span>[6](#fn_609) as

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

regards the immortality of the renovation *of the universe* manifest
therefrom, and the resting-places of its vengeance <span
id="fr_613"></span>[1](#fn_610) are the various demons; and with it
*one* is to put attentively (*s*invi*s*nŏ-dahak) in *its* appropriate
place the pomegranate (hadanapag) <span id="fr_614"></span>[2](#fn_611)
plant of the Aûrvarâm. 17. The vegetable <span
id="fr_615"></span>[3](#fn_612) sacred twigs carefully girded with the
vegetable belt (parvand) and girdle, *and* the metallic <span
id="fr_616"></span>[4](#fn_613) crescent-shaped *stands*--which are in
the position of those who are sovereigns *of* the worldly creatures who
are interpreted *as* the sacred twigs <span
id="fr_617"></span>[5](#fn_614) of the treatises--are prepared.

18\. *When* arranged (stôrdŏ) by the bringing together of clean worldly
productions, so much the more purely as is possible, the arrival of the
pure renders all the symbols reliable. 19. Those celebrators of whom the
outside of their own bodies is defiled with their bodily refuse and in
clean clothing, and *their* disposition--if <span
id="fr_618"></span>[6](#fn_615) in the religion of

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

moderate eating in which is a thirst for lawfully drinking--is
customarily sleep *and* lethargy through the tendency (rûnŏ) to
falsehood of *their* wisdom, are to consider, even from *their*
innermost hearts and minds, the retribution of the body of wrath, the
falsehood, and bad thoughts in that disposition of infamy, *and* the
recompense of their own renunciation *of it; they* are to atone for
*their* sinfulness, *and* to seek great purification of mind. 20. And
*having* acquired eyes speaking <span id="fr_619"></span>[1](#fn_616)
forth, hands in *a state of* ablution, and every other member of the
body--especially there where well-accomplishable--*free* from its bodily
refuse and covered *with* the clean clothing, the tongue is preserved
*and* guarded *from* falsehood *and* the hand from sin, the mind is
established *by* little preparation with good consideration for
knowledge of the sacred beings, and even the good are to recite by
direction (ra*d*îhâ) the verbal renunciation *of sin* <span
id="fr_620"></span>[2](#fn_617).

21\. The officiating priest (zôtŏ), *having* directed *and* purified the
place <span id="fr_621"></span>[3](#fn_618) of the fire with liturgical
words <span id="fr_622"></span>[4](#fn_619), is to go *and* walk unto
the place of the officiating priests <span
id="fr_623"></span>[5](#fn_620) while glorifying the sacred beings,

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

*and* to consider invokable the glory given to the luminaries and the
guardian spirits of the good. 22. Of those <span
id="fr_624"></span>[1](#fn_621) also who, co-operatively, conjointly,
and interspersed (ham-rê*s*), *have* each separately remained in their
own places *and* thought of the sacred beings, with propitiation of
Aûha*r*ma*zd* *and* scornful notice (tar dahi*s*nŏ) of the evil spirit,
the employment stands forth prominently at the ceremonial. 23. *As to*
the position of others co-operating *with* him who is an officiating
priest of good leadership, there are *some* who are for the Avesta <span
id="fr_625"></span>[2](#fn_622), there is the solitude (khadûî*d*ârîh)
by the fire, there are *some* who are bringers <span
id="fr_626"></span>[3](#fn_623) forward of water, there are *some* who
are for carriers away, there are *some* who are solitary ones, there are
*some* who are gregarious ones, there are *some* who are directors of
duties, and their own needful arrangement in the place is arranged in
the ceremony.

24\. In cleanliness, purity, *and* truth, as much as *there is* in
*this* mingled existence <span id="fr_627"></span>[4](#fn_624), if *one
has* to commence a ceremony glorifying the sacred beings,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

when the righteously-disposed temperament is purified *along* with the
apparatus the abundant ritualism (nîrangakîh) of the spirit is a symbol
*and* reminder of the will of the sacred beings, undesired by the
fiend <span id="fr_628"></span>[1](#fn_625), *and* remains a blessing
deservedly unto those come together. 25. Then is explained the text
(a*v*istâk) of that great scripture (naskô) which is called the
Hâ*d*ôkht <span id="fr_629"></span>[2](#fn_626), *that* is itself the
best of the chiefs of the scriptures, *and* of the sublime
Dvâ*z*dah-hômâst <span id="fr_630"></span>[3](#fn_627) *that* is not
recited by any voice with falsehood (âkadbâ) <span
id="fr_631"></span>[4](#fn_628), *and* is called the origin of every
truth <span id="fr_632"></span>[5](#fn_629).'

26\. The pure glorification of the sacred beings is in the light, this
is in the morning time (frâyar gâs) <span
id="fr_633"></span>[6](#fn_630); and even until night the ritualistic
*and* true

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

recitation of revelation (dînô) is unchangeably proceeding, undivided
and faultless. 27. This, too, is in benediction of the angels; this,
too, is producing restraint of the fiends; this, too, is in praise of
the glorious ones, the mighty doers; this, too, is as an admonition. for
creatures subject to command; this is in the true words of the ancients
who *have* passed *away*; this, too, is as a suitable servant for the
righteous, these good doers; this, too, is to obtain a permanence
(patîstân) of requisites; this, too, is suitable for the discreet *and
is* merciful; this, too, is as another way *in* which the promoters of
good (vêh-yâ*v*kârân) are pardoned, as soon as the Hôm-juice (parâhôm)
is digested, through not *having* eaten from dawn till night during the
pure utterance of the pure glorification. 28. And, moreover, *one*
performs no work <span id="fr_634"></span>[1](#fn_631), nor is even a
word uttered; *one* does not go to sleep, nor should they allow any
pollution to the body; the sequence (patîsârîh) of the religious
formulas is, likewise, not changed from that ordered, nor is even a
detached thought away from that truth *and* purity; *but* always *with*
phrases rightly consecutive *and* properly worded (hû-sakhunagânŏihâ)
the Avesta is uttered; and even the manner of response of one's
co-operators is *in* modes contributing to good (hû-pa*d*âyâkŏ), or they
utter the scripture (nask).

29\. Since the production of stench is needing *something* essentially
purifying, many formulas in the ceremonial are tokens *and* signs which,
while they

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

are strongly manifested, are terrifying *and* vexing to the demons,
*and* inviting *and* rejoicing to the angels. 30. Such as, indeed, the
pure Hôm, which is squeezed out by four applications of holy-water
(zôrîh) <span id="fr_635"></span>[1](#fn_632) with religious formulas,
is noted even *as* a similitude *of* the understanding <span
id="fr_636"></span>[2](#fn_633) and birth of the four apostles bringing
the good religion, who are *he who* was the blessed Zaratû*s*t *and they
who* are *to be* Hûshê*d*ar, Hûshê*d*ar-mâh, and Sôshâns <span
id="fr_637"></span>[3](#fn_634). 31. As also the metal mortar (hâvan)
which is struck <span id="fr_638"></span>[4](#fn_635) during the
squeezing of the Hôm, and its sound is evoked along with the words of
the Avesta, which becomes a reminder of the thoughts, words, and deeds
on the coming of those true apostles into the world. 32. As *also* the
proper rite as regards the water, that they should perform three
times <span id="fr_639"></span>[5](#fn_636), which is showing the world
the glorious seizing of water <span id="fr_640"></span>[6](#fn_637) and
formation

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

of rain, *and* the healthfulness of the production of rain <span
id="fr_641"></span>[1](#fn_638). 33. *And* as the purification of the
milk, by the glorious ritualistic *product* (nîrang) <span
id="fr_642"></span>[2](#fn_639) taken from the purifying cattle, is
divided in two, by means of which the token is that which is great,
glorious, *and* good; one *being* for the daughter *of*
Pâûrvâ*g*îryâ <span id="fr_643"></span>[3](#fn_640) the
Ma*zd*a-worshipper, *and* from her *was* Aôshnôr full of wisdom; and one
*being* Farhank, *daughter* of Vidhirisâ <span
id="fr_644"></span>[4](#fn_641), and from her came Kaî-Kavâ*d* <span
id="fr_645"></span>[5](#fn_642).

34\. And, as to the high-priests of the glorious religion, it is said
many concomitants (pa*d*vandîhâ) are obtained; such as, much
discrimination of scripture (nask), the holy-water which is
indispensable as a remedy, the healthfulness which is given in that
ceremonial to the sacred fire <span id="fr_646"></span>[6](#fn_643)
which the world destroys, that pre-eminent-strength which is given at
the end of the world from the ox Hadhayã*s* <span
id="fr_647"></span>[7](#fn_644) unto the good *people* scattered about
(fravaftân)--it is

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

mingled with the fire of men's bodies <span
id="fr_648"></span>[1](#fn_645), and they, therefore, become perfect and
immortal through it--and there are also other *things*. 35. There are
*also* in the ceremonial many tokens *and* signs of spiritual mysteries,
glorious matters, and habitual practices of which statements *would* be
very tedious.

36\. And if the wish (ayûpŏ) should be this, that they should be
*engaged* in a single ceremony of the length of a day, a man who is
righteous in purification, inside and outside the body, should stay away
from all *his* relations and the worldly transaction of business, *from*
malicious actions *and* covetous practices, separated from all lying
*and* falsehood of relatives; *and his* words are to be all those which
are serving the angels, glorifying, *and* begging favours. 37. Then,
indeed, the way of the spirit and the harmoniousness <span
id="fr_649"></span>[2](#fn_646) of the sacred beings are manifest
therefrom; *and* those which are as much the means due to the primitive
good creations as is more purely possible are strengthening as regards
the utility (bûn) for offering, encouraging for purity, confounding for
the confusers (gûmê*g*akân), terrifying for the fiends, and propitiating
for the sacred beings.

38\. The ceremonial which is good is when they shall perform *it* for a
pure disposition and assured wisdom, a minder of the religion of the
sacred beings of the spheres, and *with* pure thoughts, just
thoughts <span id="fr_650"></span>[3](#fn_647), wise deeds, a purified
body, a tongue worthy of good

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (vêh-sa*z*âk), a
scripture (nask) *made* easy <span id="fr_651"></span>[1](#fn_648), a
true text (a*v*istâk), ablutions performed, proper rites, undivided, and
faultless. 39. Near which fashion, with like abilities, *and*
innumerable times, it is very purely solemnized in the abode of the
ever-growing fire, then in the abode of the other sacred fires <span
id="fr_652"></span>[2](#fn_649), then in the abodes of
Ma*zd*a-worshippers *and* other good *people, and* then *in* other
places pronounced clean. 40. That of the three *days* <span
id="fr_653"></span>[3](#fn_650) is in the abode of the fire-place which
is nearest to that of the departed; the ceremony of the guardian spirits
of the righteous <span id="fr_654"></span>[4](#fn_651) is solemnized in
purity there where the dwelling is which is nearest that of the departed
whose soul is honoured. 41. And that for victories in war is then at its
times of battle, the husbandry of Sâm <span
id="fr_655"></span>[5](#fn_652) and other offenders (vinâsagân) who
*were* for keeping away husbandry, the household attendant's place for a
warrior of another rank, the occasion of the outcry of those not
possessing (adârigân) a lodging, unto the rest of the same temperament
(mûnôkŏ), expressly to produce *and* maintain a proportional
resemblance <span id="fr_656"></span>[6](#fn_653).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_581"></span>[159:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_584) The archangels are
usually reckoned as seven in number, because Aûha*r*ma*zd*, their
creator, is considered as presiding over the six others, whose names are
Vohûman, Ar*d*avahi*s*t, Shatvaîrô, Spenda*r*ma*d*. Ho*r*vada*d*, and
Ame*r*ôda*d*. These names are merely corruptions of Avesta phrases
meaning 'good thought, perfect rectitude, desirable dominion, bountiful
devotion, health, and immortality,' respectively, and the archangels, or
'immortal benefactors,' are personifications of these ideas. They are
said to have been the first creatures created, after the guardian
spirits or prototypes of creation, the light, and the sky (see Bd. I, 8,
23-26).

<span id="fn_582"></span>[159:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_585) See Chap. II, 5.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[159:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_586) Or gâs may mean
'time.'

<span id="fn_584"></span>[160:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_587) Referring probably
to the cup of Hôm juice, the preparation, consecration, and use of which
are essentially characteristic of the Ya*z*i*s*n or sacred ceremony, and
are, therefore, supposed to be very repulsive to the demons.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[161:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_588) That is, the
purpose of the ceremonial is to afford an outward symbol of the
spiritual mysteries of the religion.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[161:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_589) This reading is
uncertain, but the reference appears to be to the exposure of the dead.
M14 has the sentence altered as follows:--'just as the ceremony of a
season-festival is exhibited more royally (or more joyously) before the
season-festival, and a man who is a judge is for the purpose of making
the body clean from the corrupting pollution, and also from
contamination which is even outside the body, as much as is proper.'

<span id="fn_587"></span>[161:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_590) That is, the
pollution due to the Nasû*s*, or fiend of corruption, who is supposed to
seize upon all corpses (see Chap. XVII, 7).

<span id="fn_588"></span>[162:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_591) Referring to
ceremonial purification by washing with bull's urine.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[162:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_592) Or the clothing of
the body.'

<span id="fn_590"></span>[162:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_593) The sacred shirt
(see Chaps. XXXIX, 19, XL, 2).

<span id="fn_591"></span>[162:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_594) Reading va zôrîh,
but it may be nizôrîh, 'weakening.'

<span id="fn_592"></span>[162:5](sbe18055.htm#fr_595) This seems to be
the meaning of min pâ*d*afrâhîh-î dinôîkîh. At the time this was written
the religion was often persecuted, and its ceremonies were liable to
interruption; but even when such a misfortune was apprehended, they were
not to be hurried over.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[162:6](sbe18055.htm#fr_596) The word is kamîh
in the MSS., but it may possibly have been kâmîh originally, in which
case the meaning would be: '*or* even owing to wishing for evacuation.'

<span id="fn_594"></span>[162:7](sbe18055.htm#fr_597) The fire temple,
where the sacred fire is kept perpetually burning.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[163:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_598) The demons. In M14
the sentence, already obscure, is altered so as to be unintelligible.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[163:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_599) The angels. The
meaning is that, by the utterance of the proper formulas at the proper
times, the demons are discouraged, and the angels are induced to come to
the ceremony.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[163:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_600) Perhaps we should
read sâkhtârân, 'preparers,' as in M14, or else ya*s*târân,
'solemnizers,' instead of dâ*s*târân, 'holders.'

<span id="fn_598"></span>[163:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_601) This is the name
of the consecrated space within which the ceremony is performed. It is
often written Arvîs, but is probably to be traced to the Av. urvaêsa,
'goal.'

<span id="fn_599"></span>[163:5](sbe18055.htm#fr_602) That is, when the
place is about to be used for a ceremony.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[163:6](sbe18055.htm#fr_603) Literally
'material;' meaning the metallic and vegetable portions of the
ceremonial apparatus.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[163:7](sbe18055.htm#fr_604) The slightly
raised platform or table upon which all the apparatus, except the fire
and unconsecrated water, is placed.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[163:8](sbe18055.htm#fr_605) In which the twigs
of Hôm are pounded and mixed with water.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[163:9](sbe18055.htm#fr_606) For the Baresôm or
sacred twigs (see Chap. XLIII, 5).

<span id="fn_604"></span>[164:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_607) A small stone
platform on which the fire vase is placed, now usually called âdôst.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[164:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_608) Reading
nîrangîkîhâ dâ*d* instead of the unintelligible nîrang ashâyâ*d* of K35,
which is very similarly written in Pahlavi; M14 has 'which one is to
keep pure by the ritual of words of revelation.'

<span id="fn_606"></span>[164:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_609) A plant said to
grow among the mountains in southern Persia, which has not yet been
botanically identified, but Anquetil Duperron was told that it resembled
a vine without fruit. Twigs of this plant are brought to India 'by
traders and are, therefore, considered impure until they have been
purified, laid aside for a year, and again purified' (see Haug's Essays,
p. 399). A few fragments of these twigs are pounded and mixed with water
in the Hôm-mortar, and the juice is tasted by the priest who performs
the ceremony. The Avesta Hôm and the Sanskrit Soma must have been
originally the same plant, but both Parsis and Hindus now use plants
which are no doubt mere substitutes for that original. In southern and
western India the Soma plant now used by the Brahmans is the
*Sarcostemma Brevistigma*, a leafless bush of green succulent branches,
growing upwards, with flowers like those of an onion; when not in flower
it can hardly be distinguished from the *Euphorbia Tirucalli*, or
thornless milk-bush, commonly used for hedges in many parts of India.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[164:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_610) Reading
dâm-hômand; or it may be *s*em-hômand, 'renowned.'

<span id="fn_608"></span>[164:5](sbe18055.htm#fr_611) Zaratû*s*t is said
to have been begotten in consequence of his parents drinking Hôm-juice
and cow's milk infused, respectively, with his guardian spirit and glory
(see Zs. XI, 10 n). K35 has hôman, and M14 has hômand, instead of hôm,
in this clause.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[164:6](sbe18055.htm#fr_612) Av. gaokerena,
sometimes called gôkar*d* in Pahlavi, the <span id="page_165">p.
165</span> mythic white Hôm-tree which is said to grow in the
wide-formed ocean, and from which the draught of immortality is prepared
for mankind at the resurrection (see Vend. XX, 17, Bd. XVIII, 1-4,
XXVII, 4, XXX, 25).

<span id="fn_610"></span>[165:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_613) Reading ayêngîh
nisîm, but this is uncertain.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[165:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_614) Av. hadhânaêpata,
to represent which the Parsis now use a twig of the pomegranate bush,
but it must originally have been some sweet-scented plant (see Vend.
VIII, 7). The Aûrvarâm (Av. ace. urvarãm) consists of this twig, a small
fragment of which is pounded with the Hôm-twigs when preparing the
Hôm-juice.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[165:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_615) From this it would
appear that the practice of using metal wires, instead of twigs of
trees, for the baresôm (see Chap. XLIII, 5) was not in use a thousand
years ago.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[165:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_616) Literally
'Shatvaîrian;' the archangel Shatvaî*r*ô (Av. khshathra vairya,
'desirable dominion') having special charge of all metals (see Bd. XXX,
19, Sls. XV, 14-19).

<span id="fn_614"></span>[165:5](sbe18055.htm#fr_617) Reading baresom;
K35 has basom and M14 bîm-i*k*.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[165:6](sbe18055.htm#fr_618) M14 substitutes
yôshdâsarînî*d*ŏ for denman hîgarînî*d*ŏ, <span id="page_166">p.
166</span> and pa*d*mûkht for va khîm hat, so as to read 'the outside of
their own bodies is purified and attired in clean clothing,' but this
can hardly be reconciled with the context. The term hîgar or hîkhar (Av.
hikhra), here translated 'bodily refuse,' is applied to any refuse or
dirt from the living body, or any *liquid* exudation from a dead one.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[166:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_619) Reading gôvak, but
it may be yûvâk, 'wishing,' or dûvâk, 'flowing: M14 alters it to vênâk,
'looking,' which suits the eyes well enough, but hardly seems to express
the author's idea.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[166:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_620) See Chap. XLI, 5.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[166:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_621) M14 has 'having
purified around the place.'

<span id="fn_619"></span>[166:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_622) The Âta*s*
Nyâyi*s* (see Haug's Essays, p. 403).

<span id="fn_620"></span>[166:5](sbe18055.htm#fr_623) This place is at
the end of the ceremonial area farthest from <span id="page_167">p.
167</span> the fire. Here the priest first invokes the spirits in whose
honour the ceremony is about to be performed, by reciting their several
propitiatory formulas (see Chap. XXIX, I).

<span id="fn_621"></span>[167:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_624) Referring to any
other priests who may be present.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[167:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_625) M14 has 'for
carriers,' omitting the three clauses about the Avesta, fire, and
bringing water.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[167:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_626) Or, perhaps,
'there is *he* who may be a bringer;' and similarly in the following
clauses. The plural suffix -îhâ being identical in form with the Pâz.
conditional form of the verb 'to be,' which seems to be the origin of
the adverbial suffix corresponding to -ly in English when added to an
adjective; occasionally it is added to a substantive, as is probably the
case here, and can then be only translated by 'may, or would, be' (see
Chap. XLIV, 11).

<span id="fn_624"></span>[167:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_627) This first clause
may belong to the preceding section.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[168:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_628) K35 has drôn,
'sacred cake,' instead of drû*g*.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[168:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_629) The twentieth
Nask, which is said to have chiefly treated of religious ceremonies and
texts (see Byt. III, 25). Two Avesta fragments, published by Westergaard
as Yt. XXI and XXII, are traditionally ascribed to this Nask.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[168:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_630) Another name for
the Dâmdâ*d* Nask, from which the Bundahi*s* appears to have originated
(see Zs. IX, 1). The name is also applied to a particular series of
ceremonies, continued for twelve successive days in honour of each of
the twenty-two sacred beings whose names are given to the 1st-7th,
9th-14th, 16th-22nd, 24th, and 26th days of the month; these ceremonies
last, therefore, for 264 days (see Byt. II, 59).

<span id="fn_628"></span>[168:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_631) It can hardly be
akadbâ, as that would imply that it 'is not recited by any undeceitful
voice.' The use of the prefix â- in the sense of 'with' is rare, but it
occurs in âpastanû, 'pregnant,' (whence Pers. âbistan), and is noticed
by Dastûr Jâmâspji in his Pahlavi Dictionary, p. 2.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[168:5](sbe18055.htm#fr_632) Reading bun-î
ko*l*â râstîh, apparently a forerunner of the modern name Bundahi*s*.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[168:6](sbe18055.htm#fr_633) The frâyar period
of the day corresponds to the Hâvan Gâh or morning (compare Farh. Okh.
p. 42 with Bd. XXV, 9), at which time the Yasna ceremonial should be
performed when not accompanied <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> by the
Vendidâ*d*; or, according to the text, it must be performed by daylight.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[169:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_634) During the
ceremonial.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[170:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_635) In preparing the
Hôm juice fresh holy-water (zôr) is added four times to the Hôm-twigs
which are each time pounded anew, while reciting the Ahunavar formula,
and their liquor strained into a cup (see Haug's Essays, p. 402).

<span id="fn_633"></span>[170:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_636) There is no
authority for translating *s*invi*s*nŏ by 'conception,' otherwise that
meaning would suit this sentence better. M14 has yehevûni*s*nŏ,
'existence,' which differs by only one extra stroke of the pen in
Pahlavi.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[170:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_637) See Chap. II, 10.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[170:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_638) The word
*s*ikâ*v*î-aîtŏ really means 'is split.' During the pounding of the
Hôm-twigs the pestle is struck several times against the sides of the
mortar, so as to produce a ringing sound (see Haug's Essays, p. 401).

<span id="fn_636"></span>[170:5](sbe18055.htm#fr_639) Reading vidanâg,
instead of gûn-aê, by transposing the first two Pahlavi characters.
After the first series of poundings of the Hôm-twigs holy-water is added
to them three times while reciting, each time, the Ashem-vohû formula
(ibid.).

<span id="fn_637"></span>[170:6](sbe18055.htm#fr_640) The evaporation
from the ocean, said to be effected by Tî*s*tar for the production of
rain (see Chap. XCIII, 2, 3).

<span id="fn_638"></span>[171:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_641) The delightfulness
of rain after an eight-months' drought cannot be adequately appreciated
by a dweller in Europe.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[171:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_642) That is, bull's
urine.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[171:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_643) The reading of
this name, as well as that of Aôshnôr, is doubtful; but if these names
occur at all in the extant Avesta, they may perhaps be found in. the
Aoshnara pouru-*g*îra of Fravar*d*în Yt. 131, Âf. Zarat. 2; the epithet
pouru-*g*îra, when it occurs after the name, would naturally be
considered a patronymic, whence a father or grandfather could be easily
created, if he did not exist already in legendary history.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[171:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_644) This name is
written in Pâzand, and is evidently meant for the same person as the
Pâz. Vîdharg-âfrâ*s*taka of Bd. XXXI, 31.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[171:5](sbe18055.htm#fr_645) M14 has 'from him
she came unto Kaî-Kavâ*d*,' which would tally better with the statements
in Bd. XXXI, 25, 31.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[171:6](sbe18055.htm#fr_646) Literally 'the
fire of Varahrân (Bahrâm).'

<span id="fn_644"></span>[171:7](sbe18055.htm#fr_647) See Chap. XXXVII,
99.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[172:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_648) The vital heat or
Vohu-fryãn fire (see Bd. XVII, 1, 2).

<span id="fn_646"></span>[172:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_649) Reading
âhankânakîh, as in K35; M14 has khadûkânakîh, 'unity,' which is a much
commoner word, nearly identical with the other in its Pahlavi form.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[172:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_650) So in the MSS.,
but it was probably 'true words' originally, so as to complete the triad
of thought, word, and deed.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[173:1](sbe18055.htm#fr_651) That is, learnt by
heart.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[173:2](sbe18055.htm#fr_652) Literally 'fires
of Varahrân.'

<span id="fn_650"></span>[173:3](sbe18055.htm#fr_653) The three days
after a death, during which ceremonies are performed in honour of the
angel Srôsh, who is supposed to protect the departed soul from the
demons during that period, while it is still hovering about the body
(see Chap. XXVIII, 6).

<span id="fn_651"></span>[173:4](sbe18055.htm#fr_654) On the fourth day
after a death (see Chap. XXVIII, 7).

<span id="fn_652"></span>[173:5](sbe18055.htm#fr_655) That is, Keresâsp
the Sâman (see Chap. XVII, 6); having been a famous warrior, his
husbandry is said to be battle, the destruction of all ordinary
husbandry.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[173:6](sbe18055.htm#fr_656) That is, the ruin
of people by war leads them to demand a share of the property of those
more fortunate, so as to produce an equality. The whole section seems to
be a bitter sarcasm upon the effects of war, representing the generals
as cultivators of <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> slaughter and
rapine, with the soldiers as their domestic servants, driving the people
into social democracy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIX](sbe18056)
