[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18023)  [Next](sbe18025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVI.

1\. The fifteenth question is that which you ask thus: When the dogs and
birds tear it (the corpse) does the soul know *it*, and does it occur
uncomfortably *for* it, or how is it?

2\. The reply is this, that the pain *occasioned* by the tearing and
gnawing so galls (mâlê*d*ŏ) the body of men that, though the soul *were*
abiding with the body, such soul; which *one* knows is happy and
immortal, *would* then depart from the body, *along* with the animating
life, the informing (sinâyinâkŏ) consciousness, *and* the remaining
resources of life. 3. The body is inert, unmoving, and not to be galled;
and at last no pain whatever galls *it*, nor is it perceived; and the
soul, with the life, is outside of the body, and is not unsafe as
regards its gnawing, but through the spiritual perception <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_99) it sees *and* knows *it*.

4\. That which is wicked is then again desirous of its bodily
existence <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_100), when it sees them thus;
the wonderfully-constructed body which was its

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

vesture, *and* is dispersed, and that spiritual life (hûkŏ) which was
with its heart, and is even on account of this--that is: 'Because in my
bodily existence and worldly progress *there was* no atonement for sin
and no accumulation of righteousness'--also in mourning about it thus:
'In the prosperity which this body of mine had, it would have been
possible for me to atone for sin *and* to save the soul, *but* now I am
separated from every one and *from* the joy of the world, which is great
hope of spiritual *life*; and I have attained to the perplexing account
and more serious danger.' 5. And the gnawing becomes as grievous to it,
on account of that body, as a closely-shut arsenal (afzâr bêtâ-î badtûm)
and a concealed innermost garment are useless among those with limbs
*provided* with weapons and accoutrements, and are destroyed.

6\. And of that, too, which is righteous and *filled* with the great joy
that *arises* from *being* really certain of the best existence, then
also the spiritual life which was with its body, on account of the great
righteousness, *fit* for the exalted (fîrâkhtagânîk), which *was* ever
accumulated by it with the body, is well developed (madam hû-tâshî*d*ŏ),
*and* the wonderfully-constructed body is destroyed in the manner of a
garment, particularly when its dispersion (apâsi*s*nŏ) occurs thereby.

7\. And the consciousness of men, as it sits three nights outside of the
body, in the vicinity of the body, *has* to remember and expect that
*which* is truly fear and trouble (khâr) unto the demons, *and* reward,
peace, and glad tidings (nôvîk) unto the spirits of the good; and, on
account of the dispersion and injuring of the body, it utters a cry
spiritually,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

thus: 'Why do the dogs and birds gnaw this organised body, when still at
last the body and life unite together at the raising of the dead?' 8.
And this is the reminding of the resurrection *and* liberation, and it
becomes the happiness and hope of the spirit of the body *and* the other
good spirits, and the fear *and* vexation of the demons and fiends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[36:1](sbe18024.htm#fr_100) Supposing that
sinâ*s*nŏ stands for *s*inâyi*s*nŏ; otherwise we must read 'in the
spiritual places (dîvâgânŏ).'

<span id="fn_100"></span>[36:2](sbe18024.htm#fr_101) This section is
made still more complicated in the Pahlavi text by the division of this
first phrase; half of it being placed at the beginning, and the other
half at the extreme end of the sentence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](sbe18025)
