[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18072)  [Next](sbe18074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXVI.

1\. *As to* the sixty-fifth question *and* reply, that which you ask is
thus: *There is* a man of wealth of the good religion who fully intends
to order a *celebration of* all *the rites* of his religion; and a
priest of it, to whom the five chapters (fragar*d*ŏ) of the Avesta
('text') of the correct law of the Nîrangistân ('religious-formula
code') <span id="fr_746"></span>[3](#fn_743) are easy through the Zand
commentary'), is ever progressing in priestly manhood (magôî-gab*r*âîh).
2. And he (the man) goes unto him, and he (the priest) speaks thus: 'All
the religious rites are *performed* for 350 *dirhams* <span
id="fr_747"></span>[4](#fn_744), as a gift always given beforehand by
them *who* give the order unto me, so that I *may* come to *them*.'

3\. A man of the disciples <span id="fr_748"></span>[5](#fn_745), to
whom the five

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

sections (vîdag) of the Avesta are easy, and no-thing whatever of its
Zand is easy <span id="fr_749"></span>[1](#fn_746), then says unto
him--unto that man who intends to order all the religious rites--thus:
'For this gift I will conduct all the religious rites for thee twice,
with the appliances in the land of Pârs <span
id="fr_750"></span>[2](#fn_747), shouldst thou give the order unto me.
4. For it is quite possible for me to pray so many sections through my
own exertion (dastŏ), *but* for him <span
id="fr_751"></span>[3](#fn_748) it is necessary to order again of an
officiating priest (pavan zôtakŏ), who is himself not able to pray any
section, *or* does not himself pray; and it is not necessary for him to
go for the control (parvâr) <span id="fr_752"></span>[4](#fn_749) of all
the religious rites when a stipend (bâhar) is the one consideration
within him, *and* the matter is *that* he <span
id="fr_753"></span>[5](#fn_750) *may* receive again. 5. *He* who *has*
always himself prayed is better than he who shall accept readily *and*
orders *the work* again, and is not able to pray it himself, when a
fulfilment is tedious to him; when *it* is I who <span
id="fr_754"></span>[6](#fn_751) receive, I always pray myself better
than he who would accept readily *and* orders again, and it brings on my
business to a *closing* point.'

6\. The priestly man speaks thus: 'The consideration

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

of stipend is more necessary to arise *with* me than <span
id="fr_755"></span>[1](#fn_752) other men, owing to the position of
religion, not the other portion (*s*ânŏ) of all religious rites;
therefore, it is more authorisedly received *and* conducted by me when I
accept readily and again intrust *the work*; but I direct so that they
pray thoroughly, and it brings on much business to its *closing* point;
moreover, *if* I seize upon it, even then I should be authorised, for
this is the stipend of religion.'

7\. Should they seize this that is authorisedly theirs, or not? *And* is
*it* the custom of a man who is frequently ordering all the religious
rites to reduce his gift for the ceremonial, or not?

8\. Order *some one* to decide for us clearly, when they do not dispute
the gift *for* the ceremonial, or *when* they do dispute *it*, how is
then its great advantage; *and* the harmfulness that exists therein, in
many ways *and* many modes, when they give an insufficient gift for the
ceremonial. 9. Is the property which is given up as a gift for the
ceremonial--so long as it thus becomes the remuneration which *one*
gives to a receiver of remuneration (mozdô-bar)--that property which
they can seize? 10. And is the work which is done, *or* deputed, and its
great advantage, more than they would perform when, in the period of the
evil millenniums <span id="fr_756"></span>[2](#fn_753), they diminish
the gift for the ceremonial; *and* in how many modes

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

does its harm then proceed therefrom? 11. Of whom are all the religious
rites always more authorisedly ordered; of that priestly man, or of that
disciple? 12. *For* what reason, also, is it proper to diminish the gift
for all the religious rites of him who is a priestly man, or to give
*it* in excess? 13. When they do not diminish the gift for the
ceremonial, and *it* is given in excess, in what manner does its great
advantage then arise therefrom; *and* why *and* through what source
(bêkh) is it possible *for* advantage to arise therefrom? 14. When they
diminish the gift what harm to it (the ceremonial) is then possible to
arise therefrom, *and* how is *it* better when they give the gift for
the ceremonial?

15\. For when the family householders, with those of the good religion
of Irân, are early (pê*s*) *with* every single *celebration of* all the
religious rites with holy-water, in the land of Pârs, unless they are in
distress, their gift is then 400 dirhams <span
id="fr_757"></span>[1](#fn_754); and we have given more than this,
*even* 450 dirhams <span id="fr_758"></span>[2](#fn_755), for it. 16.
And now should it be needful, when we diminish anything from the 400
dirhams, or from the 450 <span id="fr_759"></span>[3](#fn_756) dirhams,
of their gift, they would then not accept *it* from us, *and* they speak
thus: 'For 400 dirhams, or *at* least for 350 dirhams <span
id="fr_760"></span>[4](#fn_757); nothing less do we

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

accept.' 17. *But* there are needy *men* <span
id="fr_761"></span>[1](#fn_758) who always come to us *and* speak thus:
'For 350 dirhams we will twice conduct all the religious rites with
holy-water <span id="fr_762"></span>[2](#fn_759), as you have always
ordered us before for 400 dirhams; order *it* only of us, *for* shouldst
thou have *it* managed by priestly men, they always say that they should
always perform a curtailment (kâstârîh) of the religious rites and
ceremonies of the sacred beings, *and* that all the religious rites are
not authorisedly ordered except of them.'

18\. Although a priest (aêrpatŏ) who becomes a ruler of the ceremonial
should be doubly a decider, yet order *some one* to explain to us
clearly concerning these questions, as asked by us.

19\. The reply is this, that the *man* of the good religion who intended
to order all the religious rites is he whose desire is goodness, and he
should be a decider of questions about it.

20\. *As to* the priest who spoke thus:--'Thou shouldst order *it* of me
for 350 <span id="fr_763"></span>[3](#fn_760) dirhams, as you have
always given before your business *was arranged*; *and* it becomes your
own non-religious share of the duty, to be authorisedly given, because
you have proceeded with the alleged demeanour of the country, *and* for
the purpose of intercession; and all the

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

religious rites with holy-water are such as they solemnize repeatedly
(pavan dôr), among which there are many in which <span
id="fr_764"></span>[1](#fn_761) I *act* and *am* very well
performing'--the gift of 350 dirhams is then not excessive remuneration
for him.

21\. *As to* the disciple who spoke thus:--'For 350 dirhams I will
*twice* <span id="fr_765"></span>[2](#fn_762) conduct all the religious
rites in the land <span id="fr_766"></span>[3](#fn_763) of Pârs'--such
of them as they then conduct repeatedly are not many in the aggregate
(*k*înakŏ), and they certainly damage his (the man's) property, and all
the religious rites of fire, through that deficiency. 22. And they would
accept it on this account, that through a love of righteousness they
might cause an advantage (khan*g*înakŏ) unto all those religious rites
by their own inferior eminence <span id="fr_767"></span>[4](#fn_764).
23. And he extends *and* impels the ceremonial of the sacred beings into
much progress who promotes it through that eminence which is owing to
his own wealth, *and* which is thus more possessed of a share (bôn) of
the ceremonial of the sacred beings and of the good work of
praise--except, indeed, a like good work of praise of his--when they
shall cause that manifestation of eminence <span
id="fr_768"></span>[5](#fn_765). 24. So that the orderer of the good
work understands that that which is diminished by him <span
id="fr_769"></span>[6](#fn_766) is the eminence

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

of the disciple, which his own wealth *has* to order for those who are
not able to give wealth which is their own property for it; *and* he
makes no curtailment (ban*g*i*s*nŏ) of those scanty remunerations.

25\. And if that disciple should accept as remuneration less than is the
custom *for* all the religious rites, *the orderer* is not undiminished
in wealth <span id="fr_770"></span>[1](#fn_767), for the reason that the
good effect owing to the advantage of holy-water is such as *when* they
conduct *them* repeatedly, unless it be necessary to conduct *them* in a
manner as *if* unpaid (pavan aga*z*î*d*). 26. That curtailment of the
good effect is not afterwards demandable (pasîn-sakhunîkŏ), if it *has*
to be accepted by him; *and* if that acceptance of less remuneration by
him be an opposing of him to the malice and ill-temper (vushâî) of the
priests, this also is not *the way* that they should cause progress as
regards their own *business*.

27\. And the proximity (nazdîh) of a master of the house <span
id="fr_771"></span>[2](#fn_768) *who* keeps away from all the religious
rites requested *and* accepted--more particularly when the accepter
accepts all the religious rites of the requester for that
remuneration--is itself necessary; he may not be of a religious
disposition, but it is yet requisite *for him* to be where this is
requested

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

and accepted for that scanty remuneration of his, owing to the extent
and impetus of *his* share of the duty.

28\. Moreover, it is perceived by us in Pârs *that* they who would
accept the work for half the remuneration which was requisite as profit
for it formerly would seize the remuneration. 29. And the reason of it
is this:--The peasants relied upon the corn of the field (khânŏ) *which*
has not come, *and they* said: 'We are hurried; we never obtain
*anything* even on a single one of various debts, and by this payment we
*shall* save *our* lives for the time; so we calculate that whatever we
seize in the manner of a debt or two, when the corn arrives *and* we
sell the corn, we *shall* make *as* profit on that business <span
id="fr_772"></span>[1](#fn_769);'--and it seemed to me very desirable
*for* such a man.

30\. If, also, they should approve that scanty remuneration of that
disciple, it is an injury of all the religious rites, of which the
forgivers  <span id="fr_773"></span>[2](#fn_770) *have* to cast the
consideration of the unequally-shared advantage out of the body <span
id="fr_774"></span>[3](#fn_771). 31. All the religious rites ordered of
him who is a better performer, owing to not diminishing the proper
remuneration, *having* proceeded unaltered, the remuneration of
righteousness *one* does not approve is important as regards such as
they solemnize and conduct in the period <span
id="fr_775"></span>[4](#fn_772).

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

32\. Since, for the 350 dirhams, all the religious rites which they
conduct once with holy-water are, it is affirmed, all the religious
rites caused to be conducted twice with holy-water in that same place
*and with* the same good effect, it is more important to order of *them*
who shall allow all the religious rites twice; for, with as much wealth,
as much efficiency, and as much good effect, more ceremonial is good.

33\. The worthiness of the disciple, which is owing to himself, is the
preparation; *and* the priest is worthy, of whose performance in the
religion *you have* spoken <span id="fr_776"></span>[1](#fn_773);
therefore, supreme worthiness is unattainable by either of them; so it
is more significant when the disciple is the preparer, *and* the priest,
*as* director, becomes a demander of good effect; both strive for good
progress, *and* through many kinds of participation they may be worthy.
34. And both of them, praising together--whereby the participation is
brought *to* an end--may authorisedly seize <span
id="fr_777"></span>[2](#fn_774); but that worthiness of theirs is owing
to the duty and the praise therein--this *one* in preparing, *and* this
*one* in superintendence (a*v*ar-ma*d*îh) of the recital--*and* the
after discourse and petitioning, *and* other good done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_743"></span>[201:3](sbe18073.htm#fr_746) This was the name
of one of the first thirty sections of the Hûspârûm Nask (see Chap. LXI,
3), and a portion of it, containing the Pahlavi commentary (or Zand) of
three chapters, with many Avesta quotations, is still extant.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[201:4](sbe18073.htm#fr_747) The word
*g*û*g*anŏ, 'dirham,' is here omitted, but occurs in §§ 16, 20. The sum
of 350 dirhams would be about 122½ rûpîs (see Chap. LII, 1 n).

<span id="fn_745"></span>[201:5](sbe18073.htm#fr_748) That is, those who
are still learning their priestly duties (see Chap. XLV).

<span id="fn_746"></span>[202:1](sbe18073.htm#fr_749) It being far
easier to learn the Avesta by heart than to understand its meaning by
aid of the Pahlavi commentary; a competent knowledge of the latter being
sought only by advanced disciples, and rarely attained by any but the
most learned priests.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[202:2](sbe18073.htm#fr_750) Reading pavan
bûm-i Pârs, as in § 15; K35 has here pavan bûn-frâs, 'for opening the
beginning,' which might be understood to refer to the preliminary
ceremonies for preparing. the ceremonial apparatus, if the phrase were
not otherwise written elsewhere. In § 21 K35 has pavan bûn-î Pârs.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[202:3](sbe18073.htm#fr_751) K35 omits the last
letter of valman.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[202:4](sbe18073.htm#fr_752) Or, it may be 'to
the precincts.'

<span id="fn_750"></span>[202:5](sbe18073.htm#fr_753) Literally 'I.'

<span id="fn_751"></span>[202:6](sbe18073.htm#fr_754) Reading li mûn,
instead of lanman, 'we.'

<span id="fn_752"></span>[203:1](sbe18073.htm#fr_755) Reading li min,
instead of the imperfect word lanm.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[203:2](sbe18073.htm#fr_756) Of the twelve
millenniums of time, mentioned in Chap. XXXVII, 11 n, the most evil one
is said to have been that in which the author lived, the millennium of
Hûshê*d*ar (about A.D. 600-1600 according to the chronology of Bund. and
Byt.), for 'mankind become most perplexed in that perplexing time' (see
Byt, II, 62, 63), a period of great tribulation for the religion of the
Ma*zd*a-worshippers.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[204:1](sbe18073.htm#fr_757) About 140 rûpîs
(see Chap. LII, 1 n). M14 has 300 dirhams.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[204:2](sbe18073.htm#fr_758) About 157½ rûpîs.
M14 has 350 dirhams. The actual value of all these sums depends upon the
cost of the necessaries of life in Pârs in the ninth century.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[204:3](sbe18073.htm#fr_759) M14 has '350.'

<span id="fn_757"></span>[204:4](sbe18073.htm#fr_760) About 122½ rûpîs.
K35 has ângûn, 'so,' instead of *g*û*g*anŏ, 'dirham' (the two words
being nearly alike in Pahl. letters); this would alter the phrase as
follows:--'or less; as to 350, so paltry a thing we do not accept.'

<span id="fn_758"></span>[205:1](sbe18073.htm#fr_761) The disciples, who
are represented as applicants for employment.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[205:2](sbe18073.htm#fr_762) That is, in the
most solemn manner, and with all appliances. It appears from Chap.
LXXXVIII, 9, that the religious rites without holy-water were then
performed for 120 to 150 dirhams, or little more than one-third the fee
demanded for those with holy-water; whereas the merit of some rites with
holy-water is said to be a hundred times as great as that of the same
rites without holy-water (see Sls. XVI, 6).

<span id="fn_760"></span>[205:3](sbe18073.htm#fr_763) M14 has '400'
here, but see § 2.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[206:1](sbe18073.htm#fr_764) Reading mûn,
'which,' instead of amat, 'when' (see Chap. LXII, 4 n).

<span id="fn_762"></span>[206:2](sbe18073.htm#fr_765) The cipher '2' is
omitted in the Pahl. text here, but see §§ 3, 17.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[206:3](sbe18073.htm#fr_766) K35 has bûn,
instead of bûm (see § 3).

<span id="fn_764"></span>[206:4](sbe18073.htm#fr_767) Or, it may be 'by
the eminence of their own wealth,' as air, 'inferior,' and khêl,
'wealth, property,' are alike in Pahlavi; but neither reading is quite
satisfactory here.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[206:5](sbe18073.htm#fr_768) By a proper
disbursement of wealth.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[206:6](sbe18073.htm#fr_769) When he diminishes
his payment.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[207:1](sbe18073.htm#fr_770) M14 has '*it* is
not eminence in wealth;' but the meaning is evidently that there is no
real saving when the expenditure is reduced, because the good effect of
the rites is also diminished when they are insufficiently paid for.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[207:2](sbe18073.htm#fr_771) Or, khânŏpânŏ may
mean 'a keeper of the sacred table,' or low stone platform on which the
ceremonial vessels are placed, which is often called khân. In either
case the orderer of the ceremony is meant, and the author evidently
contemplates the probability of the order being given as a mere formal
matter of duty, without any really religious feeling.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[208:1](sbe18073.htm#fr_772) This parable
justifies the taking of religious stipends by force, in cases of
necessity, by a practical appeal to the sympathies of the enquirers; but
it really evades the question proposed in § 7, which refers to seizures
not justified by necessity.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[208:2](sbe18073.htm#fr_773) Probably the
priests who appoint atonements for sins confessed and renounced (see
Sls. VIII, I, 2, 5, 6).

<span id="fn_771"></span>[208:3](sbe18073.htm#fr_774) Of those who have
obtained a disproportionate share of the profit of the good works by not
paying properly for them.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[208:4](sbe18073.htm#fr_775) There are several
doubtful points in the construction of this section.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[209:1](sbe18073.htm#fr_776) See § 1.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[209:2](sbe18073.htm#fr_777) Probably the
remuneration, if it be withheld; provided always they do their duty
thoroughly, as mentioned in the concluding clause.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVII](sbe18074)
