[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18087)  [Next](sbe18089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXXXI.

1\. *As to* the eightieth question and reply, that which you ask is
thus: What is the purpose of this *ceremony for* the living soul <span
id="fr_893"></span>[3](#fn_890), *and* why <span
id="fr_894"></span>[4](#fn_891) is it necessary

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

to order *it?* 2. And, whenever *one* orders it, how is it necessary
then to order it, how is it best when they celebrate *it*, and what is
its great advantage *as* a good work?

3\. The reply is this, that worship with the ceremonial *for* those
newly passed *away, during* the three days which *they spend* in the
account <span id="fr_895"></span>[1](#fn_892), is suitable for the
discreet, just as the protection with nourishment of those newly born,
in their infancy, is also much more suitable for the discreet. 4. He is
a truly discreet man through whom *there* is ceremonial for the three
*days*, on account of his own father, and privileged wife, and infant
child, *and* well-behaved servant, on *their* passing away; and it is
indispensable to order the triple ceremonial of the three days.

5\. This, too, is said: where it is not possible to solemnize his three
*days*, or they solemnize *them* afterwards, when information *of the
death* arrives <span id="fr_896"></span>[2](#fn_893), three days are to
be solemnized as a substitute *for* those three. 6. For the good work of
the ceremonial which is ordered by him himself, or bequeathed by him, or
is his *through* consenting to it by design <span
id="fr_897"></span>[3](#fn_894), exists--even though it is thus possible
that it will be conducted afterwards--whenever it comes into progress;
therefore he is exalted for it at his account

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

in the three *days*, and it comes on for his *being* exalted. 7. When
that which is conducted afterwards comes on for aiding *his being*
exalted in the three *days* of the account, that which *was* conducted
by him himself beforehand is more hopeful *and* more certain of being
exalted in that position.

8\. On account of there being also a diminution (aîtŏ-*k* gahî*d*ârîh)
of risk about their own souls, in the event of (min zak aîgh hat) their
children not ordering the three *days' ceremonial*, or it not being
possible to solemnize *it* at that time, it is desirable to order, in
their own lifetime and *at* their own convenience, *the ceremony for*
their own living souls, advisedly, without doubt, and *having* appointed
the *mode of* life of the three *days*, and also to appoint by will him
who is to conduct *it* in the end. 9. And when both are conducted, the
increase of good works and exaltation, though the end is not possible,
or is not proceeded *with*--and the previous good works are commendable,
and, therefore, preservatory--*has* reached even unto the most lordly
wishes.

10\. *As to* the man *with* great *and* powerful children, to whom the
ceremonial of the three *days* for himself *at* the final day, *and*
also the progress of many good works *have* seemed certain, *but* on
account of yet another way to freedom from doubt effectually
(frârâstîhâ) existing, he *has* bequeathed the conduct of the three
*days' ceremonial*, and also other good works, unto *his* children, in
order that *the ceremony for* the living soul *may be* conducted *at*
the final day, with him the angels are in triumph, the glory of the
religion in the most lordly glory, *and* the solemnizers of ceremonial
worship are many. 11. Then, moreover, owing to the contest of the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

demons--so unjust that *on* the day of his passing *away it* is due to
the uncleanness (apâ*d*yâ*v*îh) which *has* attained unto *its full*
extent <span id="fr_898"></span>[1](#fn_895)--all the solemnizers *in*
the country, of the acts of worship solemnized, *may have* become
thoroughly doubtful of the worship, and until it goes on to the
disciples, and the ceremony is prepared, it is not proper to perform the
whole ceremonial; in that way is manifested the great advantage *and*
commendableness which *arises* from that ceremony *for* his living soul.

12\. The nature of *the ceremony* ordered *for* the living soul is a
counterpart of the three *days*, so *it* is needful that *at* all times
of the three days *and* nights, successively emancipative
(avadîgîni*s*nîk), a ceremonial *in honour* of Srôsh <span
id="fr_899"></span>[2](#fn_896) *be* always conducted, and *that* it
proceed; and a fire is lighted in the ceremonial, and the clean ligature
of the limbs is to be tied. 13. As a rule it is so considered that <span
id="fr_900"></span>[3](#fn_897) in the three days *there* are
fifteen <span id="fr_901"></span>[4](#fn_898) ceremonies (ya*s*tanŏ) *in
honour* of Srôsh, and three sacred cakes (drôn) <span
id="fr_902"></span>[5](#fn_899) which are consecrated in each dawn
(bâm-*i*) with various dedications; and the fourth day they solemnize
the Vispara*d* <span id="fr_903"></span>[6](#fn_900), the portion <span
id="fr_904"></span>[7](#fn_901) of the righteous guardian spirits
(ar*d*âî fravar*d*ŏ). 14. And there

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

are fugitives of families of the period, *and* other still further
diminishers <span id="fr_905"></span>[1](#fn_902) of good works, who
*have* wished to produce the wealth which is necessary to perform
advantageously, as a custom of the soul in those three days, one
*celebration* of all the religious rites (hamâk dînô) *in honour* of
Srôsh, *and* the consecration of three sacred cakes for Srôsh every day;
and the third night, at dawn <span id="fr_906"></span>[2](#fn_903), the
consecration of a sacred cake *dedicated in* three modes. 15. In
accomplishing the *consecration of the* sacred cake specially for the
righteous guardian spirits, *on* the fourth day, *one* is supposed to
order a Dvâ*z*dah-hômâst <span id="fr_907"></span>[3](#fn_904) *in
honour* of the righteous guardian spirits, and the rest of the
ceremonial.

16\. And *he* who *has* intended much more laudably is declared *as* the
more devout and more judicious of worshippers; and for the sake of the
ceremonial he is cleansed by the Bareshnûm *ceremony* <span
id="fr_908"></span>[4](#fn_905), *and* is to practise other descriptions
of cleanliness as regards *his* body and clothing. 17. While in the
performance of the ceremonial, bread *made* from corn which is ground
*by* those of the good

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

religion, wine from that made *by* those of the good religion, *and*
meat from the animal <span id="fr_909"></span>[1](#fn_906) which is
slaughtered in the ceremonial are eaten; *and one* is to proceed into
the abode of fires <span id="fr_910"></span>[2](#fn_907) and of the
good, *and* to abstain from the rest of the other places which are
dubious <span id="fr_911"></span>[3](#fn_908) *and* food which is
dubious. 18. And with that thorough heedfulness *one* is to conduct and
order that ceremonial in the abode of the ever-growing fire, or other
fire of Varahrân <span id="fr_912"></span>[4](#fn_909); whereby his
numerous good works are effectual, *and* the path of good works <span
id="fr_913"></span>[5](#fn_910) is very broad. 19. Concerning <span
id="fr_914"></span>[6](#fn_911) the suffering of *him* whose capability
in that which is his preserving efficacy <span
id="fr_915"></span>[7](#fn_912) is less, it is thus revealed, that not
he who is righteous is overwhelmed, as *it were* unwilling, by
incapability <span id="fr_916"></span>[8](#fn_913).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_890"></span>[237:3](sbe18088.htm#fr_893) Dastûr Peshotanji
Behramji, the high-priest of the Parsis in Bombay, informs me that every
Parsi is bound to perform, or get performed, every year during his or
her lifetime, ceremonies for three days in honour of his or her soul,
analogous to those performed during the three days after a death These
Zindah-ravân, or Srôsh, ceremonies are generally ordered on the first
three Fravardîgân holidays, extending from the twenty-sixth to the
twenty-eighth day of the last month of the Parsi year.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[237:4](sbe18088.htm#fr_894) Reading maman râî,
as in M14; K35 has lâ 'not,' instead of râî, 'for.'

<span id="fn_892"></span>[238:1](sbe18088.htm#fr_895) See Chaps. XXIV,
XXV.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[238:2](sbe18088.htm#fr_896) M14 has 'or they
do not solemnize *them*, after which the information arrives,' which is
clearly inconsistent with the context. When a person dies away from
home, and the ceremonies are not performed on the spot, they must be
performed at his home immediately after information of his death
arrives, and the three succeeding days are considered as representing
the three days after the death (see Sls. XVII, 6).

<span id="fn_894"></span>[238:3](sbe18088.htm#fr_897) Comp. Chap. VIII,
5.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[240:1](sbe18088.htm#fr_898) The corpse being
considered utterly unclean.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[240:2](sbe18088.htm#fr_899) See Chap. XIV, 4.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[240:3](sbe18088.htm#fr_900) The following
clause, about the three days, is omitted in M14, which skips from 'that'
to 'the fourth day.'

<span id="fn_898"></span>[240:4](sbe18088.htm#fr_901) The Pers. Rivâyats
merely say that four priests are employed, two at a time, so as to
relieve each other in the continuous series of ceremonies for three days
and nights.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[240:5](sbe18088.htm#fr_902) See Chap. XXX, 1.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[240:6](sbe18088.htm#fr_903) Here written
Visparê*d*ŏ (see Chap. XLV, 6).

<span id="fn_901"></span>[240:7](sbe18088.htm#fr_904) Reading bôn,
instead of nûb; M14 omits the word.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[241:1](sbe18088.htm#fr_905) M14 has 'there are
ghostly observers of the families of the period, *and* many other
teachers.' But the original meaning was, no doubt as in K35, that there
were many persons at that period who would have been glad to possess the
means of ordering even a small portion of the proper rites for the dead.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[241:2](sbe18088.htm#fr_906) That is, at dawn
on the fourth day. The rites here mentioned seem to have been considered
as the minimum that could be approved.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[241:3](sbe18088.htm#fr_907) See Chap. XLVIII,
25.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[241:4](sbe18088.htm#fr_908) A tedious ceremony
of purification, lasting nine nights and detailed in Vend. IX, 1-145
(see App. IV). Its name is the Av. word which commences the instructions
for sprinkling the unclean person (Vend. IX, 48), and means 'the top' of
the head.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[242:1](sbe18088.htm#fr_909) A goat or sheep is
meant by gôspend here.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[242:2](sbe18088.htm#fr_910) The fire temple,
in, or near, which the priests ('the good') reside.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[242:3](sbe18088.htm#fr_911) Or, var-hômand may
mean 'open to choice,' but it is generally used as the opposite of
aêvar, 'certain:

<span id="fn_909"></span>[242:4](sbe18088.htm#fr_912) Sacred fire (see
Chap. XXXI, 7).

<span id="fn_910"></span>[242:5](sbe18088.htm#fr_913) Over the
*K*inva*d* bridge (see Chap. XXI, 5).

<span id="fn_911"></span>[242:6](sbe18088.htm#fr_914) Reading râî,
instead of lâ, 'not,' here, and *vice versa* further on in the sentence,
as in M14.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[242:7](sbe18088.htm#fr_915) That is, in good
works. M14 omits the word 'less.'

<span id="fn_913"></span>[242:8](sbe18088.htm#fr_916) The construction
of this quotation is suggestive of its being a literal translation from
the Avesta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXII](sbe18089)
