[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18008)  [Next](sbe18010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# DÂ*D*ISTÂN-Î DÎNÎK.

SOME chapters of the enquiries which Mit*r*ô-khûrshê*d*, son of
Âtû*r*ŏ-mahân <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9), and others of the good
religion made of the glorified (anoshakŏ-rûbân) Mânû*sk*îhar <span
id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10), son of Yûdân-Yim, and the replies given
by him in explanation.

### CHAPTER I.

0\. Through the name and power and assistance of the creator
Aûha*r*ma*zd* *and* all good *beings*, all the heavenly and earthly
angels, and every creature and creation that Aûha*r*ma*zd* set going for
his own angels and all pertaining to the *celestial* spheres.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

1\. *To* those of the good religion, who are these enquirers owing to
devout force of demeanour and strength of character, the type of wisdom
and standard of ability--and of whom, moreover, the questions, seeking
wisdom, contemplating good works, and investigating religion, are
specified--the blessing *and* reply of Mânû*sk*îhar, son of Yûdân-Vim,
are these:--2. That is, forasmuch as with full affection, great dignity,
and grandeur you *have* blessed me in this enquiring epistle <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11), so much as you *have* blessed, *and* just
as you *have* blessed, with full measure *and* perfect profusion, may it
happen fully likewise unto you, in the first place, and *to your*
connections, separately for yourselves and dependents; may it come upon
*you* for a long period, and may it be connected with a happy end.

3\. *As to* that which you ordered to write about wishes for an
interview and conversation *with* me, and the friendliness and regard
for religion of yourselves *and* our former *disciple* <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12) (lanmanak kâdmôn)--who is a servant of the
sacred beings (ya*zd*ânŏ) <span id="fr_13"></span>[3](#fn_13) and a
fellow-soldier in struggling with the fiend, alike persistent in
reliance upon the good religion of Ma*zd*a-worship--I am equally
desirous of that one path of righteousness when *its* extension is to a
place in the best existence <span id="fr_14"></span>[4](#fn_14), *and*
equally hopeful

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

of resurrection (âkhe*z*i*s*nŏ) at the renovation of the best
existence <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15). 4. *As to* the interview
and important conversation of that *disciple* of ours (mânak), and his
going, and that also which he expounded of the religion--that of him who
is intimate in interview and conversation with him who is wise and
righteous the stunted <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16) good works are
then more developing <span id="fr_17"></span>[3](#fn_17)--and *as to*
the degree of praise which you ordered to write concerning me, much
greater than reason, and the important statements full of the
observations of friendship as to kind regards, my course about these is
also *that* which *leads* to gratitude.

5\. That which you ordered to write about the way of knowing and
understanding not being for any one else but for *your* servant, *was*
owing to your affection, and for the sake of kind regard; but on account
of the importance of truth *it* is more expressly to he regarded *as*
being proper to write also to other spiritual <span
id="fr_18"></span>[4](#fn_18) men, as to the learning which is more
fully studied by them. 6. For even with the perplexing struggle of the
fiend, *and* the grievous devastation and collapse (nizôrîh) which have
happened to religious people, after all, through the persistence
(khvâparîh) of the sacred beings even

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

now *there are* pontiffs (ra*d*ânŏ), priests, high-priests, judges, and
also other religious leaders of those of the religion in various
quarters. 7. Moreover, the other priests *and* spiritual <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) men *here* enumerated *have* well
considered the commentary (zand) of the text (mânsar) which is muttered,
are acquainted with opinions explaining the religion, *and* are, in many
places, the cause of preferring good works; with whom also, on account
of *their* understanding *and* knowing about such opinions, the sacred
beings are pleased.

8\. The desires expressed, and the good wishes as to what is mine and
*has* happened *to me*, which you ordered to write, are likewise marks
of friendship and kind regard, and owing to them a like measure of
friendship and kind regard becomes your <span
id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20) own.

9\. *As to* that which you ordered to write in much friendship and
commendation and profusely about me--as regards the administration of
the realm (kêshvar dastôbarîh), *of* the unity without counterpart
(da*d*îgarîh), and the singleness co-extensive with any duality--if the
writing of that, too, *were* owing to your friendship, even then it
seemed *to* me disquieting, owing to this *being* so much praise. To. If
in these times and countries *there be* an understanding of the time and
a boasting about any one, if *it be* graceful as regards him who is a
leader of the religion (dînô pê*s*ûpâî) of long-continued faith, I
consider it not suitable for myself <span id="fr_21"></span>[3](#fn_21).
11. Though

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

the praise of a leader (sa*r*dâr), raised by agreeable voices <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22), is uttered about me, yet I am not pleased
when they extol my greatness *more* than *that of* their own leader; for
my wish is *for* that praise which is *due* to my own rank and similar
limits, and seems suitable to me;. and humility in oneself is as correct
as grandeur among inferiors.

12\. That which is about the lengthy writing of questions, *as to* your
worldly circumstances (stihânîhâ) and worldly affairs, *has* also shown
this, that I should write a reply at a time in which I have leisure. 13.
That is more important on account of your well-expressed questions *and*
boldness about ambiguous answers, and *your* ardent desire for the
setting aside of time; for the setting aside, or not beginning, of a
reply is implied. 14. *But* owing to the perplexing <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23) struggle on account of the fiend there is
little leisure for quick *and* searching thought, and owing to that
which is undecided <span id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24) *there is little*
for indispensable (frê*z*vânîkŏ) work.

15\. As to a reply *at* a period of leisure time, the occurrence of the
time appointed is manifested in everything, apart even from the kind
regards of friendship, and the collection of information whereby, owing
to my little leisure, it is declared unto you. 16. And I have, too, this
confidence, that your questions are written with religious faith *and*
desiring religious decision; *and* in the reply the statement of reasons
from revelation (dînô) is manifold, for

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

guidance which is not destitute of wisdom and *which* is without risk
from every kind of importunity <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25).

17\. And *this* same epistle <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26) came in
the month Tîr <span id="fr_27"></span>[3](#fn_27), at such season as,
owing to entreaties for three years from the country-folk (dêsîkânŏ),
and the burden of troubles of the offspring (sarakŏ) of those of the
good religion, the much importunity for arranging *what was* undecided
among them--which, inasmuch as I had no power about investigating that
trouble and suffering, *was* the more indispensable--the arrangements
for the preservation and education of disciples <span
id="fr_28"></span>[4](#fn_28), *and* many private *matters* which had
accumulated, I obtained no *opportunity* for properly looking *over
these* same questions till the month Shatvaî*r*ô <span
id="fr_29"></span>[5](#fn_29), when I came to Shirâ*z* <span
id="fr_30"></span>[6](#fn_30) and had *at* various times a little
leisure.

18\. And I looked *over these* same questions; and when I saw the
compact writing (ham-dâ*d*akîhâ-yektîbûni*s*nîh) it then seemed to me
more important to make each chapter of the questions separate and more
explanatory. 19. And I gave the questions to a writer, in the same copy
which you ordered to write, *and* instructed *him* to write the various
chapters, every single question in one chapter; and the several
opinions, both due to my acquaintance with the religion and my
remembrance in perfection,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

both of the decisions (dastôbarîh) of the ancients and as regards
wisdom, are the replies I intend to write below the questions.

20\. When there is nothing in such as you ask, concerning which I
consider such otherwise, as I write, than what is like that which was
one advisedly our different opinion from those high-priests of the
ancients who *were* better and wiser, and have become our lord (ahvô),
master (ra*d*ŏ), and high-priest, I *have* written that <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31), even though the *usual* decision on the
same subject is such as our high-priests, who are of our family, *have*
maintained in particular. 21. Afterwards, moreover, about the sayings of
that high-priest whose custom is otherwise there is no difference of
opinion *expressed* <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32); and if there be
*any one* for whose opinion I *have* acquired perfect reverence, a
priestly man acquainted with the religion, who understands *and* who
manages intelligently, by holding in reverence the ancient treatises and
truth, and the sayings of the high-priests, whatever *of his* is to the
purpose, as regards the reply, this also is written as successful
illustration.

22\. If owing to such cause it be not fully perceived, or regarding the
decision *it be not* clear, *it* is chiefly not owing to the
incompleteness of the decision of revelation in clearness of
demonstration and correctness of meaning, but owing to our incomplete
attainment to understanding the authoritative decrees (nikê*z*ak
fragûftŏ) <span id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33) of the religion. 23. From
the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

imperfection (avêhîh) of that also which is asked of us the hasty
thinking, notably therein, owing to the grievousness of the times, is
even till now devoid of a distinct knowledge, interpreting the texts
*about* the compassion of the good spirits, and *regarding* a clearer
demonstration of the exposition of revelation which is thereby <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) more fully declared, as regards religious
practice, from two sources, one is from the treatises which are an
exposition of the rules *and* wisdom of the leader of the religion, and
one--which is more descriptively expressed (mâ*d*îgânŏtar
hankhetûntô)--is the writings (vutakŏ) of various glorified ancients,
those who *were* the great leaders of those of the primitive faith <span
id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35). 24. Owing to that <span
id="fr_36"></span>[3](#fn_36), as their writings (nipîkân) about the
demonstration of reasons, on account of depth *and* minute wording, are
not well known, even to minute observers *and* penetrative (vêhramakŏ)
understandings, and through the little diffusion
(f*r*â*g*ŏ-pa*d*îkhûîh), likewise, of difficult words, *there* may be
doubts *among* the less intelligent, so, about the purport of *these*
same questions, if there be *anything* which is wanted by you more clear
and more plain in meaning, *or* a nearer way to a true interpretation,
not without clearness, of *any* decision of a learned leader of the
religion, I *will* give a reply, whenever you ask and I am able, so far
as my knowledge and want of power *permit*.

25\. When *one has* to observe the nature of the attributes (gôhârânŏ)
of the sacred beings the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

investigator's great advantage is the perfection, peace, equipment with
righteousness, and fiend-destroying power of his own people; *and* since
you are made aware of the result of wishes and actions, and are directed
by me, many new blessings also *arise* from you.

26\. That which is written to you yourselves and unto all, in the
beginning and even the end, is completely adapted to your own several
wants; *m*ay it have an exalted end, with one courier (aê-barî*d*ŏ) and
continuously from beginning to end, and also perpetually!

27\. A fair copy (bûr*z*i*s*nîkŏ pa*k*înŏ) of the questions, as well as
the replies, is this; so that, when there is nothing in it which owing
to that cause <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) is different, I am of
opinion as is *here* written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[3:1](sbe18009.htm#fr_9) The name Âtû*r*-mâhân
occurs in a Pahlavi inscription, dated A.Y. 378 (A. n. 1009), in one of
the Kanheri caves, near Bombay (see Indian Antiquary, vol. ix, pp. 266,
267), and Adharmâh is mentioned in Hoffmann's Auszüge aus syrischen
Akten persischer Märtyrer (Leipzig, 1880), p. 203; so that this name
must have been commonly used by Parsis in former times, though unknown
now.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[3:2](sbe18009.htm#fr_10) He calls himself
pontiff and director of the priests of Pârs and Kirmân in A.Y. 250 =
A.D. 881, and was, therefore, the leader of the religion (see Chaps.
XLV, 5, XCIV, 13, and Ep. III, 21). Besides these titles of pê*s*ûpâî,
'leader,' farmâ*d*âr, 'director,' and ra*d*, 'pontiff or executive
high-priest,' he is also called aêrpat khû*d*âî, 'priestly lordship,' in
the heading to Ep. III, and has the general title aêrpat, 'priest,' in
those of Ep. I and II. The reading of the name of his father, Yûdân-Yim
(Pers. *G*uvân-*G*am, 'the youthful *G*amshêd'), is merely a guess; the
Parsis read either Gôshna-*g*am or *G*ôdân-dam; and, perhaps,
Gûshna-dam, 'breathing virility,' is a likely alternative reading.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[4:1](sbe18009.htm#fr_11) Regarding this
epistle, nothing further is known that can be gathered from the text of
this reply to it, which gives the substance of the questions it
contained.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[4:2](sbe18009.htm#fr_12) This disciple appears
to have been previously sent by Mânû*sk*îhar to the community he is
addressing, most probably to serve as their high-priest.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[4:3](sbe18009.htm#fr_13) The word is plural,
like Elohim in the book of Genesis, but it means 'God' in Persian.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[4:4](sbe18009.htm#fr_14) Another name for
Garô*d*mân, the highest heaven, or dwelling of Aûha*r*ma*zd* (see Sls.
VI, 3, 4),

<span id="fn_15"></span>[5:1](sbe18009.htm#fr_15) That is, when this
transitory world is purified and made permanent, so as to form a part of
heaven, which is expected to take place at the resurrection.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[5:2](sbe18009.htm#fr_16) Pahl. kazd, which may
be compared with Pers. ka*z*, 'distorted,' or may be a miswriting of
Pahl. ka*z*, 'small.'

<span id="fn_17"></span>[5:3](sbe18009.htm#fr_17) The modern MSS., M14
and J, add 'and those which are great are more attainable.'

<span id="fn_18"></span>[5:4](sbe18009.htm#fr_18) The word is maînôk
(mînavad), but the omission of one stroke would make it magôg,
'priestly,' which was probably the original reading.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[6:1](sbe18009.htm#fr_19) See [p. 5](#page_5),
note 4.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[6:2](sbe18009.htm#fr_20) All MSS. have 'thy.'

<span id="fn_21"></span>[6:3](sbe18009.htm#fr_21) Although he was
himself the 'director of the profession of priests' of Pârs (see Chap.
XCIV, 13), an office which was then equivalent to that of 'leader of the
religion' (see Chap. XLV, 5).

<span id="fn_22"></span>[7:1](sbe18009.htm#fr_22) This translation of
mânŏ-advâ*z*îkŏ-âkhe*z*akŏ is somewhat doubtful.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[7:2](sbe18009.htm#fr_23) Or 'prodigious.'

<span id="fn_24"></span>[7:3](sbe18009.htm#fr_24) That is, awaiting the
high-priest's judicial and ecclesiastical decision.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[8:1](sbe18009.htm#fr_25) Or 'over-persuasion.'

<span id="fn_26"></span>[8:2](sbe18009.htm#fr_26) See § 2.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[8:3](sbe18009.htm#fr_27) The fourth month of
the Parsi year, which corresponded to July-August in the time of
Mânû*sk*îhar.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[8:4](sbe18009.htm#fr_28) That is, candidates
for the priesthood and young priests.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[8:5](sbe18009.htm#fr_29) The sixth month of the
Parsi year, which then corresponded to September-October.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[8:6](sbe18009.htm#fr_30) From this it would
appear that the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk was written at Shîrâ*z* which, being
the principal city of Pârs, was probably the high-priest's usual
residence.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[9:1](sbe18009.htm#fr_31) That is, his own
different opinion apparently, but the writer's sentences are often so
involved as to confuse the reader.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[9:2](sbe18009.htm#fr_32) Meaning, apparently,
that he does not propose to mention the opinions of others unless he
approves of them.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[9:3](sbe18009.htm#fr_33) The MSS. have fragûtŏ,
possibly Pers. far*g*ûd, 'miracle.'

<span id="fn_34"></span>[10:1](sbe18009.htm#fr_34) That is, revelation
is declared by the exposition.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[10:2](sbe18009.htm#fr_35) The true
Ma*zd*a-worshipping religion in all ages, both before and after the time
of Zaratû*s*t (see Sls. I, 3).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[10:3](sbe18009.htm#fr_36) Want of knowledge
referred to in § 23.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[11:1](sbe18009.htm#fr_37) Owing to the copying.
The sentence is equivalent to the modern phrase, 'errors excepted.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sbe18010)
