[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18003)  [Next](sbe18005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. THE EPISTLES OF MÂNÛ*SK*ÎHAR.

It has been already stated (see pp, xiii, xiv) that Zâ*d*-sparam, a
younger brother of Mânû*sk*îhar, after having been at Sarakhs, in the
extreme north-east of Khurâsân, where he seems to have associated with
the heretical Tughazghuz, was appointed high-priest of Sîrkân, south or
south-west of Kirmân <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8). Shortly after
his arrival there he issued a decree, regarding the ceremonies of
purification and other matters, which was so unpalatable to the
Ma*zd*a-worshippers of that place that they wrote an epistle to
Mânû*sk*îhar, complaining of the conduct of his brother (Ep. I, i, 2,
ii, 1).

In reply to this complaint, which was sent by a special courier (Ep. I,
i, 2), and after going to Shîrâ*z* and holding a general assembly of the
priests and elders (Ep. II, i, ii), Mânû*sk*îhar wrote his first
epistle, completed on the 15th March 881 (Ep. I, xi, 12), in which he
condemned the practices decreed by Zâ*d*-sparam, to whom he sent a
confidential agent, named Ya*zd*ân-pânak (Ep. I, xi, i, 2, 6, 10, II,
vii, 2), with a copy of this epistle and a further one to himself, which
has not been preserved, for the purpose of inducing his brother to
withdraw his decree and conform to the usual customs.

It would appear that Ya*zd*ân-pânak was not very successful in his
mission, as we find Mânû*sk*îhar writing a general epistle (Ep. III) to
all the Ma*zd*a-worshippers in Irân, in the following June or July (Ep.
III, 21), denouncing as heretical the mode of purification decreed by
Zâ*d*-sparam, and ordering an immediate return to former customs. At the
same time (Ep. II, vii, 2, viii, 1) he wrote a second epistle (Ep. II)
to his brother, as he had already

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

promised in Ep. I, xi, 2, and, after referring to an epistle (now lost)
which he had received from Zâ*d*-sparam in the previous November or
December, he proceeded to enforce his views by a judicious intermingling
of argument, entreaty, and threats. He also contemplated making
preparations (Ep. I, xi, 4, II, vii, 3) for travelling himself to
Sîrkân, notwithstanding his age (Ep. II, ix, 1), to arrange the matters
in dispute upon a satisfactory basis. Whether he actually undertook this
journey is unknown, but that his brother must have finally submitted to
his authority appears from Zâ*d*-sparam retaining his position in the
south, as has been already noticed (p. xiv).

The matter in dispute between Zâ*d*-sparam and the orthodox
Ma*zd*a-worshippers may seem a trivial one to people of other religions,
but, inasmuch as the ceremonial uncleanness of a person insufficiently
purified after contact with the dead would contaminate every one he
associated with, the sufficiency of the mode of purification was quite
as important to the community, both priests and laity, as avoidance of
breach of caste-rules is to the Hindû, or refraining from sacrifices to
heathen gods was to the Jew, the early Christian, or the Muhammadan. And
much more important than any disputes about sacraments, infallibility,
apostolic succession, ritual, or observance of the Sabbath can possibly
be to any modern Romanist or Protestant.

In his mode of dealing with this matter Mânû*sk*îhar displays at once
the moderation and tact of a statesman accustomed to responsibility, the
learning and zeal of a well-informed priest, and the kindly affection of
a brother. That he was not without rivals and enemies appears from his
casual allusions to Zaratû*s*t, the club-footed, and Âtûrŏ-pâd in Ep.
II, i, 13, v, 14, ix, 11; but in all such allusions, as well as in his
denunciation of heretical opinions, he refrains from coarse invective,
and avoids the use of exaggerated language, such as too often disfigures
and weakens the arguments in polemical discussions.

Indirectly these epistles throw some light upon the condition of the
Ma*zd*a-worshippers after more than two

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

centuries of ceaseless struggle with the ever-advancing flood of
Muhammadanism which was destined to submerge them. Shîrâ*z*, Sîrkân,
Kirmân, Râî, and Sarakhs are still mentioned as head-quarters of the old
faith; and we are told of assemblies at Shîrâ*z* and among the
Tughazghuz, the former of which appears to have had the chief control of
religious matters in Pârs, Kirmân, and the south, acting as a council to
the high-priest of Pârs and Kirmân, who was recognised as the leader of
the religion (Dd. XLV, 5). We also learn, from Ep. I, iii, I x, II, v,
14, that the leaders of the Ma*zd*a-worshippers, if not their
high-priests, were still in the habit of maintaining troops and, from
Ep. II, i, 9, that when a high-priest became very old his worldly duties
were performed by four of the most learned priests, forming a committee,
which had full authority to deliberate and act for him in all worldly
matters. Mânû*sk*îhar even speaks of emigrating by sea to China, or by
land to Asia Minor (Ep. II, viii, 5), in order to escape from the
annoyances of his position.

But the statements which are most important to the Pahlavi scholar, in
these epistles, are the date attached to the third epistle,
corresponding to A.D. 881, and the mention of Nîshahpûhar in Ep. I, iv,
15, 17 as the supreme officiating priest and councillor of king Khûsrô
Nôshirvân (A.D. 531-579), engaged apparently in writing commentaries on
the Avesta. The date of these epistles not only limits that of the
Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk to the latter half of the ninth century, but also
fixes those of the larger recension of the Bundahi*s* and of the latest
revision of the Dînka*rd* within the same period, because it is stated
in Bd. XXXIII, 10, 11 that the writer of that chapter was a contemporary
of Zâ*d*-sparam, son of Yûdân-Yim, and Âtû*r*-pâ*d*, son of Hêmî*d*, the
former of whom was evidently the brother of Mânû*sk*îhar, and the latter
is mentioned in Dînka*rd* III, ccccxiii as the latest editor of that
work. The actual compiler of a great part of the Dînka*rd* (especially
of the fourth and fifth books) was, however, the somewhat earlier writer
Atû*r*-frôbag, son of Farukhûzâ*d* (Dd. LXXXVIII, 8, Ep. I, iii, 9). The
name of Nîshahpûhar is also mentioned as that

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

of a commentator in the Pahlavi Vendidâ*d* and Nîrangistân, which works
must, therefore, have been revised since the middle of the sixth
century. And as we are informed in the book of Ar*d*â-Vîrâf (I, 35) that
'there are *some* who call *him by* the name of Nikhshahpûr,' we ought
probably to refer that book to the same age. These epistles, therefore,
enable us, for the first time, to fix the probable dates of the latest
extensive revisions of six of the most important Pahlavi works that are
still extant; and from the relationship of these to others we can
readily arrive at safer conclusions, regarding the age of Pahlavi
literature in general, than have been hitherto possible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxv:1](sbe18004.htm#fr_8) The city of Kirmân was
itself called Sîr*g*ân, or Sîrgân, in the middle ages, and is evidently
mentioned by that name in Ouseley's Oriental Geography, pp. 139, 143,
though the Sîrgân of pp. 138, 141 of the same work was clearly further
south. Which of these two towns was the Sîrkân of these epistles, may
therefore, be doubtful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Appendix](sbe18005)
