[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf13)  [Next](pf15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

#### THE TESTIMONY OF PALEONTOLOGICAL ZOÖLOGY.

<span class="small">*All the evidence at our command points to the
Northern hemisphere as the birth-place of the class, Mammalia, and
probably of all the orders*.—<span class="smallcaps">Alfred Russel
Wallace</span>.</span>

<span class="small">*C’est à des émigrations venues, sinon du pôle, du
moins des contrées attenantes au cercle polaire, qu’il faut attribuer la
présence constatée dans les deux mondes de beaucoup d’animaux propres à
l’hémisphère boréal*.—<span class="smallcaps">Count
Saporta</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">But</span> in settling the site of Eden the
animal kingdom must also have a voice. According to the Hebrew story,
the representatives of this kingdom were an earlier creation than Adam,
and in Eden was the world-fest of their christening. Evidently the lost
cradle of humanity must be fixed in time posterior to the beginnings of
animal life, and in space so located that from that spot as a centre all
the multitudinous species, and genera, and orders, and families of the
whole animal creation might have radiated forth to the various habitats
in which they are respectively found.

Now it is one of the striking facts connected with Zoölogy that if we
pass around the globe on any isothermal line, at the equator, or in any
latitude south of it, or in any latitude north of it,—*until we come to
the confines of the Arctic zone*,—we find, as we pass from land to land,
that the animals we encounter are specifically unlike. Everywhere we
find, along with like climatic and telluric conditions, different
animals. The moment, however, we reach

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

the Arctic zone, and there make the circuit of the globe, we are
everywhere surrounded by the same species.

On the other hand, if we take great circles of the earth's longitude,
and pass from the Arctic region down along the continental masses of the
New World to the South Pole, thence returning up a meridian which
crosses Africa and Europe, or Australia and Asia, we shall find in the
descent abundant fossil evidence that we are moving forward on the
pathway along which the prehistoric migrations of the animal world
proceeded; while on our return on the other side of the planet we shall
find that we are no longer following in the track of ancient migrations,
but are advancing counter to their obvious movement. All this is as true
of the flora of the world as it is of the fauna. Hence the language of
the late Professor Orton: "Only around the shores of the Arctic Sea are
the same animals and plants found through every meridian, and in passing
southward along the three principal lines of land specific identities
give way to mere identity of genera; these are replaced by family
resemblances, and at last even the families become in a measure
distinct, not only on the great continents, but also on the islands,
till every little rock in the ocean has its peculiar inhabitants." <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101)

Another well-known naturalist says: "It should also be observed that in
the beginning of things the continents were built up from North to
South,—such has been, at least, the history of the North and South
American and the Europeo-Asiatic and the African continents; and thus it
would appear that north of

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

the equator, at least, animals slowly migrated southward, keeping pace
as it were with the growth and southward extension of the grand
land-masses which appeared above the sea in the Paleozoic ages. Hence,
scanty as is the Arctic and Temperate region of the earth at the present
time, in former ages these regions were as prolific in life as the
tropics now are, the latter regions, now so vast, having through all the
Tertiary and Quaternary ages been undisturbed by great geological
revolutions, and meanwhile been colonized by emigrants driven down by
the incoming cold of the glacial period." <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102)

As long ago as 1876 Mr. Alfred Russel Wallace wrote, "All the chief
types of animal life appear to have originated in the great north
temperate or northern continents, while the southern continents have
been more or less completely isolated during long periods, both from the
northern continent and from each other." <span
id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103) And again, speaking of mammalia, he
said, "All the evidence at our command points to the Northern Hemisphere
as the birthplace of the class, and probably of all the orders." <span
id="fr_104"></span>[3](#fn_104)

From all the facts but one conclusion is possible, and that is that like
as the Arctic Pole is the mother-region of all plants, so it is the
mother-region of all animals,—the region where, in the beginning, God
created every beast of the earth after his kind, and

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

cattle after their kind, and everything that creepeth on the earth after
his kind. And this is the conclusion now being reached and announced by
all comparative zoölogists who busy themselves with the problem of the
origin and prehistoric distribution of the animal world. But to believe
that Professor Heer's "Miocene Arctic Continent" was the cradle of all
floral types and the cradle of all faunal forms, and yet deny that it
was also the cradle of the human race, is what few philosophical minds
are likely long to do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[94:1](pf14.htm#fr_101) *Comparative Zoölogy*.
New York, 1876: p. 384.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[95:1](pf14.htm#fr_102) A. S. Packard,
*Zoölogy*. New York, 2d ed., 1880: p. 665.—In his *Elements of Geology*,
New York, 1877, p. 159, Le Conte gives a graphical representation of the
polocentric zones of the earth's flora and fauna (Fig. 131), which ought
to have suggested the true genetic connection of the whole.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[95:2](pf14.htm#fr_103) *The Geographical
Distribution of Animals*. New York ed., vol. i., p. 173.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[95:3](pf14.htm#fr_104) Ibid., vol. ii., p.
544.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Testimony of Paleontological Anthropology and
Ethnology](pf15)
