[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf17)  [Next](pf19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### THE CRADLE OF THE RACE IN ANCIENT JAPANESE THOUGHT.

<span class="small">*According to the mast ancient texts, Japan is the
centre of the earth*.—<span class="smallcaps">W. E.
Griffis</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">According</span> to the earliest cosmogony of
the Japanese, as given in their most ancient book, the Ko-ji-ki, <span
id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156) the creators and first inhabitants of
our world were a god and goddess, Izanagi and Izanani by name. These, in
the beginning,—we quote from Sir Edward Reed,—"standing on the bridge of
heaven, pushed down a spear into the green plain of the sea, and stirred
it round and round. When they drew it up the drops which fell from its
end consolidated and became an island. The sun-born pair descended on to
the island, and planting a spear in the ground, point downwards, built a
palace round it, taking that for the central roof-pillar. The spear

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

became *the axis of the earth*, which had been caused to revolve by the
stirring round." <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157)

This island, however, was the Japanese Eden. Here originated the human
race. Its name was Onogorojima, "The Island of the Congealed Drop." Its
first roof-pillar, as we have seen, was the axis of the earth. Over it
was "the pivot of the vault of heaven." <span
id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_158) Mr. Reed, who has no theory on the
subject to maintain, says, "The island must have been situated at the
Pole of the earth." <span id="fr_159"></span>[3](#fn_159) In like
manner, with no idea of the vast anthropological significance and value
of the datum, Mr. Griffis remarks, "The island formed by the congealed
drops was once at the North Pole, but has since been taken to its
present position in the inland Sea." <span
id="fr_160"></span>[4](#fn_160)

Here, then, is the testimony of the most ancient

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Japanese
tradition. Nothing could be more unequivocal. Izanagi's divinely
precious spear of jade, <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161) like the
transverse jade-tube of the ancient Shû King, <span
id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_162) is an imperishable index, not only to
the astronomical attainments of prehistoric humanity, but also to
humanity's prehistoric abode.

In Part fifth, chapter fourth, further illustration of the Japanese
conception of the origin of their race will be given.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_156"></span>[140:1](pf18.htm#fr_156) Speaking of this work,
M. Léon de Rosny calls it l’un des monuments les plus authentiques de la
vieille littérature japonaise, and says, "Nous devons non seulement à
cet ouvrage la connaissance de l’histoire du Nippon antérieure au vii.
siècle de notre ère, mais l’exposé le plus autorisé de l’antique
mythologie sintauïste. Il y a même ce fait remarquable, que les dieux
primordiaux du panthéon japonais, mentionnés dans ce livre, ne figurent
déjà plus au commencement du *Yamato bumi*, qui est postérieur seulement
de quelques années à la publication du *Ko ji ki*. Ces dieux primordiaux
paraissent oubliés, ou tout au moins négligés, dans les ouvrages
indigènes qui ont paru par la suite." *Questions d’Archéologie
Japonaise*. Paris, 1882: p. 3. An English translation of the Ko-ji-ki,
by B. H. Chamberlain, has just appeared in *Transactions of the Asiatic
Society of Japan*, vol. v.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[141:1](pf18.htm#fr_157) Sir Edward J. Reed,
*Japan*, vol. i., 31.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[141:2](pf18.htm#fr_158) Léon Metchnikoff,
*L’Empire Japonais*. Genève, 1881: p. 265.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[141:3](pf18.htm#fr_159) Ibid.—Our
interpretation of ancient cosmology and of the true Eden location at
once brings light into the whole system of Japanese mythology. In the
following, extracted from Mr. Griffis, no one has ever before known what
to make of "*the Pillar of Heaven and Earth*," "*the Bridge of Heaven*,"
the position of primitive Japan "*on the top of the globe*," and at the
same time at "*the centre of the Earth:*"—"The first series of children
born were the islands of Japan. . . . Japan lies on the top of the
globe. . . . At this time heaven and earth were very close to each
other, and the goddess Amaterazu being a rare and beautiful child, whose
body shone brilliantly, Izanagi sent her up the Pillar that united
heaven and earth, and bade her rule over the high plain of heaven. . . .
As the earth-gods and evil deities multiplied, confusion and discord
reigned, which the sun goddess (Amaterazu), seeing, resolved to correct
by sending her grandson Ninigi to earth to rule over it. Accompanied by
a great retinue of deities, he descended by means of the floating Bridge
of Heaven, on which the divine first pair had stood, to Mount Kirishima.
After his descent, heaven and earth, which had already separated to a
considerable distance, receded utterly, and further communication
ceased. . . . According to the most ancient texts Japan is the centre of
the earth."

<span id="fn_160"></span>[141:4](pf18.htm#fr_160) McClintock and Strong,
*Cyclopædia*, vol. ix., p. 688. Art. "Shinto."

<span id="fn_161"></span>[142:1](pf18.htm#fr_161) Émile Burnouf, "La
pique céleste de jade rouge."—*La Mythologie des japonais d’après le
Kokŭ-si-Ryakŭ*. Paris, 1875: p. 6.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[142:2](pf18.htm#fr_162) "He examined the
pearl-adorned turning sphere, with its transverse tube of jade, and
reduced to a harmonious system the movements of the Seven Directors."
Legge's Translation in The *Sacred Books of the East*, vol. iii., p. 38.
Professor Legge once examined this passage in my presence, and found
unexpected corroboration of the interpretation which identifies "the
transverse tube of jade" with the axis of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Cradle of the Race in Chinese Thought](pf19)
