[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf19)  [Next](pf21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### THE CRADLE OF THE RACE IN EAST ARYAN OR HINDU THOUGHT.

<span class="small">*The reader cannot have failed to be struck, as the
first explorers of Sanskrit literature have been, with the close
analogy, we night even say the perfect identity, of all the essential
features of the typical description of Mount Meru in the Puranas with
the topography of Eden in the second chapter of Genesis. The garden of
Eden* (*gan-Eden*), *the garden of God* (*gan-Elohîm*, Ezek. xxviii.
13), *which is guarded by the anointed and protecting Kerub* (Ezek.
xxviii. 14, 16), *is placed, like the garden of delight of the gods of
India, on the summit of a mountain, the holy mountain of God* (*har
qodesh Elohîm*) (Ezek. xxviii. 14, 16), *all sparkling with precious
stones* (*Ibid*.). <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173)—<span
class="smallcaps">Lenormant</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> what kind of a world lived the ancient
Brahman? And what was his conception of the location of the cradle of
the race?

One of the oldest of the elaborate geographical treatises of India is
the Vishnu Purana. Taking this as a guide, let us place ourselves
alongside one of the ancients of the country, and look about us.

First, we will look to the South, far down the Indian Ocean. What was
supposed to lie in that

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

direction? To begin with their distribution of the different quarters of
the world among the gods, this is the quarter belonging to Yama, the god
of the dead:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"May he whose hands the thunder wield  
 Be in the East thy guard and shield;  
 May Yama's care the South befriend,  
 And Varun's arm the West defend;  
 And let Kuvera, lord of gold,  
 The North with firm protection hold." <span
id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174)</span>

</div>

In precise accordance with our Key to Ancient Cosmology, it is the
direction of descent. North is upwards (*uttarāt*), south is downwards
(*adharāt*) <span id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_175) Hence the abode and
kingdom of Yama is not only to the south, but also below the level of
India, *i.e.*, on the under hemisphere, or, as Monier Williams locates
it, in "the lower world." <span id="fr_176"></span>[3](#fn_176) All
Hindu literature is full of similar references. The exact time required
for the soul's journey was supposed to be four hours and forty
minutes. <span id="fr_177"></span>[4](#fn_177)

In this direction, evidently, we shall vainly seek a paradise. Let us
turn to the North and "ascend."

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> First, of course,
we come to the Himalaya range, the *Himavat* of Indian geography. All
that portion of the earth lying between this mountain range and the
great ocean to the South constitutes one of the seven, or nine,
"varshas," or divisions of the habitable (upper) hemisphere. Its name is
Bhârata. If now our ancient Hindu could proceed due North and cross the
Himavat,—which he does not think possible to mortals,—he would find
himself in Kimpurusha, an equally extensive but more elevated and
beautiful varsha, extending northward till bounded by a second range of
incredibly lofty mountains, the Himakuta. Still "ascending," or going
North, until he had crossed this division and passed the Himakuta, he
would enter Harivarsha, a still loftier and diviner country. This
extends, in turn, to another boundary range, the Nishadha, crossing
which one would come to Ilâvrita, the central varsha of all, which
occupies the top as well as the centre of the world. To the adequate
description of the beauty and glory and preciousness of this country no
tongue is equal. In its centre is situated the mount of the gods,
"Beautiful Meru," described in chapter first of the present Part. It is
at the Pole, and around it revolve all constellations of heaven. It is
the centre of the habitable world.

Continuing our imaginary journey across this divine country of Ilâvrita,
crossing of course this colossal central mountain, we should now begin
to descend on the meridian opposite to that on which we ascended on the
India side of the globe. The boundary of the central region on that side
is the Nila range, then comes the varsha of Ramyâka; its farther
boundary is the Sweta range, beyond which

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

is the varsha of Hiranmâya. Still descending, we cross this and the
range which bounds it on the farther side, the Sringin, and we are in
Uttarakuru, the last of the seven grand divisions of the earth, the one
corresponding, in distance from Meru, to Bhârata, or our starting-point.
It, of course, is on the equatorial ocean, and here too we have only to
cross this ocean in order to reach the underworld.

The way in which the varshas are made to number "nine" is by subdividing
the great central cross-section of the hemispherical surface, leaving
Ilâvrita a perfect square on the top of the globe, the land descending
eastward to the sea being called Bhadrâsva, and the corresponding
country to the West being called Ketumâlâ.

To assist the reader to a clearer conception of this sacred geography we
give herewith two cuts, one of which presents in outline the side-aspect
of the Puranic earth, and the other a flat polocentric projection of its
upper hemisphere. <span id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_178)

Having now answered our first question, and showed in what kind of a
world the ancient Hindu lived, we pass to the second: "What was his
conception of the location of the cradle of the race?"

The question is answered the moment we say that in the Hindu conception
and tradition man proceeded from Meru. His Eden-land was Ilâvrita. It
was therefore at the Pole.

How strange that Lenormant could have written the following, and still
have imagined that the true primeval Eden of the Hindu was anywhere else
than at the terrestrial Pole! He says, "In all the legends

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

of India the origin of mankind is placed on Mount Meru, the residence of
the gods, a column which unites the sky to the earth. . . . At first
sight, on reading the description of Mount Meru furnished by the
Puranas, it appears overcharged with so many purely mythological
features that one hesitates

<span id="img_15200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The Earth of the
Hindus, viewed from above.](tn/15200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15200.jpg)  
The Earth of the Hindus, viewed from above.  
</span>

The Earth of the Hindus, viewed from above

1\. Uttarakuru. 5. Harivarsha.

2\. Hiranmâya. 6. Kimpurusha.

3\. Ramyâka. 7. Bhârata (India).

8\. Ketumâlâ. 9. Bhadrâsva.

4\. SU-MERU in Ilâvrita.

to believe that it has any basis in reality. To realize these
descriptions one must represent one's self in the centre of a vast level
and very elevated surface, surrounded by various mountain-ranges, a
gigantic block, *the axis of the world*, raising its head to the highest
point of the heavens, whence there

<span id="img_15201"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE EARTH OF THE
HINDUS.&lt;br&gt; Side View of Upper Hemisphere.](tn/15201.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15201.jpg)  
THE EARTH OF THE HINDUS.  
Side View of Upper Hemisphere.  
</span>

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

falls upon its summit, *on the North Pole*, the divine Gangâ, the source
of all rivers, which there discharges itself into an ideal lake, the
Mânasa-Sârovara. . . . Meru, then, is at one and the same time the
highest part of the terrestrial world and the central point of the
visible heaven,—the two having been confounded through ignorance <span
id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_179) of the real constitution of the
universe: it is also, at one and the same time, *the north pole and the
centre of the habitable earth*, Jambu-dwîpa,—literally of the continent
of the tree Jambu, the tree of life. Leaving the higher basin of the
mountain in which its waters have at first collected the source, Gangâ
travels seven times round the Meru in descending from the abode of the
seven Rishis of the Great Bear, to empty itself afterward into four
lakes placed on four summits adjacent to this vast pyramid, and serving
as buttresses on its four sides. . . . Fed by the waters of the
celestial Gangâ the four lakes in their turn feed four terrestrial
rivers which flow out through the mouths of four symbolical animals.
These four great rivers water as many distinct regions, . . . and
discharge themselves into four opposite seas, to the east, south, west,
and north of the central Meru. . . . The four lakes, the four rivers,
and the four oceans are composed of different liquids, corresponding to
the four castes, and these latter, with which are connected all the
nations of the human race, are reputed to have set out from the four
sides of Meru to people the whole earth." <span
id="fr_180"></span>[2](#fn_180)

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

A similar illustration of the power of a wrong prepossession is given us
in the illustrious Carl Ritter, who after expressly declaring that "the
numberless Puranas and their most diverse interpretations by the Pundits
teach that *Meru is the middle of the earth*, and itself literally
designates its *centre and axis*," <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_181)
thereupon in the coolest manner imaginable proceeds to identify the same
sacred height with the mountains of Central Asia. Still worse is the
procedure of Mr. Massey, who after locating the Garden of Eden on Mount
Meru, and saying explicitly, "*The Pole, or polar region, is Meru*," and
again, "*Meru is the garden of the Tree of Life*," nevertheless tells us
that in equatorial Africa beasts first grew into men. <span
id="fr_182"></span>[2](#fn_182) Happier is the inconsistency of Mr.
Lillie, who, despite his adhesion to the flat-earth theory of Hindu
cosmology, still incidentally speaks of "the blissful Garden" as "at the
Pole." <span id="fr_183"></span>[3](#fn_183)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_173"></span>[148:1](pf20.htm#fr_173) The continuation of
the passage is as follows: "The Jehovistic writer does not say so in
Genesis, but the prophets are express in this respect. The tree of life
grows 'in the midst of the garden' (*bethoch haggan*) with the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil (Gen. ii. 9; iii. 3), exactly like the
tree Jambu, in the centre of the delightful plateau which crowns the
height of Meru. A river goes out of Eden to water the garden, and from
thence it divides and forms four arms (Gen. ii. so). This corresponds in
the most precise manner with the way in which the spring Gangâ, after
having watered the Celestial Land, or the Land of Joy at the summit of
Meru, forms four lakes on the four counterforts of this holy mountain,
whence it afterwards flows out in four large rivers toward the four
cardinal points."

<span id="fn_174"></span>[149:1](pf20.htm#fr_174) Griffiths, *Ramayana*,
ii. 20.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[149:2](pf20.htm#fr_175) Zimmer, *Allindisches
Leben*. Berlin, 1879: p. 359.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[149:3](pf20.htm#fr_176) Yama: "one of the
eight guardians of the world as regent of the South quarter, in which
direction in some region of the lower world is his abode called
Yama-pura; thither a soul, when it leaves the body, is said to repair,
and there, after the recorder, Citra-gupta, has read an account of its
actions, kept in a book called Agra-Sandānī, receives a just sentence,
either ascending to heaven, or to the world of the Pitris, or being
driven down to one of the twenty-one hells."—Williams, *Sanskrit
Dictionary*, sub. "Yama."

<span id="fn_177"></span>[149:4](pf20.htm#fr_177) "The soul is believed
to reach Yama's abode in four hours and forty minutes; consequently a
dead body cannot be burned until that time has passed after death."—W.
J. Wilkins, *Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic*. London, 1882: Art.
"Yama." See, also, Muir, *Sanskrit Texts*, v. 284-327, and our
references in "Homer's Abode of the Dead."

<span id="fn_178"></span>[151:1](pf20.htm#fr_178) See also <span
class="smallcaps">Appendix</span>, Sect. IV., "The Earth and the World
of the Hindus."

<span id="fn_179"></span>[153:1](pf20.htm#fr_179) Lenormant here follows
the misleading arguments of Wilford in *Asiatic Researches*, vol. viii.,
pp. 312, 313.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[153:2](pf20.htm#fr_180) *The Contemporary
Review*, Sept., 1881: Am. ed., p. 39. Also Les *Origines de l’Histoire*,
tom. ii. 1, ch. i. *Compare Essai de Commentaire des Fragments
Cosmogoniques de Bérose*. Paris, 1871: pp. <span id="page_154">p.
154</span> 300-328. Also Muir, *Sanskrit Texts*, vol. ii., p. 139. "In
his *Indische Studien*, vol. I., p. 165, Weber speaks of the Aryan
Indians being driven by a deluge from their home, and coming from the
North, not from the West (as Lassen, i., 515 will have it), into India."

<span id="fn_181"></span>[154:1](pf20.htm#fr_181) "Die zahllosen Puranas
and ihre verschiedenartigsten Auslegungen durch die Pundits lehren, dass
Meru die Mitte der Erde sei, and selbst wörtlich auch das Centrum, die
Axe, bezeichne."—*Erdkunde*, Bd. ii., p. 7.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[154:2](pf20.htm#fr_182) *The Natural Genesis*,
vol. ii., pp. 28, 162.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[154:3](pf20.htm#fr_183) *Buddha and Early
Buddhism*. London, 1882: p. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Cradle of the Race in Iranian, or Old-Persian,
Thought](pf21)
