[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf22)  [Next](pf24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

#### THE CRADLE OF THE RACE IN ANCIENT EGYPTIAN THOUGHT.

<span class="small">*According to the Kamite legend related by Diodorus,
Osiris and Isis lived together in Nysa, or Paradise. Here there was a
garden wherein the deathless dwelt. Here they lived in perfect happiness
until Osiris was seized with the desire to drink the water of
immortality. Then he went forth in search of it, and fell. . . . But an
earlier couple than Osiris and Isis was Sevekh and Ta-urt, who as the
two constellations of the seven stars revolving round the Tree, or Pole,
were the primeval pair in Paradise*.—*The Natural Genesis*.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> mythical geography of the ancient
Egyptians is as yet too little known to allow us to hope for much light
from this quarter on the question of the site of Eden. Even their
cosmology is little understood, and their scientific attainments are by
many inexcusably underestimated. So good a scholar as Mr. Villiers
Stuart could recently write, "The Egyptians had not attained to a
sufficiently advanced point in science to solve the problem of how the
sun in his daily course, having sunk behind the western horizon,
returned to rise at the opposite quarter of the heavens." <span
id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_219) Nevertheless, as we desire to test our
hypothesis as far as possible by all most ancient traditions and myths,
whether favorable or unfavorable, we must inquire whether anything can
be ascertained as to the ideas of the ancient Egyptians touching

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

the form of the earth and the theatre of man's first history.

The leading features of Egyptian cosmology, as interpreted by the
present writer, are in perfect accord with the cosmological ideas of
other ancient nations as described in chapter first of the present
division. They may be briefly expressed in the six following theses:—

1\. That in ancient Egyptian thought the earth was conceived of as a
sphere, with its axis perpendicular and its North Pole at the top.

2\. That in the earliest time *Amenti* was conceived of neither as a
cavern in the bowels of the earth, nor as a region of the earth to the
West, on the same general plane as the land of Egypt, but was simply the
under or southern hemisphere of the earth, conceived of as just
described.

3\. That the *Tat* pillar symbolized the axis of the world (heaven and
earth) upright in space.

4\. That *Ta nuter*, whatever its later applications, originally
signified the extreme northern or topmost point of the globe, where
earth and heaven were fabled to meet.

5\. That *Cher-nuter* was the inferior celestial hemisphere underarching
Amenti.

6\. That *Hes* and *Nebt-ha* (Isis and Nephthys) were respectively
goddesses of the North and South poles, or of the northern and southern
heavens. <span id="fr_220"></span>[1](#fn_220)

Assuming now, with Chabas, Lieblein, Lefèvre, and Ebers, that the earth
of the ancient Egyptians,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

like that of the ancient Asiatic nations, was spherical, what was their
conception of its northern terminus? In chapter first of this Part, some
indication has been already given. But our present investigation demands
a fuller answer to this question. Turning to the great work of Brugsch
on the "Geographical Inscriptions of the Old-Egyptian Monuments," we
find that the Egyptians considered the farthest limit in the North to be
"the four pillars or supports of heaven." <span
id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) The fact that these four supports of
heaven, instead of being situated in four opposite directions from
Egypt, are *all in the farthest North*, is very significant. It shows
that though the people might speak of heaven as supported on four
pillars, it is not to be inferred therefrom that they conceived of the
earth as flat, and of the sky as a flat Oriental roof one story above
it. <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_222) Brugsch himself, though
writing upon the supposition that the Egyptians’ earth was flat, avoids
this mistake. His inference, coming from one who had a traditional wrong
theory to support, is most interesting and valuable. He says, "Inasmuch
as these 'four supports of heaven,' the northern limit of the earth as
known to the Egyptians, nowhere else occur as name of people, land, or
river, it seems to me most probable that we have herein the designation
of a high mountain which was perhaps characterized by four peaks, or

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

which consisted of four ranges, from which peculiarity it received its
name. Like all peoples of antiquity,—at least all those whose literature
has come down to us,—the Egyptians conceived of the earth as rising
toward the North, so that at last at its northernmost point it joined
the sky and supported it." <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223)

In the Buddhist conception of Meru, as given in chapter first of this
Part, we have precisely the four-peaked, heaven-supporting mountain
which Brugsch here describes: "Each of the four corners of the
mountain-top has a peak seven hundred yôjanas high." It is not
impossible that in the four dwarfs which support the dome of the modern
Buddhist temple we have a far-off survival of ancient Egypt's "four
supports of heaven." Certainly the Buddhist temple-roofs symbolize the
circumpolar heaven, <span id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_224) and a recent
author, touching upon the latter's mythological support, writes as
follows: "This prop passing through the earth and the heavens at the
pole, indicated as we have seen by the Alpha of Draco, became the 'nail'
of the old astronomers, the point round which all nature revolved.
Between earth and the celestial pole the prop idea was again brought
forward as the central column of a huge conical mountain, Mount Meru,
guarded at each cardinal point by a mighty king. The four dwarfs
propping up some of the columns in the old Buddhist temples are
evidently these four kings. . . . When the prop pierced the highest
heaven it was a spire called the '*tee*,' and in Nepal it is confessedly

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

in all the temples the symbol of Adi Buddha, the supreme, in his
heavenly garden, Nandana grove." <span id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_225)

But returning from this merely curious question, we remind ourselves
that we have seen reason to believe that the ancient Egyptians conceived
of the earth as a sphere, with a heaven-supporting mountain in the
extreme North. In the extreme South was another mountain, "The Horn of
the World," represented as of incredible height (eight *atur* or
stadia). <span id="fr_226"></span>[2](#fn_226) This corresponds so
perfectly with the earth of the Puranas, with its Su-Meru and Ku-Meru,
that we are irresistibly impelled to inquire whether the parallelism
extends any farther.

We take the question of the direction of the abode of the dead. All
agree that in Indian thought the abode of the dead is in the South. So
was it in the thought of the ancient Egyptian. The recently discovered
epitaph of Queen Isis-em-Kheb, mother-in-law of Shishak, king of Assyria
(*circa* 1000 B.C.), thus reads: "She is seated all beautiful in her
place enthroned, among the *gods of the South* she is crowned with
flowers. She is seated in her beauty in the arms of Khonsou, her father,
fulfilling his desires. He is in Amenti, the place of departed
spirits." <span id="fr_227"></span>[3](#fn_227)

Again, in the mythological earth of India, the abode of the dead, being
the southern or under hemisphere, is looked upon as inverted. Viewed
from the standpoint of gods and men, it is bottom upward, and its
inhabitants move about head

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

downward. <span id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228) The same is true of
Amenti, the Egyptian underworld, and of its inhabitants. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[2](#fn_229)

Again, in Hindu thought all deadly influences proceed from the South,
the abode of death; all beneficent and life-giving influences from the
North. The same is true in ancient Egyptian thought. "It is curious,"
says the English editor of Lenormant's "Chaldæan Magic," <span
id="fr_230"></span>[3](#fn_230)—"it is curious that in Egypt all good
and healing and life proceeded from the West, the land of the setting
sun, and all evil from the East the land of its rising." The statement
is "curiously" incorrect. The North is the sacred quarter, and from the
North come life and blessing. The North wind is the very breath of God.
It "proceeds from the nostrils of Knum and enlivens all
creatures." <span id="fr_231"></span>[4](#fn_231) It is one of the high
prerogatives of the blessed dead to "breathe the delicious air of the
North wind." <span id="fr_232"></span>[5](#fn_232) That they may breathe
it is

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

the prayer of bereaved affection. <span id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233)
The "Fields of Peace" are at the North of the fields of Sanehem-u. <span
id="fr_234"></span>[2](#fn_234) There is the proper home of the great
god of whom the Nile poet sang:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">“There is no building that can contain him!  
“There is no counselor in thy heart!  
“Thy youth delight in thee, thy children;  
“Thou directest them as King.  
“Thy law is established in the whole land,  
“In the presence of thy servants *in the North*.”</span>

</div>

Of the same god it is said:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">“He createth all works therein,  
“All writings, all sacred words,  
“All his implements, in the North.” <span
id="fr_235"></span>[3](#fn_235)</span>

</div>

As yet no texts have been discovered which represent the earliest
Egyptian ideas of the origin of man and the location of his birth-place.
One proof, however, that man was conceived of as having proceeded from
the "Land of the Gods" in the North appears in connection with the myth
of the reign of Râ. In Egyptian mythology, the reign of Râ was like the
primeval reign of Kronos; the myth of it was a reminiscence of the
sinless Golden Age. <span id="fr_236"></span>[4](#fn_236) But

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

in those primeval and perfect days men still dwelt in the country of the
gods, which country, as we have seen, was in the highest North. And
because they still occupied the heaven-touching mountain, the rebellion
by which they forfeited their estate of blessedness is expressly
described as "on the mountain," <span id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_237)—an
object not easily found in Egypt.

The same teaching is further supported by the language of certain
scholars, who, without any particular theory as to the location of Eden,
have held that the hieroglyph used in Egyptian texts as the
determinative prefix to names designating civilized lands, <span
id="img_17900"></span> ![hieroglyph: cross in circle](img/17900.jpg), is
simply a pictorial symbol of primitive Eden divided by its fourfold
river. <span id="fr_238"></span>[2](#fn_238) A writer in the *Edinburgh
Review*, said to be Mr. Walter Wilkins, remarks: "The Buddhists and
Brahmans, who together constitute nearly half the population of the
world, tell us that the decussated figure of the cross, whether in a
simple or complex form, symbolizes the traditional happy abode of their
primeval ancestors,—the Paradise of Eden toward the East, as we find it
expressed in the Hebrew. And, let us ask, what better picture or more
significant characters,

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

in the complicated alphabet of symbolism, could have been selected for
the purpose than a circle and a cross?—the one to denote a region of
absolute purity and perpetual felicity, the other those four perennial
streams that divided and watered the several quarters of it." <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_239) Mr. Wilkins claims that in the Egyptian
hieroglyph above given we have the same symbol as in the Indian
*Swastika*. It was therefore primeval Paradise which was commemorated by
"the sacred circular cakes of the Egyptians, composed of the richest
materials,—of flour, of honey, of milk,—and with which the serpent and
bull, as well as the other reptiles and beasts consecrated to the
service of Isis and their higher divinities, were daily fed, and which
upon certain festivals were eaten with extraordinary ceremony by the
people and their priests." He continues, "'The cross-cake,' says Sir
Gardiner Wilkinson, 'was their hieroglyph for civilized land,'—obviously
a land superior to their own, as it was, indeed, to all mundane
territories; for it was that distant, traditional country of sempiternal
contentment and repose, of exquisite delight and serenity, where Nature,
unassisted by man, produces all that is necessary for his sustentation."

"This," says Donnelly, though arguing in favor of a mid-Atlantic
island-Eden,—"this was the Garden of Eden of our race. . . . In the
midst of it was a sacred and glorious eminence,—the *umbilicus orbis
terrarum*,—' toward which the heathen in all parts

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

of the world, and in all ages, turned a wistful gaze in every act of
devotion, and to which they hoped to be admitted, or rather to be
restored, at the close of this transitory scene.'" <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_240)

In Part fifth, chapter fourth, it will be shown that the *umbilicus
orbis terrarum* is indisputably the terrestrial pole.

Finally, if, as Plato represents, the story of lost Atlantis was
received from Egypt, and constituted a part of the priestly teaching of
the dwellers upon the Nile, our next chapter will present us further
evidence that the Eden and the antediluvian world of ancient Egyptian
tradition were precisely where the tradition of other ancient peoples
placed them, to wit, in the land of sacred memories in the far-off,
faerie North.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[172:1](pf23.htm#fr_219) *Nile Gleanings*.
London, 1879: p. 262. This is as bad as the declaration of Lauer: "Und
so glaube ich dass auch Homer nie daran gedacht hat, wie die Sonne
wieder aus dem Westen in den Osten gelange." *Nachlass*. Berlin, 1851:
vol. i., p. 317.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[173:1](pf23.htm#fr_220) In a brief
communication published in *The Independent*, New York, Feb. 8, 1883,
the critical attention of Egyptologists was respectfully invited to
these theses. Since that time much new evidence of their correctness has
come to light. See, for example, the new *Thesaurus Inscriptionum* of
Brugsch, pp. 176, 177, *et passim*.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[174:1](pf23.htm#fr_221) "Die Ansicht von den
Enden der Welt ist eine uralte and vielen Völkern gemeinsame. . . . Als
die äusserste Grenze im Süden galt den Egyptern das Meer (*’Sar*) and
der Berg *ap-en-to* oder *tap-en-to*, wörtlich 'das Horn der Welt;' als
die äusserste Grenze im Norden dagegen 'die vier Stützen des Himmels.'"
*Geographische Inschriften*, Bd. ii., p. 35. Compare Taylor's Pausanias,
vol. iii., 255, bot.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[174:2](pf23.htm#fr_222) Maspéro, *Les Contes
Populaires de l’Egypte Ancienne*. Paris, 1882: pp. lxi.-lxiii.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[175:1](pf23.htm#fr_223) *Geographische
Inschriften*, Bd. ii., p. 37.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[175:2](pf23.htm#fr_224) Koeppen, *Die Religion
des Buddhas*, ii. 262.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[176:1](pf23.htm#fr_225) Lillie, *Buddha and
Early Buddhism*, p. 50.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[176:2](pf23.htm#fr_226) See first quotation
from Brugsch above.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[176:3](pf23.htm#fr_227) Villiers Stuart, *The
Funeral Tent of an Egyptian Queen*. London, 1882: p. 34. See also
"Homer's Abode of the Dead" in the <span
class="smallcaps">Appendix</span>, Sect. VI.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[177:1](pf23.htm#fr_228) "The gods in heaven
are beheld by the inhabitants of hell as they move with their heads
inverted."—Garrett, *Classical Dictionary of India:* Art. "Naraka."

<span id="fn_229"></span>[177:2](pf23.htm#fr_229) See Brugsch,
*Hieroglyphisches Demotisches Wörterbuch*, S. 1331, sub v. "Set,"
"Set-mati." Also chapter first of the present division.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[177:3](pf23.htm#fr_230) Page 51.—Undoubtedly
there are Egyptian texts in which the sun-god Ra is represented as going
into "the land of life" at his setting (see Brugsch, *Thesaurus
Inscriptionum Ægyptiacarum*, 1ste Abth., Leipsic, 1883: p. 29), but this
is made quite intelligible by Menzel's "Sonnengarten am Nordpol" in his
*Vorchristliche Unsterblichkeitslehre*.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[177:4](pf23.htm#fr_231) *Records of the Past*,
vol. iv., p. 67.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[177:5](pf23.htm#fr_232) Ibid., p. 3. Compare
the expression, "Give the sweet breath of the North wind to the Osiris,"
Book of the Dead (Birch), p. 170; also 311, 312. Gerald Massey remarks,
"In Egyptian the *Meh* is the North, the quarter of the waters, and the
name of the cool wind that breathed new life." *The Natural Genesis*,
vol. ii., p. 168. The following very curious passage from the apocryphal
*Book of Adam*, translated from the Ethiopic by Dillmann, shows that
this ancient Egyptian idea survived to a very late period: "Als der Herr
den <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> Adam austrieb, wollte er ihn auf
der Südgrenze des Gartens nicht wohnen lassen, *weil der Nordwind, wann
er darin bläset, den süssen Geruch der Bäume des Gartens nach der
Südgegend hinführt;* und Adam sollte nicht die süssen Gerüche der Bäume
riechen, und die Uebertretung vergessen, und sich über das was er gethan
trösten, und durch den Geruch der Bäume befriedigt die Busse für die
Uebertretung unterlassen. Vielmehr liess der barmherzige Gott den Adam
in der Gegend westlich vom Garten wohnen." Dillmann, S. 13.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[178:1](pf23.htm#fr_233) "Dans le papyre Boulak
No. 3, 4, 16, on souhait à un défunt: 'les agréables vents du Nord dans
la ÂMHÎ.'"—Brugsch, *Dictionnaire Géographique*. Leipsic, 1879: p. 37.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[178:2](pf23.htm#fr_234) *Records of the Past*,
vol. iv., p. 122.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[178:3](pf23.htm#fr_235) Ibid., p. 101.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[178:4](pf23.htm#fr_236) Maspéro, *Histoire
Ancienne des Peuples de l’Orient*, p. 38.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[179:1](pf23.htm#fr_237) "Während er, der Gott
der das Sein selber ist, seines Königthums waltete, da waren die
Menschen and die Götter zusammen vereint." Brugsch, *Die neue
Weltordnung nach Vertilgung des sündigen Menschengeschlechts*. Berlin,
1881: p. 20. Naville, The Destruction of Mankind by Râ. *Records of the
Past*, vol. vi., pp. 103 *seq*.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[179:2](pf23.htm#fr_238) Sometimes this
hieroglyph is accompanied by the character signifying "God" or "divine."
In such connection Brugsch renders it "heilige Wohnstätte." On other
renderings, however, see the *Zeitschrift für ägyptische Sprache*. 1880:
p. 25. See also *Ceramic Art in Remote Ages; with Essays on the Symbols
of the Circle, the Cross and Circle, the Circle and Ray Ornament, the
Fylfot, and the Serpent, showing their relation to the primitive forms
of Solar and Nature Worship*. By John B. Waring. London, 1874: Plates
33-37.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[180:1](pf23.htm#fr_239) "The Pre-Christian
Cross." *Edinburgh Review*, January, 1870, p. 254. Zöckler did not think
the primitive character of this symbolism well established (*The Cross
of Christ*, p. 35); but the moment Eden is identified with the "middle
country" of the Pole the naturalness and primitiveness of the symbol
become most easy of belief.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[181:1](pf23.htm#fr_240) Donnelly, *Atlantis*,
p. 322.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Cradle of the Race in Ancient Greek
Thought](pf24)
