[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf23)  [Next](pf25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

#### THE CRADLE OF THE RACE IN ANCIENT GREEK THOUGHT.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span class="small"><em>In the Centre of the Sea is the White Isle of great Zeus,<br />
There is Mount Ida, and our race's Cradle</em>.<br />
                                      <span class="smallcaps"> Æneas</span>.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="small">*All that is beautiful and rare seems to come from
the North*.—<span class="smallcaps">Herodotus</span>.</span>

<span class="small">*When transactions are of such antiquity it is not
wonderful if the history should trove obscure*.—<span
class="smallcaps">Plutarch</span>.</span>

<span class="small">*The writings that narrate these fables, not being
delivered as inventions of the writers, but as things before believed
and received, appear like a soft whisper from the traditions of more
ancient nations, conveyed through the flutes of the Grecians*.—<span
class="smallcaps">Bacon</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Respecting</span> the origin of men there were
among Greek writers, as Preller states, "very different opinions." Part
of this diversity he ascribes to a difference in the natural environment
of the first inhabitants: some, residing in the woody hills, would
naturally think the first men came from these; others, inhabiting a
valley, would more naturally think of their ancestors as having come out
of the water. The Asiatic-Greek belief that the first of the human race
were made out of trees he calls "quite peculiar." <span
id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_241) What if it should be found that all
these notions were merely fragments of an old, old faith, according to
which man originated on the mountain of all mountains, by the source of
all waters, and under the tree of all trees!

However this may be, it is certainly very interesting

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

to note that in the Greek myth of Meropia, or Meropis, Renan, Lenormant,
and others recognize the old Asiatic Meru. They hold that "the sacred
expression μέροπες ἄνθρωποι originally meant 'the men sprung from
Meru.'" <span id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_242) Stephanus has the same
rendering in his "Thesaurus."

In an advance chapter of his "Origines de l’Histoire," Lenormant
expressed himself on this point as follows: "I have stated above, in
agreement with M. Renan, that the sacred expression μέροπες, as used
among the Greeks to designate mankind, could not have originally been
applied to them on account of their possessing the gift of articulate
speech, as is pretended in the etymology of grammarians of late date,
but as having proceeded from Meru. Such an explanation, the consequence
of which is to carry back this name of the sacred mountain, the abode of
the gods and the birth-place of mankind, to the most ancient period of
Aryan unity, is corroborated, in a manner to my mind quite decisive, by
the existence of myths which make the Meropes to be a special and
autochthonic population, of a date far back in the most ancient times,
who lead a life of innocence and happiness, marked by extraordinary
longevity (a feature in common with the Indian legends concerning
Uttara-Kuru), under the government of a king, Merops, who is sometimes
represented as preserving them from the Deluge in the same way as the
Yima of the Iranians, and assembling them around him to shelter them
from the Flood, from which they alone escape. This myth is usually
localized in the island of Kos, which receives the name of Meropêis,
Meropis, or Meropê.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But the island of
Siphnos is also reputed to have been called Meropia in virtue of a
similar tradition, and Strabo speaks of a fabulous region of the name of
Meropis, which was described by Theopompus, and which seems to have been
placed near the country of the Hyperboreans. Merops is also given as a
king of the Ethiopians; the most pious and most virtuous of men, the
husband of Klymenê the mother of Phaëthon, and consequently anterior to
the catastrophe of the conflagration of the universe, by which the first
human race, that of the Golden Age, is often said to have been
destroyed. Or else the same name is given to a prophet king of
Rhyndakos, in Mysia, who also receives the very significant appellation
of Makar, or Makareus, 'the happy.' All this shows that the paradisaic
myth of the Meropes was not peculiar to the island of Kos, but was
current elsewhere in the Greek world, and had undergone more than one
localization there." <span id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_243)

Plato's story of lost Atlantis, the island which the ocean-god Poseidon
prepared for his son Atlas to rule over, is a fascinating picture of the
antediluvian world. Whether originating in Egypt, as claimed by
Plato, <span id="fr_244"></span>[2](#fn_244) or inherited as a part of
the legendary wealth of the Hellenes, it is of special interest to us in
the present discussion; and this for three reasons:—

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

First, we have elsewhere shown that in oldest Greek thought Atlas
belongs at the North Pole, and it is only reasonable to locate the
kingdom of Atlas in the same locality.

Secondly, some authorities have unconsciously placed Atlantis in just
this polar position by identifying its inhabitants with the
"Hyperboreans." <span id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_245)

Thirdly, Apollodorus and Theopompus expressly call the lost land
Meropia, and its inhabitants Meropes; *i.e.*, according to the above
authorities, "issued from Meru." <span id="fr_246"></span>[2](#fn_246)

The fabled country further resembles Eden in the difficulties which
scholarship of every kind has found in giving it a location in harmony
with all the data. These difficulties are so great that some learned
writers have located it as far to the West as America, others as far to
the East as in the Sea of Azof, or in Persia. Even of those who have
sought a place for it in the mid-Atlantic, some have pushed it up and
some down, until one of the latest writers says, "All hypotheses are
permissible." <span id="fr_247"></span>[3](#fn_247) His illustrious

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

countryman, Monsieur J. S. Bailly, a century ago, came nearer the truth,
when, in view of the perplexities attending all other locations, he
correctly placed his lost Atlantis in the Paleo-Arctic Ocean.

Again, the antediluvian world was, of course, in the vicinity of lost
Eden. But it is to be observed that in Hellenic tradition Deukalion is
not a Greek, but an inhabitant of a country in the high North, a
Scythian. Moreover the Scythians, as we know from Justin, were
considered a very much more ancient people than the Greeks; indeed, as
the very oldest in the world. <span id="fr_248"></span>[1](#fn_248)
Moreover, Scythia, like polar Meru and Harâ-berezaiti, was conceived of
as a lofty region from which all the rivers of the earth descend. <span
id="fr_249"></span>[2](#fn_249) All of which obviously connects the
antediluvian

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Deukalion with the
primitive country at the Arctic summit of the globe.

Finally, in Greek tradition, the first men lived under the beneficent
rule of Kronos, father of Zeus, enjoying the blessedness of the Golden
Age. But it is clear from Strabo and others that the seat of Kronos’
kingdom was in the farthest North. <span id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_250)
Menzel begins his chapter on "The Isles of Kronos" with these words:
"The oldest of the Greek gods, Kronos, we must conceive of as enthroned
at the North Pole." <span id="fr_251"></span>[2](#fn_251)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

We have now interrogated not only natural and ethnological science, but
also the history, the traditions and myths of the eldest nations of the
world. Nowhere have we found our hypothesis inadmissible; everywhere has
it found remarkable confirmatory evidence. The aggregate of this
evidence coming from such unexpected and entirely different sources is
very great. It is so convincing that an advocate might well be content
to leave the argument at this point,—at least until some advocate of a
different location shall have made out a better case than any one has
yet done. Before leaving the subject, however, we deem it wise to glance
back to chapter second

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

of Part second, and inquire whether the various points there
hypothetically set forth as of necessity "marked and memorable features"
of a north polar Paradise, if such an one ever existed, are capable of
any not yet alleged confirmation from the fields of history and science.
The results of this inquiry will appear in the Part next following.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_241"></span>[182:1](pf24.htm#fr_241) *Griechische
Mythologie*, i., pp. 56, 57.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[183:1](pf24.htm#fr_242) Lenormant, *Origines*,
ii. 1, p. 56.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[184:1](pf24.htm#fr_243) "Ararat and Eden."
*The Contemporary Review*, Sept., 1881, Am. ed., p. 44. Compare Bryant,
*Analysis of Ancient Mythology*. London, 1807: vol. v., pp. 75-92. Also
Samuel Beal: "It can hardly be questioned that the Buddhist cosmic
arrangement is allied with Greek tradition as embodied in Homer."
*Buddhist Literature in China*. London, 1882: p. xv.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[184:2](pf24.htm#fr_244) "But, O Socrates, you
can easily invent Egyptians or anything else! "—*Phædrus*, 275 B.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[185:1](pf24.htm#fr_245) Lüken, Die
*Traditionen des Menschengeschlechtes*, p. 73. Bryant, *Analysis of
Ancient Mythology*, vol. v., p. 157: "Pindar manifestly makes them \[the
Hyperborean\] the same as the Atlantians."

<span id="fn_246"></span>[185:2](pf24.htm#fr_246) "It was a common
practice with the Greeks to disguise their own ignorance of the purport
of a foreign word by supplying a word of a similar sound and inventing a
story to agree with it: thus Meru, or the North Pole, the supposed abode
of the *Devatas*, being considered as the birth-place of the god, gave
rise to the fable that Bacchus's second birth was from the thigh of
Jupiter, because Meros, a Greek word approaching Meru in sound,
signifies thigh in that language."—J. D. Paterson, "Origin of the Hindu
Religion," in *Asiatic Researches*. London, 1808: vol. viii., p. 51.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[185:3](pf24.htm#fr_247) Reference is had to M.
le Marquis de Nadaillac, who, being himself uncertain, says, "Que
l’Atlantide ait été située vers le Nord, que ses limites aient été
reculées vers le Sud, il est difficile de rien préciser et tous les
hypothèses sont permises." *L’Amérique Préhistorique*. <span
id="page_186">p. 186</span> Paris, 1883: p. 566. See Unger, *Die
versunkene Insel Atlantis*. Vienna, 1860. Donnelly, *Atlantis: the
Antediluvian World*. New York, 1882. A "conjectural map" is given in
Bory de Saint Vincent, *l’Homme, Essai Zoölogique sur le genre humain*.
The *Última Teoría sobre la Atlántída*, by D. Pedro de Novo y Colson,
appended to the author's *Viajes Apócrifos de Juan de Fuca*, Madrid,
1881, pp. 191-223, has no independent value, being based on the
*Studies* of M. Gaffarel. An extended essay by E. F. Berlioux, is
entitled "Les Atlantes: Histoire de l’Atlantis et de l’Atlas primitif,"
appearing in the just issued *Annuaire de la Faculté de Lyon*. Paris,
1884, Première Année, Fasc. i., pp. 1-170.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[186:1](pf24.htm#fr_248) "Scytharum gentem
semper habitam fuisse antiquissimam."

<span id="fn_249"></span>[186:2](pf24.htm#fr_249) "The geographical
indications of the great epic poem of the Mahâbhârata represent Meru
rather as a vast and highly elevated region than as a distinct mountain,
and make it supply all the rivers of the world with water. This system
is pretty much in conformity with that which Justin has borrowed from
Trogus Pompeius, and according to which Scythia, the country of the most
ancient of mankind, without having, properly speaking, any mountains, is
higher than the rest of the earth in such a way as to be the
starting-point of all the rivers, *editiorem omnibus terris esse, ut
cuncta flumina ibi nata*."—Lenormant, *The Contemporary Review*, Sept.,
1881 (Am. ed.), p. 40.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[187:1](pf24.htm#fr_250) Pherecydes describes
Kronos as dwelling in that part of heaven which is "nearest the earth,"
*i.e.*, the northern. Strabo, vii., 143, places him in "the home of
Boreas." It agrees herewith that Sanchoniathon, as preserved in the
Greek version by Philo of Byblos, places the seat of his power "in the
*middle* of the lands," . . . in "a place *near springs and rivers*,
where henceforth the worship of heaven was established." Lenormant,
*Beginnings of History*, p. 531. Compare infra, Part fifth, chapters
fourth and fifth: "The Navel of the Earth," and "The Quadrifurcate
River."

<span id="fn_251"></span>[187:2](pf24.htm#fr_251)
*Unsterblichkeitslehre*, i., p. 93.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Eden Stars](pf25)
