[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf26)  [Next](pf28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### THE EDEN ZENITH.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span class="small">. . . <em>The shrine where motion first began</em>, <span id="fr_274"></span><a href="#fn_274">1</a><br />
<em>And light and life in mingling torrent ran,<br />
From whence each bright rotundity was hurled,<br />
The Throne of God,.—the Centre of the World</em>.<br />
                         <span class="smallcaps"> Campbell’s</span> Pleasures of Hope.</span></p>
<p><span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">El</span> walketh in the <span class="smallcaps">Chug</span> of heaven.—Book of Job.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">To</span> the first men, on the hypothesis of an
Arctic Eden, the zenith and the north pole of the heavens were
identical. Such an aspect of the starry vault the humanity of our late
historic ages has never seen. Under such an adjustment of the rotating
firmament, how regular and orderly would nature appear! What profound
significance would of necessity attach to that mysterious unmoving
centre-point of cosmic revolution directly overhead! As intimated on
page [50](pf08.htm#page_50), that polar centre must naturally have
seemed to be the top of the world, the true heaven, the changeless seat
of the supreme God or gods. "And if, through all the long life-time of
the antediluvian world, this circumpolar sky was thus to human thought
the true abode of God, the

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

oldest postdiluvian peoples, though scattered down the sides of the
globe half or two thirds the distance to the equator, could not easily
forget that at the centre and true top of the firmament was the throne
and the palace of its great Creator."

The religions of all ancient nations signally confirm and satisfy this
antecedent expectation. With a marvelous unanimity *they associate the
abode of the supreme God with the North Pole, "the centre of heaven," or
with the celestial space immediately surrounding it*. No writer on
Comparative Theology has ever brought out the facts which establish this
assertion, but the following outline of them will suffice for our
present purpose:—

First. *The Hebrew Conception*.—In so pure and lofty a monotheism as
that of the ancient Hebrews, we must not expect to find any such strict
localization of the supreme God in the circumpolar sky as we shall find
among polytheistic peoples. "Do I not fill heaven and earth?" is the
language of Jehovah. Nevertheless, as the Hebrews must be supposed to
have shared, in some measure, the geographical and cosmological ideas of
their age, it would not be strange if in their sacred writings traces of
these ideas were here and there discernible. Some of these traces are
quite curious, and they have attracted the attention of not a few
Biblical scholars, to whom their origin and *rationale* are entirely
unsuspected. Thus a learned writer on Hebrew geography, after blindly
repeating the common assumption that "the Hebrews conceived the surface
of the earth to be an immense disk, supported, like the flat roof of an
Eastern house, by pillars," yet uses such language as this: "The North
appears

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

to have been regarded as the highest part of the earth's surface, in
consequence, perhaps, of the mountain ranges which existed there." <span
id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_275)

Another, touching upon the same subject, says, "The Hebrews regarded
what lay to the North as *higher*, and what lay to the South as *lower:*
hence they who traveled from South to North were said to 'go up,' while
they who went from North to South were said to 'go down.'" <span
id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_276)

In Psalm seventy-fifth, verse sixth, we read, "Promotion cometh not from
the East, nor from the West, nor from the South." Why this singular
enumeration of three of the points of the compass, and this omission of
the fourth? Simply because heaven, the proper abode of the supreme God,
being conceived of by all the surrounding nations, if not by the Hebrews
themselves, as in the North, in the circumpolar sky, that was the sacred
quarter, and it could not reverently be said that promotion cometh not
from the North. <span id="fr_277"></span>[3](#fn_277) It would have been
as offensive as among us to say that promotion cometh not from above.
Therefore, having completed his negative statements, the Psalmist
immediately adds, "But God is the judge; He putteth down one, and
setteth up another."

A curious trace of the same conception appears in the book of Job, in
the eighth and ninth verses

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

of the twenty-third chapter. In Old Testament times, the Hebrews and the
Arabians designated the cardinal points by the personal terms, "before"
for East, "behind" for West, "left hand" for North, and "right hand" for
South. Thus Job, in the passage indicated, is complaining that he can
nowhere, East or West, North or South, find his divine judge. <span
id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_278) But, in speaking of one of these points,
he adds this singular qualification, "*where God doth work*." This is
said of the left hand, or North. It seems to be inserted to render
peculiarly emphatic the declaration, "I go . . . \[even\] to the left
hand where He doth work, but I cannot behold Him." If at first blush
such an apparent localizing of the divine agency seems inconsistent with
Job's splendid descriptions of God's omnipresence in other passages, it
should be remembered that we, too, speak of the omnipresent deity as
dwelling "on high," and address Him as "Our Father which art *in
Heaven*."

A natural counterpart to this idea of a northern heaven would be a
belief or impression that spiritual perils and evils were in a peculiar
degree or manner to be apprehended from the right hand, or South, as the
proper abode of demons,—the quarter to which Asmodeus fled when
exorcised by the angel. <span id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_279) We cannot
positively affirm that such a belief consciously

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

prevailed among the ancient Hebrews, but, holding the possibility in
mind, we find passages of Scripture which seem to stand out in a new and
striking light. Thus, in case there was such a belief, how great the
force and beauty of the expression, "Because \[the Lord\] is at my right
hand \[the side exposed to danger\] I shall not be moved." <span
id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_280) With this may be compared the confident
expressions of the one hundred and twenty-first Psalm: "The Lord is thy
keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand." So also in the
ninety-first it is on the right hand that destruction is anticipated: "A
thousand shall fall at thy side, and \[or even\] ten thousand at thy
right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee." Again, in the one hundred
and forty-second it is said, "I looked on my right hand, but there was
no man that would know me: refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul."
Notice also the imprecation, "Let Satan stand at his right hand" (Ps.
cix. 6), and the vision of Zechariah, where the great adversary makes
his appearance on the right of the one whom he came to resist (Zech.
iii. 1).

But as Satan here reveals himself from beneath and from the South, so to
Ezekiel the true God reveals himself from above and from the North (Eze.
i. 4). In that quarter was God's holy mountain (Is. xiv. 13), the city
of the Great King (Ps. xlviii. 2), the land of gold (Job xxxvii. 22,
marg.), the place where divine power had hung the earth upon nothing
(Job xxvi. 7). <span id="fr_281"></span>[2](#fn_281) Hence the priest
officiating at

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

the altar, both in the tabernacle and later in the temple, faced the
North. According to the Talmud, King David had an Æolian harp in the
North window of his royal bed-chamber, by means of which the North wind
woke him every night at midnight for prayer and pious meditations. <span
id="fr_282"></span>[1](#fn_282) Probably it is not without significance
that in Ezekiel's vision of the ideal temple of the future the chamber
prepared for the priests in charge of the altar was one "whose prospect
was toward the North." <span id="fr_283"></span>[2](#fn_283) (Eze. xl.
46.)

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Second. *The
Egyptian Conception*.—The correspondence of the ancient Egyptian
conception of the world and of heaven with the foregoing would be
remarkable did we not know that Egypt was the cradle of the Hebrew
people. The ancient inhabitants of the Nile valley had the same idea as
to the direction of the true summit of the earth. To them, as to the
Hebrews, it was in the North. This was the more remarkable since it was
exactly contrary to all the natural indications of their own country,
which continually ascended toward the South. As stated in a previous
chapter, Brugsch says, "The Egyptians conceived of the earth as rising
toward the North, so that *in its northernmost point it at last joined
the sky*." <span id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_284) In correspondence
herewith the Egyptians located their Ta-nuter, or "land of the gods," in
the extreme North. <span id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_285) On this account
it is on the *northern* exterior wall of the great temple of Ammon at
Karnac that the divinity promises to King Rameses II. the products of
that heavenly country, "silver, gold, lapis-lazuli, and all the
varieties of precious stones of the land of the gods." Hence, also,
contrary to all natural indications, the northern hemisphere was
considered the realm of light, the southern the realm of darkness. <span
id="fr_286"></span>[3](#fn_286)

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The passage out of
the secret chambers of the Great Pyramid was pointed precisely at the
North Pole of the heavens. All the other pyramids had their openings
only on the northern side. That this arrangement had some religious
significance few students of the subject have ever doubted. If our
interpretation is correct, such passages from the burial chamber toward
the polar heaven intimated a vital faith that from the chamber of death
to the highest abode of life, imperishable and divine, the road is
straight and ever open. <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_287)

Third. *The Conception of the Akkadians, Assyrians, Babylonians,
Indians, and Iranians*.—After what has been said in former chapters
respecting the location of Kharsak Kurra, Sad Matâti, Har-Moed, Su-Meru,
and Harâ-berezaiti, no further proof is needed that all the peoples
above named associated the true heaven, the abode of the highest gods,

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

with the northern celestial pole. <span id="fr_288"></span>[1](#fn_288)
In each case the apex of their respective mounts of the gods pierced the
sky precisely at that point. To this day the Haranite Sabæans—the most
direct heirs of the religious traditions of the Tigro-Euphratean
world—construct their temples with careful reference to the ancient
faith. <span id="fr_289"></span>[2](#fn_289) Their priests also, in the
act of sacrifice, like all ancient priesthoods, face the North. <span
id="fr_290"></span>[3](#fn_290)

In the Rig Veda, ii., 40, I, we read of the *amṛ́tasya nâ´bhim*, "the
Navel of the Heavens." The same or similar expressions occur again and
again in the Vedic literature. They refer to the northern celestial
Pole, just as the expression *nâ´bhir pṛthivyâ´s*, "Navel of the Earth,"
R.V. iii., 29, 4, and elsewhere, signifies the northern terrestrial
Pole. To each is ascribed preëminent sanctity. The one is the holiest

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

shrine in heaven, the other the holiest shrine on earth. That no
translator has hitherto caught the true meaning of the terms seems
unaccountable. <span id="fr_291"></span>[1](#fn_291)

In Buddhism, the heir and conservator of so many of the ancient ideas of
India, the same notion of a world ruler with his throne at the celestial
Pole lived on. <span id="fr_292"></span>[2](#fn_292) Very curiously, if
we follow the authority of the Lalitavistara, the first actions and
words ascribed to the infant Buddha on his arrival in our world
unmistakably identify the North with the abode of the gods, and *its
nadir* with the abode of the demons. <span
id="fr_293"></span>[3](#fn_293) Even the modern relics of the non-Aryan
aboriginal tribes of India, as for example the Gonds, have retained this
ancient ecumenical ethnic belief. <span id="fr_294"></span>[4](#fn_294)

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fourth. *The
Phœnician, Greek, Etruscan, and Roman Conception*.—That the Phœnicians
shared the general Asiatic view of a mountain of the gods in the extreme
North appears from Movers’ learned work upon that people. <span
id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_295)

The evidence that in ancient Hellenic thought, also, the heaven of the
gods was in the northern sky is incidental, but cumulative and
satisfactory. For example, heaven is upheld by Atlas, but the
terrestrial station of Atlas, as we have elsewhere shown, is at the
North Pole. Again, Olympos was the abode of the gods; but if the now
generally current etymology of this term is correct, Olympos was simply
the Atlantean pillar, pictured as a lofty mountain, and supporting the
sky at its northern Pole. <span id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_296) In fact,
many writers now affirm that the Olympos of Greek mythology was
originally simply the north polar "World-mountain" of the Asiatic
nations. <span id="fr_297"></span>[3](#fn_297)

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

In prayer the Greeks turned towards the North, and from Homer we know
that when they addressed the "Olympian" gods they stretched out their
hands "toward the starry heavens;" Greek prayers, therefore, must have
been addressed toward the northern heavens. Entirely confirmatory of
this is the account Plato gives of "the holy habitation of Zeus," in
which the solemn convocations of the gods were held, and which, he
explains, "was placed in the Centre of the World." <span
id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_298)

That this Centre is the northern celestial Pole is placed beyond
question by a well-known passage from Servius Maurus, <span
id="fr_299"></span>[2](#fn_299) where it is called the "*domicilium
Jovis*," and where we are informed that the Etruscan and Roman augurs
considered thunder and lightning in the northern sky more significant
than in any other quarter, being "higher and *nearer to the abode of
Jove*." <span id="fr_300"></span>[3](#fn_300) Countries in high northern
latitudes shared in this peculiar sanctity. "Toward

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

the end of the official or state paganism," says M. Beauvois, "the
Romans regarded Great Britain as nearer heaven and more sacred than the
Mediterranean countries." <span id="fr_301"></span>[1](#fn_301) Varro
and other Latin writers confirm this general representation, so that all
modern expounders of the old Etruscan religion unite in locating the
abode of the gods of Etruria in the Centre of Heaven, the northern
circumpolar sky. <span id="fr_302"></span>[2](#fn_302) Niebuhr and other
authorities of the highest rank assure us that the Romans shared the
same faith. <span id="fr_303"></span>[3](#fn_303)

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

Fifth. *The Japanese Conception*.—We have already seen that in the
Japanese cosmogony the down-thrust spear of Izanagi becomes the upright
axis of heaven and earth. Izanagi's place, therefore, at the upper end
of this axis can be nowhere else than at the North Pole of the
sky. <span id="fr_304"></span>[1](#fn_304)

But we are not left to inference. So inseparably was the Creator
associated with the Pole in ancient Japanese thought that one of his
loftiest and divinest titles was derived from this association. Writing
of the primitive ideas of this people, one of our best authorities uses
the following language: "I shall do the *Koji-ki*, and the Shinto
religion, and the Japanese philosophy, strict justice by saying that,
according to them, there existed in the beginning one god, and nobody
and nothing besides.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Far in the deep infinitudes of space,  
  Upon a throne of silence,'</span>

</div>

sat the god Ame-no-mi-naka-nushi-no-kami, whose name signifies <span
class="smallcaps">The Lord of the Centre of Heaven</span>." <span
id="fr_305"></span>[2](#fn_305)

What this Centre of Heaven is cannot well be doubtful to any careful
reader of the present chapter.

Sixth. *The Chinese Conception*.—The oldest traceable worship among the
Chinese is that of Shang-te, the highest of all gods. It is believed to
have existed more than two thousand years before Christ. Shang-te is
usually and correctly described

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

as the god of heaven. But his proper place of abode, his palace, is
called Tsze-wei. And if we inquire as to the meaning and location of
Tsze-wei, the native commentators upon the sacred books inform us that
it is "a celestial space about the North Pole." <span
id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_306)

Here, as in Japan, and in Egypt, and in India, and in Iran, and in
Greece, the Pole is "the centre" of the sky. A writer in the "Chinese
Repository" quotes from authoritative religious books these
declarations: "The Polar star is the Centre of Heaven." "Shang-te's
throne is in Tsze-wei, *i.e.*, the Polar star." "Immediately over the
central peak of Kwen-lun appears the Polar star, which is Shang-te's
heavenly abode." "In the central place the Polar star of Heaven, the one
Bright One, the Great Monad, always dwells." <span
id="fr_307"></span>[2](#fn_307)

In accordance with this conception, the Emperor and his assistants, when
officiating before the Altar of Heaven, always face the North. <span
id="fr_308"></span>[3](#fn_308) The Pole-star itself is a prominent
object of worship. <span id="fr_309"></span>[4](#fn_309) And how
prevalent this localization of the abode of God at

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

the Pole remains after four thousand years may be illustrated by the
following incident narrated by Rev. Dr. Edkins: "I met on one occasion a
schoolmaster from the neighborhood of Chapoo. He asked if I had any
books to give away on astronomy and geography. Such books are eagerly
desired by all members of the literary class. . . . The inquiry was put
to him 'Who is the Lord of heaven and earth?' He replied that he knew
none but the Polestar, called in the Chinese language
*Teen-hwang-ta-te*,—the Great Imperial Ruler of Heaven." <span
id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_310)

Seventh. *The Ancient German and the Finnic Conception*.—Like the
ancients, when praying and sacrificing to the gods, the pagan Germans
turned their faces toward the North. <span
id="fr_311"></span>[2](#fn_311) There, in the northern heaven, at the
top of Yggdrasil, the world-axis, stood the fair city of Asgard, the
home of the Asen. The Eddas expressly say of it that it was built "in
the Centre of the World." <span id="fr_312"></span>[3](#fn_312) At that
point, whence alone

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

the whole world of men is ever visible by night and by day, stood
Hlidskjálf, the watch-tower of Odin. From this "*partie septentrionale
du ciel*" he and Frigga, like the great gods of the Etruscans,
"*veillaient sur toute la terre*." <span id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_313)

Among the ancient Finns the name of the supreme god was Ukko. In their
mythology he is sometimes represented as upbearing the firmament, like
Atlas, and sometimes he is called *Taivahan Napanen*, "the Navel of
Heaven." As Castrén shows, this curious title is given him simply
because he resides in the centre or Pole of heaven. <span
id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_314) In the great epic of this people, the
Kalevala, the abode of the supreme God is called Tähtela, <span
id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_315) which word simply means "Place of
*Tähti:* Esthonian, *Täht*, the Polar star."

We have not exhausted our materials in hand for the illustration of this
point, <span id="fr_316"></span>[4](#fn_316) but surely we have
presented enough. Reviewing this singular unanimity of the ancient
nations, no thoughtful reader can fail to be impressed with its
significance. No other explanation of it can be so simple and obvious as
the supposition that the heaven which overarched the cradle of humanity
was a heaven whose zenith was the northern Pole.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Before concluding the present chapter, another point of considerable
interest should be noticed. In reading the Edenic traditions of the
ancient nations

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

as given in Part fourth, the question may well have suggested itself to
the reader, "How is it that, with such perfect unanimity on the part of
contemporary nations in respect to the north-polar position of the
cradle of mankind, the traditions of the Hebrews alone should have
placed it in the East?" In the facts just now reviewed we have a key to
this puzzle. The only word in Genesis which connects Eden with the East
is Kedem (*Qedem*). This term "properly means that which is *before* or
*in front of* a person, and was applied to the East from *the custom* of
turning in that direction when describing the points of the
compass." <span id="fr_317"></span>[1](#fn_317) From Gen. xiii. 14, it
would seem to have acquired this association with the East as early as
the days of Abraham, but according to "the custom" of a particular time
or people it could mean one point of the compass as well as another. It
was simply the "front-country." In late historic times among the Hebrews
it was the East, and accordingly the West was the country "behind," the
North the "left hand," the South the "right," as before noticed. In
Egypt, however, the usage was different,—the "front-country" being
either the North or the South,—which we cannot certainly tell, as
Egyptologists are divided on the question. Pierret thinks that it was
South, and that accordingly the right hand was West and the left
East. <span id="fr_318"></span>[2](#fn_318) Chabas and others, however,
exactly reverse the meaning of the hieroglyphics translated "right" and
"left," and hold that in designating the points of the compass the
ancient Egyptian faced the North.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Among the
Akkadians and Assyrians, if we may rely upon a questionable statement of
Lenormant, still another adjustment prevailed: the right hand was the
North, the left the South, and the "front" direction, of course, the
West. <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_319)

In view of these facts it is plain that, anterior to the fixation of
Hebrew usage, that is in pre-Abrahamic times, *Qedem*, or the
"front-country," may as well have meant the North as any other quarter.
And there is much reason to suppose that it did have this meaning. We
have seen that this was peculiarly the sacred quarter of the whole
Asiatic and Egyptian world. Toward it faced all earliest priest-hoods
and worshipers of whom we have any knowledge. <span
id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_320) What so natural as that they should
contemplate and designate the different quarters of the world from the
standpoint of their normal posture in worship? And if once we assume
that such was the usage of all the Noachidæ anterior to their
dispersion, and that accordingly "the front-country" meant the North,
all at once becomes plain. Genesis then unites with universal ethnic
tradition in locating the cradle of mankind in the North. The record
then reads, "And the Lord God planted a garden in the North country, in
Eden." And, in precise agreement herewith, it is down from the
mountainous heights of this North country—"from

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Qedem "—that the
descendants of Noah in after time come into "the plain in the land of
Shinar" (Gen. xi. 2). So is cleared up simultaneously another mystery,
for how to bring the first colonizers of Shinar into the Tigro-Euphrates
valley, from any probable Ararat by any probable "journeying *from the
East*," or, as the margin gives it, "*eastwards*," has always perplexed
the commentator. <span id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_321)

This interpretation harmonizes for the first time Gen. ii. 8 with Eze.
xxviii. 13, both now referring to one and the same point of the compass,
the sacred North. Again, the well-known difficulty of harmonizing the
references to "the children of Qedem," found in the oldest of the Hebrew
Scriptures, such as Gen. xxix. t, and Job i. 3, is solved at once by
this interpretation. At the same time it gives us a location for "the
land of Uz" exactly corresponding with the explicit declaration of
Josephus: "Uz founded Trachonitis and Damascus; this country lies
between Palestine and Cœlosyria." <span id="fr_322"></span>[2](#fn_322)

To most readers, this solution of the problem of the exceptional
character of the Hebrew tradition will probably at once commend itself
as eminently satisfactory. To some, however, it may seem a little
difficult of belief that one and the same term could in successive ages
have found application to different points of the compass. <span
id="fr_323"></span>[3](#fn_323) To such the following,

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

written, of course, with no reference to our problem, will be of special
interest: "The names of the four cardinal points, and, what is very
remarkable, the hieroglyphic signs by which they are expressed, are in a
certain measure the same in the Akkadian and Chinese cultures. This I
intend to show in a special monograph upon the subject; but that which
is here of importance to note is the displacement of the geographical
horizon produced in the establishing of the 'hundred families.' The
South, which was so termed on the cuneiform tablets, corresponds in
Chinese to the East, the North to the West, the East to the South,
making thus a displacement of quarter of a circle. It would be
interesting if, on examination of the Akkadian and Assyrian names, we
could find that they in their turn denoted an early displacement of
which only these traces remain to us." <span
id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_324)

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

Possibly the usage of ancient Egypt may enable us to put our solution in
yet simpler form. If we may accept the teachings of the learned Maspéro,
the Egyptians often reduced the four quarters or directions to two,
using the term East in a sense sufficiently broad to include both East
and North, and the term West in a sense sufficiently broad to include
both West and South. <span id="fr_325"></span>[1](#fn_325) If, then,
Moses, who in his education was an Egyptian, wrote in accordance

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

with such a usage, it would be quite possible to use Qedem for a
"front-country" in the North, and again, without embarrassment, to use
the same term in speaking of the East. <span
id="fr_326"></span>[1](#fn_326)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_274"></span>[202:1](pf27.htm#fr_274) The poet is speaking
of the North Pole. The first three lines are illustrated by the closing
chapters of Part third, above; the last sums up the facts to be set
forth in the present chapter. A word from Menzel is here in place: "Nysa
wird in vielen griechischen Mythen als im Centralpunkt bezeichnet von wo
das Weltleben ausging and wohin es zurückkehrt. . . . Das ideale Nysa
können wir nirgend anders als im Ausgangspunkte des Welt, im Nordpol
suchen." *Die vorchristliche Unsterblichkeitslehre*, i. 65; also p. 42.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[204:1](pf27.htm#fr_275) Rev. William Latham
Bevan, A.M., in *Smith's Dictionary of the Bible*, Art. "Earth," vol.
i., p. 633, 634 (Hackett's ed.). McClintock and Strong's *Cyclopædia*,
Art. "Geography," vol. iii., p. 792.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[204:2](pf27.htm#fr_276) McClintock and Strong,
*Cyclopædia*, Art. "North," vol. vii., p. 185. The Akkadians had the
same idiom. Lenormant, *Beginnings of History*, p. 313.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[204:3](pf27.htm#fr_277) "A peculiar sanctity
is attached to the North in the Old Testament records." T. K. Cheyne,
*The Book of Isaiah*. London, 1870; pp. 140, 141. \[See our cut: "The
Earth of the Hindus," [p. 152](pf20.htm#page_152).\]

<span id="fn_278"></span>[205:1](pf27.htm#fr_278) Adam Clarke,
*Commentary, in loc*. The best explanation the oldest commentators know
how to give is this: There were more human beings and more intelligent
ones North of Job's country than in either of the three other cardinal
directions; especially was the North the seat of the great Assyrian
empire; but God desires to reside and to work preëminently among men,
hence the language of the text! Matthew Poole, in *Dietelmair and
Baumgarten's Bibelwerk*, vol. v., p. 634.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[205:2](pf27.htm#fr_279) Tobit, viii. 3.
Compare *The Book of Enoch*, xviii. 6-16; xxi. 3-10.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[206:1](pf27.htm#fr_280) Ps. xvi. 8. The
reference seems all the more unmistakable since the next two verses
speak of Sheol, or Hades.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[206:2](pf27.htm#fr_281) "Im Norden sind die
höchsten Berge, vor allen der heilige Götterberg Is. 14, 13. . . . Vom
Norden her kommt in der Regel Jehovah." <span id="page_207">p.
207</span> Herzog's *Real-Encyklopädie*, Art. "Welt," Bd. xvii., S. 678.
"Like the Hindus, Persians, Greeks, and Teutons, . . . the Shemitic
tribes spoke of a mountain of their gods in the far North (Is. xiv. 13;
Eze. xxviii. 14); and even with the Jews, notwithstanding the
counteracting influence of the Mosaic creed, traces of such a popular
belief continued to be visible (Ps. xlviii.), the North being, *e.g.*,
regarded as the sacred quarter (Lev. i. 11; Eze. i. 4)." Dillmann, in
*Schenkel's Bibel Lexicon*. Leipsic, 1879: vol. ii., p. 49.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[207:1](pf27.htm#fr_282) "Daily from the four
quarters of the world blow the four Winds, of which three are
continually attended by the North wind; otherwise the world would cease
to be. The most pernicious of all is the South wind, which would destroy
the world were it not held back by the angel Bennetz." Quoted from the
Talmud by Bergel, *Studien über die naturwissenschaftlichen Kenntnisse
der Talmudisten*. Leipsic, 1880: p. 84. Compare Dillmann, *Das Buch
Henoch*, Kap. lxxvi.; lxxvii.; xxv. 5; xxxiv.; xxxvi. W. Menzel, *Die
vorchristliche Unsterblichkeitslehre*, Bd. ii., p. 35, 101, 168, 345.
See also [p. 177](pf23.htm#page_177) of this volume.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[207:2](pf27.htm#fr_283) At first view it seems
strange that in the Middle Ages, in Christian Europe, the North should
have come to be regarded as the special abode of Satan and his subjects,
and that on the north side of some churches, near the baptismal font,
there should have been a "Devil's Door," which was opened to let the
evil spirit pass to his own place at the time of the renunciation of him
by the person baptized. The simple explanation of this is found in the
fact that the people were taught that their old gods, whom they had
worshiped when pagans, were devils. Compare Grimm, *Deutsche
Mythologie*, p. 30, 31. Conway, in his *Demonology and Devil Lore*
(London, 1879: vol. ii., 115; i., 87), entirely misconceives the
philosophy of the fact. A similar change seems to have occurred among
the Iranians after Mazdeism <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> had
transformed their ancient Daêvas from gods to demons. Hence, while in
portions of the Avestan literature (generally the older) the heaven of
Ahura Mazda is in the North, in other portions the North is the world of
death and demons. See Bleek's *Avesta*, i., pp. 3, 137, 143; ii. 30, 31;
iii. 137, 138, *et passim*. Darmesteter, Introduction, p. lxvii., lxxx.
Haug, *Religion of the Parsis*, pp. 267 ff.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[208:1](pf27.htm#fr_284) *Geographische
Inschriften altægyptischer Denkmäler*. Leipsic, 1858: vol. ii., p. 37.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[208:2](pf27.htm#fr_285) In one place Brugsch
translates *ta-nutar-t mahti* "das nördliche Gottesland." *Astronomische
and astrologische Inschriften*, p. 176.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[208:3](pf27.htm#fr_286) "To the twelve great
gods of heaven are immediately subjected <span id="page_209">p.
209</span> the stars dispersed in infinite number through all the
ethereal space, and divided into four principal groups according to the
four quarters of the world. They were then divided into two orders more
elevated, the one filling the northern hemisphere and belonging to
light, to the good principle, the other to the southern hemisphere,
dark, cold, *funeste*, and to the sombre abodes of Amenti." Guigniaut's
Creuzer, *Religions de l’Antiquité*, vol. ii., p. 836. A very curious
survival of the above conception is found in the Talmudic *Emek
Hammeleck*. See Eisenmenger, *Entdecktes Judenthum*, Stehelin's version,
vol. i., p. 181; comp. p. 255 ff.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[209:1](pf27.htm#fr_287) The association of Set
with the constellation of the Great Bear, reported by Plutarch and
lately confirmed by original astronomical texts (Brugsch, *Astronomische
Inschriften altægyptischer Denkmäler*, Leipsic, 1883, pp. 82-84,
121-123), seems at first view inconsistent with the south polar location
of demons and destructive divinities. But the apparent difficulty is
transformed into an all the stronger proof of the correctness of our
theory when it is remembered that in the most ancient times Set "was not
a god of evil," but the supreme world-sovereign from whom the Egyptian
kings derived their authority over the two hemispheres. "*It was not
till the decline of the Empire* <span id="page_210">p. 210</span> that
this deity came to be regarded as an evil demon, that his name was
effaced from the monuments, and other names substituted for his in the
Ritual." Renouf, *Religion of Ancient Egypt*, pp. 119, 120. The
expression navel or centre of heaven, as a designation for the northern
celestial Pole, so common among ancient nations, would seem to have been
current among the Egyptians also. Brugsch, Ibid., p. 122, 123. In the
text as translated, however, there is some obscurity. Compare [p.
154](pf20.htm#page_154).

<span id="fn_288"></span>[210:1](pf27.htm#fr_288) "There can be no doubt
that 'the Heaven of Anu' was the particular limited celestial region,
centring in the Pole star and penetrated by the summit of the
Paradisaical Mount."—Rev. O. D. Miller, *The Oriental and Biblical
Journal*. Chicago, 1880: p. 173.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[210:2](pf27.htm#fr_289) "L’église n’a que deux
fenêtres et une porte qui est toujours ouverte du côté du sud, afin que
celui qui y entre ait l’étoile polaire devant lui."—N. Siouffi, *Études
sur la Religion des Soubbas ou Sabéens, les Dogmes, leur Mœurs*. Paris,
1880: p. 118.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[210:3](pf27.htm#fr_290) "Cette position de la
victime permet au sacrificateur, qui a le morgno appuyé sur l’épaule
gauche, de se placer, pour remplir son rôle, de façon qu’il ait la
figure tournée vers l’étoile polaire qui couvre Avather, tout en ayant
en même temps la tête de l’animal à sa droite."—Ibid., p. 112.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[211:1](pf27.htm#fr_291) In his heading to Hymn
I., 185, 5, Grassman parenthetically conjectures that the Navel of the
World therein spoken of may be "*im Osten*," but suggests no reason for
its location in that or any other quarter. Not by accident, however, did
the ancient bard elsewhere (X., 8z, 2) place the abode of God "beyond
the Seven Rishis," in the highest North.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[211:2](pf27.htm#fr_292) "The omnipotence of
Amitâbha is dwelt on in some fine *gâthâs*. In *the centre of heaven* he
sits on the lotus throne and guides the destinies of mortals." Arthur
Lillie, *Buddha and Early Buddhism*. London, 1882: p. 128. Compare also
p. 7: "This Pole-star (Alpha Draconis) was believed to be the pivot
round which the cosmos revolved. . . . The symbol of God and the
situation of Paradise got to be associated with this star."

<span id="fn_293"></span>[211:3](pf27.htm#fr_293) "Le Lalitavistara, 97,
rapporte ces paroles d’une manière un peu différente: 'Je suis le plus
glorieux dans ce monde, etc.' Ensuite, après avoir fait sept pas dans la
direction du septentrion: 'Je serai le plus grand de tous les êtres,'
puis après sept pas dans la direction du nadir: 'Je détruirai le Malin
et les mauvais esprits, je publierai la loi suprême qui doit éteindre le
feu de l’Enfer au profit de tous les habitants du monde souterrain.'"
Note to Professor Kern's Histoire du Bouddhisme dans l’Inde. *Revue de
l’Histoire des Religions*. Paris: tom. v., nro. 1, p. 54. Compare the
less explicit account in Beal's *Romantic History of Buddha*, p. 44.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[211:4](pf27.htm#fr_294) "In burying they lay
the head to the South and the feet to the <span id="page_212">p.
212</span> North, *as the home of their gods is supposed to be in the
latter direction*. They call the North Deoguhr sometimes, and the South,
Muraho, is looked upon as a region of terror; so the feet are laid
towards Deoguhr in order that they may carry the dead man in the right
direction."—*Report of Ethnological Committee*, quoted in Spencer's
*Descriptive Sociology*, Div. I., Pt. 3, A., p. 36.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[212:1](pf27.htm#fr_295) *Die Phönizier*. Bonn,
1841-56, vol. i., pp. 261, 414.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[212:2](pf27.htm#fr_296) "Here the idea is that
the gods reside above this mountain \[Su-Meru\], which is, as it were,
the support of their dwellings. This brings to our mind the fable of
Atlas supporting the heavens; the same idea may probably be traced in
the Greek Olympos (Sanskrit, *âlamba*, a 'support')." Samuel Beal, *Four
Lectures on Buddhist Literature in China*. London, 1882: p. 147. Compare
Grill.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[212:3](pf27.htm#fr_297) Compare A. H. Sayce,
*Transactions of Society Bib. Archæology*, vol. iii., 152.—Even in the
mathematical cosmos of Philolaos, though the *sedes deorum* seems to be
placed in Hestia, at the centre of the system, there is yet a steep way
leading perpendicularly to the polar summit of the heavens, by means of
which the gods and holy souls attain the diviner realm of all
perfection: "Dii vero, quando ad convivium pergunt, tum quidem acclivi
via proficiscuntur sub summum <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> qui sub
cœlo est fornicem (ἁψῖδα), et immortales quæ dicuntur animæ, quando ad
summum pervenerunt, extra progressæ in cœli dorso consistunt,
circumlatæque cum iis animabus, quæ comitari eas potuerunt, loca supra
cœlum spectant, ubi pura et absoluta veritas, cognitio virtus,
pulchritudo, atque omnis omnino perfectio patet" Aug. Bœckh, "De vera
indole astronomiæ Philolaicæ." *Gesammelte Kleine Schriften*. Leipsic,
1866: vol. iii., p. 288. Compare pp. 290-292.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[213:1](pf27.htm#fr_298) *Critias*, 120.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[213:2](pf27.htm#fr_299) *Æneid*, ii. 693.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[213:3](pf27.htm#fr_300) "*Et ideo ex ipsa
parte significantiora esse fulmina, quoniam altiora et viciniora
domicilio Jovis*." Compare Regell, "*Das Schautempel der Augurn*" in the
*Neue Jahrbücher der Philologie*, Bd. cxxiii., pp. 593-637. "The
Hawaiian soothsayer, or *kilo-kilo*, turned always to the North when
observing the heavens for signs or omens, or when regarding the flight
of birds for similar purposes. The ancient Hindus turned also to the
North for divining purposes, and so did the Iranians before the schism,
after which they placed the devs in the North; so did the Greek, and so
did the Scandinavians before their conversion to Christianity." A.
Fornander, *The Polynesian Race*. London, 1878: vol. i., p. 240.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[214:1](pf27.htm#fr_301) "*Sacratiora sunt
profecto Mediterraneis loca vicina cœlo*." Beauvois, in *Revue de
l’Histoire des Religions*. Paris, 1883: p. 283. The statement is based
upon expressions in the official panegyric of the Emperor Constantine
Augustus. Compare the following: "Diodorus Siculus speaks of a nation
whom he calls the Hyperboreans, who had a tradition that their country
is nearest to the moon, on which they discovered mountains like those on
the earth, and that Apollo comes there once every nineteen years. This
period, being that of the metonic cycle of the moon, shows that if this
could have been really discovered by them they must have had a long
acquaintance with astronomy." Flammarion, *Astronomical Myths*. London:
p. 88.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[214:2](pf27.htm#fr_302) "Im Nordpunkte der
Welt." K. O. Müller, *Die Etrusker*. Breslau, 1828: Bd. ii., pp. 126,
129. "Suivant eux, ceux-ci devaient habiter dans la partie
septentrionale du ciel, à raison de son immobilité. C’est de la région
polaire qu’ils veillaient sur toute la terre." A. Maury, in *Religions
de l’Antiquité*, Creuzer et Guigniaut, tom. ii., p. 1217. "La théologie
étrusque, accueillant une doctrine que nous avons déjà recontrée à
l’état de rêve confus dans la théologie grecque, plaçait à l’extréme
nord le séjour des Æsars ou dieux. Mais, tandis que l’Hellène se tourne
vers les dieux pour les interroger, le Toscan imite leur attitude
supposée, afin de voir l’espace comme ils le voient eux-mêmes. Ayant
donc le visage tourné vers le midi, il appelle *antica* la moitié
méridionale du ciel," etc. A. Bouche-Leclercq, *La Divination chez les
Étrusques*. *Revue de l’Histoire des Religions*. Paris, 1881: tom. iii.,
p. 326.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[214:3](pf27.htm#fr_303) "Der Wohnsitz der
Götter ward im Norden der Erde geglaubt." Niebuhr, *Römische
Geschichte*, vol. ii., Anhang, p. 702. "It is well known that the Romans
placed the seat of the gods in the extreme North." The Oriental journal.
Chicago, 1880: vol. i., p. 143. Niebuhr's remark, "Der Augur dachte sich
schauend wie die Götter auf die Erde schauen," explains the somewhat
unqualified and misleading <span id="page_215">p. 215</span> statement
of Professor Kuntze touching the rotary posture of the Roman in prayer.
*Prolegomena zur Geschichte Roms.. Oraculum, Auspicium Templum*, Regnum.
Leipsic, 1882: p. 15.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[215:1](pf27.htm#fr_304) See above, pt. iv.,
ch. 2.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[215:2](pf27.htm#fr_305) Sir Edward J. Reed,
*Japan*, vol. i., p. 27. Compare Léon de Rosny, in *Revue de l’Histoire
des Religions*. Paris 1884: p. 208; also p. 211.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[216:1](pf27.htm#fr_306) Legge, *The Chinese
Classics*, vol. iii., Pt. i., P. 34 n. See further, Legge, *Spring
Lectures on the Religions of China*, London, 1880, p. 175, and the not
well understood prayer in Douglas, *Confucianism and Tauism*, London,
1879, p. 278. From these and other references it is plain that
Confucians and Tauists alike identified the northern sky with the abode
of God.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[216:2](pf27.htm#fr_307) Vol. iv., p. 194. So,
likewise in West Mongolian thought the celestial pole and the "apex of
the Golden Mountain" are identical: "*Altan kadasu niken vara
Tagri-dschin urkilka*. Apex montis aurei, nomine Cardo Cœli, stella
polaris." *Uranographia Mongolica*. *Fundgruben des Orients*, Bd. iii.,
p. 181.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[216:3](pf27.htm#fr_308) See *English
Translation of the Chinese Ritual for the Sacrifice to Heaven*.
Shanghai, 1877: pp. 25, 26, 27, 28, 31, 48.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[216:4](pf27.htm#fr_309) Joseph Edkins,
*Religion in China*, p. 115. Compare G. Schlegel, *Uranographie
Chinoise*, pp. 506, 507.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[217:1](pf27.htm#fr_310) *Religion in China*,
p. 109. This title irresistibly suggests the Assyrian one, *Dayan-Same*,
"Judge of Heaven." *Transactions Society Bib. Archæology*, iii. 206.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[217:2](pf27.htm#fr_311) Jakob Grimm, "Betende
and opferende Heiden schauten gen Norden." *Deutsche Mythologie*, Bd.
i., p. 30.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[217:3](pf27.htm#fr_312) Grimm, "Im
Mittelpunkte der Welt." *Deutsche Mythologie*, p. 778. The following is
from the Prose Edda: "Then the sons of Bör built in the middle of the
universe the city called Asgard, where dwell the gods and their kindred,
and from that abode work out so many wondrous things both on the earth
and in the heavens above it. There is in that city a place called
Hlidskjálf, and when Odin is seated there upon his lofty throne he sees
over the whole world, discerns all the actions of men, and comprehends
whatever he contemplates. His wife is Frigga, the daughter of Fjörgyn,
and they and their offspring form the race that we call the Æsir,—a race
that dwells in Asgard the old, and in the regions around it, and that we
know to be entirely divine." Mallet, *Northern Antiquities*, p. 406. The
expression, "from that abode work out so many wondrous things," recalls
to mind Job's description of the North as the place "where God doth
work.'

<span id="fn_313"></span>[218:1](pf27.htm#fr_313) *Vide supra*, [p.
214](#page_214) n. [2](#fn_302).

<span id="fn_314"></span>[218:2](pf27.htm#fr_314) Castrén, *Finnische
Mythologie* (Tr. Schiefner), pp. 32, 33.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[218:3](pf27.htm#fr_315) Rune II, 32, 36, 40.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[218:4](pf27.htm#fr_316) See, for example,
Gill, *Myths and Songs of the South Pacific*. London, 1876: p. 17.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[219:1](pf27.htm#fr_317) Smith's *Bible
Dictionary*, Art. "East."

<span id="fn_318"></span>[219:2](pf27.htm#fr_318) *Dictionnaire
d’Archéologie Égyptienne*. Paris, 1895: p. 191. Comp. pp. 116, 118, 187,
344, 351, 364, 371, 392, 399.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[220:1](pf27.htm#fr_319) *Fragments de Bérose*,
p. 367; also, 380, 419. But compare *Chaldæan Magic*, pp. 168, 169,
where, by identifying the West with the point "behind the observer," he
directly contradicts the account given in his Commentary on Berosus. The
paragraph does not appear in the original French edition of the work.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[220:2](pf27.htm#fr_320) Even among the
aborigines of America and Africa we are told that "the West is the left
hand and the East the right." Massey, *The Natural Genesis*, vol. ii.,
p. 231.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[221:1](pf27.htm#fr_321) Of course, this
interpretation proceeds upon the common assumption that *Miqqedem* is
translocative in signification, and that the land of Shinar was in the
Tigro-Euphrates basin. In another note I have indicated the possibility
that the land of Shinar was in primeval Qedem, in which case *Miqqedem*
in Gen. xi. 2 should be translated precisely as in Gen. ii. 8, "in the
North country."

<span id="fn_322"></span>[221:2](pf27.htm#fr_322) *Antiquities of the
Jews*, Bk. i., 6, 4.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[221:3](pf27.htm#fr_323) See diagram
illustrative of the discrepancy between Euphratean and Egyptian
orientations in Brown, *Myth of Kirké*. London, 1883: <span
id="page_222">p. 222</span> p. 99. Comp. [p. 101](pf15.htm#page_101),
bot. Mr. G. Massey, in his vast astrotypological medley, refers to the
horizon-displacement, but affords no intelligible explanation. He says,
"In making the change to a circle of twelve signs, the point of
commencement in the North was 'slewed' round eastward. Hence the
Akkadian Mountain of the World became the Mountain of the East. Mount
Meru, the primordial birthplace in the North, likewise became the
Mountain eastward. This may be followed in the Adamah of the Genesis;
and in the Book of Enoch it says, 'The fourth wind, which is named the
North, is divided into three parts, and the third part contains
Paradise.' Thus Eden, which began at the summit of the Mount, and
descended into the Circle of Four Quarters prepared by Yima, in the
Avesta, against the coming Deluge, was finally planted in the twelfth
division of the zodiac of twelve signs, as the garden eastward." *The
Natural Genesis*. London, 1883: vol. ii., p. 263.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[222:1](pf27.htm#fr_324) Terrien de Lacouperie,
*Early History of the Chinese Civilization*. London, 1880: p. 29. On
this curious matter Mr. T. G. Pinches threw some new light at a meeting
of the Society of Biblical Archæology, Feb. 6, 1883. In May Mr. Terrien
de Lacouperie read a paper before the Royal Asiatic Society, entitled
"The Shifting of the Cardinal <span id="page_223">p. 223</span> Points
in Chaldæa and China," which will appear in his forthcoming work on *The
Origin of Chinese Civilization*. Similar interchanges and
identifications of the North and West are referred to by Menzel, *Die
vorchristliche Unsterblichkeitslehre*, i., p. 101. See also *Asiatic
Researches*, vol. viii., pp. 275-284.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[223:1](pf27.htm#fr_325) "J’ai exposé depuis
longtemps dans mes cours au Collége de France une théorie d’après
laquelle les Egyptiens auraient divisé les quatre points en deux séries
groupées: Nord-Est, Sud-Ouest. . . . Ce n’est que par suite de la
classification dont je viens de parler qu’on met souvent à l’Ouest les
régions proprement situées au Sud, ou reciproquement au Sud les régions
situées à l’Ouest. L’application de cette idée à l’Est nous mène aussi à
croire que l’on a pu dire du *Tanoutri* qu’il était au Nord." (M.
Maspéro, in a letter to the author, under date of December 20, 1882.)
This usage could hardly have arisen among any people not acquainted with
the spherical figure of the earth. How easily it could arise among us is
illustrated by Sir John de Maundeville, who, writing in A.D. 1356,
located Paradise so far to the East of England that *he could no longer
correctly describe the place by this term*. Thus, after speaking of the
Terrestrial Paradise as situate far "to the East, at the *beginning* of
the earth," he says, "But this is not that East which we call our East,
on this half, where the sun rises to us; for when the sun is East in
those parts towards Terrestrial Paradise, it is then midnight in our
parts on this half, on account of the roundness of the earth, of which I
have told you before; for our Lord God made the earth all round in the
middle of the firmament." Wright, *Early Travels in Palestine*. London,
1848: p. 276. The nearest way to an Eden thus located would, of course,
be northward. Its location could therefore be described with equal
correctness either by the term "eastward" or "northward." Still another
interesting theory of its origin will suggest itself to the thoughtful
student of such facts as those alluded to by Mr. Scribner in *Where Did
Life Begin?* pp. 32, 33.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[224:1](pf27.htm#fr_326) Compare the
arrangement of the winds on the ceiling of the Pronaos of the temple at
Dendera. Brugsch, *Astronomische Inschriften altägyptischer Denkmäler*.
Leipsic, 1883: pp. 26 bot., and 27 top.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Navel of the Earth](pf28)
