[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf36)  [Next](pf38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span> <span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

# APPENDIX.

### SECTION I.—THE EARTH OF COLUMBUS NOT A TRUE SPHERE.

(*Illustrating pp. [3](pf04.htm#page_3)-[7](pf04.htm#page_7):
[306](pf32.htm#page_306), [307](pf32.htm#page_307)*.)

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> following authentic account of the
views entertained by Columbus respecting the figure of the Earth will be
welcome to many readers:

"I have always read that the world comprising the land and the water was
spherical, and the recorded experiences of Ptolemy and all others have
proved this by the eclipses of the moon and other observations made from
East to West, as well as the elevation of the Pole from North to South.
But as I have already described, I have now seen so much irregularity,
that I have come to another conclusion respecting the Earth, namely,
that it is not round as they describe, but of the form of a pear, which
is very round except where the stalk grows, at which part it is most
prominent; or like a round ball upon part of which is a prominence like
a woman's nipple, this protrusion being the highest and nearest the sky,
situated under the equinoctial line, and at the eastern extremity of
this sea. . . . In confirmation of my opinion, I revert to the arguments
which I have above detailed respecting the line, which passes from North
to South a hundred leagues westward of the Azores; for in sailing thence
westward, the ships went on rising smoothly towards the sky, and then
the weather was felt to be milder, on account of which mildness the
needle shifted one point

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

of the compass; and the further we went, the more the needle moved to
the Northwest, this elevation producing the variation of the circle
which the North-star describes with its satellites; and the nearer I
approached the equinoctial line the more they rose and the greater was
the difference in these stars and in their circles. Ptolemy and the
other philosophers who have written upon the globe thought that it was
spherical, believing that this \[western\] hemisphere was round as well
as that in which they themselves dwelt, the centre of which was in the
island of Arin, which is under the equinoctial line between the Arabian
Gulf and the Gulf of Persia; and the circle passes over Cape St. Vincent
in Portugal westward, and eastward by Cangara and the Seras;—in which
hemisphere I make no difficulty as to its being a perfect sphere as they
describe; but this western half of the world I maintain is like half of
a very round pear, having a raised projection for the stalk, as I have
already described, or like a woman's nipple on a round ball. Ptolemy and
the others who have written on the globe had no information respecting
this part of the world, which was then unexplored; they only established
their own hemisphere, which, as I have already said, is half of a
perfect sphere. And now that your Highnesses have commissioned me to
make this voyage of discovery, the truths which I have stated are
evidently proved, because in this voyage, when I was off the island of
Hargin <span id="fr_670"></span>[1](#fn_670) and its vicinity, which is
twenty degrees to the North of the equinoctial line, I found the people
black and the land very much burnt; and when after that I went to the
Cape Verde Islands I found the people there very much darker still, and
the more southward we went, the more they approach the extreme of
blackness; so that when I reached the parallel of Sierra Leone, where,
as night came on, the North star rose five degrees, the people there
were excessively

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

black, and as I sailed westward the heat became extreme. But after I had
passed the meridian or line which I have already described, I found the
climate became gradually more temperate; so that when I reached the
island of Trinidad, where the North star rose five degrees as night came
on, there, and in the land of Gracia, I found the temperature
exceedingly mild; the fields and the foliage likewise were remarkably
fresh and green, and as beautiful as the gardens of Valencia in April.
The people there are very graceful in form, less dark than those whom I
had before seen in the Indies, and wear their hair long and smooth; they
are also more shrewd, intelligent, and courageous. The sun was then in
the sign of Virgo over our heads and theirs; therefore all this must
proceed from the extreme blandness of the temperature, which arises, as
I have said, from this country being the most elevated in the world and
the nearest to the sky. On these grounds, therefore, I affirm that the
globe is not spherical, but that there is the difference in its form
which I have described; the which is to be found in this hemisphere at
the point where the Indies meet the ocean, the extremity of the
hemisphere being below the equinoctial line. And a great confirmation of
this is, that when our Lord made the sun, the first light appeared in
the first point of the East, where the most elevated point of the globe
is."—*Hakluyt Society Publications*. *Select Letters of Columbus*. Tr.
by R. H. Major. London, 2d ed., pp. 134-138.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_670"></span>[436:1](pf37.htm#fr_670) Arguin, west coast of
Africa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II. How the Earth was Peopled](pf38)
