[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf37)  [Next](pf39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION II.—HOW THE EARTH WAS PEOPLED.

#### BY M. LE MARQUIS G. DE SAPORTA.

<span class="smallcaps">How</span> has the human race been able to
spread itself over the whole surface of the globe? Is it the result of
different and independent origins in the several continents,

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

or have all men sprung from a common cradle, a "mother-region"? On this
point students are divided, Agassiz holding that men were created, and
Carl Vogt that they were developed, at different centres, and
Quatrefages and the theologians maintaining the unity of their origin.
The fact is left that man, the same in all the essential characteristics
of the species, has advanced into all the habitable parts of the globe,
and that not recently and when provided with all the resources that
experience and inventive genius could put at his disposal, but when
still young and ignorant. It was then that, weak and almost naked,
having only just got fire and a few rude arms with which to defend
itself and procure food, the human race conquered the world and spread
itself from within the Arctic Circle to Terra del Fuego, from the
Samoyed country to Van Diemen's Land, from the North Cape to the Cape of
Good Hope. It is this primitive exodus, as certain as it is
inconceivable, accepted by science as well as by dogma, that we have to
explain, or at least to make probable; and that in an age when it is
only after the most wonderful discoveries, by the aid of the most
powerful machinery for navigation, through the boldest and most
adventurous enterprises, that civilized man has been able to flatter
himself that he has at last gone as far as infant man went in an age
that is so far removed from us as to baffle all calculations.

We must insist on this point, for it brings into light an obstacle which
those who have tried to trace out the connection between widely
separated races and to determine the course that had been followed by
tribes now separated by oceans and vast expanses have hitherto found
insurmountable; for, if man is one—to which we are ready to agree—we
must assign a single point of departure for his migrations. In these
migrations, man has gone wherever he could, and, at every spot he has
occupied and settled, has acquired characteristics peculiar to the

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

place, and which differentiated him from the men settling in other
places. Hence the varieties of human races. Some of these spots seem to
have been peculiarly favorable to his advancement, and became centres of
civilization. The number of such centres is, however, very limited, and
their distribution is significant.

The continental masses are distributed in three principal groups, one
feature in the configuration of which must strike every one who
carefully examines a map of the world. It will be noticed that they are
so expanded toward the North as to touch in that direction or be
separated only by narrow passages, and that they also surround within
the Arctic Circle a central polar sea with a bordering island-belt.
Going down toward the South we find that the three continents, North
America, Europe, and Northern Asia, which had approached each other so
closely, give place to three appendages, South America, Africa, and
Australia, which in their turn gradually taper off to mere points in an
illimitable sea, long before they reach the Antarctic Circle. Within
this circle the configuration of the land is precisely the reverse of
that in the North; it is that of a solid cap of land around the pole, in
the midst of the great ocean.

If we again observe these masses, we shall find that civilization was
born in each of them under similar geographical conditions, viz., in the
neighborhood of a smaller interior sea, near or rather North of the
tropic of Cancer, between 20° and 35° north latitude. The most eastern
of the centres is in China, near the Japan Sea. The most western, and
apparently the most recent, was along the inner shores of the Gulf of
Mexico. The last civilization was in the course of radiation and
transformation when the Europeans came to America, and was wholly
independent and autonomous; but, weak and relatively new, it was not
able to resist the sudden onset of a stronger race.

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

Toward the centre of the space whose extremes we have marked out must be
placed two other centres of civilization, more ancient than either of
the two already named, and in the same zone of latitude—Egypt, in the
valley of the Nile, and near the Arabian Gulf, and Mesopotamia, near the
head of the Persian Gulf. Thus, each continental mass had its particular
centre of civilization, except Asia, which had two—one in the extreme
east, the other near the line which joins it to Europe. This peculiar
grouping of the chief centres of civilization in such a relation of
neighborhood constitutes the most considerable paleoethnic fact that we
are able to record. The Nile and the Syrian sea on the west, upper
Armenia and the Caspian on the north, the Hindoo-Koosh and the Indus on
the east, and the Arabian Sea on the south, bound the region where
Cushites, Semites, and Aryans, the first farmers, workers, and founders
of cities, the second pastoral people, and the third mountaineers,
afterward emigrants and conquerors, met, elbowed each other, and
mingled, conquerors and conquered by turns, inventing arts and the use
of metals, learning arms and how to organize themselves hierarchically,
reaching their ideal through religion, and having in writing the most
powerful instrument at the disposition of human intelligence. With them
we have the beginning of history, and a continuous chain of social
organizations, down to our own days. The growth of civilization in these
centres leaves, however, still unaccounted for the diffusion of mankind
all over the earth, which took place at a period far anterior to it.

The spread of man throughout Europe and Asia does not offer very great
difficulties, for, in consequence of the long distance for which the two
continents are joined, Europe is in reality only a dependency of Asia;
and occupation of Europe from Asia is conformable to religious
traditions. The difficulties are, however, formidable

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

when we come to America, which we find occupied from one end to the
other by races whose unity has struck the best observers. Not only,
moreover, did the American man inaugurate on the soil of the New World
an original and relatively advanced civilization, but he has left,
chiefly in the North, indisputable traces of his presence in the most
remote ages. Paleolithic implements have been found in the valley of the
Delaware, at Trenton, New Jersey, and near Guanajuato in Mexico, so
clearly characterized that they cannot be mistaken, the situation of
which at the base of the Quaternary alluvions and their coexistence with
elephants and mastodons indicate the existence of a race contemporaneous
with that of the gravels of the Somme, having the same industry and
doubtless the same manners and physical traits. Whence could this
primitive American race, sister to the one that lived in Europe at the
same date, have come, unless we suppose a direct communication between
the two continents? The difficulty such men would have in crossing the
Atlantic and the certainty which soundings give of the antiquity of the
ocean remove all possibility of our believing either that the two
continents were formerly joined, or that one of them was discovered by
some unknown Columbus navigating the ocean a hundred thousand years
before the later one.

We are thus in the presence of the problem, always coming up before us,
and always escaping us, of the origin of the American man. Evidently it
cannot be resolved by invoking an accidental colonization of Asiatic
wanderers, or a shipwrecked company; but it is one in which we have to
deal with primitive populations flowing as in Europe by successive
waves, and attesting the continuous presence of man, whose gradual
development and extension have followed in America the same course as on
the old continent. The hypothesis of an immigration from Asia by way of
the Aleutian Islands to Alaska

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

might be acceptable, did not the certainty of the presence of an
indigenous American population in the Quaternary age reduce it to the
proportions of a secondary fact. The same is the case with the
relations—contradictory, it is true, and therefore suspicious—which some
have attempted to establish between the monuments, statues, and graphic
signs of Central America and those of Egypt and Buddhistic Asia. These
analogies, aside from their insufficiency, must fall before two
paramount considerations: first, the certainty of the
contemporaneousness of the American man with the great animals of the
Quaternary age; and, second, the relative uniformity of the
copper-colored race, so like itself through the whole extent of the
continent, except in that part which is occupied by the Esquimaux. The
difficulty arises from the fact that the monogenists, having in view a
single birthplace and a single point of departure for the whole human
race, and placing neither in the New World, have supposed America to
have been colonized by European or Asiatic immigrants following the
direction of the parallels of latitude. Emigration in this direction at
once meets an obstacle in the oceans, which grow wider the farther South
we go. The obstacle disappears if we give up the idea of lateral
emigrations, and suppose the movement to have taken place in the
direction of the meridians from North to South. No obstacle of any kind
offers itself to such migrations; and the relative uniformity of the
Americans, from one end of the continent to the other, would never have
excited astonishment, if we had not been preoccupied with the idea of
their introduction at a later date.

We may remark, on this topic, that the extreme southern points of the
three continents are occupied by races which came originally, without
doubt, from somewhere else, and which are ranked, in Terra del Fuego, at
the Cape of Good Hope, and in Tasmania, among the lowest

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

of the species. These races, advancing in front of the others, have
preserved the visible stamp of the relative inferiority of the stock
from which they were prematurely detached. We have to believe, in
effect, that these three branches—Fuegians, Bushmen, and Tasmanians—so
little elevated in their physical, intellectual, and moral traits, have
gone and planted themselves so far away only because the unoccupied
space opened out before them. Scouts for the rest of mankind, they have
reached, step by step, the extreme limits of the habitable land. They
must have occupied for the moment, at least, the parts of the
intermediate space, but they could not resist the push of the stronger
races, and they could not have survived to our time, except under the
condition of restriction to a small area in the most remote tract of
their original domain. There is nothing surprising in the fact that MM.
Quatrefages and Hamy, having described the most ancient European race of
which we have the skulls, that of Canstadt, should have found its
analogies only among these same natives of the extreme South—the Bushmen
and the Australians.

It will be seen that we are inclined to remove to the circumpolar
regions of the North the probable cradle of primitive humanity. From
there only could it have radiated as from a centre, to spread into
several continents at once, and to give rise to successive emigrations
toward the South. This theory agrees best with the presumed march of the
human races. It remains to be shown that it is equally in accord with
the most authentic and most recent geological data, and that, besides
man, it is applicable to the plants and animals which accompanied him,
and which have continued to be most closely associated with him in the
temperate regions which afterward became the seat of his civilizing
power.

The general laws of geogony favor this hypothesis in a remarkable
manner. To make it seem probable, we have

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

only to establish two essential points that will not be seriously
contested by any geologist. One is, that the polar regions, which were
covered with large trees, enjoyed a climate more temperate than that of
Central Europe, and were habitable and fertile to the eightieth degree,
underwent a slow and progressive cooling down till the middle of the
Tertiary period. Thence refrigeration made rapid progress till the ice
gained exclusive possession of the country south of them. Under such
circumstances, man as well as the animals and plants would have to
remove or perish—to emigrate step by step, or find himself reduced to a
daily more precarious state of existence.

The second point is the relative stability of the existing continental
masses, and of their distribution around a sea occupying the Arctic
Pole; while the other Pole was occupied with a cap of land surrounded by
an immense ocean. The importance of the Arctic Pole in respect to the
production of animals and plants, and to their migrations, and the
nullity of the other hemisphere in relation to this feature result from
such a grouping. The essential point is, that there is nothing
capricious in such an arrangement of lands and seas, and that there have
been, if not always, at least from a very ancient period, emerged lands
occupying a considerable part of the northern hemisphere, advancing very
far toward the Pole, and describing around the Arctic Sea a belt of more
or less contiguous countries and islands. This is, in effect, what
geology teaches. The changes, immersions, and emersions have never been
anything but partial and successive, while the skeletons of the
continents go back to the most remote ages. There have always been a
Europe, an Asia, an America, and Arctic lands. We know certainly that
there have always been around the Arctic Pole extensive territories, if
not continents, long the home of the same plants as the rest of the
globe, and that, beginning

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

with an epoch that corresponds with the end of the Jurassic, the
climate, at first as warm there as elsewhere, has tended gradually to
become colder. The depression of temperature was at first manifested
very slowly, and was far from having attained its present degree in the
Tertiary; for the trees that then grew in Greenland—the sequoias,
magnolias, and plane-trees—now attain their full development in Southern
Europe, and are not suited with the climate of Central Europe. We are,
then, assured of the ancient existence, near the Arctic Pole, of a zone
of lands covered with a rich vegetation. The permanent existence of a
polar sea is none the less attested by fossils from all parts of the
region. The neighborhood of the Pole was long habitable, and inhabited
by man in a time near that in which the vestiges of his industry begin
to show themselves alike in Europe and America. In passing thus from the
Arctic lands to those bordering on the polar circle, and through the
latter into Asia, Europe, and America, man would only have taken the
road which a host of plants and animal followed, either before him or at
the same time, and under the stress of the same circumstances.

It is, in fact, by the aid of migrations from the neighborhood of the
Pole that we can generally explain the phenomenon of scattered or
disjoined species, a phenomenon identical with the one which man of the
Old World and man of the New World present when they are compared.
Combining present notions with the indications furnished by the fossils,
we discover numerous examples of disjunction—in which allied forms,
often hardly distinguishable, have been distributed at the same time in
scattered regions, at extremely remote points in the boreal hemisphere,
without any apparent connection along the parallels, to explain the
common unit. Europe attests by undeniable fossils that it had formerly a
host of vegetable types and forms that are now American,

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

which it could have received only from the extreme North. It had, for
example, magnolias, tulip-trees, sassafras, maples, and poplars,
comparable in all respects to those which grow in the United States. The
two plane-trees, that of the West and that of Asia Minor, to which we
may add an extinct fossil European plane-tree, illustrate the same
phenomenon of dispersion. Europe in the Tertiary period witnessed the
growth of a ginko similar to the one in the north of China. It had
sequoias and a bald cypress corresponding with the trees of those names
that are now growing in California and Louisiana. The beech seems to
have been growing in the Arctic circumpolar zone before it was
introduced and extended throughout the northern hemisphere. The same is
doubtless the case with the hemlock, of which distinguishable traces
have been found in Grinnell-land, above the eighty-second degree of
latitude, of a date much earlier than that of its introduction into
Europe. The well-established presence in both continents of many animals
peculiar to the northern hemisphere must be attributed to emigrations,
if not from the Pole, at least from countries contiguous to the polar
circle. This is obvious in the case of the reindeer, bison, and stag;
but it ought to be equally true in respect to animals of more ancient
times, and although we have no other direct proofs of it than the
abundance of the remains of mammoths in upper Siberia, the same law
doubtless includes the elephants and mastodons. We mean here the species
of these two genera which were propagated from the North to the South,
and were, in America and Europe, the companions of primitive man. The
connection of the continental masses with their belt of hardly
discontinuous lands around the polar circle gives the key to all these
phenomena. The cause on which they depend would be constantly producing
radiations and consequently disjunctions of species and races, whatever
kingdom we may consider.

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

Before leaving the questions that touch on the presumed origin of man,
we cannot refrain from speaking of the relations which it has been
sought to establish between him and the pithecan apes. Primitive man,
according to some authors of the transformist school, was an
anthropomorphic ape, perfected physically as to his walk and erect
attitude, intellectually by the development of his cranial capacity,
till the moment when reasoning, or the faculty of abstraction and the
power of using articulate language, took in him the place of instinct.
Numerous and undeniable anatomical or physiological analogies of the
human body and those of the more highly organized monkeys, which have no
tails nor callosities on their paws, and whose faces and ways have
something singularly human, favor this system, at least in appearance.
The pithecans have, however, other contiguities than purely human ones.
Their ways are rather analogous than directly assimilable to those of
man; with other adaptations, they seem to have followed a wholly
different course of evolution. They are essentially climbers, while man
is exclusively a walker, and has always been predisposed to the erect
position. The highest monkeys, the anthropomorphous apes, walk badly and
with difficulty. When they leave the trees in which they live, their
position is a stooping one, and they bend down their toes so as not to
touch the ground with the soles of their feet. We have, then, reason not
to admit the simian origin of man without decisive proofs. Moreover, the
pithecans seem to have been evolved in an inverse direction from man.
Rejoicing in the heat, they perish rapidly when brought into the
temperate zones, and this is especially the case with the anthropoid
apes. Thus, while man, coming from the North, advances toward the South
only when the depression of temperature favors his progress in that
direction, the monkeys, to which a strong heat is a vital element, were
developed in an age when

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Europe had a
sub-tropical climate, and disappeared from that continent as soon as the
climate became temperate, so that their departure
[coincides](errata.htm#3) with the arrival of man. They fled South to
find the heat they needed, precisely when the diminution of the heat
opened to man the region from which it excluded his predecessors. The
necessity of placing the cradle of the pithecans in a hot country
enables us to separate the monkeys of the Eastern and Western continents
into two distinct groups, marked by differences in dentition important
enough to oblige us to assume an extreme antiquity for their separation.
Both are descended from the lemurians, now represented only in
Madagascar, but of which early Tertiary fossils are found in Europe. The
most recent lemurians in Europe are found at the end of the Eocene. It
is later, in the Miocene, and that not the lowest, that we meet
pithecans similar to those of the equatorial zone of the Eastern
continent. At this epoch, which was nearly that of Oeningen and the
Mollassic Sea, which divided Europe from East to West, a subtropical
climate still prevailed in the centre of the continent, and the
palm-trees extended up into Bohemia, along the northern banks of the
great interior sea. By favor of this temperature the monkeys occupied
Europe to near the forty-fifth degree, but without going above it, to
disappear forever as soon as it became cool enough for men and
elephants.

The *Mesopithecus Pentelici*, of which M. Gaudry has discovered
twenty-five individuals at Pikermi, was small, walked on its four paws,
and lived on twigs and leaves. The *Dryopithecus* of St. Gaudens had the
characteristics of the highest anthropomorphs, with the bestial face of
the gorilla; but it is to this animal that M. Gaudry is inclined to
attribute the flints, intentionally chipped, according to the Abbé
Bourgeois, of the Beauce limestone, at Thénay in the St. Gaudens
geognostic horizon. The

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Pliopithecus* of
Sansan (Gers) resembles a gibbon. To find the present analogues of the
*Pliopithecus* and *Dryopithecus* of Miocene Europe, it is necessary to
go across the tropic of Cancer to about 12° North latitude, or more than
thirty degrees South of the locality of these fossils. If, as is
probable, the same interval existed between the perimeter frequented by
the European anthropomorphs and the natal region in which man was
originally confined, we shall find the latter in the latitude of
Greenland, at 70° or 75°. This is indeed an hypothetical calculation,
but it is based on a double argument hard to refute.

We can reach almost the same conclusion by a little different reasoning.
The abundance of large-flaked instruments in the contiguous valleys of
the Somme and the Seine marks the existence at that point of external
conditions evidently favorable to the diffusion of man, whose race was
then multiplying for the first time. The flora of that epoch, as
observed near Fontainebleau, indicates the presence of conditions
similar to those now existing in the south of France, near the
forty-second degree of latitude. Now, to reach, starting from the
forty-second degree, the nearly tropical regions where palm, camphor,
and southern laurel trees are associated together, we have to go twelve
or fifteen degrees South, to the thirtieth or twenty-eighth degree of
latitude, where we see the same climatological conditions existing as
prevailed in Miocene Europe when it was hardly warm enough for the
anthropomorphic apes. Between these conditions and those which seem to
have been first favorable to the growth of the human race there existed
a space of twelve or fifteen degrees of latitude. But when palm-trees
were growing near Prague, and camphor-trees grew as far North as
Dantzic, man, if he existed then, might have lived without inconvenience
beyond or around the Arctic Circle, within equal reach of North America
and Europe, which he was destined to people.—*Translated for the Popular
Science Monthly from the Revue des Deux Mondes*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section III. The Reception Accorded to “The True Key.”](pf39)
