[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf41)  [Next](pf43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION VI.—HOMER'S ABODE OF THE DEAD <span id="fr_675"></span>[1](#fn_675)

(*Illustrating Chapters i. and vii. in Part Four; Chapter ii. in Part
Six, and other passages*.)

<span class="small">*So herrscht gleich über den Ort wo die Unterwelt zu
denken sei ein merkwürdiger Zwiespalt*.—<span
class="smallcaps">Preller</span>.</span>

<span class="small">*Bei Homer ist eine doppelte Ansicht von der Lage
des Todtenreiches zu erkennen, einmal unter der Erde, und dann wiederum
auf der Oberfläche des Bodens in dem ewigen Dunkel jenseits des
westlichen Ocean. Die Ansichten von den beiden Hades fliessen beständig
durcheinander. So weit aber die mit jeden verbundenen Vorstellungen zu
sondern und einzeln aufzufassen möglich ist, müssen wir sie darzulegen
im Folgenden versuchen*.—<span class="smallcaps">Völcker</span>.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Where</span> does Homer locate the realm of
Hades?

In the whole broad field of Homeric scholarship it would be difficult to
find a more fascinating question. Few have been more written upon. The
literature of the subject is itself almost a library. No mythologist, no
commentator upon the poet, no class-room interpreter even, can evade the
question; and yet, in their answers, the Homeric authorities of all
modern times, whatever their nationality, present only a pitiable
spectacle of helpless bewilderment. Classifying these various
interpreters according to the answers they respectively give to the
question propounded, they stand as follows:—

First, a class who content themselves with the general assertion that
the earth of Homer was a "flat disk," and that his Hades, like that of
the ancients generally, was undoubtedly conceived of as a dark recess or
cavern in the bosom of this earth-disk. Anything in the Odyssey

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

or elsewhere inconsistent with this view is simply a play of poetic
fancy.

Second, a class—if class it be—who say with the genial Wilhelm Jordan,
"Das Hadesreich der Odyssee ist die von der Sonne abgekehrte Rückseite
der Erdscheibe, die ἀντίχθον, Gegenerde, eines weit späteren Zeitalters.
Von der ζείδωρος ἄρουρα und vom Götterhimmel aus betrachtet bleibt es
allerdings Unterwelt, ὐπὸ κεύθεσι γαίας, aber nicht als Erdinneres,
sondern als jenseitige Oberfläche." <span
id="fr_676"></span>[1](#fn_676) Here the earth is still a flat disk; but
Hades, instead of being within it, is simply its under or reverse side.

Third, a class who locate the shadowy realm on the same plane with the
inhabited earth, but in the far West, just *inside* the Ocean-stream.
This includes all commentators who, locating Hades above ground in the
West, place Kirkè's isle in the same quarter, and hold that Odysseus did
not cross over the Ocean-stream.

Fourth, a class who locate it in the far West, just *outside* the
Ocean-stream. This includes all commentators who, locating Hades above
ground in the West, place Kirkè's isle in the same quarter, but hold
that Odysseus crossed the Ocean-stream. <span
id="fr_677"></span>[2](#fn_677)

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

Fifth, a class who locate it in the far East, just inside the
Ocean-stream. This class includes all who place Kirkè's isle in the
East, and hold that Odysseus did not cross the Ocean-stream in visiting
the superterranean Hades.

Sixth, a class who locate it in the far East, just outside the
Ocean-stream. This includes all who place Kirkè's isle in the East, and
hold that Odysseus crossed the Ocean-stream in visiting the
superterranean Hades.

Seventh, a class who try to harmonize the conflicting representations by
making the one set of expressions relate to a Hades in the bosom of the
flat earth, and the other set of expressions relate to "the entrance" of
the passage leading down to it from the world of living men. This class
is again subdivided into four sub-classes, according as they maintain a
*cis-oceanic* or *trans-oceanic* location of this mouth of Hades, and
place it to the *East* or to the *West* of the poet.

Eighth, a class who hold that the difficulty is in the poet himself, he
having got two incompatible mythologies mixed up together.

Ninth, a class who try to solve all discrepancies by assigning the
different representations in the two poems, and in different parts of
the same poem, to different ages and to different authors.

Tenth, a class who query whether or no it be not admissible to hold that
Homer had two realms of Hades,—the one "subterranean," and the other
"beyond the Ocean."

Eleventh, a class who, with Altenburg and Gerland, resolve the whole
story of Odysseus’ descent to Hades into an astronomical myth; <span
id="fr_678"></span>[1](#fn_678) or with Cox see in it simply a
mythologico-poetic expression for the prosaic fact that the Sun, the
"lord of day," returning after his morning

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

and noontide wanderings to his western home, sometimes finds it
necessary to make his way behind dark clouds. <span
id="fr_679"></span>[1](#fn_679)

Twelfth, a class who point out the manifest difficulties of the problem,
but frankly profess their utter inability to present a solution.

Of the more important of the maps of "the world according to Homer,"
those of Bunbury, Völcker, and Forbiger are constructed according to the
view of class fourth; that of Ukert, according to the view of that
division of class seventh who locate the Hades portal in the far West,
just inside the Ocean-stream; that of Gladstone, <span
id="fr_680"></span>[2](#fn_680) according to the view of that division
of class seventh who locate the Hades portal in the far East, just
inside the Ocean-stream. Völcker, however, is inclined to believe in two
Homeric Hades-realms,—the one interterranean, the other at the West
superterranean and trans-oceanic.

Such are the multifarious, contradictory, confused, and despairing
answers given to our question by the most learned and eminent of Homeric
scholars. It would be an easy task to fill a volume with citations
illustrating these various positions, and the ingenious but mutually
destructive arguments by which their respective advocates have sought to
establish them. It will be more profitable to turn from such a Babel of
ideas, over which the darkness of Hades itself seems to have fallen, and
inquire what the poet himself has to say on the subject.

The region of the dead is represented in Homer as one of perpetual
night. Its name is Erebos. <span id="fr_681"></span>[3](#fn_681) From
the

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

name of the divinity presiding in it, it is generally called the house
or abode of Aides (Hades). <span id="fr_682"></span>[1](#fn_682) That it
was conceived of as *underneath the earth* appears from the perpetually
recurring expressions, both in the Iliad and in the Odyssey, relating
the descent into and ascent out of it. <span
id="fr_683"></span>[2](#fn_683) In certain passages it is in fact
expressly spoken of as "under the earth; " <span
id="fr_684"></span>[3](#fn_684) in others, as "under the recesses of the
earth." <span id="fr_685"></span>[4](#fn_685) Hence Aïdes himself is
styled Ζεὺς καταχθόνιος, "the Subterranean Zeus." <span
id="fr_686"></span>[5](#fn_686)

In the Battle of the Gods there is a vivid picture of this underworld
and of its trembling king:—

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

<span class="small">Thus the blessed gods inciting, both sides engaged,
and among them made severe contention to break out. But dreadfully from
above thundered the Father of gods and men, while beneath Poseidon shook
the boundless earth and the lofty summits of the mountains. The roots
and all the summits of many-rilled Ida were shaken, and the city of the
Trojans and the ships of the Greeks. Aïdes himself, king of the nether
world, trembled beneath, and leaped up from his throne terrified, and
shouted aloud, lest earth-shaking Poseidon should cleave asunder the
earth over him, and disclose to mortals and immortals his mansions,
terrible, squalid, which even the gods loathe. <span
id="fr_687"></span>[1](#fn_687)</span>

But while the abode of Aïdes is thus clearly represented as under the
earth, it is nevertheless represented as just across the Ocean-river,
and capable of being reached by ship. In the eleventh and twelfth books
of the Odyssey, the voyage of Odysseus to this region is described in
the same apparently literal nautical terms as is the voyage to the Land
of the Lotus-Eaters. And of his interview with the dead, Hayman says,
"The whole scene is conceived by the poet as enacted on a geographical
extension of the earth beyond the Ocean-stream." <span
id="fr_688"></span>[2](#fn_688) There is no hint of any descent into the
interior of the earth, no passage through or into subterranean caverns.
The journey is as natural in all its aspects as any voyage from one
coast of the Atlantic to its opposite. <span
id="fr_689"></span>[3](#fn_689) Thus opens the eleventh book:—

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

<span class="small">But when we were come down to the ship and the sea,
we first of all drew the ship into the divine sea, and we placed a mast
and sails in the black ship. And taking the sheep we put them on board,
and we ourselves also embarked grieving, shedding the warm tear. And
fair-haired Kirkè (Circe)—an awful goddess, possessing human speech—sent
behind our dark-blue-prowed ship a moist wind that filled the sails, an
excellent companion. And we sat down, making use of each of the
instruments in the ship, and the wind and the pilot directed it. And the
sails of it passing over the sea were stretched out the whole day; and
the sun set, and all the ways were overshadowed. And it reached the
extreme boundaries of the deep-flowing Ocean, <span
id="fr_690"></span>[1](#fn_690) where are the people and city of the
Kimmerians covered with shadow and vapor, nor does the shining sun
behold them with his beams, neither when he goes toward the starry
heaven, nor when he turns back again from heaven to earth, but
pernicious night is spread over hapless mortals. Having come there we
drew up our ship, and we took out the sheep, and we ourselves went again
to the stream of the Ocean, until we came to the place which Kirkè
mentioned.</span>

Here the hero performed the rites and held the consultation which Kirkè
had previously prescribed in these terms:—

"O noble son of Laertes, much-contriving Odysseus, do not remain any
longer in my house against your will. But first you must perform another
voyage, and come to the house of Aïdes and awful Persephonè, to consult
the soul of Theban Tiresias, a blind prophet, whose mind is firm. To
him, even when dead, Persephonè has given understanding, alone to be
prudent, but the rest flit about as shades."

"Who, O Kirkè, will conduct me on this voyage? No one has yet come to
Aïdes in a black ship."

"O noble son of Laertes, much-contriving Odysseus, let not the desire of
a guide for thy ship be at all a care to thee; but having erected the
mast, and spread out the white sails, sit down, and let the blast of the
North wind carry it. But when thou shalt have passed through the Ocean
in thy ship, where

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

<span class="small">is the easy-dug <span
id="fr_691"></span>[1](#fn_691) shore and the groves of Persephonè, and
tall poplars, and fruit-destroying willows, there draw up thy ship in
the deep-eddying Ocean, and do thou thyself go to the spacious house of
Aïdes. Here indeed both Pyriphlegethon and Cocytus, which is a stream
from the water of Styx, flow into Acheron; and there is a rock, and the
meeting of two loud-sounding rivers. There then, O hero, approaching
near as I; command thee, dig a trench the width of a cubit each way; and
pour around it libations to all the dead, first with mixed , honey, then
with sweet wine, and again the third time with water, and sprinkle white
meal over it. And entreat much the powerless heads of the dead,
promising that when thou comest to Ithaca thou wilt offer up in thy
palace a barren heifer, whichsoever is the best, and wilt fill the pyre
with excellent things, and that thou wilt sacrifice to Tiresias alone a
black sheep, all black, which excels among thy sheep. But when thou
shalt have entreated the illustrious nations of the dead with prayers,
then sacrifice a male sheep and a black female, turning toward Erebos;
and do thou thyself be turned away at a distance, going toward the
streams of the river; but there many souls of those gone dead will come.
Then immediately exhort thy companions and command them, having skinned
the sheep which lie there slain with the unpitying brass, to burn them
and to invoke the gods, both mighty Aïdes and dread Persephonè. And do
thou, having drawn thy sharp sword from thy thigh, sit down, nor suffer
the powerless heads of the dead to go near the blood before thou
inquirest of Tiresias. Then the prophet will immediately come to thee, O
leader of the people, who will tell to thee the voyage and the measures
of the way and thy return, how thou mayest go over the fishy sea." <span
id="fr_692"></span>[2](#fn_692)</span>

In the following passage Odysseus narrates how, having arrived "at the
place which Kirkè mentioned," he fulfilled her commission:—

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

<span class="small">Then Perimedes and Eurylochos made sacred offerings;
but I, drawing my sharp sword from my thigh, dug a trench the width of a
cubit each way, and around it we poured libations to all the dead, first
with mixed honey, then with sweet wine, again a third time with water,
and I sprinkled white meal over it. And I much besought the
unsubstantial heads of the dead, promising that when I came to Ithaca I
would offer up in my palace a barren heifer, whichsoever is the best,
and that I would sacrifice separately to Tiresias alone a sheep all
black. which excels among our sheep. But when I had besought them, the
nations of the dead, with vows and prayers, then taking the sheep, I cut
off their heads into the trench, and the black blood flowed; and the
souls of the perished dead were assembled forth from Erebos,—betrothed
girls and youths, and much-enduring old men, and tender virgins having a
newly grieved mind, and many Mars-renowned men wounded with brass-tipped
spears, possessing gore-besmeared arms, who in great numbers were
wandering about the trench on different sides with a divine clamor; and
pale fear seized upon me. Then at length exhorting my companions, I
commanded them, having skinned the sheep which lay there, slain with the
cruel brass, to burn them, and to invoke the gods, both Aïdes and
Persephonè. But I, having drawn my sharp sword from my thigh, sat down;
nor did I suffer the powerless heads of the dead to draw nigh the blood,
before I inquired of Tiresias.</span>

So far it might appear uncertain whether the hero were really in Hades,
or only near it, at some point accessible alike to the living and to the
dead. But the lines immediately following show that he was truly in "the
house of Aïdes:"—

<span class="small">And first the soul of my companion Elpenor came, for
he was not yet buried beneath the wide-wayed earth; for we left his body
in the palace of Kirkè, unwept-for and unburied, since another toil then
urged us. Beholding him I wept, and pitied him in my mind; and,
addressing him, spoke winged words: "O Elpenor, how didst thou come
under the dark west? Thou hast come sooner on foot than I with a black
ship."</span>

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

<span class="small">Thus I spoke, but he groaning answered me in
discourse: "O Zeus-born son of Laertes, much-contriving Odysseus, the
evil destiny of the deity and the abundant wine hurt me. Lying down in
the palace of Kirkè, I did not think to go down backward, having come to
the long ladder; but I fell downward from the roof, and my neck was
broken from the vertebræ, and my soul descended to Hades."</span>

In line 69, Elpenor speaks of Odysseus "going *hence from the house of
Aïdes;*" and in line 164, as elsewhere (x. 502; xi. 59, 158; Xii. 21;
xxiii. 324), the expressions leave no chance to doubt that Odysseus’
voyage was a genuine *descensus ad inferos*. <span
id="fr_693"></span>[1](#fn_693)

Here, then, are the two grand tests of every proposed solution of the
problem of the location of the Homeric Hades:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I. *Its Hades must be underneath the earth;* and

II\. *It must be on the surface of the earth, beyond the Ocean*.

</div>

This strange and perplexing difference, not to say contradiction, in the
Homeric representations, did not escape the notice of the older
commentators and writers on mythology. Especially has it called out the
ingenuity of German scholars. F. A. Wolf recognized it, but did not
profess to be able to give an explanation. J. H. Voss invented the
method of solving the problem by placing Hades itself within the bosom
of the earth-disk, but its "entrance" on the westernmost point of Europe
on the inner shore of the ocean. Völcker rejected this solution, but, in
the absence of a better, cautiously suggested—as we have seen—the
possibility of Homer's having held to two kingdoms of the dead, one
within the earth, and one

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

in the dark trans-oceanic West. <span id="fr_694"></span>[1](#fn_694)
Eggers <span id="fr_695"></span>[2](#fn_695) and Nitzsch <span
id="fr_696"></span>[3](#fn_696) inclined to the support of the Vossian
compromise; and in 1854 Preller could still speak of it as the one "at
present chiefly prevalent." <span id="fr_697"></span>[4](#fn_697) Still,
as Preller and others urged, nothing in the descriptions of the western
Hades corresponds with the idea of a "portal" or "entrance" to a
subterranean world extending so far eastward as to be situated under
Greece and Asia Minor: <span id="fr_698"></span>[5](#fn_698) hence the
latest interpreters have been as free as were the earlier to take their
choice among the wild and contradictory conjectures classified at the
beginning of this paper. The latest of these guesses is that of Jordan;
and, though it comes within a hair's-breadth of the truth, it has been
the most ridiculed of all. <span id="fr_699"></span>[6](#fn_699)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

As pointed out in earlier pages, the one false principle which has
vitiated and confused all modern discussions of Homeric cosmology is the
groundless notion that the earth of Homer is a flat disk. This mistaken
presupposition is responsible for the failure of all hitherto attempted
demonstrations of the true location of the poet's Hades. Once conceive
of the Homeric Cosmos as represented

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

in the accompanying cut of the "World of Homer," and the problem of the
site of Hades is solved at a glance. It is the southern or under
hemisphere of the upright spherical earth. In this conception,
whatsoever is "trans-oceanic" is also and of necessity "subterranean."
Now for the first time can it be understood how Leda and her
noble-minded sons can be "on a geographical extension of the earth" on
the farther shore of the Ocean, and at the same time νέρθεν γῆς (Od.,
xi. 298). In this Cosmos, Hades cannot be beyond the Ocean without being
also underneath the earth. On the traditional theory of a flat earth,
the passage is and ever must be the palpable inconsistency which Völcker
represents it. Even the theory of two or of twenty Homers does not
reasonably explain it. Precisely so with the passages relating to
Elpenor. His soul at death goes κατὰ χθονός, yet it is found with the
other ghosts in the shadowy land just across the Ocean-river. So again
with the passages relating to the shades of the slain Suitors. These
reach the Underworld (xxiv. 106, 203); but it is by a route *along the
surface of the ground* to the Ocean-stream, in full sight of the gates
of the sun and of the stars of the Milky Way (xxiv. 9-12). <span
id="fr_700"></span>[1](#fn_700) Illustrious scholars have accused the
poet of *Widersprüche gröber and ärger* than usual in this
account; <span id="fr_701"></span>[2](#fn_701) but the whole trouble has
been, not in the poet, but in the poet's interpreters. With the
spherical earth, all is consistent and precisely as it should be. In
this reconstructed Homeric Cosmos, every crosser of the Ocean-stream,
whether it be Hermes, or Odysseus, or Herakles, reaches the groves of
Persephonè and the house of Aïdes. Wherever Kirkè's isle is located, the
"blast of the North wind" will drive the voyager thence towards the
realms of the dead. In like manner it can now be understood how the
stolen

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

bride of Subterranean Zeus, while descending behind swift steeds to the
Underworld, can yet for a considerable time behold the starry heaven,
the earth, the sunlight,

<span id="img_47900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The World of
Homer.](tn/47900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/47900.jpg)  
The World of Homer.  
</span>

<span class="small">For a convenient account of this reëstablished
world-view of the ancients, for the use of schools, see *The True Key to
Ancient Cosmology and Mythical Geography* (third edition, illustrated,
Boston, Messrs. Ginn, Heath and Co., 1882), from which the cut is
taken.</span>

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

and the fishy sea. <span id="fr_702"></span>[1](#fn_702) Though the god
has power to penetrate the solid sphere, <span
id="fr_703"></span>[2](#fn_703) it is down no yawning chasm that his
chariot disappears. As far as we can trace him and his victim, they are
still at the surface, simply moving from the upper to the lower
hemisphere. <span id="fr_704"></span>[3](#fn_704) In perfect accordance
with the requirement formulated by Völcker, Odysseus and his companions
descend (xi. 57, 476), while the ghosts ascend (xi. 38), to reach the
meeting-place on the lower edge of the Ocean-stream. Beautifully exact
and strikingly natural is now the poet's declaration that Tartaros is
"as far below Hades as earth from heaven,"—a declaration as fatal to
many of the fifteen or more traditional explanations of Homer's Hades as
it is to Flach's elaborate and ingenious diagram of the Hades of
Hesiod. <span id="fr_705"></span>[4](#fn_705) With this inverted
hemisphere for the kingdom of the dead, Voss need not longer trouble
himself about the mention of "clouds" therein. <span
id="fr_706"></span>[5](#fn_706) In fine, with the correct Homeric
conception of the earth and of Hades, the manifold alleged
contradictions of the poet instantaneously vanish. Better than that, the
dual images

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

of Hades, which have so long perplexed and blurred the vision of Homeric
interpreters, suddenly resolve themselves into one perfectly focused
stereoscopic picture of startling vividness and beauty.

 

One ground of misgiving and doubt may possibly still occur to cautious
minds. "Is it credible," it may be asked, "that the early Homeric Greek,
unschooled in the exercise of the scientific imagination, could picture
to himself that pendant under-surface of the earth as habitable even by
ghosts? Could he so long before 'Newton's day' have gained such
knowledge of gravitation as to see how infernal rivers and infernal
palaces could cling to an under-hemisphere? That Aristotle and the Greek
philosophers of his age were able, we know from their writings; <span
id="fr_707"></span>[1](#fn_707) but is it credible that the Greek of the
Homeric age was equal to such a task? This proposed conception of Hades
requires that we should think of a world where everything is upside
down, exactly contrary and antipodal to our own. Can we believe that
'prehistoric men' could achieve such a prodigy of abstract thought?"

A pertinent and perhaps sufficient answer to these questions might be
given by pointing to a most curious and instructive funeral-custom among
the modern Karens of Burmah. This tribe is certainly not more highly
gifted or more highly civilized than were the Greeks of the heroic age,
yet they have precisely this Homeric conception of an antipodal Hades. A
most competent authority gives us the following account: "When the day
of burial arrives, and the body is carried to the grave, four bamboo
splints are taken, and one is thrown towards the West, saying, 'That is
the East;' another is thrown to the East, saying, 'That is the West;' a
third is thrown upwards towards the top of the tree, saying, 'That is
the foot of the tree;' and a fourth is thrown downwards, saying,

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'That is the top
of the tree.' The sources of the stream are pointed to, saying, 'That is
the mouth of the stream;' and the mouth of the stream is pointed to,
saying, 'That is the head of the stream.' *This is done because in Hades
everything is upside down in relation to the things of this
world*." <span id="fr_708"></span>[1](#fn_708)

Striking, however, as would be this answer to the questioner, a better
can be given. The better one points out to him the foolishness of the
assumption that either the Greeks or the Karens originated for
themselves their conceptions of Hades. Both simply inherited from their
fathers the old pre-Hellenic Asiatic idea of an antipodal Underworld.
Ages ago the notion which underlies the Karen's rites was so prominent
in the mind of the East Aryans that the sudden and inevitable reversal
of the points of the compass, consequent upon entering the Underworld,
became a poetic circumlocution to express the idea of dying: thus,
"Before thou art carried away dead to the Ender by the royal command of
Yama, . . . *before the four quarters of the sky whirl round*, . . .
practice the most perfect contemplation." <span
id="fr_709"></span>[2](#fn_709) Ages ago the notion which underlies the
southward voyage of Odysseus led prehistoric Akkadians, in naming the
cardinal points of the compass, to designate the South as "the
*funereal* point;" and in locating the kingdom of the dead, to place

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

it *opposite the stars of the south polar sky*. <span
id="fr_710"></span>[1](#fn_710) Through all the lifetime of Babylonia
and Assyria, as through all the lifetime of ancient India, <span
id="fr_711"></span>[2](#fn_711) the mount of the gods was at the summit
of the earth at the North Pole; its counterpart—the mount of the rulers
of the dead—exactly opposite, beneath the earth, and at the South
Pole. <span id="fr_712"></span>[3](#fn_712) Hence life and light
proceeded from the North, darkness and death from the South. <span
id="fr_713"></span>[4](#fn_713) In like manner the Egyptians had their
heaven-touching mountain in the farthest North,

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

and an antipodal counterpart in Amenti, or the abode of the dead. <span
id="fr_714"></span>[1](#fn_714) As in ancient India's, so in ancient
Egypt's, thought, this world of the dead was exactly the reverse or
counterpart of the world of the living. <span
id="fr_715"></span>[2](#fn_715) "The tall hill of Hades," like Ku-meru,
is therefore a "pendent" one, <span id="fr_716"></span>[3](#fn_716)—the
southern or under terminus of the egg of the earth. <span
id="fr_717"></span>[4](#fn_717)

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The assertion
sometimes made, that the Egyptian Amenti was just over the hill to the
west of Abydos, <span id="fr_718"></span>[1](#fn_718) is only worthy of
such cosmologists as Popsey Middleton, or the still more illustrious
author of the "Zetetic Astronomy."

 

About a thousand years before Abraham went down into Egypt,—at least,
that is the date assigned by Egyptologists,—a scribe engrossed upon a
papyrus a fair copy of a tale of shipwreck. It is now one of the
treasures of St. Petersburg. At the Congress of Orientalists, held in
Berlin in the year 1881, its existence was first made known to the
modern world through the translation then submitted by M. Golénischeff.
The tale proves to be a kind of anticipation of the voyage of Odysseus
to the realm of Aïdes. As in the Odyssey, it is the ship-commander
himself who narrates his adventures. There is no imaginative and poetic
vagueness about the details. The ship was one hundred and fifty cubits
long, forty broad. The crew consisted of one hundred and fifty men. Upon
the Ocean he is wrecked, his crew lost; he himself, however, is driven
upon an island in the neighborhood of the nether world of the dead.
Indeed, the place itself was called "The Isle of the Double;" and it
was, as Maspéro believes, peopled by Shades invisible to the voyager
only because he was as yet in the body. The king of the island was a
huge serpent, thirty cubits long, and possessed of a wonderful
beard. <span id="fr_719"></span>[2](#fn_719)

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

In what direction lay this mysterious land?

Not in the West, where all our Egyptologists persist in locating Amenti,
but *in the South*. Directly *up the Nile*, and out into the Ocean at
its head-waters, lay the voyager's track. As in the case of Odysseus, so
many centuries later, it was the blast of the North wind which bore him
thither. <span id="fr_720"></span>[1](#fn_720)

In conclusion, if both the ancient Egyptians <span
id="fr_721"></span>[2](#fn_721) and Chaldæans <span
id="fr_722"></span>[3](#fn_722) believed that like as the stars of the
northern hemisphere are set over the realm of the living, so *the stars
of the southern hemisphere are set over the realm of the dead;* if in
ancient Hindu thought "the gods in heaven are beheld by the inhabitants
of hell as they move with their heads inverted;" <span
id="fr_723"></span>[4](#fn_723) if in Roman thought—

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Mundus, ut ad Scythiam Rhipæasque arduus arces  
 Consurgit premitur Libyæ devexus in austros:  
 Hic vertex semper sublimis, *at illum*  
 *Sub pedibus Styx atra videt, Manesque profundi;*" <span
id="fr_724"></span>[1](#fn_724)</span>

</div>

if in Greek cosmology the tall Pillar of Atlas is, as Euripides makes
it, simply the upright axis of earth and heaven, <span
id="fr_725"></span>[2](#fn_725)—then the earth of the ancients is
incontestably <span class="smallcaps">a sphere</span>, and Hades its
under-surface. The "flat disk" notion is itself a myth, and a myth
without foundation. In ancient thought, in a sense unrecognized even by
the writer of the words, was it true,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                   "The world of Life,  
The world of Death, are but opposing sides  
Of one great Orb." <span id="fr_726"></span>[3](#fn_726)</span>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_675"></span>[467:1](pf42.htm#fr_675) Printed in advance in
*The Boston University Year Book*, vol. x.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[468:1](pf42.htm#fr_676) Fleckeisen's
*Jahrbücher*, 1872, vol. cv., pp. 1-8.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[468:2](pf42.htm#fr_677) Rinck, Die *Religion
der Hellenen*, Th. ii., p. 459: "Bei Homer ist das Schattenreich noch
keine Unterwelt, sondern jenes liegt ausser dem von der Sonne
beschienenen Bereich der Erde, jenseits des Okeanos." Here, and in some
other writers, along with a retention of the unity of the authorship of
the Iliad and Odyssey, we find an intimation that the perplexing
discrepancy in Greek representations of Hades is due to a gradual
translocation of it from the far West to the interior of the earth, in
consequence of advancing geographical knowledge. Perhaps a separate
class should have been introduced, consisting of the representatives of
this view. But had this been done, yet a fourteenth class would have
been necessary to include those who, with Charles Francis Keary, exactly
reverse the process, and make the oldest Greek Hades interterranean, and
the trans-oceanic one at the West a later product. *The Mythology of the
Eddas*. London, 1882: p. 14.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[469:1](pf42.htm#fr_678) "Odysseus in der
Unterwelt." *Archiv für Philologie*, 1840, pp. 170-188. G. K. C.
Gerland, *Altgriechische Märchen in der Odyssee*. Magdeburg, 1869: p.
50.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[470:1](pf42.htm#fr_679) *Mythology of the
Aryan Nations*, vol. ii., 171-180.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[470:2](pf42.htm#fr_680) Mr. Gladstone has more
recently abandoned the flat-earth theory, and tentatively advocated *an
interterranean Hades* with its mouth downwards. See his *Primer*, London
and New York, 1878, pp. 5457; and *Homeric Synchronism*, London, 1876,
p. 231. Perhaps this view also should have been included in the
foregoing classification.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[470:3](pf42.htm#fr_681) "Dénomination
assyrienne." Félix Robiou, *Questions Homériques*. <span
id="page_471">p. 471</span> Paris, 1876: p 13. The Shemitic origin of
this term is significant. It prepares us to find an agreement between
the Homeric and the Assyrio-Babylonian ideas of the realm of the dead.
Mr. Gladstone says, "Long before . . . I had been struck by the
predominance of a foreign character and associations in the Homeric
Underworld of the eleventh Odyssey." *Homeric Synchronism*. London,
1876: p. 213. On the remarkably expressive cuneiform ideograph for
*eribu*, see the explanation given by Robert Brown, Jun., in the
*Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archæology*, May 4, 1880.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[471:1](pf42.htm#fr_682) This term is also
believed to be of Oriental origin, exactly corresponding to the *Bit
Edi* of the Akkadians. See the translations of *The Descent of Istar*.
"Talbot regards, and I think justly, the usual etymology of
Hades—*quasi* Aïdes, '*invisible*'—as an afterthought." Robert Brown,
Jun., *The Myth of Kirkè*, p. 111 n.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[471:2](pf42.htm#fr_683) *Iliad*, vi. 284; vii.
330; xiv. 457; xxii. 425. *Odyssey*, x. 174, 560; xi. 65, 164, 475, 624;
xxiii. 252; xxiv. 10, etc. "Von einem besondern Eingang zu diesem
unterirdischen Hades," remarks Völcker (*Homerische Geographie*, p.
141), "meldet der Dichter nichts; vielmehr gehen die Seelen, durch
nichts gehindert, begraben and unbegraben überall unter die Erde."
Granting this, there is no ground for his other assertion, "Dieser Hades
ist nicht unter, sondern in der Erde." The immaterial shade can as
easily pass through the whole globe to an opposite surface as through a
thick crust to a central cavern. But see Mr. Gladstone's *Homeric
Synchronism*, p. 222: "There is not in all Homer a single passage which
imports the idea, or indicates the possibility, of our passing through
the solid earth."

<span id="fn_684"></span>[471:3](pf42.htm#fr_684) *Iliad*, xxiii. 100;
xviii. 333.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[471:4](pf42.htm#fr_685) *Odyssey*, xxiv. 204.
Comp. *Iliad*, xxii. 482.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[471:5](pf42.htm#fr_686) *Iliad*, ix. 457.
Comp. iii. 278; xix. 259; xx. 61. Comp. Herodotus, ii. 122.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[472:1](pf42.htm#fr_687) *Iliad*, xx. 61 ff.
That there may be no question as to the impartiality of the translations
given in this paper, the well-known and widely circulated version by
Theodore Alois Buckley, of Christ Church, Oxford, is followed. A version
giving more accurately the force of the verbs expressing upward and
downward motion would in many passages be more favorable to the
cosmological view here presented.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[472:2](pf42.htm#fr_688) Henry Hayman, D. D.,
*The Odyssey of Homer*. London, 1866: vol. ii., Appendix G 3, p. xvii.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[472:3](pf42.htm#fr_689) "Von einem
Hinabsteigen findet sich keine Spur. Wer beweisen kann, Odysseus sei im
Innern der Erde gewesen, der versuche es!" Völcker, *Homerische
Geographie*, p. 150.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[473:1](pf42.htm#fr_690) That is, the farther
shore. See Völcker, p. 145.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[474:1](pf42.htm#fr_691) Buckley well expresses
dissatisfaction with this rendering. Völcker translates the term "*ein
niedriges* Gestade." It is perhaps the low-down shore as contrasted with
the upper or opposite one.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[474:2](pf42.htm#fr_692) *Odyssey*, X. 488-540.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[476:1](pf42.htm#fr_693) See Preller,
*Mythologie*, vol. i., pp. 504, 505, where he says that the region
visited was "die ganze and wirkliche Unterwelt, nicht etwa bloss ein
Eingang in die Unterwelt." See also Völcker, *Homerische Geographie*, §
76.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[477:1](pf42.htm#fr_694) This, if allowed,
would afford no relief; for, as Hentze says, "the subterranean character
of even the Odyssean Hades can by no means be got rid of." Ameis,
*Anhang*., Book X., 508.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[477:2](pf42.htm#fr_695) *De Orco Homerico*,
Altona, 1836. But Eggers located the Hades entrance inside the
Ocean-stream, Nitzsch outside.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[477:3](pf42.htm#fr_696) G. W. Nitzsch,
*Erklärende Anmerkungen zu Homers Odyssee*. Hannover, 1840: Bd. III., p.
xxxv., 187.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[477:4](pf42.htm#fr_697) *Griechische
Mythologie*, I., p. 505.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[477:5](pf42.htm#fr_698) See Preller:
*Mythologie*, vol. i., p. 504. Eisenlohr, *Lage des Homerischen
Todtenreichs*, 1872. Bunbury contents himself with the cool remark, "It
is certainly not worth while to inquire what geographical idea the poet
formed in his own mind of this visit to the regions of Hades." (!)
*History of Ancient Geography*, vol. i., p. 58.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[477:6](pf42.htm#fr_699) See Kammer, *Einheit
der Odyssee nach Widerlegung der Ansichten von Lachmann-Steinthal,
Köchly, Hennings, und Kirchhoff*. Leipsic, 1873: pp. 486-490.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[478:1](pf42.htm#fr_700) Porphyrius, *De antro
Nympharum*, 28, explains that stumbling block of commentators, "the
people of dreams."

<span id="fn_701"></span>[478:2](pf42.htm#fr_701) Völcker, *Homerische
Geographie*, p. 152.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[480:1](pf42.htm#fr_702) *Homeric Hymn to
Demeter*, 30-35. Foerster places the origin of this hymn early in the
seventh century before Christ: *Der Raub and Rückkehr der Persephonè*.
Stuttgart, 1874: pp. 33-39. See Sterrett, *Qua in Re Hymni Homerici
quinque Majores inter se different Antiquitate vel Homeritate*, Boston,
1881.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[480:2](pf42.htm#fr_703) Lines 16-18. Precisely
so in the Indian epic, the *Ramayana:* one and the same point in Hades
is reached, whether we accompany Ansumán digging through the heart of
the earth, or follow the goddess Gangâ along the surface of the earth
and across the Ocean-bed. Book I., canto xl. Compare *Odyssey*, xi. 57,
58.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[480:3](pf42.htm#fr_704) The much-debated
Nysian field whence the goddess was stolen was in the land of the gods
at the North Pole. Menzel, *Die vorchristliche Unsterblichkeitslehre*,
Bd. i., 64-67; ii., 25, 87, 93, 100, 122, 148, 345.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[480:4](pf42.htm#fr_705) *Das System der
Hesiodischen Kosmogonie*, Leipsic, 1874.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[480:5](pf42.htm#fr_706) *Odyssey*, xi. 591.
Völcker, while locating *this* Hades above ground far to the West, is
also embarrassed with these clouds, since his Homeric heaven does not
extend over the trans-oceanic region, or even over the Ocean: p. 151.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[481:1](pf42.htm#fr_707) See Dr. H. W. Schäfer,
*Entwickelung der Ansichten des Alterthums über die Gestalt and Grösse
der Erde*, Leipsic, 1868, quarto.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[482:1](pf42.htm#fr_708) Mason in *Journal of
the Asiatic Society*, Bengal, XXXV., Pt. ii., p. 28. Spencer,
*Descriptive Sociology*, No. 5, p. 23. At least one tribe of our
American Indians at the time of their discovery had a myth of creation
in which the earth was conceived of as a ball. H. H. Bancroft, *Native
Races of the Pacific States*, vol. iii., p. 536. That the same idea
underlay the Hades-conception of the New Zealanders is plain from
various indications. See present work, note on pp. 125, 126.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[482:2](pf42.htm#fr_709) *Mahâbhârata*, xii.
12,080. Muir, *Metrical Translations from Sanskrit Writers*, London,
1879, p. 220. "To the gods this sphere of asterisms revolves toward the
right; to the enemies of the gods, toward the left." *Sûrya Siddhânta*,
xii., ch. 55. Comp. Aristotle, *De Cœlo*, lib. ii., c. 2.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[483:1](pf42.htm#fr_710) Dupuis, *Origine de
Tous les Cults*, tom. i., 624. Lenormant, *Chaldæan Magic* (English
edition), pp. 168, 169. On the significance of the South in Hindu
belief, see Colebrooke, *Essays*, vol. i., pp. 174, 176, 182, 187, vol.
ii., pp. 390-392; Monier Williams, *Sanskrit Dictionary*, Art. "Yama;"
Muir, *Sanskrit Texts*, vol. v., pp. 284-327; and India literature
*passim*.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[483:2](pf42.htm#fr_711) *Sûrya Siddhânta*, ch.
xii. *Journal of the American Oriental Society*, New Haven, 1860, vol.
vi., pp. 140-480. Keightley, *Mythology* (Bohn), p. 240, n. 9.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[483:3](pf42.htm#fr_712) Of the latter mount,
Lenormant correctly says that, in ancient Chaldæan thought, it is
"*située dans les parties basses de la terre*," but at times he
incorrectly locates it in the West. In like manner the mountain of the
gods—"*le point culminant de la convexité de la surface de la terre*"—he
places not in the North (Is. xiv. 14), but often in the East or
North-east. *Origines de l’Histoire*, Paris, 1882, tom. ii. I, p. 134.
See also Tiele, *Histoire Comparée des Anciennes Religions*, Paris,
8882, p. 177, where he speaks of the entrance to Hades as at the
South-west. This is certainly a mistake, for the Akkadian expression
*mer kurra*, "the cardinal point of <span class="smallcaps">the
mountain</span>," must, at least originally, have signified the North.
And as to Lenormant's location of the antipodal mountain of Hades in the
West or South-west, our latest German writer upon the subject, Dr.
Friedrich Delitzsch, an eminent Assyriologist, affirms that in the
cuneiform literature thus far known he has discovered no trace of such a
location. *Wo lag das Paradies?* Leipsic, 1881, p. 121.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[483:4](pf42.htm#fr_713) "Nach der
pythagoräischen, orphischen und neuplatonischen Lehre brachte der
Nordwind Leben der Südwind Tod, wohnten hinter dem Nordwind die Seligen
und die Götter als Schöpfer und Erhalter der Welt, hinter dem Südwind
aber die Verdammten und alle bösen zerstörenden Urmächte." W. Menzel,
*Die vorchristliche Unsterblichkeitslehre*, vol. ii., p. 101; also pp.
36, 168, 345, and *passim*. Compare A. Maury, *Histoire des Religions de
la Grèce Antique*, Paris, 1869, tom. iii. 354.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[484:1](pf42.htm#fr_714) For the first, see
Brugsch, *Geographische Inschriften altägyptischer Denkmäler*, Leipsic,
1858, Bd. ii., p. 57; for the second, *The Book of the Dead*, *passim*.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[484:2](pf42.htm#fr_715) See Tiele, *History of
the Egyptian Religion* (English edition, 1882), p. 68, "the reversed
world;" and the still more forcible expression in his Histoire Comparée
(Paris, 1882), p. 47, "*le monde opposé au monde actuel*." Compare *Book
of the Dead* (Birch's version), where it is styled "the *inverted*
precinct;" and Thompson's *Egyptian Doctrine of the Future State*,
wherein Hades is described as "the inverted hemisphere of darkness," and
where it is said to be "evident that the leading features of the Greek
Hades were borrowed from Egypt." *Bibliotheca Sacra*, 1868, pp. 84, 86.
Still more recently Reginald S. Poole has remarked, "Now that we
recognize the Vedic source of a part of the Greek pantheon, and its
generally Aryan character, we may fairly look elsewhere for that which
is not Vedic. If embalming were derived from Egypt, why not the ideas
which the Greek saw surrounding the custom,—the pictures of the
Underworld, with its judgment, its felicity, and its misery? The stories
which Homer makes Odysseus tell, when he would disguise his identity,
show the familiarity with Egypt of the Greeks of the poet's time." *The
Contemporary Review*, London, 1881, July, p. 61. It would be better to
say that Homer's Hades, while agreeing with the Egyptian and Babylonian
and Vedic, was not necessarily "borrowed" from either of these peoples,
but more likely agreed with the Egyptian, Babylonian, and Vedic, simply
because in each case there was a common inheritance,—a survival of still
more ancient ideas of prehistoric ancestors.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[484:3](pf42.htm#fr_716) *Records of the Past*,
vol. x., p. 88.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[484:4](pf42.htm#fr_717) Tiele, *History of the
Egyptian Religion*, p. 67: "The heaven (at night) rests upon the earth,
like a goose brooding over her egg." Chabas, Lieblein, and Lefévre have
each maintained that the ancient Egyptians were acquainted with the
spherical figure of the earth; while Maspéro, despite his language in
*Les Contes Populaires de l’Égypte Ancienne* (Paris, 1882, pp.
lxi.-lxiii.), in a private letter of still more recent date admits the
possibility that the Egyptians held to such a view as long ago as
eighteen centuries before the Christian era. In this connection it may
be useful to state that Professor <span id="page_485">p. 485</span>
Tiele informs the present writer that he has abandoned his conjecture
touching *Cher-nuter*, expressed in his *Vergelijkende Geschiedenis van
de Egyptische en Mesopotamische Godesdiensten*, Amsterdam, 1872, p. 94;
French edition, 1882, p. 51; English edition, 1882, p. 72.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[485:1](pf42.htm#fr_718) As, for example, by
Marius Fontane, *Histoire Universelle, Les Égyptes,* Paris, 1882, p.
154. The following is particularly timely: "While at Abydos I explored
the mountain cliffs to the westward in the hope of finding early tombs
in them. In this, however, I was disappointed, as I came across only a
few tombs of the Roman period." Professor A. H. Sayce in letter from
Egypt in *The Academy*, London, Feb. 2, 1884, p. 84.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[485:2](pf42.htm#fr_719) *Les Contes Populaires
de l'Égypte Ancienne*, pp. 145-147. On the <span id="page_486">p.
486</span> conflicting views of Egyptologists as to the interpretation
of terms designating the points of the compass, see *Zeitschrift für
ägyptische Sprache*, 1865, 1877, etc.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[486:1](pf42.htm#fr_720) The universality of
the ancient belief that disembodied souls must cross a body of water to
reach their proper abode has attracted the attention of Mannhardt, and
led him to remark, "Da auch die keltische, hellenische, iranische and
indische Religion diese Vorstellung kennt, so ist es von vorn herein
wahrscheinlich, dass dieselbe über die Zeit der Trennung hinausgeht."
*Germanische Mythen*, Berlin, 1858, p. 364. This is a far more
reasonable explanation than the fanciful attempt of Keary in the work
already cited, and in his paper before the Royal Society of Literature
entitled *Earthly Paradise of European Myths*.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[486:2](pf42.htm#fr_721) Creuzer-Guigniaut,
*Religions de l’Antiquité*, tom. ii., p. 836. Comp. the language of the
recently discovered epitaph of Queen Isis em Kheb, mother-in law of
Shishak, King of Assyria (circa 1000 B.C.): "She is seated all beautiful
in her place enthroned, among the gods *of the South* she is crowned
with flowers." *The Funeral Tent of an Egyptian Queen*, by Villiers
Stuart, London, 1882, p. 34. Notwithstanding this, Mr. Stuart, a few
pages later,—so powerful is the influence of tradition,—alludes to
Amenti as located in the West (p. 49, also p. 27). But the inscription
continues: "She is seated in her beauty in the arms of Khonsou her
father, fulfilling his desires. He is in Amenti, the place of departed
spirits." Comp. p. 33.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[486:3](pf42.htm#fr_722) Diodorus Siculus, ii.
31, 4. Lenormant, *The Beginnings of History*, New York, 1882, pp. 568,
569.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[486:4](pf42.htm#fr_723) Garrett, *Classical
Dictionary of India*, Art. "Naraka." See also Obry, *Le Berceau de
l’Espèce humaine*, p. 184 n.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[487:1](pf42.htm#fr_724) Vergil, *Georgics*, i.
240, ss.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[487:2](pf42.htm#fr_725) Peirithous, 597, 3-5,
ed. Nauck. Comp. Aristotle, *De Anim. Motione*, c. 3. Samuel Beal, *Four
Lectures on Buddhist Literature in China*. London, 1882: p. 147. Luken
on Atlas in *Traditionen des Menschengeschlechtes*. Münster, second
edition, 1869. Also *The True Key to Ancient Cosmology*, pp. 13-21.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[487:3](pf42.htm#fr_726) Morris, *The Epic of
Hades* (fourteenth edition). London, 1882: p. 230.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section VII. Latest Polar Research](pf43)
