[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pf43)  [Next](pf45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410100847/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Paradise Found*, by William F. Warren, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

### SECTION VIII.—THE TRUSTWORTHINESS OF EARLY TRADITION.

"Is memory capable of preserving through successive generations the
facts of history, or whatever else peoples are continuously interested
in knowing? At first one is apt to say 'No,' remembering how seldom two
people can agree in their recollection of even the briefest saying or
commonest occurrence. But look into the matter. Note how the power of
memory differs in different people, and how it may be cultivated, and
especially how it strengthens when systematically depended on, while,
when little is left to it, it weakens. It is a small fact, but not
without significance, that among the first things which children are set
to fix in their memories, apart from any idea of sacredness, are long
series of historical names, dates, and events,—English kings, American
colonists and presidents,—far exceeding in difficulty those Israelitish
histories which Kuenen thinks cannot be trusted because only preserved
by memory. This shows that it is less a question of the power of memory
than of how far memory is looked on as sacred, and guarded so as to hand
on its contents unimpaired. As for evidence of the power of memory, what
better can we desire than the well-known fact of the transmission of the
Iliad, with its 15,677 lines, for generations, perhaps for centuries,
before it was even written? Yet even that is a mere trifle compared with
the transmission of the Vedas. The Rig Veda, with its 1017 hymns, is
about four times the length of the Iliad. That is only a part of the
ancient Vedic literature, and the whole was composed, and fixed, and
handed down by memory,—only, as Max Müller says, by 'memory kept under
the strictest discipline.' There is still a class of priests in India
who have to know by heart the whole of the Rig Veda. And there is this
curious corroboration of the fidelity with which this memorizing has
been carried

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

on and handed down: that they have kept on transmitting in the ancient
literal form laws prohibiting practices that have nevertheless become
established. Suttee is now found to be condemned by the Vedas
themselves. This was first pointed out by their European students, but
has since been admitted by the native Sanskrit scholars. Nothing could
show more clearly the faithfulness of the traditional memory and
transmission. It has, too, this further bearing on the date of the
so-called Mosaic legislation: it shows that the fact of customs existing
in a country for ages unchallenged does not prove that laws condemning
such customs must necessarily be of later origin. But there is more that
is instructive in the transmission of this Vedic literature. There has
been writing in India for twenty-five hundred years now, yet the
custodians of the Vedic traditions have never trusted to it. They trust,
for the perfect perpetuation and transmission of the sacred books, to
disciplined memory. They have manuscripts, they have even a printed
text, but, says Max Müller, 'they do not learn their sacred lore from
them. They learn it, as their ancestors learnt it thousands of years
ago, from the lips of a teacher, so that the Vedic succession should
never be broken.' For eight years in their youth they are entirely
occupied in learning this. 'They learn a few lines every day, repeat
them for hours, so that the whole house resounds with the noise; and
they thus strengthen their memory to that degree that, when their
apprenticeship is finished, you can open them like a book, and find any
passage you like, any word, any accent.' And Max Müller shows, from
rules given in the Vedas themselves, that this oral teaching of them was
carried on, exactly as now, at least as early as 500 B.C. <span
id="fr_729"></span>[1](#fn_729)

"Very much the same was it with those Rabbinical schools amid which the
Talmud gradually grew up. All of that vast literature, exceeding many
times in bulk

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Homer and the
Vedas and the Bible all together, was, at any rate until its later
periods, the growth of oral tradition. It was prose tradition, too,
which is the hardest to remember, and yet it was carried down century
after century in the memory; and long after it had been all committed to
writing, the old memorizing continued in the schools. Indeed, it has not
entirely ceased even now, for my friend Dr. Gottheil, of New York, tells
me that he has had in his study a man who thus knows the entire Talmud
by heart, and can take it up at any word that is given him, and go on
repeating it syllable by syllable, with absolute correctness.

"In the presence of such facts, surely we must be prepared to revise our
ideas of what memory is capable of,—ideas derived from the very limited
uses for which we usually depend on it now. Such facts show that memory,
consolidated into tradition, is perfectly competent at least to act as
an accurate instrument for transmitting along many generations whatever
men are very anxious to have remembered. It is simply a question of
being anxious and of taking special care."

After other interesting and impressive illustrations, drawn from the
history of peoples in the most diverse states of culture, the writer
closes as follows: "If there is anything in these facts which I have
collected they mean at least this: that we may take up again the
discarded traditions of the old heroic ages, and of the world's morning
time, with far more confidence than has been usual of late years. Homer
will be read with a new interest, and Herodotus, and—best of all—the
world-old histories of the Bible. I know they will not give us detailed
narratives by which this or that point can be proved, or names or dates
to be learned off as school-boy tasks. But they will give us glimpses of
the ancient days; pictures here and there of such men and women as loved
and fought in those old buried cities of Hissarlik, or meditated by the
Ganges, or wandered from Chaldea with Abraham, or

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

followed Moses out of the mighty empire of Egypt into those wild
solitudes of Sinai,—pictures of life; landmarks of great deeds and
thoughts and worships and laws; a dawn to the history, not of abstract
theories, nor of dazzling sun-myths, but of real peoples and real men."
(*Brooke Herford in The Atlantic Monthly for August*, 1883.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_729"></span>[493:1](pf44.htm#fr_729) \[See F. Max Müller,
*Origin and Growth of Religion*. New York edition, pp. 146-161.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Authors Referred to or Quoted](pf45)
