[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co1)  [Next](gal) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: 2 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the
will of God, and Timothy our brother: to the church of God that is at
Corinth, with all the saints that are in all Achaia:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace unto you and peace from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Who comforteth us in all our tribulation;
that we also may be able to comfort them who are in all distress, by the
exhortation wherewith we also are exhorted by God.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us: so also by Christ doth our comfort abound.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Now whether we be in tribulation, it is for
your exhortation and salvation: or whether we be comforted, it is for
your consolation: or whether we be exhorted, it is for your exhortation
and salvation, which worketh the enduring of the same sufferings which
we also suffer.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> That our hope for you may be steadfast:
knowing that as you are partakers of the sufferings, so shall you be
also of the consolation.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For we would not have you
ignorant,brethren, of our tribulation, which came to us in Asia, that we
were pressed out of measure above our strength, so that we were weary
even of life.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But we had in ourselves the answer of
death, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God who raiseth the
dead.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Who hath delivered and doth deliver us
out of so great dangers: in whom we trust that he will yet also deliver
us.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> You helping withal in prayer for us: that
for this gift obtained for us, by the means of many persons, thanks may
be given by many in our behalf.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For our glory is this, the testimony of
our conscience, that in simplicity of heart and sincerity of God, and
not in carnal wisdom, but in the grace of God, we have conversed in this
world: and more abundantly towards you.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For we write no other things to you than
what you have read and known. And I hope that you shall know unto the
end:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> As also you have known us in part, that
we are your glory, as you also are ours, in the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And in this confidence I had a mind to
come to you before, that you might have a second grace:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And to pass by you into Macedonia, and
again from Macedonia to come to you, and by you to be brought on my way
towards Judea.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Whereas then I was thus minded, did I use
lightness? Or, the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the
flesh, that there should be with me, It is, and It is not?

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> But God is faithful, for our preaching
which was to you, was not, It is, and It is not.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For the Son of God, Jesus Christ who was
preached among you by us, by me, and Sylvanus, and Timothy, was not, It
is and It is not, but, It is, was in him.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For all the promises of God are in him,
It is; therefore also by him, amen to God, unto our glory.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Now he that confirmeth us with you in
Christ, and that hath anointed us, is God:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Who also hath sealed us, and given the
pledge of the Spirit in our hearts.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> But I call God to witness upon my soul,
that to spare you, I came not any more to Corinth: not because we
exercise dominion over your faith: but we are helpers of your joy: for
in faith you stand.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But I determined this with myself, not to
come to you again in sorrow.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For if I make you sorrowful, who is he then
that can make me glad, but the same who is made sorrowful by me?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I wrote this same to you; that I may
not, when I come, have sorrow upon sorrow, from them of whom I ought to
rejoice: having confidence in you all, that my joy is the joy of you
all.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For out of much affliction and anguish of
heart, I wrote to you with many tears: not that you should be made
sorrowful: but that you might know the charity I have more abundantly
towards you.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And if any one have caused grief, he hath
not grieved me; but in part, that I may not burden you all.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> To him who is such a one, this rebuke is
sufficient, which is given by many:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> So that on the contrary, you should rather
forgive him and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Wherefore, I beseech you, that you would
confirm your charity towards him.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For to this end also did I write, that I
may know the experiment of you, whether you be obedient in all things.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And to whom you have pardoned any thing,
I also. For, what I have pardoned, if I have pardoned any thing, for
your sakes have I done it in the person of Christ.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> That we be not overreached by Satan. For
we are not ignorant of his devices.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And when I was come to Troas for the
gospel of Christ, and a door was opened unto me in the Lord,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I had no rest in my spirit, because I
found not Titus my brother; but bidding them farewell, I went into
Macedonia.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Now thanks be to God, who always maketh
us to triumph in Christ Jesus, and manifesteth the odour of his
knowledge by us in every place.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For we are the good odour of Christ unto
God, in them that are saved, and in them that perish.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> To the one indeed the odour of death unto
death: but to the others the odour of life unto life. And for these
things who is so sufficient?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For we are not as many, adulterating the
word of God; but with sincerity, but as from God, before God, in Christ
we speak.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Do we begin again to commend ourselves? Or
do we need (as some do) epistles of commendation to you, or from you?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> You are our epistle, written in our hearts,
which is known and read by all men:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Being manifested, that you are the epistle
of Christ, ministered by us, and written not with ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly
tables of the heart.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And such confidence we have, through
Christ, towards God.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Not that we are sufficient to think any
thing of ourselves, as of ourselves: but our sufficiency is from God.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Who also hath made us fit ministers of the
new testament, not in the letter, but in the spirit. For the letter
killeth, but the spirit quickeneth.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Now if the ministration of death, engraven
with letters upon stones, was glorious; so that the children of Israel
could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his
countenance, which is made void:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> How shall not the ministration of the
spirit be rather in glory?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For if the ministration of condemnation be
glory, much more the ministration of justice aboundeth in glory.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For even that which was glorious in this
part was not glorified, by reason of the glory that excelleth.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For if that which is done away was
glorious, much more that which remaineth is in glory.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Having therefore such hope, we use much
confidence:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And not as Moses put a veil upon his
face, that the children of Israel might not steadfastly look on the face
of that which is made void.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But their senses were made dull. For,
until this present day, the selfsame veil, in the reading of the old
testament, remaineth not taken away (because in Christ it is made void).

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But even until this day, when Moses is
read, the veil is upon their heart.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> But when they shall be converted to the
Lord, the veil shall be taken away.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Now the Lord is a Spirit. And where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But we all beholding the glory of the
Lord with open face, are transformed into the same image from glory to
glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore, seeing we have this
ministration, according as we have obtained mercy, we faint not;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> But we renounce the hidden things of
dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor adulterating the word of God;
but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's
conscience, in the sight of God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And if our gospel be also hid, it is hid to
them that are lost,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> In whom the god of this world hath blinded
the minds of unbelievers, that the light of the gospel of the glory of
Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine unto them.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For we preach not ourselves, but Jesus
Christ our Lord; and ourselves your servants through Jesus.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For God, who commanded the light to shine
out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency may be of the power of God, and not of us.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> In all things we suffer tribulation, but
are not distressed; we are straitened, but are not destitute;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> We suffer persecution, but are not
forsaken; we are cast down, but we perish not:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Always bearing about in our body the
mortification of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest
in our bodies.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> For we who live are always delivered unto
death for Jesus' sake; that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest
in our mortal flesh.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> So then death worketh in us, but life in
you.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But having the same spirit of faith, as
it is written: I believed, for which cause I have spoken; we also
believe, for which cause we speak also:

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Knowing that he who raised up Jesus, will
raise us up also with Jesus, and place us with you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For all things are for your sakes; that
the grace abounding through many, may abound in thanksgiving unto the
glory of God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For which cause we faint not; but though
our outward man is corrupted, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For that which is at present momentary
and light of our tribulation, worketh for us above measure exceedingly
an eternal weight of glory.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> While we look not at the things which are
seen, but at the things which are not seen. For the things which are
seen, are temporal; but the things which are not seen, are eternal.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For we know, if our earthly house of this
habitation be dissolved, that we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, eternal in heaven.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For in this also we groan, desiring to be
clothed upon with our habitation that is from heaven.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Yet so that we be found clothed, not naked.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For we also, who are in this tabernacle, do
groan, being burthened; because we would not be unclothed, but clothed
upon, that that which is mortal may be swallowed up by life.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now he that maketh us for this very thing,
is God, who hath given us the pledge of the Spirit.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Therefore having always confidence, knowing
that, while we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> (For we walk by faith, and not by sight.)

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But we are confident, and have a good will
to be absent rather from the body, and to be present with the Lord.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And therefore we labour, whether absent or
present, to please him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For we must all be manifested before the
judgement seat of Christ, that every one may receive the proper things
of the body, according as he hath done, whether it be good or evil.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord,
we use persuasion to men; but to God we are manifest. And I trust also
that in your consciences we are manifest.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> We commend not ourselves again to you,
but give you occasion to glory in our behalf; that you may have somewhat
to answer them who glory in face, and not in heart.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For whether we be transported in mind, it
is to God; or whether we be sober, it is for you.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For the charity of Christ presseth us:
judging this, that if one died for all, then all were dead.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And Christ died for all; that they also
who live, may not now live to themselves, but unto him who died for
them, and rose again.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Wherefore henceforth, we know no man
according to the flesh. And if we have known Christ according to the
flesh; but now we know him so no longer.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> If then any be in Christ a new creature,
the old things are passed away, behold all things are made new.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> But all things are of God, who hath
reconciled us to himself by Christ; and hath given to us the ministry of
reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> For God indeed was in Christ, reconciling
the world to himself, not imputing to them their sins; and he hath
placed in us the word of reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For Christ therefore we are ambassadors,
God as it were exhorting by us. For Christ, we beseech you, be
reconciled to God.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Him, who knew no sin, he hath made sin
for us, that we might be made the justice of God in him.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And we helping do exhort you, that you
receive not the grace of God in vain.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> For he saith: In an accepted time have I
heard thee; and in the day of salvation have I helped thee. Behold, now
is the acceptable time; behold, now is the day of salvation.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Giving no offence to any man, that our
ministry be not blamed:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But in all things let us exhibit ourselves
as the ministers of God, in much patience, in tribulation, in
necessities, in distresses,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> In stripes, in prisons, in seditions, in
labours, in watchings, in fastings,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> In chastity, in knowledge, in
longsuffering, in sweetness, in the Holy Ghost, in charity unfeigned,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> In the word of truth, in the power of God;
by the armour of justice on the right hand and on the left;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> By honour and dishonour, by evil report and
good report; as deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet known;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> As dying, and behold we live; as chastised,
and not killed;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as
needy, yet enriching many; as having nothing, and possessing all things.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Our mouth is open to you, O ye
Corinthians, our heart is enlarged.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> You are not straitened in us, but in your
own bowels you are straitened.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> But having the same recompense, (I speak
as to my children,) be you also enlarged.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Bear not the yoke with unbelievers. For
what participation hath justice with injustice? Or what fellowship hath
light with darkness?

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And what concord hath Christ with Belial?
Or what part hath the faithful with the unbeliever?

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And what agreement hath the temple of God
with idols? For you are the temple of the living God; as God saith: I
will dwell in them, and walk among them; and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Wherefore, Go out from among them, and be
ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing:

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And I will receive you; and I will be a
Father to you; and you shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord
Almighty.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Having therefore these promises, dearly
beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all defilement of the flesh and
of the spirit, perfecting sactification in the fear of God.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Receive us. We have injured no man, we have
corrupted no man, we have overreached no man.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> I speak not this to your condemnation. For
we have said before, that you are in our hearts, to die together, and to
live together.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Great is my confidence for you, great is my
glorying for you. I am filled with comfort: I exceedingly abound with
joy in all our tribulation.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For also when we were come into Macedonia,
our flesh had no rest, but we suffered all tribulation; combats without,
fears within.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But God, who comforteth the humble,
comforted us by the coming of Titus.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And not by his coming only, but also by the
consolation, wherewith he was comforted in you, relating to us your
desire, your mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced the more.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For although I made you sorrowful by my
epistle, I do not repent; and if I did repent, seeing that the same
epistle (although but for a time) did make you sorrowful;

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Now I am glad: not because you were made
sorrowful; but because you were made sorrowful unto penance. For you
were made sorrowful according to God, that you might suffer damage by us
in nothing.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For the sorrow that is according to God
worketh penance, steadfast unto salvation; but the sorrow of the world
worketh death.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For behold this selfsame thing, that you
were made sorrowful according to God, how great carefulness it worketh
in you; yea defence, yea indignation, yea fear, yea desire, yea zeal,
yea revenge: in all things you have shewed yourselves to be undefiled in
the matter.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Wherefore although I wrote to you, it was
not for his sake that I did the wrong, nor for him that suffered it; but
to manifest our carefulness that we have for you

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Before God: therefore we were comforted.
But in our consolation, we did the more abundantly rejoice for the joy
of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by you all.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And if I have boasted any thing to him of
you, I have not been put to shame; but as we have spoken all things to
you in truth, so also our boasting that was made to Titus is found a
truth.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And his bowels are more abundantly
towards you; remembering the obedience of you all, how with fear and
trembling you have received him.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I rejoice that in all things I have
confidence in you.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now we make known unto you, brethren, the
grace of God, that hath been given in the churches of Macedonia.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> That in much experience of tribulation,
they have had abundance of joy; and their very deep poverty hath
abounded unto the riches of their simplicity.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For according to their power ( I bear them
witness), and beyond their power, they were willing.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> With much entreaty begging of us the grace
and communication of the ministry that is done toward the saints.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And not as we hoped, but they gave their
own selves first to the Lord, then to us by the will of God:

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Insomuch, that we desired Titus, that as he
had begun, so also he would finish among you this same grace.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> That as in all things you abound in faith,
and word, and knowledge, and all carefulness; moreover also in your
charity towards us, so in this grace also you may abound.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> I speak not as commanding; but by the
carefulness of others, approving also the good disposition of your
charity.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that being rich he became poor, for your sakes; that through his
poverty you might be rich.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And herein I give my advice; for this is
profitable for you, who have begun not only to do, but also to be
willing, a year ago.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Now therefore perform ye it also in deed;
that as your mind is forward to be willing, so it may be also to
perform, out of that which you have.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For if the will be forward, it is
accepted according to that which a man hath, not according to that which
he hath not.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> For I mean not that others should be
eased, and you burthened, but by an equality.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> In this present time let your abundance
supply their want, that their abundance also may supply your want, that
there may be an equality,

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> As it is written: He that had much, had
nothing over; and he that had little, had no want.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And thanks be to God, who hath given the
same carefulness for you in the heart of Titus.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For indeed he accepted the exhortation;
but being more careful, of his own will he went unto you.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> We have sent also with him the brother,
whose praise is in the gospel through all the churches.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And not that only, but he was also
ordained by the churches companion of our travels, for this grace, which
is administered by us, to the glory of the Lord, and our determined
will:

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Avoiding this, lest any man should blame
us in this abundance which is administered by us.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> For we forecast what may be good not only
before God, but also before men.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And we have sent with them our brother
also, whom we have often proved diligent in many things; but now much
more diligent, with much confidence in you,

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> Either for Titus, who is my companion and
fellow labourer towards you, or our brethren, the apostles of the
churches, the glory of Christ.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Wherefore shew ye to them, in the sight
of the churches, the evidence of your charity, and of our boasting on
your behalf.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> For concerning the ministry that is done
towards the saints, it is superfluous for me to write unto you.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For I know your forward mind: for which I
boast of you to the Macedonians. That Achaia also is ready from the year
past, and your emulation hath provoked very many.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Now I have sent the brethren, that the
thing which we boast of concerning you, be not made void in this behalf,
that (as I have said) you may be ready:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Lest, when the Macedonians shall come with
me, and find you unprepared, we (not to say ye) should be ashamed in
this matter.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Therefore I thought it necessary to desire
the brethren that they would go to you before, and prepare this blessing
before promised, to be ready, so as a blessing, not as covetousness.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Now this I say: He who soweth sparingly,
shall also reap sparingly: and he who soweth in blessings, shall also
reap blessings.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Every one as he hath determined in his
heart, not with sadness, or of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful
giver.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And God is able to make all grace abound in
you; that ye always, having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to
every good work,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> As it is written: He hath dispersed abroad,
he hath given to the poor: his justice remaineth for ever.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And he that ministereth seed to the
sower, will both give you bread to eat, and will multiply your seed, and
increase the growth of the fruits of your justice:

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> That being enriched in all things, you
may abound unto all simplicity, which worketh through us thanksgiving to
God.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Because the administration of this office
doth not only supply the want of the saints, but aboundeth also by many
thanksgivings in the Lord,

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> By the proof of this ministry, glorifying
God for the obedience of your confession unto the gospel of Christ, and
for the simplicity of your communicating unto them, and unto all.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And in their praying for you, being
desirous of you, because of the excellent grace of God in you.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Thanks be to God for his unspeakable
gift.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now I Paul myself beseech you, by the
mildness and modesty of Christ, who in presence indeed am lowly among
you, but being absent, am bold toward you.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> But I beseech you, that I may not be bold
when I am present, with that confidence wherewith I am thought to be
bold, against some, who reckon us as if we walked according to the
flesh.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For though we walk in the flesh, we do
not war according to the flesh.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty to God unto the pulling down of fortifications,
destroying counsels,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And every height that exhalteth itself
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every
understanding unto the obedience of Christ;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And having in readiness to revenge all
disobedience, when your obedience shall be fulfilled.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> See the things that are according to
outward appearance. If any man trust to himself, that he is Christ's,
let him think this again with himself, that as he is Christ's, so are we
also.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> For if also I should boast somewhat more
of our power, which the Lord hath given us unto edification, and not for
your destruction, I should not be ashamed.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> But that I may not be thought as it were
to terrify you by epistles,

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> (For his epistles indeed, say they, are
weighty and strong; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech
contemptible,)

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Let such a one think this, that such as
we are in word by epistles, when absent, such also we will be indeed
when present.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For we dare not match, or compare
ourselves with some, that commend themselves; but we measure ourselves
by ourselves, and compare ourselves with ourselves.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But we will not glory beyond our
measure; but according to the measure of the rule, which God hath
measured to us, a measure to reach even unto you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> For we stretch not ourselves beyond our
measure, as if we reached not unto you. For we are come as far as to you
in the gospel of Christ.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Not glorying beyond measure in other
men's labours; but having hope of your increasing faith, to be magnified
in you according to our rule abundantly;

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Yea, unto those places that are beyond
you, to preach the gospel, not to glory in another man's rule, in those
things that are made ready to our hand.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But he that glorieth, let him glory in
the Lord.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For not he who commendeth himself, is
approved, but he, whom God commendeth.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Would to God you could bear with some
little of my folly: but do bear with me.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> For I am jealous of you with the jealousy
of God. For I have espoused you to one husband that I may present you as
a chaste virgin to Christ.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But I fear lest, as the serpent seduced
Eve by his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted, and fall from
the simplicity that is in Christ.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For if he that cometh preacheth another
Christ, whom we have not preached; or if you receive another Spirit,
whom you have not received; or another gospel which you have not
received; you might well bear with him.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> For I suppose that I have done nothing
less than the great apostles.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> For although I be rude in speech, yet not
in knowledge; but in all things we have been made manifest to you.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Or did I commit a fault, humbling myself,
that you might be exalted? Because I preached unto you the gospel of God
freely?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> I have taken from other churches,
receiving wages of them for your ministry.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And, when I was present with you, and
wanted, I was chargeable to no man: for that which was wanting to me,
the brethren supplied who came from Macedonia; and in all things I have
kept myself from being burthensome to you, and so I will keep myself.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> The truth of Christ is in me, that this
glorying shall not be broken off in me in the regions of Achaia.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Wherefore? Because I love you not? God
knoweth it.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> But what I do, that I will do, that I
may cut off the occasion from them that desire occasion, that wherein
they glory, they may be found even as we.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For such false apostles are deceitful
workmen, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And no wonder: for Satan himself
transformeth himself into an angel of light.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Therefore it is no great thing if his
ministers be transformed as the ministers of justice, whose end shall be
according to their works.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> I say again, (let no man think me to be
foolish, otherwise take me as one foolish, that I also may glory a
little.)

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> That which I speak, I speak not
according to God, but as it were in foolishness, in this matter of
glorying.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Seeing that many glory according to the
flesh, I will glory also.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> For you gladly suffer the foolish;
whereas yourselves are wise.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> For you suffer if a man bring you into
bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take from you, if a man be lifted
up, if a man strike you on the face.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> I speak according to dishonour, as if
we had been weak in this part. Wherein if any man dare (I speak
foolishly), I dare also.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> They are Hebrews: so am I. They are
Israelites: so am I. They are the seed of Abraham: so am I.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> They are the ministers of Christ (I
speak as one less wise): I am more; in many more labours, in prisons
more frequently, in stripes above measure, in deaths often.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Of the Jews five times did I receive
forty stripes, save one.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Thrice was I beaten with rods, once I
was stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I was in the
depth of the sea.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> In journeying often, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, in perils from my own nation, in perils
from the Gentiles, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness,
in perils in the sea, in perils from false brethren.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> In labour and painfulness, in much
watchings, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Besides those things which are without:
my daily instance, the solicitude for all the churches.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is
scandalized, and I am not on fire?

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> If I must needs glory, I will glory of
the things that concern my infirmity.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is blessed for ever, knoweth that I lie not.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> At Damascus, the governor of the nation
under Aretas the king, guarded the city of the Damascenes, to apprehend
me.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And through a window in a basket was I
let down by the wall, and so escaped his hands.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> If I must glory (it is not expedient
indeed): but I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> I know a man in Christ above fourteen
years ago (whether in the body, I know not, or out of the body, I know
not; God knoweth), such a one caught up to the third heaven.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And I know such a man (whether in the
body, or out of the body, I know not: God knoweth):

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> That he was caught up into paradise, and
heard secret words, which it is not granted to man to utter.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> For such an one I will glory; but for
myself I will glory nothing, but in my infirmities.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For though I should have a mind to glory,
I shall not be foolish; for I will say the truth. But I forbear, lest
any man should think of me above that which he seeth in me, or any thing
he heareth from me.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And lest the greatness of the revelations
should exalt me, there was given me a sting of my flesh, an angel of
Satan, to buffet me.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For which thing thrice I besought the
Lord, that it might depart from me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he said to me: My grace is sufficient
for thee; for power is made perfect in infirmity. Gladly therefore will
I glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> For which cause I please myself in my
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses, for Christ. For when I am weak, then am I powerful.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> I am become foolish: you have compelled
me. For I ought to have been commended by you: for I have no way come
short of them that are above measure apostles, although I be nothing.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Yet the signs of my apostleship have
been wrought on you, in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty
deeds.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> For what is there that you have had
less than the other churches, but that I myself was not burthensome to
you? Pardon me this injury.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Behold now the third time I am ready to
come to you; and I will not be burthensome unto you. For I seek not the
things that are yours, but you. For neither ought the children to lay up
for the parents, but the parents for the children.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> But I most gladly will spend and be
spent myself for your souls; although loving you more, I be loved less.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But be it so: I did not burthen you:
but being crafty, I caught you by guile.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Did I overreach you by any of them whom
I sent to you?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> I desired Titus, and I sent with him a
brother. Did Titus overreach you? Did we not walk with the same spirit?
did we not in the same steps?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Of old, think you that we excuse
ourselves to you? We speak before God in Christ; but all things, my
dearly beloved, for your edification.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> For I fear lest perhaps when I come I
shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found by you
such as you would not. Lest perhaps contentions, envyings, animosities,
dissensions, detractions, whisperings, swellings, seditions, be among
you.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Lest again, when I come, God humble me
among you: and I mourn many of them that sinned before, and have not
done penance for the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness,
that they have committed.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Behold, this is the third time I am
coming to you: In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word
stand.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> I have told before, and foretell, as
present, and now absent, to them that sinned before, and to all the
rest, that if I come again, I will not spare.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Do you seek a proof of Christ that
speaketh in me, who towards you is not weak, but is mighty in you?

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> For although he was crucified through
weakness, yet he liveth by the power of God. For we also are weak in
him: but we shall live with him by the power of God towards you.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Try your own selves if you be in the
faith; prove ye yourselves. Know you not your own selves, that Christ
Jesus is in you, unless perhaps you be reprobates?

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> But I trust that you shall know that we
are not reprobates.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Now we pray God, that you may do no evil,
not that we may appear approved, but that you may do that which is good,
and that we may be as reprobates.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> For we can do nothing against the truth;
but for the truth.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For we rejoice that we are weak, and you
are strong. This also we pray for, your perfection.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Therefore I write these things, being
absent, that, being present, I may not deal more severely, according to
the power which the Lord hath given me unto edification, and not unto
destruction.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For the rest, brethren, rejoice, be
perfect, take exhortation, be of one mind, have peace; and the God of
peace and of love shall be with you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Salute one another with a holy kiss.
All the saints salute you.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the charity of God, and the communication of the Holy Ghost be with you
all. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians](gal)
