[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phi)  [Next](th1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Colossians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the
will of God, and Timothy, a brother,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To the saints and faithful brethren in
Christ Jesus, who are at Colossa.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Grace be to you and peace from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. We give thanks to God, and the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Hearing your faith in Christ Jesus, and the
love which you have towards all the saints.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For the hope that is laid up for you in
heaven, which you have heard in the word of the truth of the gospel,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Which is come unto you, as also it is in
the whole world, and bringeth forth fruit and groweth, even as it doth
in you, since the day you heard and knew the grace of God in truth.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> As you learned of Epaphras, our most
beloved fellow servant, who is for you a faithful minister of Christ
Jesus;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Who also hath manifested to us your love in
the spirit.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Therefore we also, from the day that we
heard it, cease not to pray for you, and to beg that you may be filled
with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual
understanding:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> That you may walk worthy of God, in all
things pleasing; being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in
the knowledge of God:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Strengthened with all might, according to
the power of his glory, in all patience and longsuffering with joy,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Giving thanks to God the Father, who hath
made us worthy to be partakers of the lot of the saints in light:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Who hath delivered us from the power of
darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his
love,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> In whom we have redemption through his
blood, the remission of sins;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Who is the image of the invisible God,
the firstborn of every creature:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For in him were all things created in
heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones, or
dominations, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by
him and in him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And he is before all, and by him all
things consist.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And he is the head of the body, the
church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all
things he may hold the primacy:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Because in him, it hath well pleased the
Father, that all fullness should dwell;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And through him to reconcile all things
unto himself, making peace through the blood of his cross, both as to
the things that are on earth, and the things that are in heaven.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And you, whereas you were some time
alienated and enemies in mind in evil works:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Yet now he hath reconciled in the body of
his flesh through death, to present you holy and unspotted, and
blameless before him:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> If so ye continue in the faith, grounded
and settled, and immoveable from the hope of the gospel which you have
heard, which is preached in all the creation that is under heaven,
whereof I Paul am made a minister.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you,
and fill up those things that are wanting of the sufferings of Christ,
in my flesh, for his body, which is the church:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Whereof I am made a minister according to
the dispensation of God, which is given me towards you, that I may
fulfil the word of God:

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> The mystery which hath been hidden from
ages and generations, but now is manifested to his saints,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> To whom God would make known the riches
of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ, in you
the hope of glory.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Whom we preach, admonishing every man,
and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Wherein also I labour, striving according
to his working which he worketh in me in power.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For I would have you know, what manner of
care I have for you and for them that are at Laodicea, and whosoever
have not seen my face in the flesh:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> That their hearts may be comforted, being
instructed in charity, and unto all riches of fulness of understanding,
unto the knowledge of the mystery of God the Father and of Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Now this I say, that no man may deceive you
by loftiness of words.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For though I be absent in body, yet in
spirit I am with you; rejoicing, and beholding your order, and the
steadfastness of your faith which is in Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> As therefore you have received Jesus Christ
the Lord, walk ye in him;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Rooted and built up in him, and confirmed
in the faith, as also you have learned, abounding in him in
thanksgiving.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Beware lest any man cheat you by
philosophy, and vain deceit; according to the tradition of men,
according to the elements of the world, and not according to Christ:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the
Godhead corporeally;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And you are filled in him, who is the
head of all principality and power:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> In whom also you are circumcised with
circumcision not made by hand, in despoiling of the body of the flesh,
but in the circumcision of Christ:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Buried with him in baptism, in whom also
you are risen again by the faith of the operation of God, who hath
raised him up from the dead.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And you, when you were dead in your sins,
and the uncircumcision of your flesh; he hath quickened together with
him, forgiving you all offences:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Blotting out the handwriting of the
decree that was against us, which was contrary to us. And he hath taken
the same out of the way, fastening it to the cross:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And despoiling the principalities and
powers, he hath exposed them confidently in open shew, triumphing over
them in himself.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Let no man therefore judge you in meat or
in drink, or in respect of a festival day, or of the new moon, or of the
sabbaths,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Which are a shadow of things to come, but
the body is of Christ.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Let no man seduce you, willing in
humility, and religion of angels, walking in the things which he hath
not seen, in vain puffed up by the sense of his flesh,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And not holding the head, from which the
whole body, by joints and bands, being supplied with nourishment and
compacted, groweth unto the increase of God.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> If then you be dead with Christ from the
elements of this world, why do you yet decree as though living in the
world?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Touch not, taste not, handle not:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Which all are unto destruction by the
very use, according to the precepts and doctrines of men.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Which things have indeed a shew of wisdom
in superstition and humility, and not sparing the body; not in any
honour to the filling of the flesh.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Therefore, if you be risen with Christ,
seek the things that are above; where Christ is sitting at the right
hand of God:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Mind the things that are above, not the
things that are upon the earth.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For you are dead; and your life is hid with
Christ in God.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> When Christ shall appear, who is your life,
then you also shall appear with him in glory.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Mortify therefore your members which are
upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, lust, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is the service of idols.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For which things the wrath of God cometh
upon the children of unbelief,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> In which you also walked some time, when
you lived in them.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But now put you also all away: anger,
indignation, malice, blasphemy, filthy speech out of your mouth.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Lie not one to another: stripping
yourselves of the old man with his deeds,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And putting on the new, him who is
renewed unto knowledge, according to the image of him that created him.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Where there is neither Gentile nor Jew,
circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian nor Scythian, bond nor free.
But Christ is all, and in all.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Put ye on therefore, as the elect of God,
holy, and beloved, the bowels of mercy, benignity, humility, modesty,
patience:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Bearing with one another, and forgiving
one another, if any have a complaint against another: even as the Lord
hath forgiven you, so do you also.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But above all these things have charity,
which is the bond of perfection:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And let the peace of Christ rejoice in
your hearts, wherein also you are called in one body: and be ye
thankful.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Let the word of Christ dwell in you
abundantly, in all wisdom: teaching and admonishing one another in
psalms, hymns, and spiritual canticles, singing in grace in your hearts
to God.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> All whatsoever you do in word or in work,
do all in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God and
the Father by him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Wives, be subject to your husbands, as it
behoveth in the Lord.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Husbands, love your wives, and be not
bitter towards them.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Children, obey your parents in all
things: for this is well pleasing to the Lord.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Fathers, provoke not your children to
indignation, lest they be discouraged.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Servants, obey in all things your masters
according to the flesh, not serving to the eye, as pleasing men, but in
simplicity of heart, fearing God.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Whatsoever you do, do it from the heart,
as to the Lord, and not to men:

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Knowing that you shall receive of the
Lord the reward of inheritance. Serve ye the Lord Christ.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For he that doth wrong, shall receive for
that which he hath done wrongfully: and there is no respect of persons
with God.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Masters, do to your servants that which is
just and equal: knowing that you also have a master in heaven.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Be instant in prayer; watching in it with
thanksgiving:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Praying withal for us also, that God may
open unto us a door of speech to speak the mystery of Christ (for which
also I am bound;)

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> That I may make it manifest as I ought to
speak.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Walk with wisdom towards them that are
without, redeeming the time.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Let your speech be always in grace seasoned
with salt: that you may know how you ought to answer every man.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> All the things that concern me, Tychicus,
our dearest brother, and faithful minister and fellow servant in the
Lord, will make known to you,

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Whom I have sent to you for this same
purpose, that he may know the things that concern you, and comfort your
hearts,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> With Onesimus, a most beloved and faithful
brother, who is one of you. All things that are done here, they shall
make known to you.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, saluteth
you, and Mark, the cousin german of Barnabus, touching whom you have
received commandments; if he come unto you, receive him:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And Jesus, that is called Justus: who are
of the circumcision: these only are my helpers in the kingdom of God;
who have been a comfort to me.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Epaphras saluteth you, who is one of you,
a servant of Christ Jesus, who is always solicitous for you in prayers,
that you may stand perfect, and full in all the will of God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For I bear him testimony that he hath
much labour for you, and for them that are at Laodicea, and them at
Hierapolis.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Luke, the most dear physician, saluteth
you: and Demas.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Salute the brethren who are at Laodicea,
and Nymphas, and the church that is in his house.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And when this epistle shall have been
read with you, cause that it be read also in the church of the
Laodiceans: and that you read that which is of the Laodiceans.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And say to Archippus: Take heed to the
ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The salutation of Paul with my own hand.
Be mindful of my bands. Grace be with you. Amen

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians](th1)
