[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](neh)  [Next](job) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Esther

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the days of Assuerus, who reigned from
India to Ethiopia over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> When he sat on the throne of his kingdom,
the city Susan was the capital of his kingdom.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Now in the third year of his reign he made
a great feast for all the princes, and for his servants, for the most
mighty of the Persians, and the nobles of the Medes, and the governors
of the provinces in his sight,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> That he might shew the riches of the glory
of his kingdom, and the greatness, and boasting of his power, for a long
time, to wit, for a hundred and fourscore days.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And when the days of the feast were
expired, he invited all the people that were found in Susan, from the
greatest to the least: and commanded a feast to be made seven days in
the court of the garden, and of the wood, which was planted by the care
and the hand of the king.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And there were hung up on every side sky
coloured, and green, and violet hangings, fastened with cords of silk,
and of purple, which were put into rings of ivory, and were held up with
marble pillars. The beds also were of gold and silver, placed in order
upon a floor paved with porphyry and white marble: which was embellished
with painting of wonderful variety.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And they that were invited, drank in golden
cups, and the meats were brought in divers vessels one after another.
Wine also in abundance and of the best was presented, as was worthy of a
king's magnificence.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Neither was there any one to compel them to
drink that were not willing, but as the king had appointed, who set over
every table one of his nobles, that every man might take what he would.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Also Vasthi the queen made a feast for the
women in the palace, where king Assuerus was used to dwell.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Now on the seventh day, when the king was
merry, and after very much drinking was well warmed with wine, he
commanded Mauman, and Bazatha, and Harbona, and Bagatha, and Abgatha,
and Zethar, and Charcas, the seven eunuchs that served in his presence,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> To bring in queen Vasthi before the king,
with the crown set upon her head, to shew her beauty to all the people
and the princes: for she was exceeding beautiful.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But she refused, and would not come at
the king's commandment, which he had signified to her by the eunuchs.
Whereupon the king, being angry, and inflamed with a very great fury,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Baked the wise men, who according to the
custom of the kings, were always near his person, and all he did was by
their counsel, who knew the laws, and judgments of their forefathers:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> (Now the chief and nearest him were,
Charsena, and Sethar, and Admatha, and Tharsis, and Mares, and Marsana,
and Mamuchan, seven princes of the Persians, and of the Medes, who saw
the face of the king, and were used to sit first after him :)

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> What sentence ought to pass upon Vasthi
the queen, who had refused to obey the commandment of king Assuerus,
which he had sent to her by the eunuchs?

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And Mamuchan answered, in the hearing of
the king and the princes: Queen Vasthi hath not only injured the king,
but also all the people and princes that are in all the provinces of
king Assuerus.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For this deed of the queen will go abroad
to all women, so that they will despise their husbands, and will say:
King Assuerus commanded that queen Vasthi should come in to him, and she
would not.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And by this example all the wives of the
princes of the Persians and the Medes will slight the commandments of
their husbands: wherefore the king's indignation is just.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> If it please thee, let an edict go out
from thy presence, and let it be written according to the law of the
Persians and of the Medes, which must not be altered, that Vasthi come
in no more to the king, but another, that is better than her, be made
queen in her place.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And let this be published through all the
provinces of thy empire, (which is very wide,) and let all wives, as
well of the greater as of the lesser, give honour to their husbands.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> His counsel pleased the king, and the
princes: and the king did according to the counsel of Mamuchan.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And he sent letters to all the provinces
of his kingdom, as every nation could hear and read, in divers languages
and characters, that the husbands should be rulers and masters in their
houses: and that this should be published to every people.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> After this, when the wrath of king Assuerus
was appeased, he remembered Vasthi, and what she had done end what she
had suffered:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the king's servants and his officers
said: Let young women be sought for the king, virgins and beautiful,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And let some persons be sent through all
the provinces to look for beautiful maidens and virgins: and let them
bring them to the city of Susan, and put them into the house of the
women under the hand of Egeus the eunuch, who is the overseer and keeper
of the king's women: and let them receive women's ornaments, and other
things necessary for their use.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And whosoever among them all shall please
the king's eyes, let her be queen instead of Vasthi. The word pleased
the king: and he commanded it should be done as they had suggested.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> There was a man in the city of Susan, a
Jew, named Mardochai, the son of Jair, the son of Semei, the son of Cis,
of the race of Jemini,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Who had been carried away from Jerusalem at
the time that Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon carried away Jechonias king
of Juda,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And he had brought up his brother's
daughter Edissa, who by another name was called Esther: now she had lost
both her parents: and was exceeding fair and beautiful. And her father
and mother being dead, Mardochai adopted her for his daughter.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And when the king's ordinance was noised
abroad, and according to his commandment many beautiful virgins were
brought to Susan, and were delivered to Egeus the eunuch: Esther also
among the rest of the maidens was delivered to him to be kept in the
number of the women.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And she pleased him, and found favour in
his sight. And he commanded the eunuch to hasten the women's ornaments,
and to deliver to her her part, and seven of the most beautiful maidens
of the king's house, and to adorn and deck out both her and her waiting
maids.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And she would not tell him her people nor
her country. For Mardochai had charged her to say nothing at all of
that:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And he walked every day before the court
of the house, in which the chosen virgins werre kept, having a care for
Esther's welfare, and desiring to know what would befall her.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now when every virgin's turn came to go
in to the king, after all had been done for setting them off to
advantage, it was the twelfth month: so that for six months they were
anointed with oil of myrrh, and for other six months they used certain
perfumes and sweet spices.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And when they were going in to the king,
whatsoever they asked to adorn themselves they received: and being
decked out, as it pleased them, they passed from the chamber of the
women to the king's chamber.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And she that went in at evening, came out
in the morning, and from thence she was conducted to the second house,
that was under the hand of Susagaz the eunuch, who had the charge over
the king's concubines: neither could she re- turn any more to the king,
unless the king desired it, and had ordered her by name to come.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And as the time came orderly about, the
day was at hand, when Esther, the daughter of Abihail the brother of
Mardochai, whom he had adopted for his daughter, was to go in to the
king. But she sought not women's ornaments, but whatsoever Egeus the
eunuch the keeper of the virgins had a mind, he gave her to adorn her.
For she was exceeding fair, and her incredible beauty made her appear
agreeable and amiable in the eyes of all.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> So she was brought to the chamber of king
Assuerus the tenth month, which is called Tebeth, in the seventh year of
his reign.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the king loved her more than all the
women, and she had favour and kindness before him above all the women,
and he set the royal crown on her head, and made her queen instead of
Vasthi.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And he commanded a magnificent feast to
be prepared for all the princes, and for his servants, for the marriage
and wedding of Esther. And he gave rest to all the provinces, and
bestowed gifts according to princely magnificence.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And when the virgins were sought the
second time, and gathered together, Mardochai stayed at the king's gate,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Neither had Esther as yet declared her
country and people, according to his commandment. For whatsoever he
commanded, Esther observed: and she did all things in the same manner as
she was wont at that time when he brought her up a little one.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> At that time, therefore, when Mardochai
abode at the king's gate, Bagathan and Thares, two of the king's
eunuchs, who were porters, and presided in the first entry of the
palace, were angry: and they designed to rise up against the king, and
to kill him.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And Mardochai had notice of it, and
immediately he told it to queen Esther: and she to the king in
Mardochai's name, who had reported the thing unto her.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> It was inquired into, and found out: and
they were both hanged on a gibbet. And it was put in the histories, and
recorded in the chronicles before the king.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> After these things, king Assuerus advanced
Aman, the son of Amadathi, who was of the race of Agag: and he set his
throne above all the princes that were with him.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And all the king's servants, that were at
the doors of the palace, bent their knees, and worshipped Aman: for so
the emperor had commanded them, only Mardochai did not bend his knee,
nor worship him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And the king's servants that were chief at
the doors of the palace, said to him: Why dost thou alone not observe
the king's commandment?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And when they were saying this often, and
he would not hearken to them; they told Aman, desirous to know whether
he would continue in his resolution: for he had told them that he was a
Jew.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Now when Aman had heard this, and had
proved by experience that Mardochai did not bend his knee to him, nor
worship him, he was exceeding angry.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And he counted it nothing to lay his hands
upon Mardochai alone: for he had heard that he was of the nation of the
Jews, and he chose rather to destroy all the nation of the Jews that
were in the kingdom of Assuerus.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> In the first month (which is called Nisan)
in the twelfth year of the reign of Assuerus, the lot was cast into an
urn, which in Hebrew is called Phur, before Aman, on what day and what
month the nation of the Jews should be destroyed: and there came out the
twelfth month, which is called Adar.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And Aman said to king Assuerus: There is a
people scattered through all the provinces of thy kingdom, and separated
one from another, that use new laws and ceremonies, and moreover despise
the king's ordinances: and thou knowest very well that it is not
expedient for thy kingdom that they should grow insolent by impunity.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> If it please thee, decree that they may he
destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand talents to thy treasurers.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And the king took the ring that he used,
from his own hand, and gave it to Aman, the son of Amadathi of the race
of Agag, the enemy of the Jews,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And he said to him: As to the money which
thou promisest, keep it for thyself: and as to the people, do with them
as seemeth good to thee.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And the king's scribes were called in the
first month Nisan, on the thirteenth day of the same month: and they
wrote, as Aman had commanded, to all the king's lieutenants, and to the
judges of the provinces, and of divers nations, as every nation could
read, and hear according to their different languages, in the name of
king Assuerus: and the letters, sealed with his ring,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Were sent by the king's messengers to all
provinces, to kill and destroy all the Jews, both young and old, little
children, and women, in one day, that is, on the thirteenth of the
twelfth month, which is called Adar, and to make a spoil of their goods.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And the contents of the letters were to
this effect, that all provinces might know and be ready against that
day.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> The couriers that were sent made haste to
fulfil the king's commandment. And immediately the edict was hung up in
Susan, the king and Aman feasting together, and all the Jews that were
in the city weeping.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now when Mardochai had heard these things,
he rent his garments, and put on sackcloth, strewing ashes on his head:
and he cried with a loud voice in the street in the midst of the city,
shewing the anguish of his mind.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he came lamenting in this manner even
to the gate of the palace: for no one clothed with sackcloth might enter
the king's court.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And in all provinces, towns, and places, to
which the king's cruel edict was come, there was great mourning among
the Jews, with fasting, wailing, and weeping, many using sackcloth and
ashes for their bed.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Then Esther's maids and her eunuchs went
in, and told her. And when she heard it she was in a consternation: and
she sent a garment, to clothe him, and to take away the sackcloth: but
he would not receive it.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And she called for Athach the eunuch, whom
the king had appointed to attend upon her, and she commanded him to go
to Mardochai, and learn of him why he did this.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And Athach going out went to Mardochai, who
was standing in the street of the city, before the palace gate:

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And Mardochai told him all that had
happened, how Aman had promised to pay money into the king's treasures,
to have the Jews destroyed.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He gave him also a copy of the edict which
was hanging up in Susan, that he should shew it to the queen, and
admonish her to go in to the king, and to en- treat him for her people.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And Athach went back and told Esther all
that Mardochai had said.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> She answered him, and bade him say to
Mardochai:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> 11All the king's servants, and all the
provinces that are under his dominion, know, that whosoever, whether man
or woman, cometh into the king's inner court, who is not called for, is
immediately to be put to death without any delay: except the king shall
hold out the golden sceptre to him, in token of clemency, that so he may
live. How then can I go in to the king, who for these thirty days now
have not been called unto him?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And when Mardochai had heard this,

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> He sent word to Esther again, saying:
Think not that thou mayst save thy life only, because thou art in the
king a house, more than all the Jews:

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if thou wilt now hold thy peace, the
Jews shall be delivered by some other occasion: and thou, and thy
father's house shall perish. And who knoweth whether thou art not
therefore come to the kingdom, that thou mightest be ready in such a
time as this?

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And again Esther sent to Mardochai in
these words:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Go, and gather together all the Jews whom
thou shalt find in Susan, and pray ye for me. Neither eat nor drink for
three days and three nights: and I with my handmaids will fast in like
manner, and then I will go in to the king, against the law, not being
called, and expose myself to death and to danger.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> So Mardochai went, and did all that
Esther had commanded him.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And on the third day Esther put on her
royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house, over
against the king's hall: now he sat upon his throne in the hall of the
palace, over against the door of the house.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And when he saw Esther the queen standing,
she pleased his eyes, and he held out toward her the golden sceptre,
which he held in his hand: and she drew near, and kissed the top of his
sceptre.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And the king said to her: What wilt then,
queen Esther? what is thy request? if thou shouldst even ask one half of
the kingdom, it shall be given to thee.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But she answered: If it please the king. I
beseech thee to come to me this day, and Aman with thee to the banquet
which I have prepared.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And the king said forthwith: Call ye Aman
quickly, that he may obey Esther's will. So the king and Aman came to
the banquet which the queen had prepared for them.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And the king said to her, after he had
drunk wine plentifully: What dost thou desire should be given thee? and
for what thing askest thou? although thou shouldst ask the half of my
kingdom, thou shalt have it.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And Esther answered: My petition and
request is this:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> If I have found favour in the king's sight,
and if it please the king to give me what I ask, and to fulfil my
petition: let the king and Aman come to the banquet which I have
prepared them, and to morrow I will open my mind to the king.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> So Aman went out that day joyful and merry.
And when he saw Mardochai sitting before the gate of the palace, and
that he not only did not rise up to honour him, but did not so much as
move from the place where he sat, he was exceedingly angry:

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> But dissembling his anger, and returning
into his house, he called together to him his friends, and Zares his
wife:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And he declared to them the greatness of
his riches, and the multitude of his children, and with how great glory
the king had advanced him above all his princes and servants.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And after this he said: Queen Esther also
hath invited no other to the banquet with the king, but me: and with her
I am also to dine to morrow with the king:

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And whereas I have all these things, I
think I have nothing, so long as I see Mardochai the Jew sitting before
the king's gate.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Then Zares his wife, and the rest of his
friends answered him: Order a great beam to be prepared, fifty cubits
high, and in the morning speak to the king, that Mardochai may be hanged
upon it, and so thou shalt go full of joy with the king to the banquet.
The counsel pleased him, and he commanded a high gibbet to be prepared.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> That night the king passed without sleep,
and he commanded the histories and chronicles of former times to be
brought him. And when they were reading them before him,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> They came to that place where it was
written, how Mardochai had discovered the treason of Bagathan and Thares
the eunuchs, who sought to kill king Assuerus.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And when the king heard this, he said: What
honour and reward hath Mardochai received for this fidelity? His
servants and ministers said to him: He hath received no reward at all.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And the king said immediately: Who is in
the court? for Aman was coming in to the inner court of the king's
house, to speak to the king, that he might order Mardochai to be hanged
upon the gibbet which was prepared for him.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> The servants answered: Aman standeth in the
court, and the king said: Let him come in.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And when he was come in, he said to him:
What ought to be done to the man whom the king is desirous to honour?
But Aman thinking in his heart, and supposing that the king would honour
no other but himself,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Answered: The man whom the king desireth to
honour,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Ought to be clothed with the king's
apparel, and to be set upon the horse that the king rideth upon, and to
have the royal crown upon his head,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And let the first of the king's princes and
nobles hold his horse, and going through the street of the city,
proclaim before him and say: Thus shall he be honoured, whom the king
hath a mind to honour.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And the king said to him: Make haste and
take the robe and the horse, and do as thou hast spoken to Mardochai the
Jew, who sitteth before the gates of the palace. Beware thou pass over
any of those things which thou hast spoken.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> So Aman took the robe and the horse, and
arraying Mardochai in the street of the city, and setting him on the
horse, went before him, and proclaimed: This honour is he worthy of,
whom the king hath a mind to honour.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> But Mardochai returned to the palace
gate: and Aman made haste to go to his house, mourning and having his
head covered:

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And he told Zares his wife, and his
friends, all that had befallen him. And the wise men whom he had in
counsel, and his wife answered him: If Mardochai be of the seed of the
Jews, before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou canst not resist him,
but thou shalt fall in his sight.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> As they were yet speaking, the king's
eunuchs came, and compelled him to go quickly to the banquet which the
queen had prepared.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> So the king and Aman went in, to drink with
the queen.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And the king said to her again the second
day, after he was warm with wine: What is thy petition, Esther, that it
may be granted thee? and what wilt thou have done: although thou ask the
half of my kingdom, thou shalt have it.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Then she answered: If I have found Favour
in thy sight, O king, and if it please thee, give me my life for which I
ask, and my people for which I request.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For we are given up, I and my people, to be
destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. And would God we were sold for
bondmen and bondwomen: the evil might be borne with, and I would have
mourned in silence: but now we have an enemy, whose cruelty redoundeth
upon the king.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And king Assuerus answered and said: Who is
this, and of what power, that he should do these things?

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Esther said: It is this Aman that is
our adversary and most wicked enemy. Aman hearing this was forthwith
astonished, not being able to bear the countenance of the king and of
the queen.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> But the king being angry rose up, and went
from the place of the banquet into the garden set with trees. Aman also
rose up to entreat Esther the queen for his life, for he understood that
evil was prepared for him by the king.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And when the king came back out of the
garden set with trees, and entered into the place of the banquet, he
found Aman was fallen upon the bed on which Esther lay, and he said: He
will force the queen also in my presence, in my own house. The word was
not yet gone out of the king's mouth, and immediately they covered his
face.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And Harbona, one of the eunuchs that stood
waiting on the king, said: Behold the gibbet which he hath prepared for
Mardochai, who spoke for the king, standeth in Aman's house, being fifty
cubits high. And the king said to him: Hang him upon it.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> So Aman was hanged on the gibbet, which
he had prepared for Mardochai: and the king's wrath ceased.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> On that day king Assuerus gave the house of
Aman, the Jews' enemy, to queen Esther, and Mardochai came in before the
king. For Esther had confessed to him that he was her uncle.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And the king took the ring which he had
commanded to be taken again from Aman, and gave it to Mardochai. And
Esther set Mardochai over her house.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And not content with these things, she fell
down at the king's feet and wept, and speaking to him besought him, that
he would give orders that the malice of Aman the Agagite, and his most
wicked devices which he had invented against the Jews, should be of no
effect.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> But he, as the manner was, held out the
golden sceptre with his hand, which was the sign of clemency: and she
arose up and stood before him,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And said: If it please the king, and if I
have found favour in his sight, and my request be not disagreeable to
him, I beseech thee, that the former letters of Aman the traitor and
enemy of the Jews, by which he commanded that they should be destroyed
in all the king's provinces, may be reversed by new letters.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For how call I endure the murdering and
slaughter of my people?

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And king Assuerus answered Esther the
queen, and Mardochai the Jew: I have given Aman's house to Esther, and I
have commanded him to be hanged on a gibbet, because he durst lay hands
on the Jews.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Write ye therefore to the Jews, as it
pleaseth you, in the king's name, and seal the letters with my ring. For
this was the custom, that no man durst gainsay the letters which were
sent in the king's name, and were sealed with his ring.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Then the king's scribes and secretaries
were called for (now it was the time of the third month which is called
Siban) the three and twentieth day of the month, and letters were
written, as Mardochai had a mind, to the Jews, and to the governors, and
to the deputies, and to the judges, who were rulers over the hundred and
twenty-seven provinces, from India even to Ethiopia: to province and
province, to people and people, according to their languages and
characters, and to the Jews, according as they could read and hear.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And these letters which were sent in the
king's name, were sealed with his ring, and sent by posts: who were to
run through all the provinces, to prevent the former letters with new
messages.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the king gave orders to them, to
speak to the Jews in every city, and to command them to gather
themselves together, and to stand for their lives, and to kill and
destroy all their enemies with their wives and children and all their
houses, and to take their spoil.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And one day of revenge was appointed
through all the provinces, to wit, the thirteenth of the twelfth month
Adar.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And this was the content of the letter,
that it should be notified in all lands and peoples that were subject to
the empire of king Assuerus, that the Jews were ready to be revenged of
their enemies.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> So the swift posts went out carrying the
messages, and the king's edict was hung up in Susan.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And Mardochai going forth out of the
palace, and from the king's presence, shone in royal apparel, to wit, of
violet and sky colour, wearing a golden crown on his head, and clothed
with a cloak of silk and purple. And all the city rejoiced and was glad.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> But to the Jews a new light seemed to
rise, joy, honour, and dancing.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And in all peoples, cities, and
provinces, whithersoever the king's commandments came, there was
wonderful rejoicing, feasts and banquets, and keeping holy day: insomuch
that many of other nations and religion, joined themselves to their
worship and ceremonies. For a great dread of the name of the Jews had
fallen upon all.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> So on the thirteenth day of the twelfth
month, which as we have said above is called Adar, when all the Jews
were designed to be massacred, and their enemies were greedy after their
blood, the case being altered, the Jews began to have the upper hand,
and to revenge themselves of their adversaries.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And they gathered themselves together in
every city, and town, and place, to lay their hands on their enemies,
and their persecutors. And no one durst withstand them, for the fear of
their power had gone through every people.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And the judges of the provinces, and the
governors, and lieutenants, and every one in dignity, that presided over
every place and work, extolled the Jews for fear of Mardochai:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For they knew him to be prince of the
palace, and to have great power: and the fame of his name increased
daily, and was spread abroad through all men's mouths.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> So the Jews made a great slaughter of their
enemies, and killed them, repaying according to what they had prepared
to do to them:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Insomuch that even in Susan they killed
five hundred men, besides the ten sons of Aman the Agagite, the enemy of
the Jews: whose names are these:

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Pharsandatha, and Delphon, and Esphatha,

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Phoratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And Phermesta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and
Jezatha.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And when they had slain them, they would
not touch the spoils of their goods.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And presently the number of them that
were killed in Susan was brought to the king.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And he said to the queen: The Jews have
killed five hundred men in the city of Susan, besides the ten sons of
Aman: how many dost thou think they have slain in all the provinces?
What askest thou more, and what wilt thou have me to command to be done?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And she answered: If it please the king,
let it be granted to the Jews, to do to morrow in Susan as they have
done to day, and that the ten sons of Aman may be hanged upon gibbets.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And the king commanded that it should be
so done. And forthwith the edict was hung up in Susan, and the ten sons
of Aman were hanged.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> 15And on the fourteenth day of the month
Adar the Jews gathered themselves together, and they killed in Susan
three hundred men: but they took not their substance.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Moreover through all the provinces which
were subject to the king's dominion the Jews stood for their lives, and
slew their enemies and persecutors: insomuch that the number of them
that were Billed amounted to seventy-five thousand, and no man took any
of their goods.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Now the thirteenth day of the month Adar
was the first day with them all of the slaughter, and on the fourteenth
day they left off. Which they ordained to be kept holy day, so that all
times hereafter they should celebrate it with feasting, joy, and
banquets.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> But they that were killing in the city of
Susan, were employed in the slaughter on the thirteenth and fourteenth
day of the same month: and on the fifteenth day they rested. And
therefore they appointed that day to be a holy day of feasting and
gladness.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> But those Jews that dwelt in towns not
walled and in villages, appointed the fourteenth day of the month Adar
for banquets and gladness, so as to rejoice on that day, and send one
another portions of their banquets and meats.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And Mardochai wrote all these things, and
sent them comprised in letters to the Jews that abode in all the king's
provinces, both those that lay near and those afar off,

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> 21That they should receive the fourteenth
and fifteenth day of the month Adar for holy days, and always at the
return of the year should celebrate them with solemn honour:

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Because on those days the Jews revenged
themselves of their enemies, and their mourning and sorrow were turned
into mirth and joy, and that these should be days of feasting and
gladness, in which they should send one to another portions of meats;
and should give gifts to the poor.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And the Jews undertook to observe with
solemnity all they had begun to do at that time, which Mardochai by
letters had commanded to be done.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> For Aman, the son of Amadathi of the race
of Agag, the enemy and adversary of the Jews, had devised evil against
them, to kill them and destroy them: and had cast Phur, that is, the
lot.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And afterwards Esther went in to the
king, beseeching him that his endeavours might be made void by the
king's letters: and the evil that he had intended against the Jews,
might return upon his own head. And so both he and his sons were hanged
upon gibbets.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And since that time these days are called
Phurim, that is, of lots: because Phur, that is, the lot, was cast into
the urn. And all things that were done, are contained in the volume of
this epistle, that is, of this book:

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And the things that they suffered, and
that were afterwards changed, the Jews took upon themselves and their
seed, and upon all that had a mind to be joined to their religion, so
that it should be lawful for none to pass these days without solemnity:
which the writing testifieth, and certain times require, as the years
continually succeed one another.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> These are the days which shall never be
forgot: and which all provinces in the whole world shall celebrate
throughout all generations: neither is there any city wherein the days
of Phurim, that is, of lots, must not be observed by the Jews, and by
their posterity, which is bound to these ceremonies.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And Esther the queen, the daughter of
Abihail, and Mardochai the Jew, wrote also a second epistle, that with
all diligence this day should be established a festival for the time to
come.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And they sent to all the Jews that were
in the hundred and twenty-seven provinces of king Assuerus, that they
should have peace, and receive truth,

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And observe the days of lots, and
celebrate them with joy in their proper time: as Mardochai and Esther
had appointed, and they undertook them to be observed by themselves and
by their seed, fasts, and cries, and the days of lots,

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And all things which are contained in the
history of this book, which is called Esther.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And king Assuerus made all the land, and
all the islands of the sea tributary.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And his strength and his empire, and the
dignity and greatness wherewith he exalted Mardochai, are written in the
books of the Medes, and of the Persians:

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And how Mardochai of the race of the
Jews, was next after king Assuerus: and great among the Jews, and
acceptable to the people of his brethren, seeking the good of his
people, and speaking those things which were for the welfare of his
seed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job](job)
