[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ch2)  [Next](neh) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Ezra

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the first year of Cyrus king of the
Persians, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias might be
fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of the Persians:
and he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and in writing
also, saying:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Thus saith Cyrus king of the Persians: The
Lord the God of heaven hath given to me all the kingdoms of the earth,
and he hath charged me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in
Judea.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Who is there among you of all his people?
His God be with him. Let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Jndert, and
build the house of the Lord the God of Israel: he is the God that is in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And let all the restin all places
wheresoever they dwell, help him every man from his place. with silver
and gold, and goods, and cattle, besides that which they offer freely to
the temple of God, which is in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Then rose up the chief of the fathers of
Juda and Benjamin, and the priests, and Levites, and every one whose
spirit God had raised up, to go up to build the temple of the Lord,
which was in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And all they that were round about, helped
their hands with vessels of silver, and gold, with goods, and with
beasts, and with furniture, besides what they had offered on their own
accord.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And king Cyrus brought forth the vessels of
the temple of the Lord, which Nabuchodonosor had taken from Jerusalem,
and had put them in the temple of his god.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now Cyrus king of Persia brought them forth
by the hand of Mithridates the son of Gazabar, and numbered them to
Sassabasar the prince of Juda.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And this is the number of them: thirty
bowls of gold, a thousand bowls of silver, nine and twenty knives,
thirty cups of gold,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Silver cups of a second sort, four
hundred and ten: other vessels a thousand.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> All the vessels of gold and silver, five
thousand four hundred: all these Sassabasar brought with them that came
up from the captivity of Babylon to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now these are the children of the province,
that went out of the captivity, which Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had
carried away to Babylon, and who returned to Jerusalem and Juda, every
man to his city.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Who came with Zorobabel, Josue, Nehemia,
Saraia, Rahelaia, Mardochai, Belsan, Mesphar, Beguai, Rehum, Baana. The
number of the men of the people of Israel:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> The children of Pharos two thousand one
hundred seventy-two.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The children of Sephatia, three hundred
seventy-two.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The children of Area, seven hundred
seventy-five.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The children of Phahath Moab, of the
children of Josue: Joab, two thousand eight hundred twelve.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The children of Elam, a thousand two
hundred fifty-four.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The children of Zethua, nine hundred
forty-five.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The children of Zachai, seven hundred
sixty.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The children of Bani, six hundred
forty-two.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The children of Bebai, six hundred
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The children of Azgad, a thousand two
hundred twenty-two.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The children of Adonicam, six hundred
sixty-six.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The children of Beguai, two thousand
fifty-six.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> The children of Adin, four hundred
fifty-four.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> The children of Ather, who were of
Ezechias, ninety-eight.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The children of Besai, three hundred and
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> The children of Jora, a hundred and
twelve.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> The children of Hasum, two hundred
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The children of Gebbar, ninety-five.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> The children of Bethlehem, a hundred
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> The men of Netupha, fifty-six.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> The men of Anathoth, a hundred
twenty-eight.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> The children of Azmaveth, forty-two.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> The children of Cariathiarim, Cephira,
and Beroth, seven hundred forty-three.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> The children of Rama and Gabaa, six
hundred twenty-one.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> The men of Machmas, a hundred twenty-two.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> The men of Bethel and Hai, two hundred
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> The children of Nebo, fifty-two.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> The children of Megbis, a hundred
fifty-six.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> The children of the other Elam, a
thousand two hundred fifty-four.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> The children of Harim, three hundred and
twenty.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> The children of Lod, Hadid and One, seven
hundred twenty-five.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> The children of Jericho, three hundred
forty-five.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> The children of Senaa, three thousand six
hundred thirty.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> The priests: the children of Jadaia of
the house of Josue, nine hundred seventy-three.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> The children of Emmer, a thousand
fifty-two.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> The children of Pheshur, a thousand two
hundred forty-seven.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> The children of Harim, a thousand and
seventeen.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> The Levites: the children of Josue and of
Cedmihel, the children of Odovia, seventy-four.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> The singing men: the children of Asaph, a
hundred twenty-eight.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> The children of the porters: the children
of Sellum, the children of Ater, the children of Telmon, the children of
Accub, the children of Hatita, the children of Sobai: in all a hundred
thirty-nine.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> The Nathinites: the children of Siha, the
children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> The children of Ceros, the children of
Sia, the children of Phadon,

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> The children of Lebana, the children of
Hegaba, the children of Accub,

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> The children of Hagab, the children of
Semlai, the children of Hanan,

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> The children of Gaddel, the children of
Gaher, the children of Raaia,

<span id="an_2:48">2:48</span> The children of Basin, the children of
Necoda, the children of Gazam,

<span id="an_2:49">2:49</span> The children of Asa, the children of
Phasea, the children of Besee,

<span id="an_2:50">2:50</span> The children of Asena, the children of
Munim, the children of Nephusim,

<span id="an_2:51">2:51</span> The children of Bacbuc, the children of
Hacupha, the children of Harhur,

<span id="an_2:52">2:52</span> The children of Besluth, the children of
Mahida, the children of Harsa,

<span id="an_2:53">2:53</span> The children of Bercos, the children of
Sisara, the children of Thema,

<span id="an_2:54">2:54</span> The children of Nasia, the children of
Hatipha,

<span id="an_2:55">2:55</span> The children of the servants of Solomon,
the children of Sotai, the children of Sopheret, the children of
Pharuda,

<span id="an_2:56">2:56</span> The children of Jala, the children of
Dercon, the children of Geddel,

<span id="an_2:57">2:57</span> The children of Saphatia, the children of
Hatil, the children of Phochereth, which were of Asebaim, the children
of Ami,

<span id="an_2:58">2:58</span> All the Nathinites, and the children of
the servants of Solomon, three hundred ninety-two.

<span id="an_2:59">2:59</span> And these are they that came up from
Thelmela, Thelharsa, Cherub, and Adon, and Emer. And they could not shew
the house of their fathers and their seed, whether they were of Israel.

<span id="an_2:60">2:60</span> The children of Dalaia, the children of
Tobia, the children of Necoda, six hundred fifty-two.

<span id="an_2:61">2:61</span> And of the children of the priests: the
children of Hobia, the children of Accos, the children of Berzellai, who
took a wife of the daughters of Berzellai, the Galaadite, and was called
by their name:

<span id="an_2:62">2:62</span> These sought the writing of their
genealogy, and found it not, and they were cast out of the priesthood.

<span id="an_2:63">2:63</span> And Athersatha said to them, that they
should not eat of the holy of holies, till there arose a priest learned
and perfect.

<span id="an_2:64">2:64</span> All the multitudes as one man, were
forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty:

<span id="an_2:65">2:65</span> Besides their menservants, and
womenservants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred and
thirty-seven : and among them singing men, and singing women two
hundred.

<span id="an_2:66">2:66</span> Their horses seven hundred thirty- six,
their mules two hundred forty-five,

<span id="an_2:67">2:67</span> Their camels four hundred thirty-five,
their asses six thousand seven hundred and twenty.

<span id="an_2:68">2:68</span> And some of the chief of the fathers,
when they came to the temple of the Lord, which is in Jerusalem, offered
freely to the house of the Lord to build it in its place.

<span id="an_2:69">2:69</span> According to their ability, they gave
towards the expenses of the work, sixty- one thousand solids of gold,
five thousand pounds of silver, and a hundred garments for the priests.

<span id="an_2:70">2:70</span> So the priests and the Levites, and some
of the people, and the singing men, and the porters, and the Nathinites
dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And now the seventh month was come, and the
children of Israel were in their cities: and the people gathered
themselves together as one man to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And Josue the son of Josedec rose up, and
his brethren the priests, and Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and his
brethren, and they built the altar of the God of Israel that they might
offer holocausts upon it, as it is written in the law of Moses the mall
of God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And they set the altar of God upon its
bases, while the people of the lands round about put them in fear, and
they offered upon it a holocaust to the Lord morning and evening.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And they kept the feast of tabernacles, as
it is written, and offered the holocaust every day orderly according to
the commandment, the duty of the day in its day.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And afterwards the continual holocaust,
both on the new moons, and on all the solemnities of the Lord, that were
consecrated, and on all in which a freewill offering was made to the
Lord.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> From the Brat day of the seventh month they
began to offer holocausts to the Lord: but the temple of God was not yet
founded.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And they gave money to hewers of stones and
to masons: and meat and drink, and oil to the Sidonians and Tyrians, to
bring cedar trees from Libanus to the sea of Joppe, according to the
orders which Cyrus king of the Persians had given them.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And in the second year of their coming to
the temple of God in Jerusalem, the second month, Zorobabel the son of
Salathiel, and Josue the son of Josedec, and the rest of their brethren
the priests, and the Levites, and all that were come from the captivity
to Jerusalem began, and they appointed Levites from twenty years old and
upward, to hasten forward the work of the Lord.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Then Josue and his sons and his brethren,
Cedmihel, and his sons, and the children of Juda, as one man, stood to
hasten them that did the work in the temple of God: the sons of Henadad,
and their sons, and their brethren the Levites.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And when the masons laid the foundations
of the temple of the Lord, the priests stood in their ornaments with
trumpets: and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise God
by the hands of David king of Israel.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And they sung together hymns, and praise
to the Lord: because he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever towards
Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout, praising the
Lord, because the foundations of the temple of the Lord were laid.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> But many of the priests and the Levites,
and the chief of the fathers and the ancients that had seen the former
temple; when they had the foundation of this temple before their eyes,
wept with a loud voice: and many shouting for joy, lifted up their
voice.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> So that one could not distinguish the
voice of the shout of joy, from the noise of the weeping of the people:
for one with another the people shouted with a loud shout, and the voice
was heard afar off.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now the enemies of Juda and Benjamin heard
that the children of the captivity were building a temple to the Lord
the God of Israel.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And they came to Zorobabel, and the chief
of the fathers, and said to them: Let us build with you, for we seek
your God as ye do: behold we have sacrificed to him, since the days of
Asor Haddan king of Assyria, who brought us hither.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> But Zorobabel, and Josue, and the rest of
the chief of the fathers of Israel said to them: You have nothing to do
with us to build a house to our God, but we ourselves alone will build
to the Lord our God, as Cyrus king of the Persians hath commanded us.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Then the people of the land hindered the
hands of the people of Juda, and troubled them in building.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And they hired counsellors against them, to
frustrate their design all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until
the reign of Darius king of the Persians.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And in the reign of Assuerus, in the
beginning of his reign, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants
of Juda and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And in the days of Artaxerxes, Beselam,
Mithridates, and Thabeel, and the rest that were in the council wrote to
Artaxerxes king of the Persians : and the letter of accusation was
written in Syriac, and was read in the Syrian tongue.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Reum Beelteem, and Samsai the scribe wrote
a letter from Jerusalem to king Artaxerxes, in this manner:

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Reum Beelteem, and Samsai the scribe and
the rest of their counsellors, the Dinites, and the Apharsathacites, the
Therphalites, the Apharsites, the Erchuites, the Babylonians, the
Susanechites, the Dievites, and the Elamites,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And the rest of the nations, whom the
great and glorious Asenaphar brought over: and made to dwell in the
cities of Samaria and in the rest of the countries of this side of the
river in peace.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> (This is the copy of the letter, which
they sent to him:) To Artaxerxes the king, thy servants, the men that
are on this side of the river, send greeting.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Be it known to the king, that the Jews,
who came up from thee to us, are come to Jerusalem a rebellious and
wicked city, which they are building, setting up the ramparts thereof
and repairing the walls.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And now be it known to the king, that if
this city be built up, and the walls thereof repaired, they will not pay
tribute nor toll, nor yearly revenues, and this loss will fail upon the
kings.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> But we remembering the salt that we have
eaten in the palace, and because we count it a crime to see the king
wronged, have therefore sent and certified the king,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> That search may be made in the books of
the histories of thy fathers, and thou shalt find written in the
records: and shalt know that this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful
to the kings and provinces, and that wars were raised therein of old
time: for which cause also the city was destroyed.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> We certify the king, that if this city be
built, and the walls thereof repaired, thou shalt have no possession on
this side of the river.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> The king sent word to Reum Beelteem and
Samsai the scribe, and to the rest that were in their council,
inhabitants of Samaria, and to the rest beyond the river, sending
greeting and peace.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The accusation, which you have sent to
us, hath been plainly read before me,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And I commanded: and search hath been
made, and it is found, that this city of old time hath rebelled against
kings, and seditions and wars have been raised therein.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> For there have been powerful kings in
Jerusalem, who hare had dominion over all the country that is beyond the
river: and have received tribute, and toll and revenues.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Now therefore hear the sentence: Hinder
those men, that this city be not built, till further orders be given by
me.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> See that you be not negligent in
executing this, lest by little and little the evil grow to the hurt of
the kings.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Now the copy of the edict of king
Artaxerxes was read before Reum Beelteem, and Samsai the scribe, and
their counsellors: and they went up in haste to Jerusalem to the Jews,
and hindered them with arm and power.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Then the work of the house of the Lord in
Jerusalem was interrupted, and ceased till the second year of the reign
of Darius king of the Persians.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now Aggeus the prophet, and Zacharias the
son of Addo, prophesied to the Jews that were in Judea and Jerusalem, in
the name of the God of Israel.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Then rose up Zorobabel the son of
Salathiel, and Josue the son of Josedec, and began to build the temple
of God in Jerusalem, and with them were the prophets of God helping
them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And at the same time came to them
Thathanai, who was governor beyond the river, and Stharbuzanai, and
their counsellors: and said thus to them: Who hath given you counsel to
build this house, and to repair the walls thereof?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> In answer to which we gave them the names
of the men who were the promoters of that building.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> But the eye of their God was upon the
ancients of the Jews, and they could not hinder them. And it was agreed
that the matter should be referred to Darius, and then they should give
satisfaction concerning that accusation.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> The copy of the letter that Thathanai
governor of the country beyond the river, and Stharbuzanai, and his
counsellors the Arphasachites, who dwelt beyond the river, sent to
Darius the king.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The letter which they sent him, was written
thus: To Darius the king all peace.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Be it known to the king, that we went to
the province of Judea, to the house of the great God, which they are
building with unpolished stones, and timber is laid in the walls: and
this work is carried on diligently, and advanceth in their hands.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And we asked those ancients, and said to
them thus: Who hath given you authority to build this house, and to
repair these walls?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> We asked also of them their names, that
we might give thee notice: and we have written the names of the men that
are the chief among them.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And they answered us in these words,
saying: We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and we are
building a temple that was built these many years ago, and which a great
king of Israel built and set up.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But after that our fathers had provoked
the God of heaven to wrath, he delivered them into the hands of
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon the Chaldean: and he destroyed this
house, and carried away the people to Babylon.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But in the first year of Cyrus the king
of Babylon, king Cyrus set forth al decree, that this house of God
should be built.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the vessels also of gold and silver
of the temple of God, which Nabuchodonosor had taken out of the temple,
that was in Jerusalem, and had brought them to the temple of Babylon,
king Cyrus brought out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered
to one Sassabasar, whom also he appointed governor,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And said to him: Take these vessels, and
go, and put them in the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house
of God be built in its place.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Then came this same Sassabasar, and laid
the foundations of the temple of God in Jerusalem, and from that time
until now it is in building, and is not yet finished.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Now therefore if it seem good to the
king, let him search in the king's library, which is in Babylon, whether
it hath been decreed by Cyrus the king, that the house of God in
Jerusalem should be built, and let the king send his pleasure to us
concerning this matter.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Then king Darius gave orders, and they
searched in the library of the books that were laid up in Babylon,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And there was found in Ecbatana, which is a
castle in the province of Media, a book in which this record was
written.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> In the first year of Cyrus the king: Cyrus
the king decreed, that the house of God should be built, which is in
Jerusalem, in the place where they may offer sacrifices, and that they
lay the foundations that may support the height of threescore cubits,
and the breadth of threescore cubits,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Three rows of unpolished stones, and so
rows of new timber: and the charges shall be given out of the king's
house.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And also let the golden and silver vessels
of the temple of Cod, which Nabuchodonosor took out of the temple of
Jerusalem, and brought to Babylon, be restored, and carried back to the
temple of Jerusalem to their place, which also were placed in the temple
of God.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Now therefore Thathanai, governor of the
country beyond the river, Stharbuzanai, and your counsellors the
Apharsachites, who are beyond the river, depart far from them,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And let that temple of God be built by the
governor of the Jews, and by their ancients, that they may build that
house of God in its place.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> I also have commanded what must be done by
those ancients of the Jews, that the house of God may be built, to wit,
that of the king's chest, that is, of the tribute that is paid out of
the country beyond the river, the charges be diligently given to those
men, lest the work be hindered.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And if it shall be necessary, let calves
also, and lambs, and kids, for holocausts to the God of heaven, wheat,
salt, wine, and oil, according to the custom of the priests that are in
Jerusalem, be given them day by day, that there be no complaint in any
thing.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And let them offer oblations to the God
of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his children.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And I have made a decree: That ii any
whosoever, shall alter this commandment, a beam be taken from his house.
and set up, and he be nailed upon it, and his house be confiscated.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And may the God, that hath caused his
name to dwell there, destroy all kingdoms, and the people that shall put
out their hand to resist, and to destroy the house of God, that is in
Jerusalem. I Darius have made the decree, which I will have diligently
complied with.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> So then Thathanai, governor of the
country beyond the river, and Stharbuzanai, and his counsellors
diligently executed what Darius the king had commanded.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the ancients of the Jews built and
prospered according to the prophecy of Aggeus the prophet, and of
Zacharias the son of Addo: and they built and finished, by the
commandment of the God of Israel, and by the commandment of Cyrus, and
Darius, and Artaxerxes kings of the Persians.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And they were finishing this house of
God, until the third day of the month of Adar, which was in the sixth
year of the reign of king Darius.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And the children of Israel, the priests
and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the captivity kept the
dedication of the house of God with joy.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And they offered at the dedication of the
house of God, a, hundred calves, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs,
and for a sin offering for all Israel twelve he goats, according to the
number of the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And they set the priests in their
divisions, and the Levites in their courses over the works of God in
Jerusalem, as it is written in the book of Moses.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the children of Israel of the
captivity kept the phase, 0 on the fourteenth day of the first month.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For all the priests and the Levites were
purified as one man: all were clear to kill the phase for all the
children of the captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and
themselves.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And the children of Israel that were
returned from captivity, and all that had separated themselves from the
filthiness of the nations of the earth to them, to seek the Lord the God
of Israel, did eat.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And they kept the feast of unleavened
bread seven days with joy, for the Lord had made them joyful, and had
turned the heart of the king of Assyria to them, that he should help
their hands in the work of the house of the Lord the God of Israel.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now after these things in the reign of
Artaxerxes king of the Persians, Esdras the son of Saraias, the son of
Azarias, the son of Helcias,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> The son of Sellum, the son of Sadoc, the
son of Achitob,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> The son of Amarias, the son of Azarias, the
son of Maraioth,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The son of Zarahias, the son of Ozi, the
son of Bocci,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> The son of Abisue, the son of Phinees, the
son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest from the beginning.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> This Esdras went up from Babylon, and he
was a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which the Lord God had given to
Israel: and the king granted him all his request, according to the hand
of the Lord his God upon him.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And there went up some of the children of
Israel, and of the children of the priests, and of the children of the
Levites, and of the singing men, and of the porters, and of the
Nathinites to Jerusalem in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And they came to Jerusalem in the fifth
month, in the seventh year of the king.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> For upon the first day of the first month
he began to go up from Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month
he came to Jerusalem according to the good hand of his God upon him.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For Esdras had prepared his heart to seek
the law of the Lord, and to do and to teach in Israel the commandments
and judgment.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And this is the copy of the letter of the
edict, which king Artaxerxes gave to Esdras the priest, the scribe
instructed in the words and commandments of the Lord, and his ceremonies
in Israel.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Artaxerxes king of kings to Esdras the
priest, the most learned scribe of the law of the God of heaven,
greeting.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> It is decreed by me, that all they of the
people of Israel, and of the priests and of the Levites in my realm,
that are minded to go into Jerusalem, should go with thee.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For thou art sent from before the king,
and his seven counsellors, to visit Judea and Jerusalem according to the
law of thy God, which is in thy hand.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And to carry the silver and gold, which
the king and his counsellors have freely offered to the God of Israel,
whose tabernacle is in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And all the silver and gold that thou
shalt find in all the province of Babylon, and that the people is
willing to offer, and that the priests shall offer of their own accord
to the house of their God, which is in Jerusalem,

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Take freely, and buy diligently with this
money, calves, rams, lambs, with the sacrifices and libations of them,
and offer them upon the altar of the temple of your God, that is in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And if it seem good to thee, and to thy
brethren to do any thing with the rest of the silver and gold, do it
according to the will of your God.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The vessels also, that are given thee for
the sacrifice of the house of thy God, deliver thou in the sight of God
in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And whatsoever more there shall be need
of for the house of thy God, how much soever thou shalt have occasion to
spend, it shall be given out of the treasury, and the king's exchequer,
and by me.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I Artaxerxes the king have ordered and
decreed to all the keepers of the public chest, that are beyond the
river, that whatsoever Esdras the priest, the scribe of the law of the
God of heaven, shall require of you, you give it without delay,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Unto a hundred talents of silver, and
unto a hundred cores of wheat, and unto a hundred bates of wine, and
unto a hundred bates of oil, and salt without measure.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> All that belongeth to the rites of the
God of heaven, let it be given diligently in the house of the God of
heaven: lest his wrath should be enkindled against the realm of the
king, and of his sons.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> We give you also to understand concerning
all the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the porters, and
the Nathinites, and ministers of the house of this God, that you have no
authority to impose toll or tribute, or custom upon them.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And thou Esdras according to the wisdom
of thy God, which is in thy hand, appoint judges and magistrates, that
may judge all the people, that is beyond the river, that is, for them
who know the law of thy God, yea and the ignorant teach ye freely.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And whosoever will not do the law of thy
God, and the law of the king diligently, judgment shall be executed upon
him, either unto death, or unto banishment, or to the confiscation of
goods, or at least to prison.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Blessed be the Lord the God of our
fathers, who hath put this in the king's heart, to glorify the house of
the Lord, which is in Jerusalem,

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And hath inclined his mercy toward me
before the king and his counsellors, and all the mighty princes of the
king: and I being strengthened by the hand of the Lord my God, which was
upon me, gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now these are the chiefs of families, and
the genealogy of them, who came up with me from Babylon in the reign of
Artaxerxes the king.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Of the sons of Phinees, Gersom. Of the sons
of Ithamar, Daniel. Of the sons of David, Hattus.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Of the sons of Sechenias, the son of
Pharos, Zacharias, and with him were numbered a hundred and fifty men.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Of the sons of Phahath Moab, Eleoenai the
son of Zareha, and with him two hundred men.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Of the sons of Sechenias, the son of
Ezechiel, and with him three hundred men.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Of the sons of Adan, Abed the son of
Jonathan, and with him fifty men.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Of the sons of Alam, Isaias the son of
Athalias, and with him seventy men.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Of the sons of Saphatia: Zebodia the son of
Michael, and with him eighty men.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Of the sons of Joab, Obedia the son of
Jahiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen men.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Of the sons of Selomith, the son of
Josphia, and with him a hundred and sixty men.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Of the sons of Bebai, Zacharias the son
of Bebai: and with him eight and twenty men.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Of the sons of Azgad, Joanan the son of
Eccetan, and with him a hundred and ten men.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Of the sons of Adonicam, who were the
last: and these are their names: Eliphelet, and Jehiel, and Samaias, and
with them sixty men.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Of the sons of Begui, Uthai and Zachur,
and with them seventy men.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And I gathered them together to the
river, which runneth down to Ahava, and we stayed there three days: and
I sought among the people and among the priests for the sons of Levi,
and found none there.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> So I sent Eliezer, and Ariel, and
Semeias, and Elnathan, and Jarib, and another Elnathan, and Nathan, and
Zacharias, and Mosollam, chief men: and Joiarib, and Elnathan, wise men.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And I sent them to Eddo, who is chief in
the place of Chasphia, and I put in their mouth the words that they
should speak to Eddo, and his brethren the Nathinites in the place of
Chasphia, that they should bring us ministers of the house of our God.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And by the good hand of our God upon us,
they brought us a most learned man of the sons of Moholi the son of Levi
the son of Israel, and Sarabias and his sons, and his brethren eighteen,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And Hasabias, and with him Isaias of the
sons of Merari, and his brethren, and his sons twenty.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And of the Nathinites, whom David, and
the princes gave for the service of the Levites, Nathinites two hundred
and twenty: all these were called by their names.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And I proclaimed there a fast by the
river Ahava, that we might afflict ourselves before the Lord our God,
and might ask of him a right way for us and for our children, and for
all our substance.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> For I was ashamed to ask the king for aid
and for horsemen, to defend us from the enemy in the way: because we had
said to the king: The hand of our God is upon all them that seek him in
goodness: and his power and strength, and wrath upon all them that
forsake him.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And we fasted, and besought our God for
this: and it fell out prosperously unto us.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And I separated twelve of the chief of
the priests, Sarabias, and Hasabias, and with them ten of their
brethren,

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And I weighed unto them the silver and
gold, and the vessels consecrated for the house of our God, which the
king and his counsellors, and his princes, and all Israel, that were
found had offered.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And I weighed to their hands six hundred
and fifty talents of silver, and a hundred vessels of silver, and a
hundred talents of gold,

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And twenty cups of gold, of a thousand
solids, and two vessels of the best shining brass, beautiful as gold.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And I said to them: You are the holy ones
of the Lord, and the vessels are holy, and the silver and gold, that is
freely offered to the Lord the God of our fathers.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> Watch ye and beep them, till you deliver
them by weight before the chief of the priests, and of the Levites, and
the heads of the families of Israel in Jerusalem, into the treasure of
the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And the priests and the Levites received
the weight of the silver and gold, and the vessels, to carry them to
Jerusalem to the house of our God.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Then we set forward from the river Ahava
on the twelfth day of the first month to go to Jerusalem: and the hand
of our God was upon us, and delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and
of such as lay in wait by the way.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And we came to Jerusalem, and we stayed
there three days.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And on the fourth day the silver and the
gold, and the vessels were weighed in the house of our God by the hand
of Meremoth the son of Urias the priest, and with him was Eleazar the
son of Phinees, and with them Jozabad the son of Josue, and Noadaia the
son of Benoi, Levites.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> According to the number and weight of
every thing: and all the weight was written at that time.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Moreover the children of them that had
been carried away that were come out of the captivity, offered
holocausts to the God of Israel, twelve calves for all the people of
Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy- seven lambs, and twelve he goats for
sin: all for a holocaust to the Lord.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And they gave the king's edicts to the
lords that were from the king's court, and the governors beyond the
river, and they furthered the people and the house of God.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And after these things were accomplished,
the princes came to me, saying: The people of Israel, and the priests
and Levites have not separated themselves from the people of the lands,
and from their abominations, namely, of the Chanaanites, and the
Hethites, and the Pherezites, and the Jebusites, and the Ammonites, and
the Moabites, and the Egyptians, and the Amorrhites.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For they have taken of their daughters for
themselves and for their sons, and they have mingled the holy seed with
the people of the lands. And the hand of the princes and magistrates
hath been first in this transgression.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And when I had heard this word, I rent my
mantle and my coat, and plucked off the hairs of my head and my beard,
and I sat down mourning.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And there were assembled to me all that
feared the God of Israel, because of the transgression of those that
were come from the captivity, and I sat sorrowful, until the evening
sacrifice.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And at the evening sacrifice I rose up from
my affliction, and having rent my mantle and my garment, I fell upon my
knees, and spread out my hands to the Lord my God,

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And said: My God I am confounded and
ashamed to lift up my face to thee: for our iniquities are multiplied
over our heads, and our sins are grown up even unto heaven,

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> From the days of our fathers: and we
ourselves also have sinned grievously unto this day, and for our
iniquities we and our kings, and our priests have been delivered into
the hands of the kings of the lands, and to the sword, and to captivity,
and to spoil, and to confusion of face, as it is at this day.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And now as a little, and for a moment has
our prayer been made before the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant, and
give us a pin in his holy place, and that our God would enlighten our
eyes, and would give us a little life in our bondage.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For we are bondmen, and in our bondage our
God hath not forsaken us, but hath extended mercy upon us before the
king of the Persians, to give us life, and to set up the house of our
God, and rebuild the desolations thereof, and to give us a fence in Juda
and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And now, O our God, what shall we say
after this? for we have forsaken thy commandments,

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Which thou hast commanded by the hand of
thy servants the prophets, saying: The land which you go to possess, is
an unclean land, according to the uncleanness of the people, and of
other lands, with their abominations, who have filled it from mouth to
mouth with their filth.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Now therefore give not your daughters to
their sons, and take not their daughters for your sons, and seek not
their peace, nor their prosperity forever: that you may be strengthened,
and may eat the good things of the land, and may have your children your
heirs for ever.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And after all that is come upon us, for
our most wicked deeds, and our great sin, seeing that thou our God hast
saved us from our iniquity, and hast given us a deliverance as at this
day,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> That we should not turn away, nor break
thy commandments, nor join in marriage with the people of these
abominations. Art thou angry with us unto utter destruction, not to
leave us a remnant to be saved?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> O Lord God of Israel, thou art just: for
we remain yet to be saved as at this day. Behold we are before thee in
our sin, for there can be no standing before thee in this matter.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now when Esdras was thus praying, and
beseeching, and weeping, and lying before the temple of God, there was
gathered to him of Israel an exceeding great assembly of men and women
and children, and the people wept with much lamentation.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And Sechenias the son of Jehiel of the
sons of Elam answered, and said to Esdras: We have sinned against our
God, and have taken strange wives of the people of the land: and now if
there be repentance in Israel concerning this,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Let us make a covenant with the Lord our
God, to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them, according
to the will of the Lord, and of them that fear the commandment of the
Lord our God: let it be done according to the law.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Arise, it is thy part to give orders, and
we will be with thee: take courage, and do it.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> So Esdras arose, and made the chiefs of
the priests and of the Levites, and all Israel, to swear that they would
do according to this word, and they swore.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And Esdras rose up from before the house
of God, and went to the chamber of Johanan the son of Eliasib, and
entered in thither: he ate no bread, and drank no water: for he mourned
for the transgression of them that were come out of the captivity.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And proclamation was made in Juda and
Jerusalem to all the children of the captivity, that they should
assemble together into Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And that whosoever would not come within
three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the ancients,
all his substance should be taken away, and he should be cast out of the
company of them that were returned from captivity.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Then all the men of Juda, and Benjamin
gathered themselves together to Jerusalem within three days, in the
ninth month, the twentieth day of the month: and all the people sat in
the street of the house of God, trembling because of the sin, and the
rain.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And Esdras the priest stood up, and
said to them: You have transgressed, and taken strange wives, to add to
the sine of Israel.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And now make confession to the Lord the
God of your fathers, and do his pleasure, and separate yourselves from
the people of the land, and from your strange wives.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And all the multitude answered and said
with a loud voice: According to thy word unto us, so be it done.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But as the people are many, and it is
time of rain, and me are not able to stand without, and it is not a work
of one day or two, (for we have exceedingly sinned in this matter,)

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Let rulers be appointed in all the
multitude: and in all our cities, let them that have taken strange wives
come at the times appointed, and with them the ancients and the judges
of every city, until the wrath of our God be turned away from us for
this sin.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Then Jonathan the son of Azahel, and
Jaasia the son of Thecua were appointed over this, and Mesollam and
Sebethai, Levites, helped them:

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And the children of the captivity did
so. And Esdras the priest, and the men heads of the families in the
houses of their fathers, and all by their names, went and sat down in
the first day of the tenth month to examine the matter.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And they made an end with all the men
that had taken strange wives by the first day of the first month.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And there were found among the sons of
the priests that had taken strange wives: Of the sons of Josue the son
of Josedec, and his brethren, Maasia, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and
Godolia.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And they gave their hands to put away
their wives, and to offer for their offence a ram of the flock.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And of the sons of Emmer, Hanani, and
Zebedia.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And of the sons of Harim, Maasia, and
Elia, and Semeia, and Jehiel, and Ozias.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And of the sons of Pheshur, Elioenai,
Maasia, Ismael, Nathanael, Jozabed, and Elasa.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And of the sons of the Levites,
Jozabed, and Semei, and Celaia, the same is Calita, Phataia, Juda, and
Eliezer.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And of the singing men, Elisiab: and of
the porters, Sellum, and Telem, and

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And of Israel, of the sons of Pharos,
Remeia, and Jezia, and Melchia, and Miamin, and Eliezer, and Melchia,
and Banea.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And of the sons of Elam, Mathania,
Zacharias, annd Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jerimoth, and Elia.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And of the sons of Zethua, Elioenai,
Eliasib, Mathania, Jerimuth, and Zabad, and Aziaza.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And of the sons of Babai, Johanan,
Hanania, Zabbai, Athalai:

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And of the sons of Bani, Mosollam, and
Melluch, and Adaia, Jasub, and Seal, and Ramoth.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And of the sons of Phahath, Moab, Edna,
and Chalal, Banaias, and Maasias, Mathanias, Beseleel, Bennui, and
Manasse.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And of the sons of Herem, Eliezer,
Josue, Melchias, Semeias, Simeon,

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Benjamin, Maloch, Samarias.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> And of the sons of Hasom, Mathanai,
Mathatha, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jermai, Manasse, Semei.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Of the sons of Bani, Maaddi, Amran, and
Uel,

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> Baneas, and Badaias, Cheliau,

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> Vania, Marimuth, and Eliasib,

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> Mathanias, Mathania, and Jasi,

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And Bani, and Bennui, Semei,

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And Salmias, and Nathan, and Adaias,

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> And Mechnedebai, Sisai, Sarai,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Ezrel, and Selemiau, Semeria,

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> Sellum, Amaria, Joseph.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> Of the sons of Nebo, Jehiel,
Mathathias, Zabad, Zabina, Jeddu, and Joel, and Banaia.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> All these had taken strange wives, and
there were among them women that had borne children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah](neh)
