[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Next](exo) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Genesis

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the beginning God created heaven, and
earth.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And the earth was void and empty, and
darkness was upon the face of the deep; and the spirit of God moved over
the waters.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And God said: Be light made. And light was
made.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And God saw the light that it was good; and
he divided the light from the darkness.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And he called the light Day, and the
darkness Night; and there was evening and morning one day.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And God said: Let there be a firmament made
amidst the waters: and let it divide the waters from the waters.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And God made a firmament, and divided the
waters that were under the firmament, from those that were above the
firmament, and it was so.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And God called the firmament, Heaven; and
the evening and morning were the second day.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> God also said: Let the waters that are
under the heaven, be gathered together into one place: and let the dry
land appear. And it was so done.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And God called the dry land, Earth; and
the gathering together of the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that
it was good.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And he said: Let the earth bring forth
the green herb, and such as may seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit
after its kind, which may have seed in itself upon the earth. And it was
so done.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And the earth brought forth the green
herb, and such as yieldeth seed according to its kind, and the tree that
beareth fruit having seed each one according to its kind. And God saw
that it was good.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the evening and the morning were the
third day.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And God said: Let there be lights made in
the firmament of heaven, to divide the day and the night, and let them
be for signs, and for seasons, and for days and years:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> To shine in the firmament of heaven, and
to give light upon the earth. And it was so done.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And God made two great lights: a greater
light to rule the day; and a lesser light to rule the night: and the
stars.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And he set them in the firmament of
heaven to shine upon the earth.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And to rule the day and the night, and to
divide the light and the darkness. And God saw that it was good.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the evening and morning were the
fourth day.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> God also said: Let the waters bring forth
the creeping creature having life, and the fowl that may fly over the
earth under the firmament of heaven.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And God created the great whales, and
every living and moving creature, which the waters brought forth,
according to their kinds, and every winged fowl according to its kind.
And God saw that it was good.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And he blessed them, saying: Increase and
multiply, and fill the waters of the sea: and let the birds be
multiplied upon the earth.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And the evening and morning were the
fifth day.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And God said: Let the earth bring forth
the living creature in its kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts
of the earth, according to their kinds. And it was so done.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And God made the beasts of the earth
according to their kinds, and cattle, and every thing that creepeth on
the earth after its kind. And God saw that it was good.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And he said: Let us make man to our image
and likeness: and let him have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and
the fowls of the air, and the beasts, and the whole earth, and every
creeping creature that moveth upon the earth.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And God created man to his own image: to
the image of God he created him: male and female he created them.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And God blessed them, saying: Increase
and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it, and rule over the
fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, and all living creatures
that move upon the earth.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And God said: Behold I have given you
every herb bearing seed upon the earth, and all trees that have in
themselves seed of their own kind, to be your meat:

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> And to all the beasts of the earth, and
to every fowl of the air, and to all that move upon the earth, and
wherein there is life, that they may have to feed upon. And it was so
done.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And God saw all the things that he had
made, and they were very good. And the evening and morning were the
sixth day.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> So the heavens and the earth were finished,
and all the furniture of them.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And on the seventh day God ended his work
which he had made: and he rested on the seventh day from all his work
which he had done.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And he blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it: because in it he had rested from all his work which God
created and made.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> These are the generations of the heaven and
the earth, when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made the
heaven and the earth:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And every plant of the field before it
spring up in the earth, and every herb of the ground before it grew: for
the Lord God had not rained upon the earth; and there was not a man to
till the earth.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But a spring rose out the earth, watering
all the surface of the earth.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the Lord God formed man of the slime of
the earth: and breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became
a living soul.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And the Lord God had planted a paradise of
pleasure from the beginning: wherein he placed man whom he had formed.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And the Lord God brought forth of the
ground all manner of trees, fair to behold, and pleasant to eat of: the
tree of life also in the midst of paradise: and the tree of knowledge of
good and evil.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And a river went out the place of
pleasure to water paradise, which from thence is divided into four
heads.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The name of the one is Phison: that is it
which compasseth all the land of Hevilath, where gold groweth.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And the gold of that land is very good:
there is found bdellium, and the onyx stone.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the name of the second river is
Gehon: the same is it that compasseth all the land of Ethiopia

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And the name of the third river is
Tigris: the same passeth along by the Assyrians. And the fourth river is
Euphrates.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And the Lord God took man, and put him
into the paradise for pleasure, to dress it, and keep it.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And he commanded him, saying: Of every
tree of paradise thou shalt eat:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, thou shalt not eat. for in what day soever thou shalt eat of it,
thou shalt die the death.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And the Lord God said: It is not good for
man to be alone: let us make him a help like unto himself.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And the Lord God having formed out of the
ground all the beasts of the earth, and all the fowls of the air,
brought them to Adam to see what he would call them: for whatsoever Adam
called any living creature the same is its name.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And Adam called all the beasts by their
names, and all the fowls of the air, and all the cattle of the field:
but for Adam there was not found a helper like himself.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Then the Lord God cast a deep sleep upon
Adam: and when he was fast asleep, he took one of his ribs, and filled
up flesh for it.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And the Lord God built the rib which he
took from Adam into a woman: and brought her to Adam.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And Adam said: This now is bone of my
bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called woman, because she was
taken out of man.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Wherefore a man shall leave father and
mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they shall be two in one
flesh.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And they were both naked: to wit, Adam
and his wife: and were not ashamed.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now the serpent was more subtle than any of
the beasts of the earth which the Lord God made. And he said to the
woman: Why hath God commanded you, that you should not eat of every tree
of paradise?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the woman answered him, saying: Of the
fruit of the trees that are in paradise we do eat:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> But of the fruit of the tree which is in
the midst of paradise, God hath commanded us that we should not eat; and
that we should not touch it, lest perhaps we die.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the serpent said to the woman: No, you
shall not die the death.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For God doth know that in what day soever
you shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened: and you shall be as
Gods, knowing good and evil.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the woman saw that the tree was good to
eat, and fair to the eyes, and delightful to behold: and she took of the
fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave to her husband who did eat.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And the eyes of them both were opened: and
when they perceived themselves to be naked, they sewed together fig
leaves, and made themselves aprons.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And when they heard the voice of the Lord
God walking in paradise at the afternoon air, Adam and his wife hid
themselves from the face of the Lord God, amidst the trees of paradise.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And the Lord God called Adam, and said to
him: Where art thou?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And he said: I heard thy voice in
paradise; and I was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid myself.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And he said to him: And who hath told
thee that thou wast naked, but that thou hast eaten of the tree whereof
I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And Adam said: The woman, whom thou
gavest me to be my companion, gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And the Lord God said to the woman: Why
hast thou done this? And she answered: The serpent deceived me, and I
did eat.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And the Lord God said to the serpent:
Because thou hast done this thing, thou art cursed among all cattle, and
the beasts of the earth: upon thy breast shalt thou go, and earth shalt
thou eat all the days of thy life.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> I will put enmities between thee and the
woman, and thy seed and her seed: she shall crush thy head, and thou
shalt lie in wait for her heel.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> To the woman also he said: I will
multiply thy sorrows, and thy conceptions: in sorrow shalt thou bring
forth children, and thou shalt be under thy husband's power, and he
shall have dominion over thee.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And to Adam he said: Because thou hast
hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, whereof
I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat, cursed is the earth in thy
work; with labour and toil shalt thou eat thereof all the days of thy
life.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth
to thee; and thou eat the herbs of the earth.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat
bread till thou return to the earth, out of which thou wast taken: for
dust thou art, and into dust thou shalt return.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And Adam called the name of his wife Eve:
because she was the mother of all the living.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And the Lord God made for Adam and his
wife, garments of skins, and clothed them.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And he said: Behold Adam is become as one
of us, knowing good and evil: now, therefore, lest perhaps he put forth
his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And the Lord God sent him out of the
paradise of pleasure, to till the earth from which he was taken.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And he cast out Adam; and placed before
the paradise of pleasure Cherubims, and a flaming sword, turning every
way, to keep the way of the tree of life.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Adam knew Eve his wife: who conceived
and brought forth Cain, saying: I have gotten a man through God.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And again she brought forth his brother
Abel. And Abel was a shepherd, and Cain a husbandman.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And it came to pass after many days, that
Cain offered, of the fruits of the earth, gifts to the Lord.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Abel also offered of the firstlings of his
flock, and of their fat: and the Lord had respect to Abel, and to his
offerings.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But to Cain and his offerings he had no
respect: and Cain was exceedingly angry, and his countenance fell.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the Lord said to him: Why art thou
angry? and why is thy countenance fallen?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> If thou do well, shalt thou not receive?
but if ill, shall not sin forthwith be present at the door? but the lust
thereof shall be under thee, and thou shalt have dominion over it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And Cain said to Abel his brother: Let us
go forth abroad. And when they were in the field, Cain rose up against
his brother Abel, and slew him.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And the Lord said to Cain: Where is thy
brother Abel? And he answered, I know not: am I my brother's keeper?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And he said to him: What hast thou done?
the voice of thy brother's blood crieth to me from the earth.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Now, therefore, cursed shalt thou be upon
the earth, which hath opened her mouth and received the blood of thy
brother at thy hand,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> When thou shalt till it, it shall not
yield to thee its fruit: a fugitive and vagabond shalt thou be upon the
earth.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And Cain said to the Lord: My iniquity is
greater than that I may deserve pardon.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Behold thou dost cast me out this day
from the face of the earth, and I shall be hidden from thy face, and I
shall be a vagabond and a fugitive on the earth: everyone, therefore,
that findeth me, shall kill me.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And the Lord said to him: No, it shall
not be so: but whosoever shall kill Cain, shall be punished sevenfold.
And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, that whosoever found him should not
kill him.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Cain went out from the face of the
Lord, and dwelt as a fugitive on the earth, at the east side of Eden.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And Cain knew his wife, and she
conceived, and brought forth Henoch: and he built a city, and called the
name thereof by the name of his son Henoch.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Henoch begot Irad, and Irad begot
Maviael, and Maviael begot Mathusael, and Mathusael begot Lamech:

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Who took two wives: the name of the one
was Ada, and the name of the other was Sella.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And Ada brought forth Jabel: who was the
father of such as dwell in tents, and of herdsmen.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And his brother's name was Jubal; he was
the father of them that play upon the harp and the organs.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Sella also brought forth Tubalcain, who
was a hammerer and artificer in every work of brass and iron. And the
sister of Tubalcain was Noema.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And Lamech said to his wives Ada and
Sell: Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech, hearken to my speech: for I
have slain a man to the wounding of myself, and a stripling to my own
bruising.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Sevenfold vengeance shall be taken for
Cain: but for Lamech seventy times sevenfold.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Adam also knew his wife again: and she
brought forth a son, and called his name Seth, saying: God hath given me
another seed, for Abel whom Cain slew.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> But to Seth also was born a son, whom he
called Enos; this man began to call upon the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> This is the book of the generation of Adam.
In the day that God created man, he made him to the likeness of God.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> He created them male and female; and
blessed them: and called their name Adam, in the day when they were
created.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years,
and begot a son to his own image and likeness, and called his name Seth.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And the days of Adam, after he begot Seth,
were eight hundred years: and he begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And all the time that Adam lived came to
nine hundred and thirty years, and he died.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Seth also lived a hundred and five years,
and begot Enos.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And Seth lived after he begot Enos, eight
hundred and seven years, and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And all the days of Seth were nine hundred
and twelve years, and he died.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And Enos lived ninety years, and begot
Cainan.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> After whose birth he lived eight hundred
and fifteen years, and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And the days of Enos were nine hundred
and five years, and he died.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And Cainan lived seventy years, and begot
Malaleel.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And Cainan lived after he begot Malaleel,
eight hundred forty years, and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And all the days of Cainan were nine
hundred and ten years, and he died.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And Malaleel lived sixty-five years, and
begot Jared.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And Malaleel lived after he begot Jared,
eight hundred and thirty years, and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And all the days of Malaleel were eight
hundred and ninety-five years, and he died.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And Jared lived a hundred and sixty-two
years, and begot Henoch.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And Jared lived after he begot Henoch,
eight hundred years, and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And all the days of Jared were nine
hundred and sixty-two years, and he died.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And Henoch lived sixty-five years, and
begot Mathusala.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And Henoch walked with God: and lived
after he begot Mathusala, three hundred years, and begot sons and
daughters.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And all the days of Henoch were three
hundred and sixty-five years.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And he walked with God, and was seen no
more: because God took him.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And Mathusala lived a hundred and
eighty-seven years, and begot Lamech.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And Mathusala lived after he begot
Lamech, seven hundred and eighty-two years, and begot sons and
daughters.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And all the days of Mathusala were nine
hundred and sixty-nine years, and he died.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> And Lamech lived a hundred and eighty-two
years, and begot a son.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And he called his name Noe, saying: This
same shall comfort us from the works and labours of our hands on the
earth which the Lord hath cursed.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And Lamech lived after he begot Noe, five
hundred and ninety-five years, and he begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And all the days of Lamech came to seven
hundred and seventy-seven years, and he died. And Noe, when he was five
hundred years old, begot Sem, Cham, and Japheth.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And after that men began to be multiplied
upon the earth, and daughters were born to them.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The sons of God seeing the daughters of
men, that they were fair, took themselves wives of all which they chose.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And God said: My spirit shall not remain in
man for ever, because he is flesh, and his days shall be a hundred and
twenty years.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Now giants were upon the earth in those
days. For after the sons of God went in to the daughters of men and they
brought forth children, these are the mighty men of old, men of renown.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And God seeing that the wickedness of men
was great on the earth, and that all the thought of their heart was bent
upon evil at all times,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> It repented him that he had made man on the
earth. And being touched inwardly with sorrow of heart,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> He said: I will destroy man, whom I have
created, from the face of the earth, from man even to beasts, from the
creeping thing even to the fowls of the air, for it repenteth me that I
have made them.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But Noe found grace before the Lord.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> These are the generations of Noe: Noe was a
just and perfect man in his generations, he walked with God.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he begot three sons, Sem, Cham, and
Japheth.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the earth was corrupted before God,
and was filled with iniquity.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And when God had seen that the earth was
corrupted (for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth,)

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> He said to Noe: The end of all flesh is
come before me, the earth is filled with iniquity through them, and I
will destroy them with the earth.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Make thee an ark of timber planks: thou
shalt make little rooms in the ark, and thou shalt pitch it within and
without.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And thus shalt thou make it: The length
of the ark shall be three hundred cubits: the breadth of it fifty
cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Thou shalt make a window in the ark, and
in a cubit shalt thou finish the top of it: and the door of the ark thou
shalt set in the side: with lower, middle chambers, and third stories
shalt thou make it.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Behold I will bring the waters of a great
flood upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of
life, under heaven. All things that are in the earth shall be consumed.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And I will establish my covenant with
thee, and thou shalt enter into the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy
wife, and the wives of thy sons with thee.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And of every living creature of all
flesh, thou shalt bring two of each sort into the ark, that they may
live with thee: of the male sex, and the female.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Of fowls according to their kind, and of
beasts in their kind, and of every thing that creepeth on earth
according to its kind; two of every sort shall go in with thee, that
they may live.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Thou shalt take unto thee of all food
that may be eaten, and thou shalt lay it up with thee: and it shall be
food for thee and them.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And Noe did all things which God
commanded him.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the Lord said to him: Go in thou and
all thy house into the ark: for thee I have seen just before me in this
generation.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Of all clean beasts take seven and seven,
the male and female.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> But of the beasts that are unclean two and
two, the male and female. Of the fowls also of the air seven and
seven,the male and the female: that seed may be saved upon the face of
the whole earth.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For yet a while, and after seven days, I
will rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and I will destroy
every substance that I have made, from the face of the earth.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And Noe did all things which the Lord had
commanded him.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And he was six hundred years old, when the
waters of the flood overflowed the earth.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Noe went in and his sons, his wife and
the wives of his sons with him into the ark, because of the waters of
the flood.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And of the beasts clean and unclean, and of
fowls, and of every thing that moveth upon the earth,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Two and two went in to Noe into the ark,
male and female, as the Lord had commanded Noe.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And after seven days were passed, the
waters of the flood overflowed the earth.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> In the six hundreth year of the life of
Noe in the second month, in the seventeenth day of the month, all the
fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the flood gates of
heaven were open:

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And the rain fell upon the earth forty
days and forty nights.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> In the selfsame day Noe, and Sem, and
Cham, and Japheth his sons: his wife, and the three wives of his sons
with them, went into the ark:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> They and every beast according to its
kind, and all the cattle in their kind, and every thing that moveth upon
the earth according to its kind, and every fowl according to its kind,
and every fowl according to its kind, all birds, and all that fly.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Went in to Noe into the ark, two and two
of all flesh, wherein was the breath of life.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And they that went in, went in male and
female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the Lord shut him in
on the outside.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And the flood was forty days upon the
earth, and the waters increased, and lifted up the ark on high from
earth.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> For they overflowed exceedingly: and
filled all on the face of the earth: and the ark was carried upon the
waters.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the waters prevailed beyond measure
upon the earth: and all the high mountains under the whole heaven were
covered.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> The water was fifteen cubits higher than
the mountains which it covered.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And all flesh was destroyed that moved
upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beasts, and of all
creeping things that creep upon the earth: and all men.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And all things wherein there is the
breath of life on the earth, died.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And he destroyed all the substance that
was upon the earth, from man to beast, and the creeping things and fowls
of the air: and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noe only
remained, and they that were with him in the ark.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And the waters prevailed upon the earth a
hundred and fifty days.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And God remembered Noe, and all the living
creatures, and all the cattle which were with him in the ark, and
brought a wind upon the earth, and the waters were abated.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> The fountains also of the deep, and the
flood gates of heaven were shut up, and the rain from heaven was
restrained.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And the waters returned from off the earth
going and coming: and they began to be abated after a hundred and fifty
days.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And the ark rested in the seventh month,
the seven and twentieth day of the month, upon the mountains of Armenia.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the waters were going and decreasing
until the tenth month: for in the tenth month, the first day of the
month, the tops of the mountains appeared.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And after that forty days were passed, Noe,
opening the window of the ark which he had made, sent forth a raven:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Which went forth and did not return, till
the waters were dried up upon the earth.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> He sent forth also a dove after him, to see
if the waters had now ceased upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But she, not finding where her foot might
rest, returned to him into the ark: for the waters were upon the whole
earth: and he put forth his hand, and caught her, and brought her into
the ark.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And having waited yet seven other days,
he again sent forth the dove out of the ark.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And she came to him in the evening,
carrying a bough of an olive tree, with green leaves, in her mouth. Noe
therefore understood that the waters were ceased upon the earth.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And he stayed yet other seven days: and
he sent forth the dove, which returned not any more unto him.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Therefore in the six hundreth and first
year, the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were
lessened upon the earth, and Noe opening the covering of the ark,
looked, and saw that the face of the earth was dried.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> In the second month, the seven and
twentieth day of the month, the earth was dried.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And God spoke to Noe, saying:

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Go out of the ark, thou and thy wife, thy
sons, and the wives of thy sons with thee.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> All livings things that are with thee of
all flesh, as well in fowls as in beasts, and all creeping things that
creep upon the earth, bring out with thee, and go ye upon the earth:
increased and multiply upon it.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> So Noe went out, he and his sons: his
wife, and the wives of his sons with him.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And all living things, and cattle, and
creeping things that creep upon the earth, according to their kinds,
went out of the ark.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Noe built an altar unto the Lord: and
taking of all cattle and fowls that were clean, offered holocausts upon
the altar.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And the Lord smelled a sweet savour, and
said: I will no more curse the earth for the sake of man: for the
imagination and thought of man's heart are prone to evil from his youth:
therefore I will no more destroy every living soul as I have done.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> All the days of the earth, seedtime and
harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, night and day, shall not
cease.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And God blessed Noe and his sons. And he
said to them: Increase and multiply, and fill the earth.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And let the fear and dread of you be upon
all the beasts of the earth, and upon all the fowls of the air, and all
that move upon the earth: all the fishes of the sea are delivered into
your hand.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And every thing that moveth and liveth
shall be meat for you: even as the green herbs have I delivered them all
to you:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Saving that flesh with blood you shall not
eat.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For I will require the blood of your lives
at the hand of every beast, and at the hand of man, at the hand of every
man, and of his brother, will I require the life of man.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Whosoever shall shed man's blood, his blood
shall be shed: for man was made to the image of God.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> But increase you and multiply, and go upon
the earth, and fill it.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> This also said God to Noe, and to his sons
with him,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Behold I will establish my covenant with
you, and with your seed after you:

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And with every living soul that is with
you, as well in all birds as in cattle and beasts of the earth, that are
come forth out of the ark, and in all the beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> I will establish my covenant with you,
and all flesh shall be no more destroyed with the waters of a flood,
neither shall there be from henceforth a flood to waste the earth.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And God said: This is the sign of the
covenant which I will give between me and you, and to every living soul
that is with you, for perpetual generations.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> I will set my bow in the clouds, and it
shall be the sign of a covenant between me, and between the earth.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And when I shall cover the sky with
clouds, my bow shall appear in the clouds:

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And I will remember my covenant with you,
and with every living soul that beareth flesh: and there shall no more
be waters of a flood to destroy all flesh.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And the bow shall be in the clouds, and I
shall see it, and shall remember the everlasting covenant, that was made
between God and every living soul of all flesh which is upon the earth.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And God said to Noe: This shall be the
sign of the covenant which I have established between me and all flesh
upon the earth.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And the sons of Noe who came out of the
ark, were Sem, Cham, and Japheth: and Cham is the father of Chanaan.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> These three are the sons of Noe: and from
these was all mankind spread over the whole earth.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And Noe, a husbandman, began to till the
ground, and planted a vineyard.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And drinking of the wine was made drunk,
and was uncovered in his tent.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Which when Cham the father of Chaanan had
seen, to wit, that his father's nakedness was uncovered, he told it to
his two brethren without.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> But Sem and Japheth put a cloak upon
their shoulders, and going backward, covered the nakedness of their
father: and their faces were turned away, and they saw not their
father's nakedness.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And Noe awaking from the wine, when he
had learned what his younger son had done to him,

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> He said: Cursed be Chaanan, a servant of
servants, shall he be unto his brethren.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And he said: Blessed be the Lord God of
Sem, be Chanaan his servant.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> May God enlarge Japheth, and may he dwell
in the tents of Sem, and Chanaan be his servant.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And Noe lived after the flood three
hundred and fifty years:

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And all his days were in the whole nine
hundred and fifty years: and he died.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> These are the generations of the sons of
Noe: Sem, Cham, and Japheth: and unto them sons were born after the
flood.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog,
and Madai, and Javan, and Thubal, and Mosoch, and Thiras.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And the sons of Gomer: Ascenez and
Riphath and Thogorma.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And the sons of Javan: Elisa and Tharsis,
Cetthim, and Dodanim.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> By these were divided the islands of the
Gentiles in their lands, every one according to his tongue and their
families in their nations.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And the sons of Cham: Chus, and Mesram,
and Phuth, and Chanaan.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And the sons of Chus: Saba and Hevila,
and Sabatha, and Regma, and Sabatacha. The sons of Regma: Saba and
Dadan.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Now Chus begot Nemrod: he began to be
mighty on earth.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And he was a stout hunter before the
Lord. Hence came a proverb: Even as Nemrod the stout hunter before the
Lord.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And the beginning of his kingdom was
Babylon, and Arach, and Achad, and Chalanne in the land of Sennaar.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Out of that land came forth Assur, and
built Ninive, and the streets of the city, and Chale.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Resen also between Ninive and Chale:
this is the great city.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And Mesraim begot Ludim, and Anamim,
and Laabim, Nepthuim,

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And Phetrusim, and Chasluim; of whom
came forth the Philistines, and the Capthorim.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And Chanaan begot Sidon, his firstborn,
the Hethite,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And the Jebusite, and the Amorrhite,
and the Gergesite,

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> The Hevite and the Aracite: the Sinite,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the Aradian, the Samarite, and the
Hamathite: and afterwards the families of the Chanaanites were spread
abroad.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the limits of Chanaan were from
Sidon as one comes to Gerara even to Gaza, until thou enter Sodom and
Gomorrha, and Adama, and Seboim even to Lesa.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> These are the children of Cham in their
kindreds, and tongues, and generations, and lands, and nations.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Of Sem also, the father of all children
of Heber, the elder brother of Japheth, sons were born.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The sons of Sem: Elam and Assur, and
Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> The sons of Aram: Us and Hull, and
Gether: and Mess.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> But Arphaxad begot Sale, of whom was
born Heber.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And to Heber were born two sons: the
name of the one was Phaleg, because in his days the earth was divided:
and his brother's name Jectan.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Which Jectan begot Elmodad, and Saleph,
and Asarmoth, Jare,

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And Anduram, and Uzal, and Decla,

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Ebal, and Abimael, Saba,

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And Ophir, and Hevila, and Jobab.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And their dwelling was from Messa as we
go on as far as Sephar, a mountain in the east.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> These are the children of Sem according
to their kindreds and tongues, and countries in their nations.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> These are the families of Noe,
according to their peoples and nations. By these were the nations
divided on the earth after the flood.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the earth was of one tongue, and of
the same speech.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And when they removed from the east, they
found a plain in the land of Sennaar, and dwelt in it.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And each one said to his neighbour: Come,
let us make brick, and bake them of stones, and slime instead of mortar.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And they said: Come, let us make a city
and a tower, the top whereof may reach to heaven: and let us make our
name famous before we be scattered abroad into all lands.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the Lord came down to see the city
and the tower, which the children of Adam were building.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And he said: Behold, it is one people,
and all have one tongue: and they have begun to do this, neither will
they leave off from their designs, till they accomplish them in deed.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Come ye, therefore, let us go down, and
there may not understand one another's speech.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And so the Lord scattered them from that
place into all lands, and they ceased to build the city.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And therefore the name thereof was called
Babel, because there the language of the whole earth was confounded: and
from thence the Lord scattered them abroad upon the face of all
countries.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> These are the generations of Sem: Sem
was a hundred years old when he begot Arphaxad, two years old when he
begot Arphaxad, two years after the flood.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And Sem lived after he begot Arphaxad,
five hundred years, and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And Arphaxad lived thirty-five years,
and begot Sale.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And Arphaxad lived after he begot Sale,
three hundred and three years; and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Sale also lived thirty years, and begot
Heber.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And Sale lived after he begot Heber,
four hundred and three years; and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And Heber lived thirty-four years, and
begot Phaleg.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And Heber lived after he begot Phaleg,
four hundred and thirty years: and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Phaleg also lived thirty years, and
begot Reu.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And Phaleg lived after he begot Reu,
two hundred and nine years, and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And Reu lived thirty-two years, and
begot Sarug.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And Reu lived after he begot Sarug, two
hundred and seven years, and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Sarug lived thirty years, and begot
Nachor.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And Sarug lived after he begot Nachor,
two hundred years: and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And Nachor lived nine and twenty years,
and begot Thare.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And Nachor lived after he begot Thare,
a hundred and nineteen years: and begot sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And Thare lived seventy years, and
begot Abram, and Nachor, and Aran.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And these are the generations of Thare:
Thare begot Abram, Nachor, and Aran. And Aran begot Lot.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And Aran died before Thare his father,
in the land of his nativity in Ur of the Chaldees.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Abram and Nachor married wives: the
name of Abram's wife was Sarai: and the name of Nachor's wife, Melcha,
the daughter of Aran, father of Melcha, and father of Jescha.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> And Sarai was barren, and had no
children.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And Thare took Abram, his son, and Lot
the son of Aran, his son's son, and Sarai his daughter in law, the wife
of Abram his son, and brought them out of Ur of the Chaldees, to go into
the land of Chanaan: and they came as far as Haran, and dwelt there.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And the days of Thare were tow hundred
and five years, and he died in Haran.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And the Lord said to Abram: Go forth out
of thy country, and from thy kindred, and out of they father's house,
and come into the land which I shall shew thee.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And I will make of thee a great nation,
and I will bless thee, and magnify thy name, and thou shalt be blessed.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> I will bless them that bless thee, and
curse them that curse thee, and IN THEE shall all the kindred of the
earth be blessed:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> So Abram went out as the Lord had
commanded him, and Lot went with him: Abram was seventy-five years old
when he went forth from Haran.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And he took Sarai his wife, and Lot his
brother's son, and all the substance which they had gathered, and the
souls which they had gotten in Haran: and they went out to go into the
land of Chanaan. And when they were come into it,

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Abram passed through the country into the
place of Sichem, as far as the noble vale: now the Chanaanite was at
that time in the land.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And the Lord appeared to Abram, and said
to him: To thy seed will I give this land. And he built there an altar
to the Lord, who had appeared to him.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And passing on from thence to a mountain,
that was on the east side of Bethel, he there pitched his tent, having
Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east; he built there also an altar to
the Lord, and called upon his name.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And Abram went forward, going, and
proceeding on to the south.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And there came a famine in the country;
and Abram went down into Egypt, to sojourn there: for the famine was
very grievous in the land.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And when he was near to enter into
Egypt, he said to Sarai his wife: I know that thou art a beautiful
woman:

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And that when the Egyptians shall see
thee, they will say: She is his wife: and they will kill me, and keep
thee.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Say, therefore, I pray thee, that thou
art my sister: that I may be well used for thee, and that my soul may
live for thy sake.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And when Abram was come into Egypt, the
Egyptians saw the woman that she was very beautiful.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And the princes told Pharao, and
praised her before him: and the woman was taken into the house of
Pharao.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And they used Abram well for her sake.
And he had sheep and oxen, and he asses, and menservants and
maidservants, and she asses, and camels.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But the Lord scourged Pharao and his
house with most grievous stripes for Sarai, Abram's wife.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And Pharao called Abram, and said to
him: What is this that thou hast done to me? Why didst thou not tell me
that she was thy wife.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> For what cause didst thou say, she was
thy sister, that I might take her to my wife? Now therefore, there is
thy wife, take her, and go thy way.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And Pharao gave his men orders
concerning Abram: and they led him away, and his wife, and all that he
had.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And Abram went up out of Egypt, he and
his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the south.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And he was very rich in possession of
gold and silver.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And he returned by the way that he came,
from the south to Bethel, to the place where before he had pitched his
tent between Bethel and Hai:

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> In the place of the altar which he had
made before; and there he called upon the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> But Lot also, who was with Abram, had
flocks of sheep, and herds of beasts, and tents.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Neither was the land able to bear them,
that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, and they
could not dwell together.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Whereupon also there arose a strife
between the herdsmen of Abram and of Lot. And at that time the
Chanaanite and the Pherezite dwelled in that country.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Abram therefore said to Lot: Let there be
no quarrel, I beseech thee, between me and thee, and between my herdsmen
and thy herdsmen: for we are brethren.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Behold the whole land is before thee:
depart from me I pray thee: if thou wilt go to the left hand, I will
take the right: if thou choose the right hand, I will pass to the left.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And Lot, lifting up his eyes, saw all
the country about the Jordan, which was watered throughout, before the
Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha, as the paradise of the Lord, and like
Egypt as one comes to Segor.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And Lot chose to himself the country
about the Jordan, and he departed from the east: and they were separated
one brother from the other.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Abram dwelt in the land of Chanaan; and
Lot abode in the towns that were about the Jordan, and dwelt in Sodom.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And the men of Sodom were very wicked,
and sinners before the face of the Lord, beyond measure.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And the Lord said to Abram, after Lot
was separated from him: Lift up thy eyes, and look from the place
wherein thou now art, to the north and to the south, to the east and to
the west.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> All the land which thou seest, I will
give to thee, and to thy seed for ever.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And I will make thy seed as the dust of
the earth: if any man be able to number the dust of the earth, he shall
be able to number thy seed also.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Arise and walk through the land in the
length, and in the breadth thereof: for I will give it to thee.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> So Abram removing his tent came and
dwelt by the vale of Mambre, which is in Hebron: and he built there an
altar to the Lord.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And it came to pass at that time, that
Amraphel king of Sennaar, and Arioch king of Pontus, and Chodorlahomor
king of the Elamites, and Thadal king of nations,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Made war against Bara king of Sodom, and
against Bersa king of Gomorrha, and against Sennaab king of Adama, and
against Semeber king of Seboim, and against the king of Bala, which is
Segor.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> All these came together into the woodland
vale, which now is the salt sea.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> For they had served Chodorlahomor twelve
years, and in the thirteenth year they revolted from him.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And in the fourteenth year came
Chodorlahomor, and the kings that were with him: and they smote the
Raphaim in Astarothcarnaim, and the Zuzim with them, and the Emim in
Save of Cariathaim.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And the Chorreans in the mountains of
Seir, even to the plains of Pharan, which is in the wilderness.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And they returned, and came to the
fountain of Misphat, the same is Cades: and they smote all the country
of the Amalecites, and the Amorrhean that dwelt in Asasonthamar.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the king of Sodom, and the king of
Gomorrha, and the king of Adama, and the king of Seboim, and the king of
Bala, which is Segor, went out: and they set themselves against them in
battle array in the woodland vale:

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> To wit, against Chodorlahomor king of the
Elamites, and Thadal king of nations, and Amraphel king of Sennaar, and
Arioch king of Pontus: four kings against five.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Now the woodland vale had many pits of
slime. And the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrha turned their
backs and were overthrown there: and they that remained fled to the
mountain.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they took all the substance of the
Sodomites, and Gomorrhites, and all their victuals, and went their way:

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And Lot also, the son of Abram's
brother, who dwelt in Sodom, and his substance.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And behold one that had escaped told
Abram the Hebrew, who dwelt in the vale of Mambre the Amorrhite, the
brother of Escol, and the brother of Aner: for these had made league
with Abram.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Which when Abram had heard, to wit,
that his brother Lot was taken, he numbered of the servants born in his
house, three hundred and eighteen well appointed: and pursued them to
Dan.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And dividing his company, he rushed
upon them in the night: and defeated them, and pursued them as far as
Hoba, which is on the left hand of Damascus.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And he brought back all the substance,
and Lot his brother, with his substance, the women also the people.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And the king of Sodom went out to meet
him, after he returned from the slaughter of Chodorlahomor, and of the
kings that were with him in the vale of Save, which is the king's vale.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> But Melchisedech the king of Salem,
bringing forth bread and wine, for he was the priest of the most high
God,

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Blessed him, and said: Blessed be Abram
by the most high God, who created heaven and earth.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And blessed be the most high God, by
whose protection the enemies are in thy hands. And he gace him the
tithes of all.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And the king of Sodom said to Abram:
Give me the persons, and the rest take to thyself.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And he answered him: I lift up my hand
to the Lord God the most high, the possessor of heaven and earth,

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> That from the very woof thread unto the
shoe latchet, I will not take of any things that are thine, lest thou
say I have enriched Abram:

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> Except such things as the young men
have eaten, and the shares of the men that came with me, Aner, Escol,
and Mambre: these shall take their shares.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now when these things were done, the word
of the Lord came to Abram by a vision, saying: Fear not, Abram, I am thy
protector, and thy reward exceeding great.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And Abram said: Lord God, what wilt thou
give me? I shall go without children: and the son of the steward of my
house is this Damascus Eliezer.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And Abram added: But to me thou hast not
given seed: and lo my servant, born in my house, shall be my heir.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And immediately the word of the Lord came
to him, saying: He shall not be thy heir: but he that shall come out of
thy bowels, him shalt thou have for thy heir.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And he thought him forth abroad, and said
to him: Look up to heaven and number the stars, if thou canst. And he
said to him: So shall thy seed be.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Abram believed God, and it was reputed to
him unto justice.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And he said to him: I am the Lord who
brought thee out from Ur of the Chaldees, to gibe thee this land, and
that thou mightest possess it.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> But he said: Lord God, whereby may I know
that I shall possess it?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And the Lord answered, and said: Take me
a cow of three years old, and a she goat of three years, and a ram of
three years, a turtle also, and a pigeon.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And he took all these, and divided them
in the midst, and laid the two pieces of each one against the other; but
the birds he divided not.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And the fowls came down upon carcasses,
and Abram drove them away.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And when the sun was setting, a deep
sleep fell upon Abram, and a great and darksome horror seized upon him.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And it was said unto him: Know thou
beforehand that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land not their own,
and they shall bring them under bondage, and afflict them four hundred
years.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> But I will judge the nation which they
shall serve, and after this they shall come out with great substance.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And thou shalt go to thy fathers in
peace, and be buried in a good old age.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> But in the fourth generation they shall
return hither: for as yet the iniquities of the Amorrhites are not at
the full until this present time.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And when the sun was set, there arose a
dark mist, and there appeared a smoking furnace and a lamp of fire
passing between those divisions.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> That day God made a covenant with
Abram, saying: To thy seed will I give this land, from the river of
Egypt even to the great river Euphrates.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> The Cineans and Cenezites, the
Cedmonites,

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And the Hethites, and the Pherezites,
the Raphaim also,

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And the Amorrhites, and the Chanaanits,
and the Gergesites, and the Jebusites.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Now Sarai the wife of Abram, had brought
forth no children; having a handmaid, an Egyptian, named Agar,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> She said to her husband: Behold, the Lord
hath restrained me from bearing: go in unto my handmaid, it may be I may
have children of her at least. And when he agreed to her request,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> She took Agar the Egyptian her handmaid,
ten years after they first dwelt in the land of Chanaan, and gave her to
her husband to wife.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And he went in to her. But she,
perceiving that she was with child, despised her mistress.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And Sarai said to Abram: Thou dost
unjustly with me: I gave my handmaid into thy bosom, and she perceiving
herself to be with child, despiseth me. The Lord judge between me and
thee.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Abram made answer, and said to her:
Behold thy handmaid is in thy own hand, use her its it pleaseth thee.
And when Sarai afflicted her, she ran away.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And the angel of the Lord having found
her, by a fountain of water in the wilderness, which is in the way to
Sur in the desert,

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> He said to her: Agar, handmaid of Sarai,
whence comest thou? and whither goest thou? And she answered: I flee
from the face of Sarai, my mistress.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And the angel of the Lord said to her:
Return to thy mistress, and humble thyself under her hand.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And again he said: I will multiply thy
seed exceedingly, and it shall not be numbered for multitude.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And again: Behold, said he, thou art
with child, and thou shalt bring forth a son: and thou shalt call his
name Ismael, because the Lord hath heard thy affliction.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> He shall be a wild man: his hand will
be against all men, and all men's hands against him: and he shall pitch
his tents over against all his brethren.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And she called the name of the Lord
that spoke unto her: Thou the God who hast seen me. For she said: Verily
here have I seen the hinder parts of him that seeth me.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Therefore she called that well, The
well of him that liveth and seeth me. The same is between Cades and
Bared.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And Agar brought forth a son to Abram:
who called his name Ismael.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Abram was fourscore and six years old
when Agar brought him forth Ismael.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And after he began to be ninety and nine
years old, the Lord appeared to him: and said unto him: I am the
Almighty God: walk before me, and be perfect.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And I will make my covenant between me
and thee: and I will multiply thee exceedingly.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Abram tell flat on his face.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And God said to him: I AM, and my
covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father. of many nations.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Neither shall thy name be called any more
Abram: but thou shalt be called Abraham: because I have made thee a
father of many nations.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And I will make thee increase,
exceedingly, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out
of thee.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And I will establish my covenant between
me and thee, and between thy sad after thee in their generations, by a
perpetual covenant: to be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And I will give to thee, and to thy seed,
the land of thy sojournment, all the land of Chanaan for a perpetual
possession, and I will be their God.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Again God said to Abraham: And thou
therefore shalt keep my covenant, and thy seed after thee in their
generations.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> This is my covenant which you shall
observe, between me and you, and thy seed after thee: All the male kind
of you shall be circumcised:

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And you shall circumcise the flesh of
your foreskin, that it may be for a h sign of the covenant between me
and you.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> An infant of eight days old shall be
circumcised among you, every man child in your generations: he that is
born in the house, as well as the bought servant shall be circumcised,
and whosoever is not of your stock:

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And my covenant shall be in your flesh
for a perpetual covenant.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> The male, whose dash of his foreskin
shall not be circumcised, that soul shall be destroyed out of his
people: because he hath broken my covenant.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> God said also to Abraham: Sarai thy
wife thou shalt not call Sarai, but Sara.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And I will bless her, and of her I will
give thee a son, whom I will bless, and he shell become nations, and
kings of people shall spring from him.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Abraham fell upon his face, and
laughed, saying in his heart: Shall a son, thinkest thou, be born to him
that is a hundred years old? and shall Sara that is ninety years old
bring forth?

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And he said to God: O that Ismael may
live before thee.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And God said to Abraham: Sara thy wife
shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name Isaac, and I will
establish my covenant with him for a perpetual covenant, and with his
seed after him.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And as for Ismael I have also heard
thee. Behold, I will bless him, and increase, and multiply him
exceedingly: he shall beget twelve chiefs, and I will make him a great
nation.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> But my covenant I will establish with
Isaac, whom Sara shall bring forth to thee at this time in the next
year.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And when he had left oil speaking with
him, God went up from Abraham.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And Abraham took Ismael his son, and
all that were born in his house: and all whom he had bought, every male
among the men of his house: and he circumcised the flesh of their
foreskin forthwith the very same day, as God had commanded him.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Abraham was ninety and nine years old,
when he circumcised the flesh of his foreskin.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And Ismael his son was full thirteen
years old at the time of his circumcision.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> The selfsame day was Abraham
circumcised and Ismael his son.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> And all the men of his house, as well
they that were born in his house, as the bought servants and strangers
were circumcised with him.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And the Lord appeared to him in the vale
of Mambre as he was sitting at the door of his tent, in the very heat of
the day.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And when he had lifted up his eyes, there
appeared to him three men standing near him: and as soon as he saw them
he ran to meet them from the door of his tent, and adored down to the
ground.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And he said: Lord, if I have found favour
in thy sight, pass not away from thy servant:

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> But I will fetch a little water, and wash
ye your feet, and rest ye under the tree.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And I will set a morsel of bread, and
strengthen ye your heart, afterwards you shall pass on: for therefore
are you come aside to your servant. And they said: Do as thou hast
spoken.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> Abraham made haste into the tent to Sera,
and said to her: Make haste, temper together three measures of flour,
and make cakes upon the hearth.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And he himself ran to the herd, and took
from thence a calf very tender and very good, and gave it to a young
man: who made haste and boiled it.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> He took also butter and milk, and the
calf which he had boiled, and set before them: but he stood by them
under the tree.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And when they had eaten, they said to
him: Where is Sara thy wife? He answered: Lo, she is in the tent.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And he said to him: I will return and
come to thee at this time, life accompanying and Sara thy wife shall
have a son. Which when Sara heard, she laughed behind the door of the
tent.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now they were both old, and far
advanced in years, and it had ceased to be with Sara after the manner of
women.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And she laughed secretly, saying: After
I am grown old, and my lord is an old man, shall I give myself to
pleasure?

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And the Lord said to Abraham: Why did
Sera laugh, saying: Shall I who am an old woman bear a child indeed ?

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Is there any thing hard to God?
according to appointment I will return to thee at this same time, life
accompanying, and Sara shall have a son.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Sara denied, saying: I did not laugh:
for she was afraid. But the Lord said, Nay: but thou didst laugh:

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And when the men rose up from thence,
they turned their eyes towards Sodom: and Abraham walked with them,
bringing them on the way.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And the Lord said: Can I hide from
Abraham what I am about to do:

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> "Seeing he shall become a great and
mighty nation, and in him all the nations of the earth shall be blessed?

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> For I know that he will command his
children, and his household after him to keep the way of the Lord, and
do judgment and justice: that for Abraham's sake the Lord may bring to
effect all the things he hath spoken unto him.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And the Lord said: The cry of Sodom and
Gomorrha is multiplied, and their sin is become exceedingly grievous.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> I will go down and see whether they
have done according to the cry that is come to me: or whether it be not
so, that I may know.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And they turned themselves from thence,
and went their way to Sodom: but Abraham as yet stood before the Lord.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And drawing nigh he said: Wilt thou
destroy the just with the wicked?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> If there be fifty just men in the city,
shall they perish withal? and wilt thou not spare that place for the
sake of the fifty just, if they be therein?

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Far be it from thee to do this thing,
and to slay the just with the wicked, and for the just to be in like
case as the wicked, this is not beseeming thee: thou who judgest all the
earth, wilt not make this judgment.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And the Lord said to him: If I And in
Sodom fifty just within the city, I will spare the whole place for their
sake.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Abraham answered, and said: Seeing
I have once begun, I will speak to my Lord, whereas I am dust and ashes.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> What if there be Ave less than fifty
just persons? wilt thou for five and forty destroy the whole city? And
he said: I will not destroy it, if I find five and forty.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And again he said to him: But if forty
be found there, what wilt thou do? He said: I will not destroy it for
the sake of forty.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Lord, saith he, be not angry, I beseech
thee, if I speak: What if thirty shall be found there? He answered: I
will not do it, if I And thirty there.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Seeing, saith he, I have once begun, I
will speak to my Lord. What if twenty be found there? He said: I will
not destroy it for the sake of twenty.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> I beseech thee, saith he, be not angry,
Lord, if I speak yet once more: What if tell should be found there ? And
he said: I will not destroy it for the sake of ten.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> And the Lord departed, after he had
left speaking to Abraham: and Abraham returned to his place.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And the two angels came to Sodom ii in
the evening, and Lot was sitting in the gate of the city. And seeing
them, he rose up and went to meet them: and worshipped prostrate to the
ground,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And said: I beseech you, my lords, turn
in to the house of your servant, and lodge there: wash your feet, and in
the morning you shall go on your way. And they said: No, but we will
abide in the street.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> He pressed them very much to turn in unto
him: and when they were come in to his house, he made them a feast, and
baked unleavened bread and they ate:

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> But before they went to bed, the men of
the city beset the house both young and old, all the people together.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And they called Lot, and said to him:
Where are the men that came in to thee at night? bring them out hither
that we may know them:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Lot went out to them, and shut the door
after him, and said:

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> no not so, I beseech you, my brethren, do
not commit this evil.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> I have two daughters who as yet have not
known man : I will bring them out to you, and abuse you them as it shall
please you, so that you do no evil to these men, because they are come
in under the shadow of my roof.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> But they said: Get thee back thither. And
again: Thou camest in, said they, as a, stranger, was it to be a judge?
therefore we will afflict thee more than them. 0 And they pressed very
violently upon Lot: and they were even at the point of breaking open the
doors.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And behold the men put out their hand,
and drew in Lot unto them, and shut the door:

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And them that were without, p they
struck with blindness from the least to the greatest, so that they could
not find the door.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And they said to Lot: Hast thou here
ally of thine? son in law, or sons, or daughters, all that are thine
bring them out of this city:

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> For we will destroy this place, because
their cry is grown loud before the Lord, who hath sent us to destroy
them.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> So Lot went out, and spoke to his sons
in law that were to have his daughters, and said : Arise : get you out
of this place, because the Lord will destroy this city. And he seemed to
them to speak as it were in jest.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And when it was- morning, the angels
pressed him, saying: Arise, take thy wife, and the two daughters which
thou hast: lest thou also perish in the wickedness of the city.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And as he lingered, they took his hand,
and the hand of his wife, and of his two daughters, because the Lord
spared him.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And they brought him forth, and set him
without the city: and there they spoke to him, saying : Save thy life :
look not back, neither stay thou in all the country about: but save
thyself in the mountain, lest thou be also consumed.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And Lot said to them: I beseech thee my
Lord,

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Because thy servant hath found grace
before thee, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewn to
me, in saving my life, and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some
evil seize me, and I die :

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> There is this city here at hand, to
which I may flee, it is a little one, and I shall be saved in it: is it
not a little one, and my soul shall live?

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And he said to him: Behold also in
this, I have heard thy prayers, not to destroy the city for which thou
hast spoken.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Make haste and be saved there, because
I cannot do any thing till thou go in thither. Therefore the name of
that city was called Segor.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The sun was risen upon the earth, and
Lot entered into Segor.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And the Lord rained upon Sodom and
Gomorrha brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And he destroyed these cities, and all
the country about, all the inhabitants of the cities, and all things
that spring from the earth.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And his wife looking behind her, was
turned into a statue of salt.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> And Abraham got up early in the morning
and in the place where he had stood before with the Lord, U

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> He looked towards Sodom and Gomorrha,
and the whole land of that country: and he saw the ashes rise up from
the earth as the smoke of a furnace.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Now when God destroyed the cities of
that country, remembering Abraham, he delivered Lot out of the
destruction of the cities wherein he had dwelt.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And Lot went up out of Segor, and abode
in the mountain, and his two daughters with him, (for he was afraid to
stay in Segor,) and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters with
him.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And the elder said to the younger Our
father is old, and there is no man left on the earth, to come in unto us
after the manner of the whole earth.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Come, let us make him drunk with wine,
and let us lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And they made their father drink wine
that night: and the elder went in and lay with her father : but he
perceived not neither when his daughter lay down, nor when she rose up.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> And the next day the elder said to the
younger : Behold I lay last night with my father, let us make him drink
wine also to night, and thou shalt lie with him, that we may save seed
of our father.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> They made their father drink wine that
night also, and the younger daughter went in, and lay with him: and
neither then did he perceive when she lay down, nor when she rose up.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> the two daughters of Lot were with
child by their father.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And the elder bore a son, and called
his name Moab: he is the father of the Moabites unto this day.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> The younger also bore a son, and called
his name Ammon, that is, the son of my people: he is the father of the
Ammonites unto this day.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Abraham removed from thence to the south
country, and dwelt between Cedes and Sur, and sojourned in Gerara.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And he said of Sara his wife: She is my
sister. So Abimelech the king of Oerara sent, and took her.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And God came to Abimelech in a dream by
night, and he said to him: Lo thou shalt die for the woman thou hast
taken: for she hath a husband.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Now Abimelech had not touched her, and he
said : Lord, wilt thou slay a nation, that is ignorant and justl

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Did not he say to me : She is my sister:
and she say, He is my brother? in the simplicity of my heart, and
cleanness of my hands have I done this.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And God said to him: And I know that thou
didst it with a sincere heart: and therefore I withheld thee from
sinning against me, and I suffered thee not to touch her.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Now therefore restore the man his wife,
for he is a prophet: and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live:
but if thou wilt not restore her, know that thou shalt surely die, thou
and all that are thins.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And Abimelech forthwith rising up in the
night, called all his servants: and spoke all these words in their
hearing, and all the men were exceedingly afraid.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And Abimelech called also for Abraham,
and said to him: What hast thou done to us? what have we offended thee
in, that thou hast brought upon me and upon my kingdom a great sin? thou
hast done to us what thou oughtest not to do.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And again he expostulated with him, and
said, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this?

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Abraham answered: I thought with
myself, saying: Perhaps there is not the fear of God in this place: and
they will kill me for the sake of my wife:

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Howbeit, otherwise also she is truly my
sister, the daughter of my father, and not the daughter of my mother,
and I took her to wife.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And after God brought me out of my
father's house, I said to her: I Thou shalt do me this kindness: In
every place, to which we shall come, thou shalt say that I am thy
brother.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and
servants and handmaids, and gave to Abraham: and restored to him Sara,
his wife.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And said: The land is before you, dwell
wheresoever it shall please thee.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And to Sara he said: Behold I have
given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: this shall serve thee for
a covering of thy eyes to all that are with thee, and whithersoever thou
shalt go: and remember thou wast taken.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And when Abraham prayed, God healed
Abimelech and his wife, and his handmaids, and they bore children:

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> For the Lord had closed up every womb
of the house of Abimelech on ac- count of Sara, Abraham's wife.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And the Lord visited Sara, as he had
promised: and fulfilled what he had spoken.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And she conceived and bore a son in her
old age, at the time that God had foretold her.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And Abraham called the name of his son,
whom Sara bore him, Isaac.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And he circumcised him the eighth day, as
God had commanded him,

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> When he was a hundred years old: for at
this age of his father was Isaac born.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And Sara said: God hath made a laughter
for me: whosoever shall hear of it will laugh with me.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And again she said: Who would believe
that Abraham should hear that Sara gave suck to a son, whom she bore to
him in his old age.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the child grew and was weaned: and
Abraham made a great feast on the day of his weaning.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And when Sara had seen the son of Agar
the Egyptian playing with Isaac her son, she said to Abraham:

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Cast out this bondwoman, and her son:
for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with my son Isaac.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Abraham took this grievously for his
son.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And God said to him: Let it not seem
grievous to thee for the boy, and for thy bondwoman: in all that Sara
hath said to thee, hearken to her voice: for in Isaac shall thy seed be
called.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> But I will make the son also of the
bondwoman a great nation, because he is thy seed.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> So Abraham rose up in the morning, and
taking bread and a bottle of water, put it upon her shoulder, and
delivered the boy, and sent her away. And she departed, and wandered in
the wilderness of Bersabee.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And when the water in the bottle was
spent, she cast the boy under one of the trees that were there.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And she went her way, and sat over
against him a great way off as far as a bow can carry, for she said: I
will not see the boy die: and sitting over against, she lifted up her
voice and wept.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And God heard the voice of the boy: and
an angel of God called to Agar from heaven, saying: What art thou doing,
Agar? fear not: for God hath heard the voice of the boy, from the place
wherein he is.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Arise, take up the boy, and hold him by
the hand: for I will make him a great nation.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And God opened her eyes: and she saw a
well of water, and went and filled the bottle, and gave the boy to
drink.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And God was with him: and he grew, and
dwelt in the wilderness, and became a young man, an archer.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And he dwelt in the wilderness of
Pharan, and his mother took a wife for him out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> At the same time Abimelech, and Phicol
the general of his army said to Abraham: God is with thee in all that
thou dost.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Swear therefore by God, that thou wilt
not hurt me, nor my posterity, nor my stock: but according to the
kindness that I have done to thee, thou shalt do to me, and to the land
wherein thou hast lived a stranger.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And Abraham said: I will swear.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And he reproved Abimelech for a well of
water, which his servants had taken away by force.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> And Abimelech answered: I knew not who
did this thing: and thou didst not tell me, and I heard not of it till
to day.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And Abraham took sheep and oxen and
gave them to Abimelech: and both of them made a league.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And Abraham set apart seven ewe lambs
of the flock.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> And Abimelech said to him: What mean
these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set apart?

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> But he said: Thou shalt take seven ewe
lambs at my hand: that they may be a testimony for me, that I dug this
well.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Therefore that place was called
Bersabee: because both of them did swear.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> And they made a league for the well of
oath.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> And Abimelech, and Phicol the general
of his army arose and returned to the land of the Palestines. But
Abraham planted a grove in Bersabee, and there called upon the name of
the Lord God eternal.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And he was a sojourner in the land of
the Palestines many days.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> After these things, God tempted Abraham,
and said to him: Abraham, Abraham. And he answered: Here I am.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> He said to him: Take thy only begotten
son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and go into the land of vision: and there
thou shalt offer him for a holocaust upon one of the mountains which I
will show thee.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> So Abraham rising up in the night,
saddled his ass: and took with him two young men, and Isaac his son: and
when he had cut wood for the holocaust he went his way to the place
which God had commanded him.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And on the third day, lifting up his
eyes, he saw the place afar off.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And he said to his young men: Stay you
here with the ass: I and the boy will go with speed as far as yonder,
and after we have worshipped, will return to you.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And he took the wood for the holocaust,
and laid it upon Isaac his son: and he himself carried in his hands fire
and a sword. And as they two went on together,

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Isaac said to his father: My father. And
he answered: What wilt thou, son? Behold, saith he, fire and wood: where
is the victim for the holocaust?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And Abraham said: God will provide
himself a victim for an holocaust, my son. So they went on together.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And they came to the place which God had
shown him, where he built an altar, and laid the wood in order upon it:
and when he had bound Isaac his son, he laid him on the altar upon the
pile of wood.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And he put forth his hand and took the
sword, to sacrifice his son.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And behold an angel of the Lord from
heaven called to him, saying: Abraham, Abraham. And he answered: Here I
am.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And he said to him: Lay not thy hand
upon the boy, neither do thou any thing to him: now I know that thou
fearest God, and hast not spared thy only begotten son for my sake.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw
behind his back a ram amongst the briers sticking fast by the horns,
which he took and offered for a holocaust instead of his son.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And he called the name of that place,
The Lord seeth. Whereupon even to this day it is said: In the mountain
the Lord will see.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And the angel of the Lord called to
Abraham a second time from heaven, saying:

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> By my own self have I sworn, saith the
Lord: because thou hast done this thing, and hast not spared thy only
begotten son for my sake:

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> I will bless thee, and I will multiply
thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that is by the
seashore: thy seed shall possess the gates of their enemies.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voice.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Abraham returned to his young men, and
they went to Bersabee together, and he dwelt there.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> After these things, it was told Abraham
that Melcha also had borne children to Nachor his brother.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Hus the firstborn, and Buz his brother,
and Camuel the father of the Syrians,

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And Cased, and Azau, and Pheldas, and
Jedlaph,

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And Bathuel, of whom was born Rebecca:
These eight did Melcha bear to Nachor Abraham's brother.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And his concubine, named Roma, bore
Tabee, and Gaham, and Tahas, and Maacha.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Sara lived a hundred and twenty-seven
years.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And she died in the city of Arbee which
is Hebron, in the land of Chanaan: and Abraham came to mourn and weep
for her.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And after he rose up from the funeral
obsequies, he spoke to the children of Heth, saying:

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> I am a stranger and sojourner among you:
give me the right of a burying-place with you, that I may bury my dead.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> The children of Heth answered, saying:

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> My Lord, hear us, thou art a prince of
God among us: bury thy dead in our principle sepulchers: and no man
shall have power to hinder thee from burying thy dead in his sepulcher.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Abraham rose up, and bowed down to the
people of the land, to wit the children of Heth:

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> And said to them: If it please your soul
that I should bury my dead, hear me, and intercede for me to Ephron the
son of Seor.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> That he may give me the double cave,
which he hath in the end of his field: for as much money as it is worth
he shall give it me before you, for a possession of a buryingplace.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Now Ephron dwelt in the midst of the
children of Heth. And Ephron made answer to Abraham in the hearing of
all that went in at the gate of the city, saying:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Let it not be so, my lord, but do thou
rather hearken to what I say: The field I deliver to thee, and the cave
that is therein, in the presence of the children of my people, bury thy
dead.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Abraham bowed down before the people of
the land,

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And he spoke to Ephron, in the presence
of the people: I beseech thee to hear me: I will give money for the
field: take it, and so I will bury my dead in it.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And Ephron answered:

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> My lord, hear me. The ground which thou
desirest, is worth four hundred sicles of silver: this is the price
between me and thee: but what is this? bury thy dead.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And when Abraham had heard this, he
weighed out the money that Ephron had asked, in the hearing of the
children of Heth, four hundred sicles of silver of common current money.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And the field that before was Ephron's,
wherein was the double cave, looking towards Mambre, both it and the
cave, and all the trees thereof in all its limits round about,

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Was made sure to Abraham for a
possession, in the sight of the children of Heth, and of all that went
in at the gate of his city.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And so Abraham buried Sara his wife, in
a double cave of the field, that looked towards Mambre, this is Hebron
in the land of Chanaan.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And the field was made sure to Abraham,
and the cave that was in it, for a possession to bury in, by the
children of Heth.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Now Abraham was old; and advanced in age:
and the Lord had blessed him in all things.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And he said to the elder servant of his
house, who was ruler over all he had: Put thy hand under my thigh,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> That I may make thee swear by the Lord
the God of heaven and earth, that thou take not a wife for my son, of
the daughters of the Chanaanites, among whom I dwell:

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> But that thou go to my own country and
kindred, and take a wife from thence for my son Isaac.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> The servant answered: If the woman will
not come with me into this land, must I bring thy son back again to the
place, from whence thou camest out?

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And Abraham said: Beware thou never bring
my son back again thither.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> The Lord God of heaven, who took me out
of my father's house, and out of my native country, who spoke to me, and
swore to me, saying: To thy seed will I give this land: he will send his
angel before thee, and thou shalt take from thence a wife for my son.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> But if the woman will not follow thee,
thou shalt not be bound by the oath; only bring not my son back thither
again.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> The servant therefore put his hand under
the thigh of Abraham his lord, and swore to him upon this word.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And he took ten camels of his master's
herd, and departed, carrying something of all his goods with him, and he
set forth and went on to Mesopotamia to the city of Nachor.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And when he had made the camels lie
down without the town near a well of water in Evening, at the time when
women were wont to come out to draw water, he said:

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> O Lord the God of my master Abraham,
meet me to day, I beseech thee, and show kindness to my master Abraham.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Behold I stand nigh the spring of
water, and the daughters of the inhabitants of this city will come out
to draw water.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Now, therefore, the maid to whom I
shall say: Let down thy pitcher that I may drink: and she shall answer,
Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let it be the same whom
thou hast provided for thy servant Isaac: and by this I shall
understand, that thou hast shown kindness to my master.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> he had not yet ended these words within
himself, and behold Rebecca came out, the daughter of Bathuel, son of
Melcha, wife to Nachor the brother of Abraham, having a pitcher on her
shoulder:

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> An exceedingly comely maid, and a most
beautiful virgin, and not known to man: and she went down to the spring,
and filled her pitcher and was coming back.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the servant ran to meet her, and
said: Give me a little water to drink of thy pitcher.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And she answered: Drink, my lord. And
quickly she let down the pitcher upon her arm, and gave him drink.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And when he had drunk, she said: I will
draw water for thy camels also, till they all drink.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> And pouring out the pitcher into the
troughs, she ran back to the well to draw water: and having drawn she
gave to all the camels.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> But he musing beheld her with silence,
desirous to know whether the Lord had made his journey prosperous or
not.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And after that the camels had drunk,
the man took out golden earrings, weighing two sicles: and as many
bracelets of ten sicles weight.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And he said to her: Whose daughter art
thou? tell me: is there any place in thy father's house to lodge?

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And she answered: I am the daughter of
Bathuel, the son of Melcha, whom she bore to Nachor.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And she said moreover to him: We have
good store of both straw and hay, and a large place to lodge in.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> The man bowed himself down, and adored
the Lord,

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Saying: Blessed be the Lord God of my
master Abraham, who hath not taken away his mercy and truth from my
master, and hath brought me the straight way into the house of my
master's brother.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Then the maid ran, and told in her
mother's house, all that she had heard.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> And Rebecca had a brother named Laban,
who went out in haste to the man, to the well.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> And when he had seen the earrings and
bracelets in his sister's hands, and had heard all that she related,
saying: Thus and thus the man spoke to me: he came to the man who stood
by the camels, and near to the spring of water,

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And said to him: Come in, thou blessed
of the Lord: why standest thou without? I have prepared the house, and a
place for the camels.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> And he brought him in into his lodging:
and he unharnessed the camels and gave straw and hay, and water to wash
his feet, and the feet of the men that were come with him.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> And bread was set before him. But he
said: I will not eat, till I tell my message. He answered him: Speak.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> And he said: I am the servant of
Abraham:

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> And the Lord hath blessed my master
wonderfully, and he is become great: and he hath given him sheep and
oxen, silver and gold, menservants and womenservants, camels and asses.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> And Sara my master's wife hath borne my
master a son in her old age, and he hath given him all that he had.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> And my master made me swear, saying:
Thou shalt not take a wife for my son of the Chanaanites, in whose land
I dwell:

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> But thou shalt go to my father's house,
and shalt take a wife of my own kindred for my son:

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> But I answered my master: What if the
woman will not come with me?

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> The Lord, said he, in whose sight I
walk, will send his angel with thee, and will direct thy way: and thou
shalt take a wife for my son of my own kindred, and of my father's
house.

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> But thou shalt be clear from my curse,
when thou shalt come to my kindred, if they will not give thee one.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> And I came to day to the well of water,
and said: O Lord God of my master Abraham, if thou hast prospered my
way, wherein I now walk,

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> Behold I stand by the well of water,
and the virgin, that shall come out to draw water, who shall hear me
say: Give me a little water to drink of thy pitcher:

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> And shall say to me: Both drink thou,
and I will also draw for thy camels: let the same be the woman, whom the
Lord hath prepared for my master's son.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> And whilst I pondered these things
secretly with myself, Rebecca appeared coming with a pitcher, which she
carried on her shoulder: and she went down to the well and drew water.
And I said to her: Give me a little to drink.

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> And she speedily let down the pitcher
from her shoulder, and said to me: Both drink thou, and to thy camels I
will give drink. I drank, and she watered the camels.

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> And I asked her, and said: Whose
daughter art thou? And she answered: I am the daughter of Bathuel, the
son of Nachor, whom Melcha bore to him. So I put earrings on her to
adorn her face, and I put bracelets on her hands.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> And falling down I adored the Lord,
blessing the Lord God of my master Abraham, who hath brought me the
straight way to take the daughter of my master's brother for his son.

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> Wherefore if you do according to mercy
and truth with my master, tell me: but if it please you otherwise, tell
me that also, that I may go to the right hand, or to the left.

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> And Laban and Bathuel answered: The
word hath proceeded from the Lord, we cannot speak any other thing to
thee but his pleasure.

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> Behold Rebecca is before thee, take her
and go thy way, and let her be the wife of thy master's son, as the Lord
hath spoken.

<span id="an_24:52">24:52</span> WHich when Abraham's servant heard,
falling down to the ground he adored the Lord.

<span id="an_24:53">24:53</span> And bringing forth vessels of silver
and gold, and garments, he gave them to Rebecca for a present. He
offered gifts also to her brothers, and to her mother.

<span id="an_24:54">24:54</span> And a banquet was made, and they ate
and drank together, and lodged there. And in the morning, the servant
arose, and said: Let me depart, that I may go to my master.

<span id="an_24:55">24:55</span> And her brother and mother answered:
Let the maid stay at least ten days with us, and afterwards she shall
depart.

<span id="an_24:56">24:56</span> Stay me not, said he, because the Lord
hath prospered my way: send me away, that I may go to my master.

<span id="an_24:57">24:57</span> And they said: Let us call the maid,
and ask her will.

<span id="an_24:58">24:58</span> And they called her, and when she was
come, they asked: Wilt thou go with this man? She said: I will go.

<span id="an_24:59">24:59</span> So they sent her away, and her nurse,
and Abraham's servant, and his company,

<span id="an_24:60">24:60</span> Wishing prosperity to their sister, and
saying: Thou art our sister, mayst thou increase to thousands of
thousands, and may thy seed possess the gates of their enemies.

<span id="an_24:61">24:61</span> So Rebecca and her maids, being set
upon camels, followed the man: who with speed returned to his master.

<span id="an_24:62">24:62</span> At the same time Isaac was walking
along the way to the well which is called Of the living and the seeing:
for he dwelt in the south country.

<span id="an_24:63">24:63</span> And he was gone forth to meditate in
the field, the day being now well spent: and when he had lifted up his
eyes, he saw camels coming afar off.

<span id="an_24:64">24:64</span> Rebecca also, when she saw Isaac,
lighted off the camel,

<span id="an_24:65">24:65</span> And said to the servant: Who is that
man who cometh towards us along the field? And he said to her: That man
is my master. But she quickly took her cloak, and covered herself.

<span id="an_24:66">24:66</span> And the servant told Isaac all that he
had done.

<span id="an_24:67">24:67</span> Who brought her into the tent of Sara
his mother, and took her to wife: and he loved her so much, that it
moderated the sorrow which was occasioned by his mother's death.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And Abraham married another wife, named
Cetura:

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Who bore to him Zamran, and Jecsan, and
Madan, and Madian, and Jesboc, and Sue.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Jecsan also begot Saba and Dadan. The
children of Dadan were Assurim, and Latusim, and Loomin.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But of Madian was born Epha, and Opher,
and Henoch, and Abida, and Eldaa: all these were the children of Cetura.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And Abraham gave all his possessions to
Isaac.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And to the children of the concubines he
gave gifts, and separated them from Isaac his son, while he yet lived,
to the east country.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And the days of Abraham's life were a
hundred and seventy-five years.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And decaying he died in a good old age,
and having lived a long time, and being full of days: and was gathered
to his people.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And Isaac and Ismael his sons buried him
in the double cave, which was situated in the field of Ephron the son of
Seor the Hethite, over against Mambre;

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Which he had bought of the children of
Heth: there was he buried, and Sara his wife.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And after his death, God blessed Isaac
his son, who dwelt by the well named Of the living and seeing.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> These are the generations of Ismael the
son of Abraham, whom Agar the Egyptian, Sara's servant, bore unto him:

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And these are the names of his children
according to their calling and generations. The firstborn of Ismael was
Nabajoth, then Cedar, and Adbeel, and Mabsam.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And Masma, and Duma, and Massa,

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Hadar, and Thema, and Jethur, and
Naphis, and Cedma.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> These are the sons of Ismael: and these
are their names by their castles and towns, twelve princes of their
tribes.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And the years of Ismael's life were a
hundred and thirty-seven, and decaying he died, and was gathered unto
his people.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And he dwelt from Hevila as far as Sur,
which looketh towards Egypt, to them that go towards the Assyrians. He
died in the presence of all his brethren.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> These also are the generations of Isaac
the son of Abraham: Abraham begot Isaac:

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> Who when he was forty years old, took
to wife Rebecca the daughter of Bathuel the Syrian of Mesopotamia,
sister to Laban.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> And Isaac besought the Lord for his
wife, because she was barren; and he heard him, and made Rebecca to
conceive.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> But the children struggled in her womb:
and she said: If it were to be so with me, what need was there to
conceive? And she went to consult the Lord.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And he answering said: Two nations are
in thy womb, and two peoples shall be divided out of thy womb, and one
people shall overcome the other, and the elder shall serve the younger.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And when her time was come to be
delivered, behold twins were found in her womb.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> He that came forth first was red, and
hairy like a skin: and his name was called Esau. Immediately the other
coming forth, held his brother's foot in his hand, and therefore he was
called Jacob.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Isaac was threescore years old when the
children were born unto him.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> And when they were grown up, Esau
became a skillful hunter, and a husbandman, but Jacob a plain man dwelt
in tents.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Isaac loved Esau, because he ate of his
hunting: and Rebecca loved Jacob.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> And Jacob boiled Pottage: to whom Esau,
coming faint out of the field,

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> Said: Give me of this red pottage, for
I am exceeding faint. For which reason his name was called Edom.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> And Jacob said to him: Sell me thy
first birthright.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> He answered: Lo I die, what will the
first birthright avail me.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> Jacob said: Swear therefore to me. Esau
swore to him, and sold his first birthright.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> And so taking bread and the pottage of
lentils, he ate, and drank, and went his way; making little account of
having sold his first birthright.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And when a famine came in the land, after
that barrenness which had happened in the days of Abraham, Isaac went to
Abimelech king of the Palestines to Gerara.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> And the Lord appeared to him and said: Go
not down into Egypt, but stay in the land that I shall tell thee.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> And sojourn in it, and I will be with
thee, and will bless thee: for to thee and to thy seed I will give all
these countries, to fulfill the oath which I swore to Abraham thy
father.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And I will multiply thy seed like the
stars of heaven: and I will give to thy posterity all these countries:
and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept
my precepts and commandments, and observed my ceremonies and laws.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> So Isaac abode in Gerara.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And when he was asked by the men of that
place, concerning his wife, he answered: She is my sister; for he was
afraid to confess that she was his wife, thinking lest perhaps they
would like him because of her beauty.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And when very many days were passed, and
he abode there, Abimelech king of the Palestines looking out through a
window, saw him playing with Rebecca his wife.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And calling for him, he said: It is
evident she is thy wife: why didst thou feign her to be thy sister? He
answered: I feared lest I should die for her sake.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And Abimelech said: Why hadst thou
deceived us? Some man of the people might have lain with thy wife, and
thou hadst brought upon us a great sin. And he commanded all the people,
saying:

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> He that shall touch this man's wife,
shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And Isaac sowed in that land, and he
found that same year a hundredfold: and the Lord blessed him.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And the man was enriched, and he went
on prospering and increasing, till he became exceeding great:

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And he had possessions of sheep and of
herds, and a very great family. Wherefore the Palestines envying him,

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Stopped up at that time all the wells,
that the servants of his father Abraham had digged, filling them up with
earth:

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Insomuch that Abimelech himself said to
Isaac: Depart from us, for thou art become much mightier than we.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> So he departed and came to the torrent
of Gerara, to dwell there:

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And he digged again other wells, which
the servants of his father Abraham had digged, and which, after his
death, the Palestines had of old stopped up: and he called them by the
same names by which his father before had called them.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And they digged in the torrent, and
found living water.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> But there also the herdsmen of Gerara
strove against the herdsmen of Isaac, saying: It is our water. Wherefore
he called the name of the well, on occasion of that which had happened,
Calumny.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And they digged also another; and for
that they quarreled likewise, and he called the name of it, Enmity.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> Going forward from thence, he digged
another well, for which they contended not: therefore he called the name
thereof, Latitude, saying: Now hath the Lord given us room, and made us
to increase upon the earth.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And he went up from that place to
Bersabee,

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> Where the Lord appeared to him that
same might, saying: I am the God of Abraham thy father; do not fear, for
I am with thee: I will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant
Abraham's sake.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And he built there an altar: and called
upon the name of the Lord, and pitched his tent: and commanded his
servants to dig a well.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> To which place when Abimelech, and
Ochozath his friend, and Phicol chief captain of his soldiers came from
Gerara,

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> Isaac said to them: Why are ye come to
me, a man whom you hate, and have thrust out from you?

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And they answered: We saw that the Lord
is with thee, and therefore we said: Let there be an oath between us,
and let us make a covenant,

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> That thou do us no harm, as we on our
part have touched nothing of thine, nor have done any thing to hurt
thee: but with peace have sent thee away increased with the blessing of
the Lord.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And he made them a feast, and after
they had eaten and drunk:

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> Arising in the morning, they swore one
to another: and Isaac sent them away peaceably to their own home.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And behold the same day the servants of
Isaac came, telling him of a well which they had digged, and saying: We
have found water.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> Whereupon he called it Abundance: and
the name of the city was called Bersabee, even to this day.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> And Esau being forty years old, married
wives, Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hethite, and Basemath the
daughter of Elon of the same place.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> And they both offended the mind of
Isaac and Rebecca.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Now Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim,
and he could not see: and he called Esau, his elder son, and said to
him: My son? And he answered: Here I am.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And his father said to him: Thou seest
that I am old, and know not the day of my death.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Take thy arms, thy quiver, and bow, and
go abroad: and when thou hast taken some thing by hunting,

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Make me savoury meat thereof, as thou
knowest I like, and bring it, that I may eat: and my soul may bless thee
before I die.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And when Rebecca had heard this, and he
was gone into the field to fulfill his father's commandment,

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> She said to her son Jacob: I heard thy
father talking with Esau thy brother, and saying to him:

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Bring me of thy hunting, and make me
meats that I may eat, and bless thee in the sight of the Lord, before I
die.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Now, therefore, my son, follow my
counsel:

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And go thy way to the flock, bring me two
kids of the best, that I may make of them meat for thy father, such as
he gladly eateth:

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Which when thou hast brought in, and he
hath eaten, he may bless thee before he die.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And he answered her: Thou knowest that
Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am smooth.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> If my father shall feel me, and
perceive it, I fear lest he will think I would have mocked him, and I
shall bring upon me a curse instead of a blessing.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And his mother said to him: Upon me be
this curse, my son: only hear thou my voice, and go, fetch me the things
which I have said.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> He went, and brought, and gave them to
his mother. She dressed meats, such as she knew his father liked.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And she put on him very good garments
of Esau, which she had at home with her:

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And the little skins of the kids she
put about his hands, and covered the bare of his neck.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> And she gave him the savoury meat, and
delivered him bread that she had baked.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Which when he had carried in, he said:
My father? But he answered: I hear. Who art thou, my son?

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And Jacob said: I am Esau thy
firstborn: I have done as thou didst command me: arise, sit, and eat of
my venison, that thy soul may bless me.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And Isaac said to his son: How couldst
thou find it so quickly, my son?

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And Isaac said: Come hither, that I may
feel thee, my son, and may prove whether thou be my son Esau, or not.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> He came near to his father, and when he
had felt him, Isaac said: The voice indeed is the voice of Jacob; but
the hands are the hands of Esau.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> He said: Art thou my son Esau? He
answered: I am.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Then he said: Bring me the meats of thy
hunting, my son, that my soul may bless thee. And when they were
brought, and he had eaten, he offered him wine also, which after he had
drunk,

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> He said to him: Come near me, and give
me a kiss, my son.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> He came near, and kissed him. And
immediately as he smelled the fragrant smell of his garments, blessing
him, he said: Behold the smell of my son is as the smell of a plentiful
field, which Lord hath blessed.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> God give thee the dew of heaven, and of
the fatness of the earth, abundance of corn and wine.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> And let peoples serve thee, and tribes
worship thee: be thou lord of thy brethren, and let they mother's
children bow down before thee. Cursed be he that curseth thee: and let
him that blesseth thee be filled with blessings.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> Isaac had scarce ended his words, when
Jacob being now gone out abroad, Esau came,

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And brought in to his father meats made
of what he had taken in hunting, saying: Arise, my father, and eat of
thy son's venison; that thy soul may bless me.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And Isaac said to him: Why! who art
thou? He answered: I am thy firstborn son Esau.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> Isaac was struck with fear, and
astonished exceedingly: and wondering beyond what can be believed, said
Who is he then the even now brought me venison that he had taken, and I
ate of all before thou camest? and I have blessed him, and he shall be
blessed.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> Esau having heard his father's words,
roared out with a great cry: and being in a great consternation, said:
Bless me also, my father.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And he said: Thy brother came
deceitfully and got thy blessing.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> But he said again: Rightly is his name
called Jacob; for he hath supplanted me lo this second time: my first
birthright he took away before, and now this second time he hath stolen
away my blessing. And again he said to his father: Hast thou not
reserved me also a blessing?

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> Isaac answered: I have appointed him
thy lord, and have made all his brethren his servants: I have
established him with corn and wine, and after this, what shall I do more
for thee, my son?

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> And Esac said to him: Hast thou only
one blessing, father? I beseech thee bless me also. And when he wept
with a loud cry,

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> Isaac being moved, said to him: In the
fat of the earth, and in the dew of heaven from above,

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> Shall thy blessing be. Thou shalt live
by the sword and shalt serve thy brother: and the time shall come, when
thou shalt shake off and loose his yoke from thy neck.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> Esau therefore always hated Jacob for
the blessing wherewith his father had blessed him: and he said in his
heart: The days will come of the mourning of my father, and I will kill
my brother Jacob.

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> These things were told to Rebecca: and
she sent and called Jacob her son, and said to him: Behold Esau thy
brother threateneth to kill thee.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> Now therefore, my son, hear my voice:
arise and flee to Laban my brother to Haran:

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> And thou shalt dwell with him a few
days, till wrath of thy brother be assuaged,

<span id="an_27:45">27:45</span> And his indignation cease, and he
forget the things thou hast done to him: afterwards I will send, and
bring thee from thence hither. Why shall I be deprived of both my sons
in one day?

<span id="an_27:46">27:46</span> And Rebecca said to Isaac: I am weary
of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the
stock of this land, I choose not to live.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him,
and charged him, saying: Take not a wife of the stock of Chanaan:

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> But go, and take a journey to Mesopotamia
of Syria, to the house of Bathuel thy mother's father, and take thee a
wife thence of the daughters of Laban thy uncle.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And God almighty bless thee, and make
thee to increase, and multiply thee: that thou mayst be a multitude of
people.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And give the blessings of Abrabam to
thee, and to thy seed after thee: that thou mayst possess the land of
thy sojournment, which he promised to thy grandfather.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And when Isaac had sent him away, he took
his journey and went to Mesopotamia of Syria to Laban the son of Bathuel
the Syrian, brother to Rebecca his mother.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And Esau seeing that his father had
blessed Jacob, and had sent him into Mesopotamia of Syria, to marry a
wife thence; and that after the blessing he had charged him, saying:
Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Chanaan:

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And that Jacob obeying his parents was
gone into Syria:

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> Experiencing also that his father was not
well pleased with the daughters of Chanaan:

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> He went to Ismael, and took to wife,
besides them he had before, Maheleth the daughter of Ismael, Abraham's
son, the sister of Nabajoth.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> But Jacob being departed from Bersabee,
went on to Haran.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And when he was come to a certain
place, and would rest in it after sunset, he took of the stones that lay
there, and putting under his head, slept in the same place.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And he saw in his sleep a ladder
standing upon the earth, and the top thereof touching heaven: the angels
also of God ascending and descending by it;

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And the Lord leaning upon the ladder,
saying to him: I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of
Isaac; the land, wherein thou sleepest, I will give to thee and to thy
seed.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And thy seed shall be as the dust of
the earth: thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to
the north, and to the south: and IN THEE and thy seed all the tribes of
the earth SHALL BE BLESSED.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And I will be thy keeper whithersoever
thou goest, and will bring thee back into this land: neither will I
leave thee, till I shall have accomplished all that I have said.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And when Jacob awaked out of sleep, he
said: Indeed the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And trembling he said: How terrible is
this place! this is no other but the house of God, and the gate of
heaven.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And Jacob, arising in the morning, took
the stone, which he had laid under his head, and set it up for a title,
pouring oil upon the top of it.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> And he called the name of the city
Bethel, which before was called Luza.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And he made a vow, saying: If God shall
be with me, and shall keep me in the way by which I walk, and shall give
me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And I shall return prosperously to my
father's house: the Lord shall be my God:

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And this stone, which I have set up for
a title, shall called the house of God: and of all things that thou
shalt give to me, I will offer tithes to thee.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Then Jacob went on in his journey, and
came into the east country.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And he saw a well in the field, and three
flocks of sheep lying by it: for the beasts were watered out of it, and
the mouth thereof was closed with a great stone.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And the custom was, when all the sheep
were gathered together to roll away the stone, and after the sheep were
watered, to put it on the mouth of the well again.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And he said to the shepherds: Brethren,
whence are you? They answered: Of Haran.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And he asked them, saying: Know you Laban
the son of Nachor? They said: We know him.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> He said: Is he in health? He is in
health, say they: and behold Rachel his daughter cometh with his flock.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And Jacob said: There is yet much day
remaining, neither is it time to bring the flocks into the folds again:
first give the sheep drink, and so lead them back to feed.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> They answered: We cannot, till all the
cattle be gathered together, and we remove the stone from the well's
mouth, that we may water the flocks.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> They were yet speaking, and behold Rachel
came with her father's sheep: for she fed the flock.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> And when Jacob saw her, and knew her to
be his cousin-german, and that they were the sheep of Laban, his uncle:
he removed the stone wherewith the well was closed.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And having watered the flock, he kissed
her: and lifting up his voice, wept.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And he told her that he was her
father's brother, and the son of Rebecca: but she went in haste and told
her father.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> Who, when he heard that Jacob his
sister's son was come, ran forth to meet him; and embracing him, and
heartily kissing him, brought him into his house. And when he had heard
the causes of his journey,

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> He answered: Thou art my bone and my
flesh. And after the days of one month were expired,

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> He said to him: Because thou art my
brother, shalt thou serve me without wages? Tell me what wages thou wilt
have.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> Now he had two daughters, the name of
the elder was Lia: and the younger was called Richel.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> But Lia was blear eyed: Rachel was well
favoured, and of a beautiful countenance.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And Jacob being in love with her, said:
I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Lahan answered: It is better that I
give her thee than to another man; stay with me.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> So Jacob served seven years for Rachel:
and they seemed but a few days, because of the greatness of his love.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> And he said to Laban: Give me my wife;
for now the time is fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And he, having invited a great number
of his friends to the feast, made the marriage.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And at night he brought in Lia his
daughter to him,

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Giving his daughter a handmaid, named
Zalpha. Now when Jacob had gone in to her according to custom when
morning was come he saw it was Lia:

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> And he said to his father in law: What
is it that thou didst mean to do? did not I serve thee for Rachel? why
hast thou deceived me?

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Laban answered: It is not the custom in
this place, to give the younger in marriage first.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> Make up the week of days of this match:
and I will give thee her also, for the service that thou shalt render me
other seven years.

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> He yielded to his pleasure: and after
the week was past, he married Rachel:

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> To whom her father gave Bala for her
servant.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> And having at length obtained the
marriage he wished for, he preferred the love of the latter before the
former, and served with him other seven years.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> And the Lord seeing that he despised
Lia, opened her womb, but her sister remained barren.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And she conceived and bore a son, and
called his name Ruben, saying: The Lord saw my affliction: now my
husband will love me.

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> And again she conceived and bore a son,
and said: Because the Lord heard that I was despised, he hath given this
also to me: and she called his name Simeon.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> And she conceived the third time, and
bore another son: and said: Now also my husband will be joined to me,
because I have borne him three sons: and therefore she called hi sname
Levi.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> The fourth time she conceived and bore
a son, and said: now will I praise the Lord: and for this she called him
Juda. And she left bearing.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And Rachel, seeing herself without
children, envied her sister, and said to her husband: Give me children,
otherwise I shall die.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> And Jacob being angry with her, answered:
Am I as God, who hath deprived thee of the fruit of thy womb?

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> But she said: I have here my servant
Bala: go in unto her, that she may bear upon my knees, and I may have
children by her.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And she gave him Bala in marriage: who,

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> When her husband had gone in unto her,
conceived and bore a son.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And Rachel said: The Lord hath judged for
me, and hath heard my voice, giving me a son, and therefore she called
his name Dan.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And again Bala conceived and bore
another,

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> For whom Rachel said: God hath compared
me with my sister, and I have prevailed: and she called him Nephtali.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> Lia, perceiving that she had left off
bearing, gave Zelpha her handmaid to her husband.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And when she had conceived and brought
forth a son,

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> She said: Happily. And therefore called
his name Gad.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> Zelpha also bore another.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And Lia said: This is for my happiness:
for women will call me blessed. Therefore she called him Aser.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And Ruben, going out in the time of the
wheat harvest into the field, found mandrakes: which he brought to his
mother Lia. And Rachel said: Give me part of thy son's mandrakes.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> She answered: Dost thou think it a
small matter, that thou hast taken my husband from me, unless thou take
also my son's mandrakes? Rachel said: He shall sleep with thee this
night, for thy son's mandrakes.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And when Jacob returned at even from
the field, Lia went out to meet him, and said: Thou shalt come in unto
me, because I have hired thee for my son's mandrakes. And he slept with
her that night.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> And God heard her prayers: and she
conceived and bore the fifth son,

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> And said: God hath given me a reward,
because I gave my handmaid to my husband. And she called his name
Issachar.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> And Lia conceived again, and bore the
sixth son,

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And said: God hath endowed me with a
good dowry: this turn also my husband will be with me, because I have
borne him six sons: and therefore she called his name Zabulon.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> After whom she bore a daughter, named
Diana.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> The Lord also remembering Rachel, heard
her, and opened her womb.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And she conceived, and bore a son,
saying: God hath taken my reproach.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And she called his name Joseph, saying:
The Lord give me also another son.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And when Joseph was born, Jacob said to
his father in law: Send me away that I may return into my country, and
to my land.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> Give me my wives, and my children, for
whom I have served thee, that I may depart: thou knowest the service
that I have rendered thee.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> Laban said to him: Let me find favour
in thy sight: I have learned by experience, that God hath blessed me for
thy sake.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> Appoint thy wages which I shall give
thee.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> But he answered: Thou knowest how I
have served thee, and how great thy possession hath been in my hands.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> Thou hadst but little before I came to
thee, and now thou art become rich: and the Lord hath blessed thee at my
coming. It is reasonable therefore that I should now provide also for my
own house.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> And Laban said: What shall I give thee?
But he said: I require nothing: but if thou wilt do what I demand, I
will feed, and keep thy sheep again.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> Go round through all thy flocks, and
separate all the sheep of divers colours, and speckled: and all that is
brown and spotted, and of divers colours, as well among the sheep, as
among the goats, shall be my wages.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> And my justice shall answer for me to
morrow before thee when the time of the bargain shall come: and all that
is not of divers colours, and spotted, and brown, as well among the
sheep as among the goats, shall accuse me of theft.

<span id="an_30:34">30:34</span> And Laban said: I like well what thou
demandest.

<span id="an_30:35">30:35</span> And he separated the name day the she
goats, and the sheep, and the he goats, and the rams of divers colours,
and spotted: and all the flock of one colour, that is, of white and
black fleece, he delivered into the hands of his sons.

<span id="an_30:36">30:36</span> And he set the space of three days'
journey betwixt himself and his son in law, who fed the rest of his
flock.

<span id="an_30:37">30:37</span> And Jacob took green robs of poplar,
and of almond, and of place trees, and pilled them in part: so when the
bark was taken off, in the parts that were pilled, there appeared
whiteness: but the parts that were whole remained green: and by this
means the colour was divers.

<span id="an_30:38">30:38</span> And he put them in the troughs, where
the water was poured out: that when the flocks should come to drink,
they might have the rods before their eyes, and in the sight of them
might conceive.

<span id="an_30:39">30:39</span> And it came to pass that in the very
heat of coition, the sheep beheld the rods, and brought forth spotted,
and of divers colours, and speckled.

<span id="an_30:40">30:40</span> And Jacob separated the flock, and put
the rods in the troughs before the eyes of the rams: and all the white
and the black were Laban's: and the rest were Jacob's, when the flocks
were separated one from the other.

<span id="an_30:41">30:41</span> So when the ewes went first to ram,
Jacob put the rods in the roughs of water before the eyes of the rams,
and of the ewes, that they might conceive while they were looking upon
them:

<span id="an_30:42">30:42</span> But when the latter coming was, and the
last conceiving, he did not put them. And those that were late ward,
become Laban's: and they of the first time, Jacob's.

<span id="an_30:43">30:43</span> And the man was enriched exceedingly,
and he had many flocks, maid servants and men servants, camels and
asses.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> But after that he heard the words of the
sons of Laban, saying: Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's,
and being enriched by his substance is become great:

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> And perceiving also that Laban's
countenance was not towards him as yesterday and the other day,

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Especially the Lord saying to him: Return
into the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred, and I will be with
thee.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> He sent, and called Rachel and Lia into
the field, where he fed the flocks,

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And said to them: I see your father's
countenance is not towards me as yesterday and the other day: but the
God of my father hath been with me.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And you know that I have served your
father to the utmost of my power.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Yea, your father also hath overreached
me, and hath changes my wages ten times: and yet God hath not suffered
him to hurt me.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> If at any time he said: The speckled
shall be thy wages: all the sheep brought forth speckled: but when he
said on the contrary: Thou shalt take all the white ones for thy wages:
all the flocks brought forth white ones.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And God hath taken your father's
substance, and given it to me.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> For after that time came of the ewes
conceiving, I lifted up my eyes, and saw in my sleep that the males
which leaped upon the females were of diverse colors, and spotted, and
speckled.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> And the angel of God said to me in my
sleep: Jacob? And I answered: Here I am.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And he said: Lift up thy eyes, and see
that all the males leaping upon the females, are of divers colors,
spotted, and speckled. For I have seen all that Laban hath done to thee.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> I am the God of Bethel, where thou
didst anoint the stone, and make a vow to me. Now therefore arise, and
go out of this land, and return into thy native country.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And Rachel and Lia answered: Have we
anything left among the goods and inheritance of our father's house?

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Hath he not counted us as strangers and
sold us, and eaten up the price of us?

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> But God hath taken our father's riches,
and delivered them to us, and to our children: wherefore do all that God
hath commanded thee.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Then Jacob rose up, and having set his
children and wives upon camels, went his way.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And he took all his substance, and
flocks, and whatsoever he had gotten in Mesopotamia, and went forward to
Isaac his father to the land of Chanaan.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> At that time Laban was gone to shear
his sheep, and Rachel stole away her father's idols.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> And Jacob would not confess to his
father in law that he was flying away.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> And when he was gone, together with all
that belonged to him, and having passed the river, was going on towards
mount Galaad,

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> It was told Laban on the third day that
Jacob fled.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> And he took his brethren with him, and
pursued after him seven days; and overtook him in the mount of Galaad.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And he saw in a dream God saying to
him: Take heed thou speak not any thing harshly against Jacob.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the
mountain: and when he with his brethren had overtaken him, he pitched
his tent in the same mount of Galaad.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> And he said to Jacob: Why hast thou
done thus, to carry away, without my knowledge, my daughters, as
captives taken with the sword.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> Why wouldst thou run away privately and
not acquaint me, that I might have brought thee on the way with joy, and
with songs, and with timbrels, and with harps?

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Thou hast not suffered me to kiss my
sons and daughters: thou hast done foolishly: and now, indeed,

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> It is in my power to return thee evil:
but the God of your father said to me yesterday: Take heed thou speak
not any things harshly against Jacob.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Suppose thou didst desire to go to thy
friends, and hadst a longing after thy father's house: why hast thou
stolen away my gods?

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Jacob answered: That I departed unknown
to thee, it was for fear lest thou wouldst take away thy daughters by
force.

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> But whereas thou chargest me with
theft: with whomsoever thou shalt find thy gods, let him be slain before
our brethren. Search, and if thou find any of thy things with me, take
them away. Now when he said this, he knew not that Rachel had stolen the
idols.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> So Laban went into the tent of Jacob,
and of Lia, and of both the handmaids, and found them not. And when he
was entered into Rachel's tent,

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> She in haste hid the idols under the
camel's furniture, and sat upon them: and when he had searched all the
tent, and found nothing,

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> She said: Let not my lord be angry that
I cannot rise up before thee, because it has now happened to me,
according to the custom of women, So his careful search was in vain.

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> And jacob being angry, said in a
chiding manner: For what fault of mine, and for what offense on my part
hast thou so hotly pursued me,

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> And searched all my household stuff?
What hast thou found of all the substance of thy house? lay it here
before my brethren, and thy brethren, and let them judge between me and
thee.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> Have I therefore been with thee twenty
years? thy ewes and goats were not barren, the rams of thy flocks I did
not eat:

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> Neither did I show thee that which the
beast had torn, I made good all the damage: whatsoever was lost by
theft, thou didst exact it of me:

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> Day and night was I parched with heat,
and with frost, and sleep departed from my eyes.

<span id="an_31:41">31:41</span> And in this manner have I served thee
in thy house twenty years, fourteen for thy daughters, and six for thy
flocks: thou hast changed also my wages ten times.

<span id="an_31:42">31:42</span> Unless the God of my father Abraham,
and the fear of Isaac had stood by me, peradventure now thou hadst sent
me away naked: God beheld my affliction and the labour of my hands, and
rebuked thee yesterday.

<span id="an_31:43">31:43</span> Laban answered him: The daughters are
mine and the children, and thy flocks, and all things that thou seest
are mine: what can I do to my children, and grandchildren?

<span id="an_31:44">31:44</span> Come therefore, let us enter into a
league: that it may be for a testimony between me and thee.

<span id="an_31:45">31:45</span> And Jacob took a stone, and set it up
for a title:

<span id="an_31:46">31:46</span> And he said to his brethren: Bring
hither stones. And they gathering stones together, made a heap, and they
ate upon it.

<span id="an_31:47">31:47</span> And Laban called it The witness heap:
and Jacob, The hillock of testimony: each of them according to the
propriety of his language.

<span id="an_31:48">31:48</span> And Laban said: This heap shall be a
witness between me and thee this day, and therefore the name thereof was
called Galaad, that is, The witness heap.

<span id="an_31:49">31:49</span> The Lord behold and judge between us
when we shall be gone one from the other.

<span id="an_31:50">31:50</span> If thou afflict my daughters, and if
thou bring in other wives over them: none is witness of our speech but
God, who is present and beholdeth.

<span id="an_31:51">31:51</span> And he said again to Jacob: Behold,
this heap, and the stone which I have set up between me and thee,

<span id="an_31:52">31:52</span> Shall be a witness: this heap, I say,
and the stone, be they for a testimony, if either I shall pass beyond it
going towards thee, or thou shalt pass beyond it, thinking harm to me.

<span id="an_31:53">31:53</span> The God of Abraham, and the God of
Nachor, the God of their father, judge between us. And jacob swore by
the fear of his father Isaac.

<span id="an_31:54">31:54</span> And after he had offered sacrifices in
the mountain, he called his brethren to eat bread. And when they had
eaten, they lodged there:

<span id="an_31:55">31:55</span> But laban arose in the night, and
kissed his sons, and daughters, and blessed them: and returned to his
place.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Jacob also went on the journey he had
begun: and the angels of God met him.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And when he saw them, he said: These are
the camps of God, and he called the name of that place Mahanaim, that
is, Camps.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And he sent messengers before him to Esau
his brother to the land of Seir to the country of Edom:

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And he commanded them, saying: Thus shall
ye speak to my lord Esau: Thus saith thy brother Jacob: I have sojourned
with Laban, and have been with him until this day.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> I have oxen, and asses, and sheep, and
menservants, and womenservants: and now I send a message to my lord,
that I may find favor in thy sight.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And the messengers returned to Jacob,
saying: We came to Esau thy brother, and behold he cometh with speed to
meet thee with four hundred men.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Then Jacob was greatly afraid; and in his
fear divided the people that was with him, and the flocks, and the
sheep, and the oxen, and the camels, into two companies,

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> Saying: If Esau come to one company and
destroy it, the other company that is left shall escape.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And Jacob said: O God of my father
Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, O Lord, who saidst to me: Return to
thy land and to the place of thy birth, and I will do well for thee,

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mercies, and of thy truth which thou hast fulfilled to thy servant. With
my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I return with two companies.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Deliver me from the hand of my brother
Esau, for I am greatly afraid of him: lest perhaps he come, and kill the
mother with the children.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Thou didst say that thou wouldst do
well by me, and multiply my seed like the sand of the sea, which cannot
be numbered for the multitude.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> And when he had slept there that night,
he set apart, of the things which he had, presents for his brother Esau.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Two hundred she goats, twenty he goats,
two hundred ewes, and twenty rams,

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Thirty milch camels with their colts,
forty kine, and twenty bulls, twenty she asses, and ten of their foals.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And he sent them by the hands of his
servants, every drove by itself, and he said to his servants: Go before
me, and let there be a space between drove and drove.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And he commanded the first, saying: If
thou meet my brother Esau, and he ask thee: Whose art thou? or whither
goest thou? or whose are these before thee?

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Thou shalt answer: Thy servant Jacob's:
he hath sent them as a present to my lord Esau: and he cometh after us.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> In like manner he commanded the second
and the third, and all that followed with the droves, saying: Speak ye
the same words to Esau, when ye find him.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And ye shall add: thy servant Jacob
himself also followeth after us: for he said: I will appease him with
the presents that go before, and afterwards I will see him, perhaps he
will be gracious to me.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> So the presents went before him, but
himself lodged that night in the camp.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And rising early he took his two wives,
and his two handmaids, with his eleven sons, and passed over the ford of
Jaboc.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> And when all things were brought over
that belonged to him,

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> He remained alone: and behold a man
wrestled with him till morning.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And when he saw that he could not
overcome him, he touched the sinew of his thigh, and forthwith it
shrank.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> And he said to him: Let me go, for it
is break of day. He answered: I will not let thee go except thou bless
me.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And he said: What is thy name? He
answered: Jacob.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> But he said: Thy name shall not be
called Jacob, but Israel: for if thou hast been strong against God, how
much more shalt thou prevail against men?

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> Jacob asked him, Tell me by what name
art thou called? He answered: Why dost thou ask my name? And he blessed
him in the same place.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> And Jacob called the name of the place
Phanuel, saying: I have seen God face to face, and my soul has been
saved.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> And immediately the sun rose upon him,
after he was past Phanuel; but he halted on his foot.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> Therefore the children of Israel, unto
this day, eat not the sinew, that shrank in Jacob's thigh: because he
touched the sinew of his thigh and it shrank.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And Jacob lifting up his eyes, saw Esau
coming, and with him four hundred men: and he divided the children of
Lia, and of Rachel, and of the two handmaids:

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And he put both the handmaids and their
children foremost: and Lia and her children in the second place: and
Rachel and Joseph last.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> And he went forward and bowed down with
his face to the ground seven times until his brother came near.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Then Esau ran to meet his brother, and
embraced him: and clasping him fast about the neck, and kissing him,
wept.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And lifting up his eyes, he saw the women
and their children, and said: What mean these? And do they belong to
thee? He answered: They are the children which God hath given to me thy
servant.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Then the handmaids and their children
came near, and bowed themselves.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Lia also with her children came near, and
bowed down in like manner, and last of all Joseph and Rachel bowed down.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And Esau said: What are the droves that I
met? He answered: That I might find favor before my lord.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> But he said: I have plenty, my brother,
keep what is thine for thyself.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And Jacob said: Do not so I beseech
thee, but if I have found favor in thy eyes, receive a little present at
my hands: for I have seen thy face, as if I should have seen the
countenance of God: be gracious to me,

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> And take the blessing, which I have
brought thee, and which God hath given me, who giveth all things. He
took it with much ado at his brother's earnest pressing him,

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And said: Let us go on together, and I
will accompany thee in thy journey.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And Jacob said: My lord, thou knowest
that I have with me tender children, and sheep, and kine with young:
which if I should cause to be overdriven, in one day all the flocks will
die.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> May it please my lord to go before his
servant: and I will follow softly after him, as I shall see my children
to be able, until I come to my lord in Seir.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> Esau answered: I beseech thee, that
some of the people at least, who are with me, may stay to accompany thee
in the way. And he said: There is no necessity: I want nothing else but
only to find favor, my lord, in thy sight.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> So Esau returned, that day, the way
that he came, to Seir.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And Jacob came to Socoth: where having
built a house, and pitched tents, he called the name of the place
Socoth, that is, Tents.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And he passed over to Salem, a city of
the Sichemites, which is in the land of Chanaan, after he returned from
Mesopotamia of Syria: and he dwelt by the town:

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And he bought that part of the field,
in which he pitched his tents, of the children of Hemor, the father of
Sichem for a hundred lambs.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And raising an altar there, he invoked
upon it the most mighty God of Israel.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Dina the daughter of Lia went out to
see the women of that country.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> And when Sichem the son of Hemor the
Hevite, the prince of that land, saw her, he was in love with her: and
took her away, and lay with her, ravishing the virgin.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> And his soul was fast knit unto her, and
whereas she was sad, he comforted her with sweet words.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And going to Hemor his father, he said:
Get me this damsel to wife.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> But when Jacob had heard this, his sons
being absent, and employed in feeding the cattle, he held his peace till
they came back.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And when Hemor the father of Sichem was
come out to speak to Jacob,

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Behold his sons came from the field: and
hearing what had passed, they were exceeding angry, because he had done
a foul thing in Israel, and committed an unlawful act, in ravishing
Jacob's daughter,

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And Hemor spoke to them: The soul of my
son Sichem has a longing for your daughter: give her him to wife:

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And let us contract marriages one with
another: give us your daughters and take you our daughters,

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And dwell with us: the land is at your
command, till, trade,and possess it.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> Sichem also said to her father and to
her brethren: Let me find favor in your sight: and whatsoever you shall
appoint I will give.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Raise the dowery,, and ask gifts, and I
will gladly give what you shall demand: only give me this damsel to
wife.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> The sons of Jacob answered Sichem and
his father deceitfully, being enraged at the deflowering of their
sister:

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> We cannot do what you demand, nor give
our sister to one that is uncircumcised, which with us is unlawful and
abominable.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> But in this way may we be allied with
you, if you will be like us, and all the male sex among you be
circumcised:

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> Then will we mutually give and take
your daughters, and ours: and we will dwell with you, and will be one
people:

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> But if you will not be circumcised, we
will take our daughter and depart:

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Their offer pleased Hemor, and Sichem
his son:

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And the young man made no delay, but
forthwith fulfilled what was required, for he loved the damsel
exceedingly, and he was the greatest man in all his father's house.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> And going into the gate of the city
they spoke to the people:

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> These men are peaceable and willing to
dwell with us: let them trade in the land, and till it, which being
large and wide wanteth men to till it: we shall take their daughters for
wives, and we will give them ours.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> One thing there is for which so great a
good is deferred: We must circumcise every male among us, following the
manner of the nation.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> And their substance, and cattle, and
all that they possess, shall be ours: only in this let us condescend,
and by dwelling together, we shall make one people.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> And they all agreed, and circumcised
all the males.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> And behold the third day, when the pain
of the wound was greatest, two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi,
the brothers of Dina, taking their swords, entered boldly into the city,
and slew all the men:

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> And they killed also Hemor and Sichem,
and took away their sister Dina, out of Sichem's house.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And when they were gone out, the other
sons of Jacob came upon the slain; and plundered the city in revenge of
the rape.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And they took their sheep and their
herds and their asses, wasting all they had in their houses and in the
fields.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> and their children and wives they took
captive,

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And when they had boldly perpetrated
these things, Jacob said to Simeon and Levi: You have troubled me, and
made me hateful to the Chanaanites and Pherezites, the inhabitants of
this land: we are few: they will gather themselves together and kill me;
and both I, and my house, shall be destroyed.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> They answered: Should they abuse our
sister as a strumpet?

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> In the meantime God said to Jacob: Arise,
and go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an altar to God,
who appeared to thee when thou didst flee from Esau thy brother.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> And Jacob having called together all his
household, said: Cast away the strange gods that are among you, and be
cleansed and change your garments.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> Arise, and let us go up to Bethel, that
we may make there an altar to God: who heard me in the day of my
affliction, and accompanied me in my journey.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> So they gave him all the strange gods
they had, and the earrings which were in their ears: and he buried them
under the turpentine tree, that is behind the city of Sichem.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> And when they were departed, the terror
of God fell upon all the cities round about, and they durst not pursue
after them as they went away.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> And Jacob came to Luza, which is in the
land of Chanaan, surnamed Bethel: he and all the people that were with
him.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And he built there an altar, and called
the name of that place, The house of God: for there God appeared to him
when he fled from his brother.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> At the same time Debora the nurse of
Rebecca died, and was buried at the foot of Bethel under an oak: and the
name of that place was called, The oak of weeping.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> And God appeared again to Jacob, after he
returned from Mesopotamia of Syria, and he blessed him,

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Saying: Thou shalt not be called any
more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And he called him Israel.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> And said to him: I am God Almighty,
increase thou and be multiplied. Nations and peoples of nations shall be
from thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And the land which I gave to Abraham
and Isaac, I will give to thee, and to thy seed after thee.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> And he departed from him.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> But he set up a monument of stone, in
the place where God had spoken to him: pouring drink offerings upon it,
and pouring oil thereon:

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And calling the name of that place
Bethel.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> And going forth from thence, he came in
the springtime to the land which leadeth to Ephrata: wherein when Rachel
was in travail,

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> By reason of her hard labor she began
to be in danger, and the midwife said to her: Fear not, for thou shalt
have this son also.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> And when her soul was departing for
pain, and death was now at hand, she called the name of her son Benoni,
that is, The son of my pain: but his father called him Benjamin, that
is, The son of the right hand.

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> So Rachel died, and was buried in the
highway that leadeth to Ephrata, that is Bethlehem.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> And Jacob erected a pillar over her
sepulcher: this is the pillar of Rachel's monument, to this day.

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> Departing thence, he pitched his tent
beyond the Flock tower.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> And when he dwelt in that country,
Ruben went, and slept with Bala, the concubine of his father: which he
was not ignorant of. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve.

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> The sons of Lia: Ruben the firstborn,
and Simeon, and Levi, and Juda, and Issachar, and Zebulon.

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> The sons of Rachel: Joseph and
Benjamin.

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> The sons of Bala, Rachel's handmaid:
Dan and Naphthali.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> The sons of Zelpha, Lia's handmaid: Gad
and Aser: these are the sons of Jacob, that were born to him in
Mesopotamia of Syria.

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> And he came to Isaac his father in
Mambre, the city of Arbee, this is Hebron: Wherein Abraham and Isaac
sojourned.

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> And the days of Isaac were a hundred
and eighty years.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> And being spent with age he died, and
was gathered to his people, being old and full of days: and his sons
Esau and Jacob buried him.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And these are the generations of Esau,
the same is Edom.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Esau took wives of the daughters of
Chanaan: Ada the daughter of Elon the Hethite, and Oolibama the daughter
of Ana, the daughter of Sebeon the Hevite:

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> And Basemath the daughter of Ismael,
sister of Nabajoth.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And Ada bore Eliphaz: Basemath bore
Rahuel:

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Oolibama bore Jehus and Ihelon and Core.
These are the sons of Esau, that were born to him in the land of
Chanaan.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> And Esau took his wives and his sons and
daughters, and every soul of his house, and his substance, and cattle,
and all that he was able to acquire in the land of Chanaan: and went
into another country, and departed from his brother Jacob.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> For they were exceeding rich, and could
not dwell together: neither was the land in which they sojourned able to
bear them, for the multitude of their flocks.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And Esau dwelt in mount Seir: he is Edom.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> And these are the generations of Esau the
father of Edom in mount Seir,

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And these the names of his sons:
Eliphaz the son of Ada the wife of Esau: and Rahnel the son of Basemath
his wife.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And Eliphaz had sons: Theman, Omar,
Sepho, and Gatham, and Cenee.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> And Thamna was the concubine of Eliphaz
the son of Esau: and she bore him Amalech. These are the sons of Ada the
wife of Esau.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And the sons of Rahuel were Nahath and
Zara, Samma and Meza. These were the sons of Basemath the wife of Esau.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> And these were the sons of Oolibama,
the daughter of Ana, the daughter of Sebeon, the wife of Esau, whom she
bore to him, Jehus, and Ihelon, and Core.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> These were dukes of the sons of Esau:
the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau: duke Theman, duke Omar, duke
Sepho, duke Cenez,

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Duke Core, duke Gatham, duke Amalech:
these are the sons of Eliphaz, in the land of Edom, and these the Bone
of Ada.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And these were the sons of Rahuel, the
son of Esau: duke Nahath, duke Zara, duke Samma, duke Meza. And these
are the dukes of Rahuel, in the land of Edom: these the sons of Base-
math the wife of Esau.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And these the sons of Oolibama the wife
of Esau: duke Jehus, duke Ihelon, duke Core. These are the dukes of
Oolibama, the daughter of Ana, and wife of Esau.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> These are the sons of Esau, and these
the dukes of them: the same is Edom.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> These are the sons of Seir the Horrite,
the inhabitants of the land: Lotan, and Sobal, and Sebeon, and Ana,

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> And Dison, and Eser, and Disan. These
are dukes of the Horrites, the sons of Seir in the land of Edom.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> And Lotan had sons: Hori and Heman. And
the sister of Lotan was Thamna.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And these the sons of Sobal: Alvan and
Manahat, and Ebal, and Sepho, and Oman.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> And these the sons of Sebeon: Aia and
Ana. This is Ana that found the hot waters in the wilderness, when he
fed the asses of Sebeon his father:

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And he had a son Dison, and a daughter
Oolibama.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> And these were the sons of Dison:
Hamdan, and Eseban, and Jethram, and Charan.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> These also were the sons of Eser:
Balaan, and Zavan, and Acan.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> And Disan had sons : Hus, and Aram.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> These were dukes of the Horrites: duke
Lotan, duke Sobal, duke Sebeon, duke Ana,

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> Duke Dison, duke Eser, duke Disan:
these were dukes of the Horrites that ruled in the land of Seir.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And the kings that ruled in the land of
Edom, before the children of Israel had a king were these:

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> Bela the son of Beer, and the name of
his city Denaba.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> And Bela died, and Jobab the son of
Zara of Bosra reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And when Jobab was dead, Husam of the
land of the Themanites reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And after his death, Adad the son of
Badad reigned in his stead, who defeated the Madianites in the country
of Moab: and the name of his city was Avith.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> And when Adad was dead, there reigned
in his stead, Semla of Masreca.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> And he being dead, Saul of the river
Rohoboth, reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> And when he also was dead, Balanan the
son of Achobor succeeded to the kingdom.

<span id="an_36:39">36:39</span> This man also being dead, Adar reigned
in his place, and the name of his city was Phau: and his wife was called
Meetabel, the daughter of Matred, daughter of Mezaab.

<span id="an_36:40">36:40</span> And these are the names of the dukes of
Esau in their kindreds, and places, and callings: duke Thamna, duke
Alva, duke Jetheth,

<span id="an_36:41">36:41</span> Duke Oolibama, duke Ela, duke Phinon,

<span id="an_36:42">36:42</span> Duke Cenez, duke Theman, duke Mabsar,

<span id="an_36:43">36:43</span> Duke Magdiel, duke Hiram: these are the
dukes of Edom dwelling in the land of their government; the same is Esau
the father of the Edomites.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And Jacob dwelt in the land of Chanaan
wherein his father sojourned.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And these are his generations: Joseph,
when he was sixteen years old, was feeding the dock with his brethren,
being but a boy: and he was with the sons of and of Zelpha his father's
wives : and he accused his brethren to his father of a most wicked
crime.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> Now Israel loved Joseph above all his
sons, because he had him in his old age: and he made him a coat of
divers colours.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And his brethren seeing that he was loved
by his father, more than all his sons, hated him, and could not speak
peaceably to him.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> Now it fell out also that he told his
brethren a dream, that he had dreamed: which occasioned them to hate him
the more.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And he said to them: Hear my dream which
I dreamed.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> I thought we were binding sheaves in the
field: and my sheaf arose as it were, end stood, and your sheaves
standing about, bowed down before my sheaf.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> His brethren answered : Shalt thou be our
king? or shall we be subject to thy dominion? Therefore this matter of
his dreams and words ministered nourishment to their envy and hatred.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> He dreamed also another dream, which he
told his brethren, saying: I saw in a dream, as it were the sun, and the
moon, and eleven stars worshipping me.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> And when he had told this to his father
and brethren, his father rebuked him, and said: What meaneth this dream
that thou hast dreamed? shall I and thy mother, and thy brethren worship
thee upon the earth?

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> His brethren therefore envied him: but
his father considered the thing with himself.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And when his brethren abode in Sichem
feeding their father's docks,

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> Israel said to him : Thy brethren feed
the sheep in Sichem: come, I will send thee to them. And when he
answered:

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> I am ready: he said to him: Go, and see
if all things be well with thy brethren, and the cattle: and bring me
word again what is doing. So being sent from the vale of Hebron, he came
to Sichem:

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And a man found him there wandering in
the field, and asked what he sought.

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> But he answered: I seek my brethren;
tell me where they feed the docks.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> And the man said to him: They are
departed from this place: for I heard them say: Let us go to Dothain.
And Joseph went forward after his brethren, and found them in Dothain.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> And when they saw him afar off, be-
fore he came nigh them, they thought to kill him.

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> And said one to another: Behold the
dreamer cometh.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Come, let us kill him, and cast him
into some old pit : and we will say : Some evil beast hath devoured him:
and then it shall appear what his dreams avail him :

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And Ruben hearing this, endeavoured to
deliver him out of their hands, end said:

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> Do not take away his life, nor shed his
blood: but cast him into this pit, that is in the wilderness, and keep
your hands harmless: now he said this, being desirous to deliver him out
of their hands and to restore him to his father.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> And as soon as he came to his brethren,
they forthwith stript him of his outside coat, that was of divers
colours:

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> And cast him into an old pit, where
there was no water.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And sitting down to eat bread, they saw
some Ismaelites on their way coming from Calaad, with their camels,
carrying spices, and balm, and myrrh to Egypt.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> And Juda said to his brethren: What
will it profit us to kill our brother, and conceal his blood?

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> It is better that he be sold to the
Ismaelites, and that our hands be not defiled: for he is our brother and
our flesh. His brethren agreed to his words.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And when the Madianite merchants passed
by, they drew him out of the pit, and sold him to the Ismaelites, for
twenty pieces of silver: and they led him into Egypt.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> And Ruben, returning to the pit, found
not the boy:

<span id="an_37:30">37:30</span> And rending his garments he went to his
brethren, and said: The boy doth not appear and whither shall I go?

<span id="an_37:31">37:31</span> And they took his coat, and dipped it
in the blood of a kid, which they had killed :

<span id="an_37:32">37:32</span> Sending some to carry it to their
father, and to say: This we have found: see whether it be thy son's
coat, or not.

<span id="an_37:33">37:33</span> And the father acknowledging it, said:
It is my son's coat, an evil wild beast hath eaten him, a beast hath
devoured Joseph.

<span id="an_37:34">37:34</span> And tearing his garments, he put an
sackcloth, mourning for his son a long time.

<span id="an_37:35">37:35</span> And alibis children being gathered
together to comfort their father in his sorrow, he would not receive
comfort, but said: I will go down to my son into hell, mourning. And
whilst he continued weeping,

<span id="an_37:36">37:36</span> The Madianites sold Joseph in Egypt to
Putiphar, an eunuch of Pharao, captain of the soldiers.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> At that time Juda went down from his
brethren, and turned in to a certain Odollamite, named Hiras.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> And he saw there the daughter of a man of
Chanaan, called Sue: and taking her to wife, he went in unto her.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And she conceived, and bore a son, and
called his name Her.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And conceiving again, she bore a son, and
called him Onan.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> She bore also a third: whom she called
Sela. after whose birth, she ceased to bear any more.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And Juda took a wife for Her his
firstborn, whose name was Thamar.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And Her, the firstborn of Juda, was
wicked in the sight of the Lord: and was slain by him.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> Juda, therefore add to Onan his son: Go
in to thy brother's wife and marry her, that thou mayst raise seed to
thy brother.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> He knowing that the children should not
be his, when he went in to his brother's wife, spilled his seed upon the
ground, lest children should be born in his brother's name.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> And therefore the Lord slew him, be-
cause he did a detestable thing.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> Wherefore Juda said to Thamar his
daughter in law: Remain a widow in thy father's house, till Sela my son
grow up: for he was afraid lest he also might die, as his brethren did.
She went her way and dwelt in her father's house.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> And after many days were past, the
daughter of Sue the wife of Juda died: and when he had taken comfort
after his mourning, he went up to Thamnas, to the shearers of his sheep,
he and Hiras the Odollamite the shepherd of his flock.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> And it was told Thamar that her father
in law was come up to Thamnas to shear his sheep.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> And she put off the garments of her
widowhood, and took a veil: and changing her dress, sat in the cross
way, that leadeth to Thamnas: because Sela was grown up, and she had not
been married to him.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> When Juda saw her, he thought she was a
harlot: for she had covered her face, lest she should be known.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> And going to her, he said: Suffer me to
lie with thee: for he knew her not to be his daughter in law. And she
answered: What wilt thou give me to en joy my company?

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> He said: I will send thee a kid out of
the flock. And when she said again: I will suffer what thou wilt, if
thou give a pledge, till thou send what thou promisest,

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> Juda said: What wilt thou have for a
pledge ? She answered: Thy ring and bracelet, and the staff which thou
holdest in thy hand. The woman therefore at one copulation conceived.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> And she arose and went her way: and
putting off the apparel which she had taken, put on the garments of her
widowhood.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> And Juda sent a kid by his shepherd,
the Odollamite, that he might receive the pledge again, which he had
given to the woman: but he, not finding her,

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> asked the men of that place : Where is
the woman that sat in the cross way? And when they all made answer:
There was no harlot in this place,

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> He returned to Juda, and said to him: I
have not found her; moreover the men of that place said to me, that
there never sat a harlot there.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> Juda said : Let her take it to herself
; surely she cannot charge us with a,lie: I sent the kid which I
promised: and thou didst not find her.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> And behold after three months they told
a lie, saying: Thamar, thy daughter in law hath played the harlot, and
she appeareth to have a big belly. And Juda said : Bring her out that
she may be burnt.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> But when she was led to execution, she
sent to her father in law, saying: By the man, to whom these things
belong, I am with child. See whose ring, and bracelet, and staff this
is.

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> But he acknowledging the gifts, said:
She is juster than I: because I did not give her to Sela, my son.
However, he knew her no more.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> And when she was ready to be brought to
bed, there appeared twins in her womb: and in the very delivery of the
infants, one put forth a hand, whereon the midwife tied a scarlet
thread, saying:

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> This shall come forth the first.

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> But he drawing back his hand, the other
came forth: and the woman said: Why is the partition divided for thee?
and therefore called his name Phares.

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> Afterwards his brother came out, on
whose hand was the scarlet thread: and she called him Zara.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And Joseph was brought into Egypt, and
Putiphar an eunuch of Pharao, chief captain of the army, an Egyptian,
bought him of the Ismaelites, by whom he was brought.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And the Lord was with him, and he was a
prosperous man in all things: and he dwelt in his master's house,

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> Who knew very well that the Lord was with
him, and made all that he did to prosper in his hand.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And Joseph found favour in the sight of
his master, and ministered to him: and being set over all by him, he
governed the house committed to him, and all things that were delivered
to him:

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And the Lord blessed the house of the
Egyptian for Joseph's sake, and multiplied all his substance, both at
home, and in the fields.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Neither knew he any other thing, but the
bread which he ate. And Joseph was of a beautiful countenance, and
comely to behold.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> h And after many days his mistress 'cast
her eyes on Joseph, and said: Lie with me.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> But he, in no wise consenting to that
wicked act, said to her: Behold, my master hath delivered all things to
me, and knoweth not what he hath in his own house:

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Neither is there any thing which is hot
in my power, or that he hath not delivered to me, but thee, who art his
wife : how then can I do this wicked thing, and I sin against my God?

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> With such words as these day by day,
both the woman was importunate with the young man, and he refused the
adultery.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> Now it happened on it certain day, that
Joseph went into the house, and was doing some business without any, man
with him:

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> And she catching the skirt of his
garment, said: Lie with me. But he leaving the garment in her hand,
fled, and went out.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> And when the woman saw the garment in
her hands, and herself disregarded,

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> She called to her the men of her house,
and said to them: See, he hath brought in a Hebrew, to abuse us: he came
in to me, to lie with me : and when I cried out,

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And he heard my voice, he left the
garment that I held, and got him out.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> For a proof therefore of her fidelity,
she kept the garment, and shewed it to her husband when he returned
home:

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And said: The Hebrew servant, whom thou
best brought, came to me to abuse me.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> And when he heard me cry, he left the
garment which I held, and fled out.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> His master hearing these things, and
giving too much credit to his wife's words, was very angry.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> And cast Joseph into the prison, where
the king's prisoners were kept, and he was there shut up.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> But the Lord was with Joseph and having
mercy upon him gave him favour in the sight of the chief keeper of the
prison:

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> Who delivered into his hand all the
prisoners that were kept in custody: and whatsoever was done was under
him.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> Neither did he himself know any thing,
having committed all things to him: for the Lord was with him, and made
all that he did to prosper.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> After this, it came to pass, that two
eunuchs, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, offended their
lord.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> And Pharao being angry with them (now the
one was chief butler, the other chief baker)

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> He sent them to the prison of the
commander of the soldiers, in which Joseph also was prisoner,

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> But the keeper of the prison delivered
them to Joseph, and he served them. Some little time passed, and they
were kept in custody.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And they both dreamed a dream the same
night, according to the interpretation agreeing to themselves:

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And when Joseph was come in to them in
the morning, and saw them sad,

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> He asked them, saying: Why is your
oountenance sadder to day than usual?

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> They answered: We have dreamed a dream,
and there is nobody to interpret it to us. And Joseph said to them: Both
not interpretation belong to God? Tell me what you have dreamed.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> The chief butler first told his dream: I
saw before me a vine,

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> On which were three branches, which by
little and little sent out buds, and after the blossoms brought forth
ripe grapes :

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And the cup of Pharao was in my hand:
and I took the grapes, and pressed them into the cup which I held, and I
gave the cup to Pharao.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Joseph answered: This is the
interpretation of the dream: The three branches are yet three days:

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> After which Pharao will remember thy
service, and will restore thee to thy former place: and thou shah
present him the cup according to thy office, as before thou wast wont to
do.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> Only remember me, when it shall be well
with thee, and do me this kindness: to put Pharao in mind to take me out
of this prison:

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> For I was stolen away out of the land I
of the Hebrews, and here without any fault was cast into the dungeon.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> The chief baker seeing that he had
wisely interpreted the dream, said: I also dreamed a dream, That I bed
three baskets of meal upon my heed:

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> And that in one basket which was
uppermost, I carried all meats that are made by the art of baking, and
that the birds ate out of it.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> Joseph answered: This is the
interpretation of the dream: The three baskets are yet three days:

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> After which Pharao will take thy hand
from thee, and hang thee on a cross, and the birds shall tear thy flesh.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> The third day after this was the
birthday of Pharao: and he made a. great feast for his servants, and at
the banquet remembered the chief butler, and the chief baker.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> And he restored the one to his place to
present him the cup:

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> The other he hanged on a gibbet, that
the truth of the interpreter might be shewn.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> But the chief butler, when things
prospered with him, forgot his interpreter.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> After two years Pharao had a dream. He
thought he stood by the river,

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Out of which came up seven kine, very
beautiful and fat: and they fed in marshy places.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Other seven also came up out of the
river, ill favoured, and leanfleshed: and they fed on the very bank of
the river, in green places:

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> And they devoured them, whose bodies were
very beautiful and well conditioned. So Pharao awoke.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> He slept again, and dreamed another
dream: Seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk full and fair:

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> Then seven other ears sprung up thin and
blasted,

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And devoured all the beauty of the
former. Pharao awaked after his rest:

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> And when morning was come, being struck
with fear, he sent to all the interpreters of Egypt, and to all the wise
men: and they being called for, he told them his dream, and there was
not any one that could interpret it.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Then at length the chief butler
remembering, said: I confess my sin:

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> The king being angry with his servants,
commanded me and the chief baker to be cast into the prison of the
captain of the soldiers:

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Where in one night both of us dreamed a
dream foreboding things to come.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> There was there a young man a Hebrew,
servant to the same captain of the soldiers: to whom we told our dreams,

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> And we heard what afterwards the event
of the thing proved to be so. For I was restored to my office: and he
was hanged upon a gibbet.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Forthwith at the king's command, Joseph
was brought out of the prison, and they shaved him, and changing his
apparel, brought him in to him.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> And he said to him: I have dreamed
dreams, and there is no one that can expound them: Now I have heard that
thou art very wise at interpreting them.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> Joseph answered: Without me, God shall
give Pharao a prosperous answer.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> So Pharao told what he had dreamed:
Methought I stood upon the bank of the river,

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> And seven kine came up out of the river
exceeding beautiful and full of flesh: and they grazed on green places
in a marshy pasture.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> And behold, there followed these, other
seven kine, so very ill favoured and lean, that I never saw the like in
the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> And the devoured and consumed the
former,

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> And yet gave no mark of their being
full: but were as lean and ill favoured as before. I awoke, and then
fell asleep again,

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> And dreamed a dream: Seven ears of corn
grew upon one stalk, full and very fair.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> Other seven also thin and blasted,
sprung of the stock:

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> And they devoured the beauty of the
former: I told this dream to the conjecturers, and there is no man that
can expound it.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> Joseph answered: The king's dream is
one: God hath shewn to Pharao what he is about to do.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> The seven beautiful kine, and the seven
full ears, are seven years of plenty: and both contain the same meaning
of the dream.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> And the seven lean and thin kine that
came up after them, and the seven thin ears that were blasted with the
burning wind, are seven years of famine to come:

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> Which shall be fulfilled in this order:

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> Behold, there shall come seven years of
great plenty in the whole land of Egypt:

<span id="an_41:30">41:30</span> After which shall follow other seven
years of so great scacity, that all the abundance before shall be
forgotten: for the famine shall consume all the land,

<span id="an_41:31">41:31</span> And the greatness of the scarcity shall
destroy the greatness of the plenty.

<span id="an_41:32">41:32</span> And for that thou didst see the second
time a dream pertaining to the same thing: it is a token of the
certainty, and that the word of God cometh to pass, and is fulfilled
speedily.

<span id="an_41:33">41:33</span> Now therefore let the king provide a
wise and industrious man, and make him ruler over the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_41:34">41:34</span> That he may appoint overseers over all
the countries: and gather into barns the fifth part of the fruits,
during the seven fruitful years,

<span id="an_41:35">41:35</span> That shall now presently ensue: and let
all the corn be laid up under Pharao's hands and be reserved in the
cities.

<span id="an_41:36">41:36</span> And let it be in readiness, against the
famine of seven years to come, which shall oppress Egypt, and the land
shall not consumed with scarcity.

<span id="an_41:37">41:37</span> The counsel pleased Pharao and all his
servants.

<span id="an_41:38">41:38</span> And he said to them: Can we find such
another man, that is full of the spirit of God?

<span id="an_41:39">41:39</span> He said therefore to Joseph: Seeing God
hath shewn thee all that thou hast said, can I find one wiser and one
like unto thee?

<span id="an_41:40">41:40</span> Thou shalt be over my house, and at the
commandment of thy mouth all the people shall obey: only in the kingly
throne will I be above thee.

<span id="an_41:41">41:41</span> And again Pharao said to Joseph:
Behold, I have appointed thee over the whole land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:42">41:42</span> And he took his ring from his own hand,
and gave it into his hand: and he put upon him a robe of silk, and put a
chain of gold about his neck.

<span id="an_41:43">41:43</span> And he made him go up into his second
chariot, the crier proclaiming that all should bow their knee before
him, and that they should know he was made govenor over the whole land
of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:44">41:44</span> And the king said to Joseph: I am
Pharao; without thy commandment no man shall move hand or foot in all
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:45">41:45</span> And he turned his name, and called him
in the Eyyptian tounge, The saviour of the world. And he gave him to
wife Asenth the daughter of Putiphare priest of Heliopolis. Then Joseph
went out to the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_41:46">41:46</span> (Now he was thirty years old when he
stood before king Pharao) and he went round all the countries of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:47">41:47</span> And the fruitfulness of the seven years
came: and the corm being bound up into sheaves was gathered together
into the barns of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:48">41:48</span> And all the abundance of grain was laid
up in every city.

<span id="an_41:49">41:49</span> And there was so great abundance of
wheat, that it was equal to the sand of the sea, and the plenty exceeded
measure.

<span id="an_41:50">41:50</span> And before the famine came, Joseph had
two sons born: whom Aseneth the daughter of Putiphare priest of
Heliopolis bore unto him.

<span id="an_41:51">41:51</span> And he called the name of the first
born Manasses, saying: God hath made me to forget all my labours, and my
father's house.

<span id="an_41:52">41:52</span> And he named the second Epharaim,
saying: God hath made me to grow in the land of my poverty.

<span id="an_41:53">41:53</span> Now when the seven years of the plenty
that had been in Egypt were past:

<span id="an_41:54">41:54</span> The seven years of scarcity, which
Joseph had foretold, began to come: and the famine prevailed in the
whole world, but there was bread in all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:55">41:55</span> And when there also they began to be
famished, the people cried to Pharao for food. And he said to them: Go
to Joseph: and do all that he shall say to you.

<span id="an_41:56">41:56</span> And the famine increased daily in all
the land: and Joseph opened all the barns, and sold to the Egyptians:
for the famine had oppressed them also.

<span id="an_41:57">41:57</span> And all provinces came into Egypt, to
buy food, and to seek some relief of their want.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> And Jacob hearing that food was sold in
Egypt, said to his sons: Why are ye careless?

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> I have heard that wheat is sold in Egypt:
go ye down, and buy us necessaries, that we may live, and not be
consumed with want.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> So the ten brethren of Joseph went down,
to buy corn in Egypt:

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> Whilst Benjamin was kept at home by
Jacob, who said to his brethren: Lest perhaps he take any harm in the
journey.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> And they entered into the land of Egypt
with others that went to buy. For the famine was in the land of Chanaan.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> And Joseph was governor in the land of
Egypt, and corn was sold by his direction to the people. And when his
brethren had bowed down to him,

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And he knew them, he spoke as it were to
strangers somewhat roughly, asking them: Whence came you? They answered:
From the land of Chanaan, to buy necessaries of life.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> And though he knew his brethren, he was
not known by them.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> And remembering the dreams, which
formerly he had dreamed, he said to them: You are spies. You are come to
view the weaker parts of the land.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> But they said: It is not so, my lord,
but thy servants are come to buy food.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> We are all the sons of one man: we are
come as peaceable men, neither do thy servants go about any evil.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And he answered them: It is otherwise:
you are come to consider the unfenced parts of this land.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> But they said: We thy servants are
twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Chanaan: the
youngest is with our father, the other is not living.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> He saith: This is it that I said: You
are spies.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> I shall now presently try what you are:
by the health of Pharao you shall not depart hence, until your youngest
brother come.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> Send one of you to fetch him: and you
shall be in prison, till what you have said be proved, whether it be
true or false: or else by the health of Pharao you are spies.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> So he put them in prison three days.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> And the third day he brought them out
of prison, and said: Do as I have said, and you shall live: for I fear
God.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> If you be peaceable men, let one of
your brethren be bound in prison: and go ye your ways and carry the corn
that you have bought, unto your houses.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> And bring your youngest brother to me,
that I may find your words to be true, and you may not die. They did as
he had said.

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> And they talked one to another: We
deserve to suffer these things, because we have sinned against our
brother, seeing the anguished of his soul, when he besought us, and we
would not hear: therefore is this affliction come upon us.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> And Ruben one of them, said: Did not I
say to you: Do not sin against the boy: and you would not hear me?
Behold his blood is required.

<span id="an_42:23">42:23</span> And they knew not that Joseph
understood, because he spoke to them by an interpreter.

<span id="an_42:24">42:24</span> And he turned himself away a little
while, and wept: and returning he spoke to them.

<span id="an_42:25">42:25</span> And taking Simeon, and binking him in
their presence, he commanded his servants to fill their sacks with
wheat, and to put every man's money again in their sacks, and to give
them besides provisions for the way: and they did so.

<span id="an_42:26">42:26</span> But they having loaded their asses with
the corn, went their way.

<span id="an_42:27">42:27</span> And one of them opening his sack, to
give his beast provender in the inn, saw the money in the sack's mouth;

<span id="an_42:28">42:28</span> And said to his brethren: My money is
given me again, hehold it is in the sack. And thye were astonished, and
troubled, and said to one another: What is this that God hath done unto
us?

<span id="an_42:29">42:29</span> And they came to Jacob their father in
the land of Chanaan, and they told him all things that had befallen
them, saying:

<span id="an_42:30">42:30</span> The lord of the land spoke roughly to
us, and took us to be spies of the country.

<span id="an_42:31">42:31</span> And we answered him: We are peaceable
men, and we mean no plot.

<span id="an_42:32">42:32</span> We are twelve brethren born of one
father: one is not living, the youngest is with our father in the land
of Chanaan.

<span id="an_42:33">42:33</span> And he said to us: Hereby shall I know
that you are peaceable men: Leave one of your brethren with me, and take
ye necessary provision for your houses, and go your ways.

<span id="an_42:34">42:34</span> And bring your youngest brother to me,
that I may know you are not spies: and you may receive this man again,
that is kept in prison: and afterwards may have leave to buy what you
will.

<span id="an_42:35">42:35</span> When they had told this, they poured
out their corn and every man found his money tied in the mouth of his
sack: and all being astonished together,

<span id="an_42:36">42:36</span> Their father Jacob said: You have made
me to be without children: Joseph is not living, Simeon is kept in
bonds, and Benjamin you will take away: all these evils are fallen upon
me.

<span id="an_42:37">42:37</span> And Ruben answered him: Kill my two
sons if I bring him not again to thee: deliver him unto my hand, and I
will restore him to thee.

<span id="an_42:38">42:38</span> But he said: My son shall not go down
with you: his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if any mischief
befall him in the land to which you go, you will bring down my gray
hairs with sorrow to hell.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> In the mean time the famine was heavy
upon all the land.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> And when they had eaten up all the corn,
which they had brought out of Egypt, Jacob said to his sons: Go again
and buy us a little food.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> Juda answered: The man declared unto us
with the atteststion of an oath, saying: You shall not see my face,
unless you bring your youngest brother with you.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> If therefore thou wilt send him with us,
we will set out together, and will buy necessaries for thee.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> But if thou wilt not, we will not go: for
the man, as we have often said, declared unto us, saying: You shall not
see my face without your youngest brother.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> Israel said to them: You have done this
for my misery in that you told him you had also another brother.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> But they answered: The man asked us in
order concerning our kindred: if our father lived: if we had a brother:
and we answered him regularly, according to what he demanded: Bring
hither your brother with you?

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> And Juda said to his father: Send the bou
with me, that we may set forward, and may live: lest both we and our
children perish.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> I take the boy upon me, require him at my
hand: unless I bring him again, and restore him to thee, I will be
guilty of sin against thee for ever.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> If delay had not been made, we had been
here again the second time.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> Then Israel said to them: If it must
needs be so, do what you will: take of the best fruits of the land in
your vessels, and carry down presents to the man, a little balm, and
honey, and storax, myrrh, turpentine, and almonds.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> And take with you double money, and
carry back what you found in your sacks, lest perhaps it was done by
mistake.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> And take also your brother, and go to
the man.

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> And may my almighty Bod make him
favourable to you; and send back with you your brother, whom he keepeth,
and this Benjamin: and as for me I shall be desolate without children.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> So the men took the presents, and
double money, and Benjamin: and went down into Egypt, and stood before
Joseph.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> And when he had seen them, and Benjamin
with them, he commanded the steward of his house, saying: Bring in the
men into the house, and kill victims, and prepare a feast: because they
shall eat with me at noon.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> He did as he was commanded, and brought
the men into the house.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> And they being much afraid, said there
one to another: Because of the money, which we carried back the first
time in our sacks, we are brought in: that he may bring upon us a false
accusation, and by violence make slaves of us and our asses.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> Wherefore going up to the steward of
the house, at the door,

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> They said: Sir, we desire thee to hear
us: We came down once before to buy food:

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> And when we had bought, and come to the
inn, we opened our sacks, and found our money in the mouths of the
sacks: which we have now brought again in the same weight.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> And we have brought other money
besides, to buy what we want: we cannot tell who put it in our bags.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> But he answered: Peace be with you,
fear not: your God, and the God of your Father hath given you treasure
in your sacks. For the money, which you gave me, I have for good. And he
brought Simeon out to them.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> And having brought them into the house,
he fetched water, and they washed their feet, and he gave provender to
their asses.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> But they made ready the presents,
against Joseph came at noon: for they had heard that they should eat
bread there.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Then Joseph came into his house, and
they offered him the presents holding them in their hands, and they
bowed down with their face to the ground.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> But he, courteously saluting them
again, asked them, saying: Is the old man your father in health, of whom
uou told me? Is he yet living?

<span id="an_43:28">43:28</span> And they answered: Thy servant our
father is in health, he is yet living. And bowing themselves they made
obeisance to him.

<span id="an_43:29">43:29</span> And Joseph lifting up his eyes, saw
Benjamin his brother, by the same mother, and said: Is this your young
brother, of whom you told me? And he said: God be gracious to thee, my
son.

<span id="an_43:30">43:30</span> And he made haste becouse his heart was
moved upon his brother, and tears gushed out: And going into his chamber
he wept.

<span id="an_43:31">43:31</span> And when he had washed his face, coming
out again, he refrained himself, and said: Set bread on the table.

<span id="an_43:32">43:32</span> And when it was set on, for Joseph
apart, and for his brethren apart, for the Egyptians also that ate with
him, apart, (for it is unlawful for the Egyptians to eat with the
Hebrews, and they think such a feast profane:)

<span id="an_43:33">43:33</span> They sat before him, the firstborn
according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his age. And
they wondered very much:

<span id="an_43:34">43:34</span> Taking the messes which they received
of him: and the greater mess came to Benjamin, so that it exceeded by
five parts. And they drank, and were merry with him.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> And Joseph commanded the steward of his
house, saying: Fill their sacks with corn, as much as they can hold: and
put the money of every one in the top of his sack.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> And in the mouth of the younger's sack
put my silver cup, and the price which he gave for the wheat. And it was
so done.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> And when the morning arose, they were
sent away with their asses.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And when they were now departed out of
the city, and had gone forward a little way; Joseph sendingfor the
steward of his house, said: Arise, and pursue after the men: and when
thou hast overtaken them, say to them: Why have you returned evil for
good?

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> The cup which you have stolen is that in
which my lord drinketh, and in which he is wont to divine: you have done
a very evil thing.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> He did as he had commanded him. And
having overtaken them, he spoke to them the same words.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> And they answered: Why doth our lord
speak so, as though thy servants had committed so heinous a fact?

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> The money, that we found in the top of
our sacks, we brought back to thee from the land of Chanaan: how then
should it be that we should steal out of thy lord's house, gold or
silver?

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> With whomsoever of thy servants shall be
found that which thou seekest, let him die, and we will be the bondmen
of my lord.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> And he said to them: Let it be
according to your sentence: with whomsoever it shall be found, let him
be my servant, and you shall be blameless.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Them they speedily took down their
sacks to the ground, and every man opened his sack.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> Which when he had searched, beginning
at the eldest and ending at the youngest, he found the cup in Benjamin's
sack.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> Then they rent their garments, and
loading their asses again, returned into the town.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> And Juda at the head of his brethren
went in to Joseph, (for he was not yet gone out of the place, ) and they
altogether fell down before him on the ground.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> And he said to them: Why would you do
so? know you not that there is no one like me in the science of
divining.

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> And Juda said to him: What shall we
answer my lord? or what shall we say, or be able justly to allege? God
hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we are all bondmen
to my lord, both we, and he with whom the cup was found.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> Joseph answered: God forbid that should
do so: he that stole the cup, he shall be my bondman: and go you away
free to your father.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> Then Juda coming hearer, said boldly: I
beseech thee, my lord, let thy servant speak a word in thy ears,and be
not angry with thy servant: for after Pharao thou art,

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> My lord. Thou didst ask thy servants
the first time: Have you a father or a brother?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> And we answered thee, my lord: We have
a father an old man, and a young boy, that was born in his old age;
whose brother by the mother is dead: and he alone is left of his mother,
and his father loveth him tenderly.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> And thou saidst to thy servants: Bring
him hither to me, and I will set my eyes on him.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> We suggested to my lord: The boy cannot
leave his father: for if he leave him, he will die.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> And thou saidst to thy servants: Except
your youngest brother come with you, you shall see my face no more.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> Therefore when we were gone up to thy
servant our father, we told him all that my lord had said.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> And our father said: Go again, and buy
us a little wheat.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> And we said to him: We cannot go: if
our youngest brother go down with us, we will set out together:
otherwise, without him we dare not see the man's face.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> Whereunto he answered: You know that my
wife bore two.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> One went out, and you said: A beast
devoured him: and hitherto he appeareth not.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> If you take this also, and any thing
befall him in the way you will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow unto
hell.

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> 30Therefore if I shall go to thy
servant our father, and the boy be wanting, (whereas his life dependeth
upon the life of him,)

<span id="an_44:31">44:31</span> And he shall see that he is not with
us, he will die, and thy servants shall bring down his gray hairs with
sorrow unto hell.

<span id="an_44:32">44:32</span> Let me be tht proper servant, who took
him into my trust, and promised, saying: If I bring him not again, I
will be guilty of sin against my father for ever.

<span id="an_44:33">44:33</span> Therefore I thy servant will stay
instead of the boy in the service of my lord, and let the boy go up with
his brethren.

<span id="an_44:34">44:34</span> For I cannot return to my father
without the boy, lest I be a witness of the calamity that will oppress
my father.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> Joseph could no longer refrain himself
before many that stood by: whereupon he commanded that all should go
out, and no stranger be present at their knowing one another.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> And he lifted up his voice with weeping,
which the Egyptians and all the house of Pharao heard.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And he said to his brethren: I am Joseph:
is my father yet living? His brethren could no answer him, being struck
with exceeding great fear.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> And he said mildly to them: Come nearer
to me. And when they were come near him, he said: I am Joseph, your
brother, whom you sold into Egypt.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> Be not afraid, and let it not seem to you
a hard case that you sold me into these countries: for God sent me
before you into Egypt for your preservation.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> For it is two years since the famine
began to be upon the land, and five years more remain, wherein there can
be neither ploughing nor reaping.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> And God sent me before, that you may be
preserved upon the earth, and may have food to live.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> Not by your counsel was I sent hither,
but by the will of God: who hath made me as it were a father to Pharao,
and lord of his whold house, and governor in all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Make haste, and go ye up to my father,
and say to him: Thus saith thy son Joseph: God hath made me lord of the
whole land of Egypt: come down to me, linger not.

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> And thou shalt dwell in the land of
Gessen: and thou shalt be near me, thou and thy sons, and thy son's
sons, thy sheep, and thy gerds, and all things that thou hast.

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> And there I will feed thee, (for there
are yet five years of famine remaining,) lest both thou perish, and thy
house, and all things that thou hast.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> Behold, your eyes, and the eyes of my
brother Benjamin see that it is my mouth that speaketh to you.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> You shall tell my father of all my
glory, and all things that you have seen in Egypt: make haste and bring
him to me.

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> And falling upon the neck of his
brother Benjamin, he embraced him and wept: and Benjamin in like manner
wept also on his neck.

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> And Joseph kissed all his brethren, and
wept upon every one of them: after which they were emboldened to ,peak
to him.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> And it was heard, and the fame was
abroad in the king's court: The brethren of Joseph are come: and Pharao
with all his family was glad.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> And he spoke to Joseph that he should
give orders to his brethren, saying : Load your beasts, and go into the
land of Chanaan.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> And bring away from thence your father
and kindred, and come to me: and I will give you all the good things of
Egypt, that you may eat the marrow of the land.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> Give orders also that they take wagons
out of the land of Egypt, for/ the carriage of their children and their
wives: and say: Take up your father, and make haste to come with all
speed:

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> And leave nothing of your house- hold
stuff: for all the riches of Egypt shall be yours.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> And the sons of Israel did as they were
bid. And Joseph gave them wagons according to Pharao's commandment: and
provisions for the way.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> He ordered also to be brought out for
every one of them two robes: but to Benjamin he gave three hundred
pieces of silver with Ave robes of the best:

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> Sending to his father as much money and
raiment, adding besides ten he asses to carry off all the riches of
Egypt, and as many she asses, carrying wheat and bread for the journey.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> So he sent away his brethren, and at
their departing said to them: Be not angry in the way.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> And they went up out of Egypt, and came
into the land of Chanaan to their father Jacob.

<span id="an_45:26">45:26</span> And they told him, saying: Joseph thy
son is living: and he is ruler in all the land of Egypt. Which when
Jacob heard, he awaked as it were out of a deep sleep, yet did not
believe them.

<span id="an_45:27">45:27</span> They, on the other side, told the whole
order of the thing. And when he saw the wagons and all that he had sent
his spirit revived,

<span id="an_45:28">45:28</span> And he said: It is enough for me, if
Joseph my son be yet living: Iwill go and see him before I die.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> And Israel taking his journey, with all
that he had, came to the well of the oath, and killing victims there to
the God of his father Isaac,

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> He heard him by a vision in the night
calling him, and saying to him: Jacob, Jacob. And he answered him: Lo,
here I am.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> God said to him: I am the most mighty God
of thy father: fear not, go down into Egypt, for I will make a great
nation of thee there.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> I will go down with thee thither, and
will bring thee back again from thence: Joseph also shall put his hands
upon thy eyes.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> And Jacob rose up from the well of the
oath: and his sons took him up, with their children and wives in the
wagons, which Pharao had sent to carry the old man,

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> And all that he had in the land of
Chanaan, and he came into Egypt with all his seed:"

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> His sons, and grandsons, daughters, and
all his offspring together.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> And these are the names of the children
of Israel, that entered into Egypt, he and his children. His firstborn
Ruben,

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> The sons of Ruben: Henoch and Phallu, and
Hesron and Charmi.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> The sons of Simeon: Jamuel and Jamin
and Ahod, and Jachin and Sohar, and Saul the son of a woman of Chanaan.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> The sons of Levi: Gerson and Caath and
Merari.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> The sons of Juda: Her and Onan and Sela
and Phares and Zara. And Her and Onan died in the land of Chanaan. And
sons were born to Phares: Hesron and Hamul.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> The sons of Issachar: Thola and Phua
and Job and Semron.

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> The sons of Zabulon: Sared and Elo and
Jahelel.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> These are the sons of Lia, whom she
bore in Mesopotamia of Syria, with Dins his daughter. All the souls of
her sons and daughters, thirty-three.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> The sons of Cad: Sephian and Haggi and
Suni and Esebon and Heri and Arodi and Areli.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> The sons of Beer: Jamne and Jesua and
Jessuri and Beria, and Sara their sister. The sons of Beria: Heber and
Melchiel.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> These are the sons of Zelpha, whom
Laban gave to Lia his daughter. And these she bore to Jacob, sixteen
souls.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife: Joseph
and Benjamin.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> And sons were born to Joseph, in the
land of Egypt, whom Aseneth the daughter of Putiphare priest of
Heliopolis bore him: Manasses and Ephraim.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> The sons of Benjamin: Bela and Bechor
and Asbel and Gera and Naaman and Echi and Ros and Mophim and Ophim and
Ared.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> These are the sons of Rachel, whom she
bore to Jacob: all the souls, four- teen.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> The sons of Dan: Husim.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> The sons of Nephtali: Jaziel and Guni
and Jeser and Sallem.

<span id="an_46:25">46:25</span> These are the sons of Bala, whom Laban
gave to Rachel his daughter: and these she bore to Jacob: all the souls,
seven.

<span id="an_46:26">46:26</span> All the souls that went with Jacob into
Egypt, and that came out of his thigh, besides his sons' wives,
sixty-six.

<span id="an_46:27">46:27</span> And the sons of Joseph, that were born
to him in the land of Egypt, two souls. All the souls of the house of
Jacob, that entered into Egypt, were seventy.

<span id="an_46:28">46:28</span> And he sent Juda before him to Joseph,
to tell him; and that he should meet him in Gessen.

<span id="an_46:29">46:29</span> And when he was come thither, Joseph
made ready his chariot, and went up to meet his father, in the same
place: and seeing him, he fell upon his neck, and embracing him wept.

<span id="an_46:30">46:30</span> And the father said to Joseph: Now
shall I die with joy, because I have seen thy face, and leave thee
alive.

<span id="an_46:31">46:31</span> And Joseph said to his brethren, and to
all his father's house: I will go up, and will tell Pharao, and will say
to him: My brethren and my father's house, that were in the land of
Chanaan, are come to me:

<span id="an_46:32">46:32</span> And the men are shepherds, and their
occupation is to feed cattle: their flocks and herds, and all they have,
they have brought with them.

<span id="an_46:33">46:33</span> And when he shall call you, and shall
say: What is your occupation?

<span id="an_46:34">46:34</span> You shall answer: We thy servants are
shepherds, from our infancy until now, both we and our fathers. And this
you shall say, that you may dwell in the land of Gessen, because the
Egyptians have all shepherds in abomination.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> Then Joseph went in and told Pharao,
saying: My father and brethren, their sheep and their herds, and all
that they possess, are come out of the land of Chanaan: and behold they
stay in the land of Gessen.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Five men also the last of his brethren,
he presented before the king:

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> And he asked them: What is your
occupation? They answered: Re thy servants are shepherds, both we, and
our fathers.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> We are come to sojourn in thy land,
because there is no grass for the flocks of thy servants, the famine
being very grievous in the land of Chanaan: and we pray thee to give
orders that we thy servants may be in the land of Gessen.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> The king therefore said to Joseph: Thy
father and thy brethren are come to thee.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> The land of Egypt is before thee: make
them dwell in the best place, and give them the land of Gessen. And if
thou knowest that there are industrious men among them, make them rulers
over my cattle.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> After this Joseph brought in his to the
king, and presented him before him: and he blessed him.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> And being asked by him: How many are the
days of the years of thy life?

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> He answered: The days of my pilgrimage
are a hundred and thirty years, few, and evil, and they are not come up
to the days of the pilgrimage of my fathers.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> And blessing the king, he went out.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> But Joseph gave a possession to his
father and his brethren in Egypt, in the best place of the land, in
Ramesses, as Pharao had commanded.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> And he nourished them, and all his
father's house, allowing food to every one.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> For in the whole world there was want
of bread, and a famine had op- pressed the land: more especially of
Egypt and Chanaan.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> Out of which he gathered up all the
money for the corn which they bought, and brought it into the king's
treasure.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> And when the buyers wanted money, all
Egypt came to Joseph, saying: Give us bread: why should we die in thy
presence, having now net money.

<span id="an_47:16">47:16</span> And he answered them: Bring your
cattle, and for them I will give you food, if you have no money.

<span id="an_47:17">47:17</span> And when they had brought them, he gave
them food in exchange for their horses, and sheep, and oxen, end asses
and he maintained them that year for the exchange of their cattle.

<span id="an_47:18">47:18</span> And they came the second year, and said
to him: We will not hide from our lord, how that our money is spent, and
our cattle also are gone: neither art thou ignorant that we have nothing
now left but our bodies and our lands.

<span id="an_47:19">47:19</span> Why therefore shall we die before thy
eyes? we will be thins, both we and our lands: buy us to be the king's
servants, and give us seed, lest for want of tillers the land be turned
into a wilderness.

<span id="an_47:20">47:20</span> So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt,
every man selling his possessions, because of the greatness of the
famine. And he brought it into Pharao's hands:

<span id="an_47:21">47:21</span> And all its people from one end of the
borders of Egypt, even to the other end thereof,

<span id="an_47:22">47:22</span> Except the land of the priests, which
had been given them by the king: to whom also a certain allowance of
food was given out of the public stores, and therefore they were not
forced to sell their possessions.

<span id="an_47:23">47:23</span> Then Joseph said to the people : Be-
hold as you see, both you and your lands belong to Pharao: take seed and
sow the fields,

<span id="an_47:24">47:24</span> That you may have corn. The fifth part
you shall give to the king: the other four you shall have for seed, and
for food for your families and children.

<span id="an_47:25">47:25</span> And they answered: Our life is in thy
hand: only let my lord look favourably upon us, and we will gladly serve
the king.

<span id="an_47:26">47:26</span> From that time unto this day, in the
whole land of Egypt, the fifth part is paid to the king, and it is
become as a law, except the land of the priests, which was free from
this covenant.

<span id="an_47:27">47:27</span> So Israel dwelt in Egypt, that is, in
the land of Gessen, and possessed it: and grew, and was multiplied
exceedingly.

<span id="an_47:28">47:28</span> And he lived in it seventeen years: and
all the days of his life came to a hundred and forty-seven years.

<span id="an_47:29">47:29</span> And when he saw that the day of his
death drew nigh, he called his son Joseph, and said to him: If I have
found favour in thy sight, put thy hand under my thigh; and thou shalt
shew me this kindness and truth, not to bury me in Egypt:

<span id="an_47:30">47:30</span> But I will sleep with my fathers, end
thou shalt take me away out of this land, and bury me in the burying
place of my ancestors. And Joseph answered him: I will do what thou hast
commanded.

<span id="an_47:31">47:31</span> And he said: Swear then to me. And as
he was swearing, Israel adored God, turning to the bed's head.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> After these things, it was told Joseph
that his father was sick: and he set out to go to him, taking his two
sons Manasses and Ephraim.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> And it was told the old man: Behold I thy
son Joseph cometh to thee. And being strengthened he sat on his bed.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> And when Joseph was come in to him, he
said : God Almighty appeared to me at Lute, which is in the land of
Chanaan: and he blessed me,

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> And he said : I will cause thee to
increase and multiply, and I will make of thee a multitude of people:
and I will give this land to thee, and to thy seed after thee for an
everlasting possession.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> So thy two sons who were born to thee in
the land of Egypt before I came hither to thee, shall be mine: Ephraim
and Manasses shall be reputed to me as Ruben and Simeon.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> But the rest whom thou shalt have after
them, shall be thine, and shall be called by the name of their brethren
in their possessions.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> For, when I came out of Mesopotamia,
Rachel died from me in the land of Ohanaan in the very journey, and it
was springtime: and I was going to Ephrata, and I buried her near the
way of Ephrata, which by another name is called Bethlehem.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> Then seeing his sons, he said to him: Who
are these?

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> He answered: They are my sons, whom God
hath given me in this place. And he said: Bring them to me that I may
bless them.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> For Israel's eyes were dim by reason of
his great age, and he could not see clearly. And when they were brought
to him, he kissed and embraced them.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> And said to his son: I am not deprived
of seeing thee: moreover God hath shewed me thy seed.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> And when Joseph had taken them from his
father's lap, he bowed down with his face to the ground.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And he set Ephraim on his right bend,
that is, towards the left hand of Israel; but Manasses on his left hand,
to wit, towards his father's right hand, and brought them near to him.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> But he stretching forth his right hand,
put it upon the head of Ephraim the younger brother; and the left upon
the head of Manasses who was the elder, changing his hands.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> And Jacob blessed the sons of Joseph,
and said: God, in whose sight my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, God
that feedeth me from my youth until this day;

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> The angel that delivereth me from all
evils, bless these boys: and let my name be called upon them, and the
names of my fathers Abraham, and Isaac, and may they grow into a
multitude upon the earth.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> And Joseph seeing that his father had
put his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, was much displeased: and
taking his father's hand he tried to lift it from Ephraims head, and to
remove it to the head of Manasses.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> And he said to his father: It should
not be so, my father: for this is the first- born, put thy right hand
upon his head.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> But he refusing, said: I know, my son,
I know: and this also shall become peoples, and shall be multiplied: but
this younger brother shall be greater than he: and his seed shall grow
into nations.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> And he blessed them at that time,
saying: In thee shall Israel be blessed, and it shall be said: God do to
thee as to Ephraim, and as to Manasses. And he set Ephraim before
Manasses.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And he said to Joseph his son: Be- hold
I die, and God will be with you, and will bring you back into the land
of your fathers.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> I give thee a portion above thy
brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorrhite a with my sword
and bow.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> And Jacob called his sons, and said to
them: Gather yourselves together that I may tell you the things that
shall befall you in the last days.

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> Gather yourselves together, and hear, O
ye sons of Jacob, hearken to Israel your father:

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> Ruben, my firstborn, thou art my
strength, and the beginning of my sorrow: excelling in gifts, greater in
command.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> Thou art poured out as water, grow thou
not: because thou wentest up to thy father's bed, and didst defile his
couch.

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> Simeon and Levi brethren: vessels of
iniquity, waging war.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> Let not my soul go into their counsel,
nor my glory be in their assembly: "be- cause in their fury they slew a
man, and in their selfwill they undermined a wall.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Cursed be their fury, because it was
stubborn: and their wrath because it was cruel: I Will divide them in
Jacob, and will scatter them in Israel.

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> Juda, thee shall thy brethren praise: thy
hands shall be on the necks of thy enemies: the sons of thy father shall
bow down to thee.

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> Juda is a lion's whelp: to the prey, my
son, thou art gone up: resting thou hast couched as a lion, and as a
lioness, who shall rouse him?

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> The sceptre shall not be taken away
from Juda, nor a ruler from his thigh, till he come that is to be sent,
and he shall be the expectation of nations.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> Tying his foal to the vineyard, and his
ass, 0 my son, to the vine. He shall wash his robe in wine, and his
garment in the blood of the grape.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> His eyes are more beautiful than wine,
and his teeth whiter than milk.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> Zabulon shall dwell on the sea shore,
and in the road of ships, reaching as far as Sidon.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> Issachar shall be a strong ass lying
down between the borders.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> He saw rest that it was good: and the
land that it was excellent: and he bowed his shoulder to carry, and
became a servant under tribute.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> Dan shall judge his people like an-
other tribe in Israel.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Let Dan be a snake in the way, a
serpent in the path, that biteth the horse's heels that his rider may
fall backward.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> I will look for thy salvation, 0 Lord.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> Gad, being girded, shall fight before
him: and he himself shall be girded backward.

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> Aser, his bread shall be fat, and he
shall yield dainties to kings.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> Nephtali, a hart let loose, and giving
words of beauty.

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Joseph is a growing son, a growing son
and comely to behold; the daughters run to and fro upon the wall.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> But they that held darts provoked him,
and quarrelled with him, and envied him.

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> His bow rested upon the strong, and the
bands of his arms and his hands were loosed, by the hands of the mighty
one of Jacob: thence he came forth a pastor, the stone of Israel.

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> The God of thy father shall be thy
helper, and the Almighty shall bless thee with the blessings of heaven
above, with the blessings of the deep that lieth be- neath, with the
blessings of the breasts and of the womb.

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> The blessings of thy father are
strengthened with the blessings of his fathers: until the desire of the
everlasting hills should come; may they be upon the head of Joseph, and
upon the crown of the Nazarite among his brethren.

<span id="an_49:27">49:27</span> Benjamin a ravenous wolf, in the
morning shall eat the prey, and in the evening shall divide the spoil.

<span id="an_49:28">49:28</span> All these are the twelve tribes of
Israel: these things their father spoke to them, and he blessed every
one, with their proper blessings.

<span id="an_49:29">49:29</span> And he charged them, saying: I am now
going to be gathered to my people : bury me with my fathers in the
double cave, which is in the field of Ephron the Hethite,

<span id="an_49:30">49:30</span> Over against Mambre in the land of
Chanaan, which Abraham bought to- gather with the field of Ephron the
Hethite for a possession to bury in.

<span id="an_49:31">49:31</span> There they buried him, and Sara his
wife: there was Isaac buried with Rebecca his wife: there also Lia doth
lie buried.

<span id="an_49:32">49:32</span> And when he had ended the commandments,
wherewith he instructed his sons, he drew up his feet upon the bed, and
died: and he was gathered to his people."

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> And when Joseph saw this, he fell upon
his father's face weeping and kissing him.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> And he commanded his servants the
physicians to embalm his father.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> And while they were fulfilling his
commands, there passed forty days: for this was the manner with bodies
that were embalmed, and Egypt mounted for him seventy days.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> And the time of the mourning being
expired, Joseph spoke to the family of Pharao: If I have found favour in
your sight, speak in the ears of Pharao:

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> For my father made me swear to him,
saying: Behold I die: thou shalt bury me in my sepulchre which I have
digged for myself in the land of Chanaan. So I will go up and bury my
father, and return.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> And Pharao said to him: Go up and bury
thy father according as he made thee swear.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> So he went up, and there went with him
all the ancients of Pharao's house, and all the elders of the land of
Egypt,

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> And the house of Joseph with his
brethren, except their children, and their flocks and herds, which they
left in the land of Gessen.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> He had also in his train chariots and
horsemen: and it was it great company.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> And they came to the threshingfloor of
Atad, which is situated beyond the Jordan: where celebrating the
exequies with a great and vehement lamentation, they spent full seven
days.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> And when the inhabitants of Chanaan saw
this, they said: This is a great mourning to the Egyptians. And there-
fore the name of that place was called, The mourning of Egypt.

<span id="an_50:12">50:12</span> So the sons of Jacob did as he had
commanded them.

<span id="an_50:13">50:13</span> And carrying him into the land of
Chanaan, they buried him in the double cave which Abraham had bought
together with the held for a possession of a buryingplace, of Ephron the
Hethite over against Mambre.

<span id="an_50:14">50:14</span> And Joseph returned into Egypt with his
brethren, and all that were in his company, after he had buried his
father.

<span id="an_50:15">50:15</span> Now he being dead, his brethren were
afraid, and talked one with another : Lest perhaps he should remember
the wrong he suffered, and requite us all the evil that we did to him.

<span id="an_50:16">50:16</span> And they sent a message to him, saying:
Thy father commanded us before he died,

<span id="an_50:17">50:17</span> That we should say thus much to thee
from him: I beseech thee to forget the wickedness of thy brethren, and
the sin and malice they practiced against thee: we also pray thee, to
forgive the servants of the God of thy father this wickedness. And when
Joseph heard this, he wept.

<span id="an_50:18">50:18</span> And his brethren came to him: and
worshipping prostrate on the ground they said: We are thy servants.

<span id="an_50:19">50:19</span> And he answered them: Fear not: can we
resist the will of God?

<span id="an_50:20">50:20</span> You thought evil against me: but God
turned it into good, that he might exalt me, as at present you see, and
might save many people.

<span id="an_50:21">50:21</span> Fear not: I will feed you and your
children. And he comforted them, and spoke gently and mildly.

<span id="an_50:22">50:22</span> And he dwelt in Egypt with all his
father's house: and lived a hundred and ten years. And he saw the
children of Ephraim to the third generation. The children also of Machir
the son of Ma-nasses were born on Joseph's knees.

<span id="an_50:23">50:23</span> After which he told his brethren: God
will visit you after my death, and will make you go up out of this land,
to the land which he swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

<span id="an_50:24">50:24</span> And he made them swear to him, saying:
God will visit you, Carry my bones with you out of this place:

<span id="an_50:25">50:25</span> And he died being a hundred and ten
years old. And being embalmed he was laid in a coffin in Egypt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus](exo)
