[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hos)  [Next](amo) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Joel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of the Lord that came to Joel the
son of Phatuel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye
inhabitants of the land: did this ever happen in your days, or in the
days of your fathers?

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Tell ye of this to your children, and let
your children tell their children, and their children to another
generation.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> That which the palmerworm hath left, the
locust hath eaten: and that which the locust hath left, the bruchus hath
eaten: and that which the bruchus hath left, the mildew hath destroyed.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Awake, ye that are drunk, and weep, and
mourn all ye that take delight in drinking sweet wine: for it is cut off
from your mouth.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For a nation is come up upon my land,
strong and without number: his teeth are like the teeth of a lion: and
his cheek teeth as of a lion's whelp.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> He hath laid my vineyard waste, and hath
pilled off the bark of my fig tree: he hath stripped it bare, and cast
it away; the branches thereof are made white.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth
for the husband of her youth.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Sacrifice and libation is cut off from the
house of the Lord: the priests, the Lord's ministers, have mourned:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The country is destroyed, the ground hath
mourned: for the corn is wasted, the wine is confounded, the oil hath
languished.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> The husbandmen are ashamed, the
vinedressers have howled for the wheat, and for the barley, because the
harvest of the field is perished.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> The vineyard is confounded, and the fig
tree hath languished: the pomegranate tree, and the palm tree, and the
apple tree, and all the trees of the field are withered: because joy is
withdrawn from the children of men.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Gird yourselves, and lament, O ye
priests, howl, ye ministers of the altars: go in, lie in sackcloth, ye
ministers of my God: because sacrifice and libation is cut off from the
house of your God.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Sanctify ye a fast, call an assembly;
gather together the ancients, all the inhabitants of the land into the
house of your God: and cry ye to the Lord:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Ah, ah, ah, for the day: because the day
of the Lord is at hand, and it shall come like destruction from the
mighty.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Is not your food cut off before your
eyes, joy and gladness from the house of our God?

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> The beasts have rotted in their dung, the
barns are destroyed, the storehouses are broken down: because the corn
is confounded.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Why did the beast groan, why did the
herds of cattle low? because there is no pasture for them: yea, and the
flocks of sheep are perished.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> To thee, 0 Lord, will I cry: because fire
hath devoured the beautiful places of the wilderness, and the flame hath
burnt all the trees of the country.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Yea and the beasts of the field have
looked up to thee, as a garden bed that thirsteth after rain, for the
springs of waters are dried up, and fire hath devoured the beautiful
places of the wilderness.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Blow ye the trumpet in Sion, sound an alarm
in my holy mountain, let all the inhabitants of the land tremble:
because the day of the Lord cometh, because it is nigh at hand,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> A day of darkness, and of gloominess, a day
of clouds and whirlwinds: a numerous and strong people as the morning
spread upon the mountains: the like to it hath not been from the
beginning, nor shall be after it even to the years of generation and
generation.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Before the face thereof a devouring fire,
and behind it a burning flame: the land is like a garden of pleasure
before it, and behind it a desolate wilderness, neither is there any one
that can escape it.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The appearance of them is as the appearance
of horses, and they shall run like horsemen.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> They shall leap like the noise of chariots
upon the tops of mountains, like the noise of a flame of fire devouring
the stubble, as a strong people prepared to battle.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> At their presence the people shall be in
grievous pains: all faces shall be made like a kettle.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> They shall run like valiant men: like men
of war they shall scale the wall: the men shall march every one on his
way, and they shall not turn aside from their ranks.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> No one shall press upon his brother: they
shall walk every one in his path: yea, and they shall fall through the
windows, and shall take no harm.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> They shall enter into the city: they shall
run upon the wall, they shall climb up the houses, they shall come in at
the windows as a thief.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> At their presence the earth hath
trembled, the heavens are moved: the sun and moon are darkened, and the
stars have withdrawn their shining.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And the Lord hath uttered his voice
before the face of his army: for his armies are exceeding great, for
they are strong and execute his word: for the day of the Lord is great
and very terrible: and who can stand it?

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now therefore saith the Lord: Be
converted to me with all your heart, in fasting, and in weeping, and in
mourning.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And rend your hearts, and not your
garments, and turn to the Lord your God: for he is gracious and
merciful, patient and rich in mercy, and ready to repent of the evil.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who knoweth but he will return, and
forgive, and leave a blessing behind him, sacrifice and libation to the
Lord your God?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a
fast, call a solemn assembly,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Gather together the people, sanctify the
church, assemble the ancients, gather together the little ones, and them
that suck at the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth from his bed, and
the bride out of her bride chamber.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Between the porch and the altar the
priests the Lord's ministers shall weep, and shall say: Spare, O Lord,
spare thy people: and give not thy inheritance to reproach, that the
heathen should rule over them. Why should they say among the nations:
Where is their God?

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> The Lord hath been zealous for his land,
and hath spared his people.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And the Lord answered and said to his
people: Behold I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and you shall be
filled with them: and I will no more make you a reproach among the
nations.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And I will remove far off from you the
northern enemy: and I will drive him into a land unpassable, and desert,
with his face towards the east sea, and his hinder part towards the
utmost sea: and his stench shall ascend, and his rottenness shall go up,
because he hath done proudly.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Fear not, O land, be glad and rejoice:
for the Lord hath done great things.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Fear not, ye beasts of the fields: for
the beautiful places of the wilderness are sprung, for the tree hath
brought forth its fruit, the fig tree, and the vine have yielded their
strength.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And you, O children of Sion, rejoice, and
be joyful in the Lord your God: because he hath given you a teacher of
justice, and he will make the early and the latter rain to come down to
you as in the beginning.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And the floors shall be filled with
wheat, and the presses shall overflow with wine and oil.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And I will restore to you the ears which
the locust, and the bruchus, and the mildew, and the palmerworm have
eaten; my great host which I sent upon you.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And you shall eat in plenty, and shall be
filled: and you shall praise the name of the Lord your God, who hath
done wonders with you, and my people shall not be confounded for ever.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And you shall know that I am in the midst
of Israel: and I am the Lord your God, and there is none besides: and my
people shall not be confounded for ever.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And it shall come to pass after this,
that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy: your old men shall dream dreams, and your
young men shall see visions.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Moreover upon my servants and handmaids
in those days I will pour forth my spirit.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> And I will shew wonders in heaven; and in
earth, blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> The sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood: before the great and dreadful day of the Lord
doth come.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And it shall come to pass, that every one
that shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: for in mount
Sion, and in Jerusalem shall be salvation, as the Lord hath said, and in
the residue whom the Lord shall call.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For behold in those days, and in that time
when I shall bring back the captivity of Juda and Jerusalem:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I will gather together all nations, and
will bring them down into the valley of Josaphat: and I will plead with
them there for my people, and for my inheritance Israel, whom they have
scattered among the nations, and have parted my land.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And they have cast lots upon my people: and
the boy they have put in the stews, and the girl they have sold for
wine, that they might drink.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But what have you to do with me, O Tyre,
and Sidon, and all the coast of the Philistines? will you revenge
yourselves on me? and if you revenge yourselves on me, I will very soon
return you a recompense upon your own head.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For you have taken away my silver and my
gold: and my desirable and most beautiful things you have carried into
your temples.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the children of Juda, and the children
of Jerusalem you have sold to the children of the Greeks, that you might
remove them far off from their own country.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Behold, I will raise them up out of the
place wherein you have sold them: and I will return your recompense upon
your own heads.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And I will sell your sons, and your
daughters by the hands of the children of Juda, and they shall sell them
to the Sabeans, a nation far off, for the Lord hath spoken it.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Proclaim ye this among the nations: prepare
war, rouse up the strong: let them come, let all the men of war come up.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Cut your ploughshares into swords, and
your spades into spears. Let the weak say: I am strong.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Break forth, and come, all ye nations,
from round about, and gather yourselves together: there will the Lord
cause all thy strong ones to fall down.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Let them arise, and let the nations come
up into the valley of Josaphat: for there I will sit to judge all
nations round about.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Put ye in the sickles, for the harvest is
ripe: come and go down, for the press is full, the fats run over: for
their wickedness is multiplied.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Nations, nations in the valley of
destruction: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of
destruction.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> The sun and the moon are darkened, and
the stars have withdrawn their shining.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And the Lord shall roar out of Sion, and
utter his voice from Jerusalem: and the heavens and the earth shall be
moved, and the Lord shall be the hope of his people, and the strength of
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And you shall know that I am the Lord
your God, dwelling in Sion my holy mountain: and Jerusalem shall be holy
and strangers shall pass through it no more.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the mountains shall drop down sweetness, and the hills shall flow
with milk: and waters shall flow through all the rivers of Juda: and a
fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the
torrent of thorns.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom a
wilderness destroyed: because they have done unjustly against the
children of Juda, and have shed innocent blood in their land.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And Judea shall be inhabited for ever,
and Jerusalem to generation and generation.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I will cleanse their blood which I
had not cleansed: and the Lord will dwell in Sion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos](amo)
