[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aza)  [Next](ma2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: 1 Macabees

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now it came to pass, after that Alexander
the son of Philip the Macedonian, who first reigned in Greece, coming
out of the land of Cethim, had overthrown Darius king of the Persians
and Medes:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> He fought many battles, and took the strong
holds of all, and slew the kings of the earth:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And he went through even to the ends of the
earth, and took the spoils of many nations: and the earth was quiet
before him.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And he gathered a power, and a very strong
army: and his heart was exalted and lifted up.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And he subdued countries of nations, and
princes: and they became tributaries to him.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And after these things, he fell down upon
his bed, and knew that he should die.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he called his servants the nobles that
were brought up with him from his youth: and he divided his kingdom
among them, while he was yet alive.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Alexander reigned twelve years, and he
died.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And his servants made themselves kings
every one in his place:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And they all put crowns upon themselves
after his death, and their sons after them many years, and evils were
multiplied in the earth.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And there came out of them a wicked root,
Antiochus the Illustrious, the son of king Antiochus, who had been a
hostage at Rome: and he reigned in the hundred and thirty-seventh year
of the kingdom of the Greeks.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> In those days there went out of Israel
wicked men, and they persuaded many, saying: Let us go, and make a
covenant with the heathens that are round about us: for since we
departed from them, many evils have befallen us.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the word seemed good in their eyes.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And some of the people determined to do
this, and went to the king: and he gave them license to do after the
ordinances of the heathens.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And they built a place of exercise in
Jerusalem, according to the laws of the nations:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And they made themselves prepuces, and
departed from the holy covenant, and joined themselves to the heathens,
and were sold to do evil.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And the kingdom was established before
Antiochus, and he had a mind to reign over the land of Egypt, that he
might reign over two kingdoms.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And he entered into Egypt with a great
multitude, with chariots and elephants, and horsemen, and a great number
of ships:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And he made war against Ptolemee king of
Egypt, but Ptolemee was afraid at his presence, and fled, and many were
wounded unto death.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And he took the strong cities in the land
of Egypt: and he took the spoils of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And after Antiochus had ravaged Egypt in
the hundred and forty-third year, he returned and went up against
Israel.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And he went up to Jerusalem with a great
multitude.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And he proudly entered into the
sanctuary, and took away the golden altar, and the candlestick of light,
and all the vessels thereof, and the table of proposition, and the
pouring vessels, and the vials, and the little mortars of gold, and the
veil, and the crowns, and the golden ornament that was before the
temple: and he broke them all in pieces.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And he took the silver and gold, and the
precious vessels: and he took the hidden treasures which he found: and
when he had taken all away he departed into his own country.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And he made a great slaughter of men, and
spoke very proudly.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And there was great mourning in Israel,
and in every place where they were.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And the princes, and the ancients
mourned, and the virgins and the young men were made feeble, and the
beauty of the women was changed.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Every bridegroom took up lamentation: and
the bride that set in the marriage bed, mourned:

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And the land was moved for the
inhabitants thereof, and all the house of Jacob was covered with
confusion.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> And after two full years the king sent
the chief collector of his tributes to the cities of Juda, and he came
to Jerusalem with a great multitude.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And he spoke to them peaceable words in
deceit: and they believed him.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And he fell upon the city suddenly, and
struck it with a great slaughter, and destroyed much people in Israel.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> And he took the spoils of the city, and
burnt it with fire, and threw down the houses thereof, and the walls
thereof round about:

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And they took the women captive, and the
children, and the cattle they possessed.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And they built the city of David with a
great and strong wall, and with strong towers, and made it a fortress
for them:

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And they placed there a sinful nation,
wicked men, and they fortified themselves therein: and they stored up
armour, and victuals, and gathered together the spoils of Jerusalem;

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> And laid them up there: and they became a
great snare.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And this was a place to lie in wait
against the sanctuary, and an evil devil in Israel.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And they shed innocent blood round about
the sanctuary, and defiled the holy place.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> And the inhabitants of Jerusalem fled
away by reason of them, and the city was made the habitation to
strangers, and she became a stranger to her own seed, and her children
forsook her.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Her sanctuary was desolate like a
wilderness, her festival days were turned into mourning, her sabbaths
into reproach, her honours were brought to nothing.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> Her dishonour was increased according to
her glory, and her excellency was turned into mourning.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And king Antiochus wrote to all his
kingdom, that all the people should be one: and every one should leave
his own law.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And all nations consented according to
the word of king Antiochus.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And many of Israel consented to his
service, and they sacrificed to idols, and profaned the sabbath.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> And the king sent letters by the hands of
messengers to Jerusalem, and to all the cities of Juda: that they should
follow the law of the nations of the earth,

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> And should forbid holocausts and
sacrifices, and atonements to be made in the temple of God.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> And should prohibit the sabbath, and the
festival days, to be celebrated.

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> And he commanded the holy places to be
profaned, and the holy people of Israel.

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> And he commanded altars to be built, and
temples, and idols, and swine's flesh to be immolated, and unclean
beasts.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> And that they should leave their children
uncircumcised, and let their souls be defiled with all uncleannesses,
and abominations, to the end that they should forget the law, and should
change all the justifications of God.

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> And that whosoever would not do according
to the word of king Antiochus should be put to death.

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> According to all these words he wrote to
his whole kingdom, and he appointed rulers over the people that should
force them to do these things.

<span id="an_1:54">1:54</span> And they commanded the cities of Juda to
sacrifice.

<span id="an_1:55">1:55</span> Then many of the people were gathered to
them that had forsaken the law of the Lord: and they committed evils in
the land:

<span id="an_1:56">1:56</span> And they drove away the people of Israel
into lurking holes, and into the secret places of fugitives.

<span id="an_1:57">1:57</span> On the fifteenth day of the month Casleu,
in the hundred and forty-fifth year, king Antiochus set up the
abominable idol of desolation upon the altar of God, and they built
altars throughout all the cities of Juda round about:

<span id="an_1:58">1:58</span> And they burnt incense, and sacrificed at
the doors of the houses, and in the streets.

<span id="an_1:59">1:59</span> And they cut in pieces, and burnt with
fire the books of the law of God:

<span id="an_1:60">1:60</span> And every one with whom the books of the
testament of the Lord were found, and whosoever observed the law of the
Lord, they put to death, according to the edict of the king.

<span id="an_1:61">1:61</span> Thus by their power did they deal with
the people of Israel, that were found in the cities month after month.

<span id="an_1:62">1:62</span> And on the five and twentieth day of the
month they sacrificed upon the altar of the idol that was over against
the altar of God.

<span id="an_1:63">1:63</span> Now the women that circumcised their
children, were slain according to the commandment of king Antiochus.

<span id="an_1:64">1:64</span> And they hanged the children about their
necks in all their houses: and those that had circumcised them, they put
to death.

<span id="an_1:65">1:65</span> And many of the people of Israel
determined with themselves, that they would not eat unclean things: and
they chose rather to die than to be defiled with unclean meats.

<span id="an_1:66">1:66</span> And they would not break the holy law of
God, and they were put to death:

<span id="an_1:67">1:67</span> And there was very great wrath upon the
people.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> In those days arose Mathathias the son of
John, the son of Simeon, a priest of the sons of Joarib, from Jerusalem,
and he abode in the mountain of Modin.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And he had five sons: John who was surnamed
Gaddis:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And Simon, who was surnamed Thasi:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And Judas, who was called Machabeus:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And Eleazar, who was surnamed Abaron: and
Jonathan, who was surnamed Apphus.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> These saw the evils that were done in the
people of Juda, and in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And Mathathias said: Woe is me, wherefore
was I born to see the ruin of my people, and the ruin of the holy city,
and to dwell there, when it is given into the hands of the enemies?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The holy places are come into the hands of
strangers: her temple is become as a man without honour.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The vessels of her glory are carried away
captive: her old men are murdered in the streets, and her young men are
fallen by the sword of the enemies.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> What nation hath not inherited her
kingdom, and gotten of her spoils?

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> All her ornaments are taken away. She
that was free is made a slave.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And behold our sanctuary, and our beauty,
and our glory is laid waste, and the Gentiles have defiled them.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> To what end then should we live any
longer?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And Mathathias and his sons rent their
garments, and they covered themselves with haircloth, and made great
lamentation.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And they that were sent from king
Antiochus came thither, to compel them that were fled into the city of
Modin, to sacrifice, and to burn incense, and to depart from the law of
God.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And many of the people of Israel
consented, and came to them: but Mathathias and his sons stood firm.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And they that were sent from Antiochus,
answering, said to Mathathias: Thou art a ruler, and an honourable, and
great man in this city, and adorned with sons, and brethren.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Therefore come thou first, and obey the
king's commandment, as all nations have done, and the men of Juda, and
they that remain in Jerusalem: and thou, and thy sons, shall be in the
number of the king's friends, and enriched with gold, and silver, and
many presents.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Then Mathathias answered, and said with a
loud voice: Although all nations obey king Antiochus, so as to depart
every man from the service of the law of his fathers, and consent to his
commandments:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> I and my sons, and my brethren will obey
the law of our fathers.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> God be merciful unto us: it is not
profitable for us to forsake the law, and the justices of God:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> We will not hearken to the words of king
Antiochus, neither will we sacrifice, and transgress the commandments of
our law, to go another way.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Now as he left off speaking these words,
there came a certain Jew in the sight of all to sacrifice to the idols
upon the altar in the city of Modin, according to the king's
commandment.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And Mathathias saw and was grieved, and
his reins trembled, and his wrath was kindled according to the judgment
of the law, and running upon him he slew him upon the altar:

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Moreover the man whom king Antiochus had
sent, who compelled them to sacrifice, he slew at the same time, and
pulled down the altar.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And shewed zeal for the law, as Phinees
did by Zamri the son of Salomi.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And Mathathias cried out in the city with
a loud voice, saying: Every one that hath zeal for the law, and
maintaineth the testament, let him follow me.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> So he, and his sons fled into the
mountains, and left all that they had in the city.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Then many that sought after judgment, and
justice, went down into the desert:

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> And they abode there, they and their
children, and their wives, and their cattle: because afflictions
increased upon them.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> And it was told to the king's men, and to
the army that was in Jerusalem in the city of David, that certain men
who had broken the king's commandment, were gone away into the secret
places in the wilderness, and that many were gone after them.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And forthwith they went out towards them,
and made war against them on the sabbath day,

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> And they said to them: Do you still
resist? come forth, and do according to the edict of king Antiochus, and
you shall live.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> And they said: We will not come forth,
neither will we obey the king's edict, to profane the sabbath day.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> And they made haste to give them battle.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> But they answered them not, neither did
they cast a stone at them, nor stopped up the secret places,

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Saying: Let us all die in our innocency:
and heaven and earth shall be witnesses for us, that you put us to death
wrongfully.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> So they gave them battle on the sabbath:
and they were slain with their wives, and their children, and their
cattle, to the number of a thousand persons.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> And Mathathias and his friends heard of
it, and they mourned for them exceedingly.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And every man said to his neighbour: If
we shall all do as our brethren have done, and not fight against the
heathens for our lives, and our justifications: they will now quickly
root us out of the earth.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> And they determined in that day, saying:
Whosoever shall come up against us to fight on the sabbath day, we will
fight against him: and we will not all die, as our brethren that were
slain in the secret places.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> Then was assembled to them the
congregation of the Assideans, the stoutest of Israel, every one that
had a good will for the law.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> And all they that fled from the evils,
joined themselves to them, and were a support to them.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And they gathered an army, and slew the
sinners in their wrath, and the wicked men in their indignation: and the
rest fled to the nations for safety.

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> And Mathathias and his friends went round
about, and they threw down the altars:

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> And they circumcised all the children
whom they found in the confines of Israel that were uncircumcised: and
they did valiantly.

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> And they pursued after the children of
pride, and the work prospered in their hands:

<span id="an_2:48">2:48</span> And they recovered the law out of the
hands of the nations, and out of the hands of the kings: and they
yielded not the horn to the sinner.

<span id="an_2:49">2:49</span> Now the days drew near that Mathathias
should die, and he said to his sons: Now hath pride and chastisement
gotten strength, and the time of destruction, and the wrath of
indignation:

<span id="an_2:50">2:50</span> Now therefore, O my sons, be ye zealous
for the law, and give your lives for the covenant of your fathers.

<span id="an_2:51">2:51</span> And call to remembrance the works of the
fathers, which they have done in their generations: and you shall
receive great glory, and an everlasting name.

<span id="an_2:52">2:52</span> Was not Abraham found faithful in
temptation, and it was reputed to him unto justice?

<span id="an_2:53">2:53</span> Joseph in the time of his distress kept
the commandment, and he was made lord of Egypt.

<span id="an_2:54">2:54</span> Phinees our father, by being fervent in
the zeal of God, received the covenant of an everlasting priesthood.

<span id="an_2:55">2:55</span> Jesus, whilst he fulfilled the word, was
made ruler in Israel.

<span id="an_2:56">2:56</span> Caleb, for bearing witness before the
congregation, received an inheritance.

<span id="an_2:57">2:57</span> David by his mercy obtained the throne of
an everlasting kingdom.

<span id="an_2:58">2:58</span> Elias, while he was full of zeal for the
law, was taken up into heaven.

<span id="an_2:59">2:59</span> Ananias and Azarias and Misael by
believing, were delivered out of the flame.

<span id="an_2:60">2:60</span> Daniel in his innocency was delivered out
of the mouth of the lions.

<span id="an_2:61">2:61</span> And thus consider through all
generations: that none that trust in him fail in strength.

<span id="an_2:62">2:62</span> And fear not the words of a sinful man,
for his glory is dung, and worms:

<span id="an_2:63">2:63</span> To day he is lifted up, and to morrow he
shall not be found, because he is returned into his earth; and his
thought is come to nothing.

<span id="an_2:64">2:64</span> You therefore, my sons, take courage, and
behave manfully in the law: for by it you shall be glorious.

<span id="an_2:65">2:65</span> And behold, I know that your brother
Simon is a man of counsel: give ear to him always, and he shall be a
father to you.

<span id="an_2:66">2:66</span> And Judas Machabeus who is valiant and
strong from his youth up, let him be the leader of your army, and he
shall manage the war of the people.

<span id="an_2:67">2:67</span> And you shall take to you all that
observe the law: and revenge ye the wrong of your people.

<span id="an_2:68">2:68</span> Render to the Gentiles their reward, and
take heed to the precepts of the law.

<span id="an_2:69">2:69</span> And he blessed them, and was joined to
his fathers.

<span id="an_2:70">2:70</span> And he died in the hundred and
forty-sixth year: and he was buried by his sons in the sepulchres of his
fathers in Modin, and all Israel mourned for him with great mourning.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then his son Judas, called Machabeus, rose
up in his stead.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And all his brethren helped him, and all
they that had joined themselves to his father, and they fought with
cheerfulness the battle of Israel.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he got his people great honour, and put
on a breastplate as a giant, and girt his warlike armour about him in
battles, and protected the camp with his sword.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> In his acts he was like a lion, and like a
lion's whelp roaring for his prey.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he pursued the wicked and sought them
out, and them that troubled his people he burnt with fire:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And his enemies were driven away for fear
of him, and all the workers of iniquity were troubled: and salvation
prospered in his hand.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And he grieved many kings, and made Jacob
glad with his works, and his memory is blessed for ever.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And he went through the cities of Juda, and
destroyed the wicked out of them, and turned away wrath from Israel.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he was renowned even to the utmost part
of the earth, and he gathered them that were perishing.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And Apollonius gathered together the
Gentiles, and a numerous and great army from Samaria, to make war
against Israel.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Judas understood it, and went forth
to meet him: and he overthrew him, and killed him: and many fell down
slain, the rest fled away.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And he took their spoils, and Judas took
the sword of Apollonius, and fought with it all his lifetime.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And Seron captain of the army of Syria
heard that Judas had assembled a company of the faithful, and a
congregation with him,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And he said: I will get me a name, and
will be glorified in the kingdom, and will overthrow Judas, and those
that are with him, that have despised the edict of the king.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And he made himself ready: and the host
of the wicked went up with him, strong succours, to be revenged of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And they approached even as far as
Bethoron: and Judas went forth to meet him, with a small company.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> But when they saw the army coming to meet
them, they said to Judas: How shall we, being few, be able to fight
against so great a multitude and so strong, and we are ready to faint
with fasting to day?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And Judas said: It is an easy matter for
many to be shut up in the hands of a few: and there is no difference in
the sight of the God of heaven to deliver with a great multitude, or
with a small company:

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> For the success of war is not in the
multitude of the army, but strength cometh from heaven.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> They come against us with an insolent
multitude, and with pride, to destroy us, and our wives, and our
children, and to take our spoils.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But we will fight for our lives and our
laws:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the Lord himself will overthrow them
before our face: but as for you, fear them not.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And as soon as he had made an end of
speaking, he rushed suddenly upon them: and Seron and his host were
overthrown before him:

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And he pursued him by the descent of
Bethoron even to the plain, and there fell of them eight hundred men,
and the rest fled into the land of the Philistines.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And the fear of Judas and of his
brethren, and the dread of them fell upon all the nations round about
them.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And his fame came to the king, and all
nations told of the battles of Judas.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Now when king Antiochus heard these
words, he was angry in his mind: and he sent and gathered the forces of
all his kingdom, an exceeding strong army.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> And he opened his treasury, and gave out
pay to the army for a year: and he commanded them, that they should be
ready for all things.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> And he perceived that the money of his
treasures failed, and that the tributes of the country were small
because of the dissension, and the evil that he had brought upon the
land, that he might take away the laws of old times:

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> And he feared that he should not have as
formerly enough, for charges and gifts, which he had given before with a
liberal hand: for he had abounded more than the kings that had been
before him.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> And he was greatly perplexed in mind, and
purposed to go into Persia, and to take tributes of the countries, and
to gather much money.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> And he left Lysias, a nobleman of the
blood royal, to oversee the affairs of the kingdom, from the river
Euphrates even to the river of Egypt:

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> And to bring up his son Antiochus, till
he came again.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And he delivered to him half the army,
and the elephants: and he gave him charge concerning all that he would
have done, and concerning the inhabitants of Judea, and Jerusalem:

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> And that he should send an army against
them, to destroy and root out the strength of Israel, and the remnant of
Jerusalem, and to take away the memory of them from that place:

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> And that he should settle strangers to
dwell in all their coasts, and divide their land by lot.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> So the king took the half of the army
that remained, and went forth from Antioch the chief city of his
kingdom, in the hundred and forty-seventh year: and he passed over the
river Euphrates, and went through the higher countries.

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> Then Lysias chose Ptolemee the son of
Dorymenus, and Nicanor, and Gorgias, mighty men of the king's friends.

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> And he sent with them forty thousand men,
and seven thousand horsemen: to go into the land of Juda, and to destroy
it according to the king's orders.

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> So they went forth with all their power,
and came, and pitched near Emmaus in the plain country.

<span id="an_3:41">3:41</span> And the merchants of the countries heard
the fame of them: and they took silver and gold in abundance, and
servants: and they came into the camp, to buy the children of Israel for
slaves: and there were joined to them the forces of Syria, and of the
land of the strangers.

<span id="an_3:42">3:42</span> And Judas and his brethren saw that evils
were multiplied, and that the armies approached to their borders: and
they knew the orders the king had given to destroy the people and
utterly abolish them.

<span id="an_3:43">3:43</span> And they said every man to his neighbour:
Let us raise up the low condition of our people, and let us fight for
our people, and our sanctuary.

<span id="an_3:44">3:44</span> And the assembly was gathered that they
might be ready for battle: and that they might pray, and ask mercy and
compassion.

<span id="an_3:45">3:45</span> Now Jerusalem was not inhabited, but was
like a desert: there was none of her children that went in or out: and
the sanctuary was trodden down: and the children of strangers were in
the castle, there was the habitation of the Gentiles: and joy was taken
away from Jacob, and the pipe and harp ceased there.

<span id="an_3:46">3:46</span> And they assembled together, and came to
Maspha over against Jerusalem: for in Maspha was a place of prayer
heretofore in Israel.

<span id="an_3:47">3:47</span> And they fasted that day, and put on
haircloth, and put ashes upon their heads: and they rent their garments:

<span id="an_3:48">3:48</span> And they laid open the books of the law,
in which the Gentiles searched for the likeness of their idols:

<span id="an_3:49">3:49</span> And they brought the priestly ornaments,
and the firstfruits and tithes, and stirred up the Nazarites that had
fulfilled their days:

<span id="an_3:50">3:50</span> And they cried with a loud voice toward
heaven, saying: What shall we do with these, and whither shall we carry
them?

<span id="an_3:51">3:51</span> For thy holies are trodden down, and are
profaned, and thy priests are in mourning, and are brought low.

<span id="an_3:52">3:52</span> And behold the nations are come together
against us to destroy us: thou knowest what they intend against us.

<span id="an_3:53">3:53</span> How shall we be able to stand before
their face, unless thou, O God, help us?

<span id="an_3:54">3:54</span> Then they sounded with trumpets, and
cried out with a loud voice.

<span id="an_3:55">3:55</span> And after this Judas appointed captains
over the people, over thousands, and over hundreds, and over fifties,
and over tens.

<span id="an_3:56">3:56</span> And he said to them that were building
houses, or had betrothed wives, or were planting vineyards, or were
fearful, that they should return every man to his house, according to
the law.

<span id="an_3:57">3:57</span> So they removed the camp, and pitched on
the south side of Emmaus.

<span id="an_3:58">3:58</span> And Judas said: Gird yourselves, and be
valiant men, and be ready against the morning, that you may fight with
these nations that are assembled against us to destroy us and our
sanctuary.

<span id="an_3:59">3:59</span> For it is better for us to die in battle,
than to see the evils of our nation, and of the holies:

<span id="an_3:60">3:60</span> Nevertheless as it shall be the will of
God in heaven so be it done.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then Gorgias took five thousand men, and a
thousand of the best horsemen: and they removed out of the camp by
night.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> That they might come upon the camp of the
Jews, and strike them suddenly: and the men that were of the castle were
their guides.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And Judas heard of it, and rose up, he and
the valiant men, to attack the king's forces that were in Emmaus.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For as yet the army was dispersed from the
camp.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And Gorgias came by night into the camp of
Judas, and found no man, and he sought them in the mountains: for he
said: These men flee from us.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And when it was day, Judas shewed himself
in the plain with three thousand men only, who neither had armour nor
swords.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And they saw the camp of the Gentiles that
it was strong, and the men in breastplates, and the horsemen round about
them, and these were trained up to war.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And Judas said to the men that were with
him: Fear ye not their multitude, neither be ye afraid of their assault.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Remember in what manner our fathers were
saved in the Red Sea, when Pharao pursued them with a great army.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And now let us cry to heaven: and the
Lord will have mercy on us, and will remember the covenant of our
fathers, and will destroy this army before our face this day:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And all nations shall know that there is
one that redeemeth and delivereth Israel.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And the strangers lifted up their eyes,
and saw them coming against them.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And they went out of the camp to battle,
and they that were with Judas sounded the trumpet.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And they joined battle: and the Gentiles
were routed, and fled into the plain.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But all the hindmost of them fell by the
sword, and they pursued them as far as Gezeron, and even to the plains
of Idumea, and of Azotus, and of Jamnia: and there fell of them to the
number of three thousand men.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Judas returned again with his army
that followed him,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And he said to the people: Be not greedy
of the spoils: for there is war before us:

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Gorgias and his army are near us in
the mountain: but stand ye now against our enemies, and overthrow them,
and you shall take the spoils afterwards with safety.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And as Judas was speaking these words,
behold part of them appeared looking forth from the mountain.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And Gorgias saw that his men were put to
flight, ad that they had set fire to the camp: for the smoke that was
seen declared what was done.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And when they had seen this, they were
seized with great fear, seeing at the same time Judas and his army in
the plain ready to fight.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> So they all fled away into the land of
the strangers.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And Judas returned to take the spoils of
the camp, and they got much gold, and silver, and blue silk, and purple
of the sea, and great riches.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And returning home they sung a hymn, and
blessed God in heaven, because he is good, because his mercy endureth
for ever.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> So Israel had a great deliverance that
day.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And such of the strangers as escaped,
went and told Lysias all that had happened.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And when he heard these things, he was
amazed and discouraged: because things had not succeeded in Israel
according to his mind, and as the king had commanded.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> So the year following Lysias gathered
together threescore thousand chosen men, and five thousand horsemen,
that he might subdue them.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And they came into Judea, and pitched
their tents in Bethoron, and Judas met them with ten thousand men.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And they saw that the army was strong,
and he prayed, and said: Blessed art thou, O Saviour of Israel, who
didst break the violence of the mighty by the hand of thy servant David,
and didst deliver up the camp of the strangers into the hands of
Jonathan the son of Saul and of his armourbearer.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Shut up this army in the hands of thy
people Israel, and let them be confounded in their host and their
horsemen.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> Strike them with fear, and cause the
boldness of their strength to languish, and let them quake at their own
destruction.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> Cast them down with the sword of them
that love thee: and let all that know thy name, praise thee with hymns.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And they joined battle: and there fell of
the army of Lysias five thousand men.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And when Lysias saw that his men were put
to flight, and how bold the Jews were, and that they were ready either
to live, or to die manfully, he went to Antioch, and chose soldiers,
that they might come again into Judea with greater numbers.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> Then Judas, and his brethren said: Behold
our enemies are discomfited: let us go up now to cleanse the holy places
and to repair them.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And all the army assembled together, and
they went up into mount Sion.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And they saw the sanctuary desolate, and
the altar profaned, and the gates burnt, and shrubs growing up in the
courts as in a forest, or on the mountains, and the chambers joining to
the temple thrown down.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> And they rent their garments, and made
great lamentation, and put ashes on their heads:

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> And they fell face down to the ground on
their faces, and they sounded with the trumpets of alarm, and they cried
towards heaven.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Then Judas appointed men to fight against
them that were in the castle, till they had cleansed the holy places.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> And he chose priests without blemish,
whose will was set upon the law of God:

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> And they cleansed the holy places, and
took away the stones that had been defiled into an unclean place.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> And he considered about the altar of
holocausts that had been profaned, what he should do with it.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> And a good counsel came into their minds,
to pull it down: lest it should be a reproach to them, because the
Gentiles had defiled it; so they threw it down.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> And they laid up the stones in the
mountain of the temple in a convenient place, till there should come a
prophet, and give answer concerning them.

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> Then they took whole stones according to
the law, and built a new altar according to the former:

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> And they built up the holy places, and
the things that were within the temple: and they sanctified the temple,
and the courts.

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> And they made new holy vessels, and
brought in the candlestick, and the altar of incense, and the table into
the temple.

<span id="an_4:50">4:50</span> And they put incense upon the altar, and
lighted up the lamps that were upon the candlestick, and they gave light
in the temple.

<span id="an_4:51">4:51</span> And they set the loaves upon the table,
and hung up the veils, and finished all the works that they had begun to
make.

<span id="an_4:52">4:52</span> And they arose before the morning on the
five and twentieth day of the ninth month (which is the month of Casleu)
in the hundred and forty-eighth year.

<span id="an_4:53">4:53</span> And they offered sacrifice according to
the law upon the new altar of holocausts which they had made.

<span id="an_4:54">4:54</span> According to the time, and according to
the day wherein the heathens had defiled it, in the same was it
dedicated anew with canticles, and harps, and lutes, and cymbals.

<span id="an_4:55">4:55</span> And all the people fell upon their faces,
and adored, and blessed up to heaven, him that had prospered them.

<span id="an_4:56">4:56</span> And they kept the dedication of the altar
eight days, and they offered holocausts with joy, and sacrifices of
salvation, and of praise.

<span id="an_4:57">4:57</span> And they adorned the front of the temple
with crowns of gold, and escutcheons, and they renewed the gates, and
the chambers, and hanged doors upon them.

<span id="an_4:58">4:58</span> And there was exceeding great joy among
the people, and the reproach of the Gentiles was turned away.

<span id="an_4:59">4:59</span> And Judas, and his brethren, and all the
church of Israel decreed, that the day of the dedication of the altar
should be kept in its season from year to year for eight days, from the
five and twentieth day of the month of Casleu, with joy and gladness.

<span id="an_4:60">4:60</span> They built up also at that time mount
Sion, with high walls, and strong towers round about, lest the Gentiles
should at any time come, and tread it down as they did before.

<span id="an_4:61">4:61</span> And he placed a garrison there to keep
it, and he fortified it to secure Bethsura, that the people might have a
defence against Idumea.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now it came to pass, when the nations round
about heard that the altar and the sanctuary were built up as before,
that they were exceeding angry.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And they thought to destroy the generation
of Jacob that were among them, and they began to kill some of the
people, and to persecute them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then Judas fought against the children of
Esau in Idumea, and them that were in Acrabathane: because they beset
the Israelites around about, and he made a great slaughter of them.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And he remembered the malice of the
children of Bean: who were a snare and a stumblingblock to the people,
by lying in wait for them in the way.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And they were shut up by him in towers, and
he set upon them, and devoted them to utter destruction, and burnt their
towers with fire, and all that were in them.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Then he passed over to the children of
Ammon, where he found a mighty power, and much people, and Timotheus was
their captain:

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And he fought many battles with them, and
they were discomfited in their sight, and he smote them:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And he took the city of Gazer and her
towns, and returned into Judea.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And the Gentiles that were in Galaad,
assembled themselves together against the Israelites that were in their
quarters to destroy them: and they fled into the fortress of Datheman.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And they sent letters to Judas and his
brethren, saying, The heathens that are round about are gathered
together against us, to destroy us:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And they are preparing to come, and to
take the fortress into which we are fled: and Timotheus is the captain
of their host.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Now therefore come, and deliver us out of
their hands, for many of us are slain.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And all our brethren that were in the
places of Tubin, are killed: and they have carried away their wives, and
their children, captives, and taken their spoils, and they have slain
there almost a thousand men.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And while they were yet reading these
letters, behold there came other messengers out Galilee with their
garments rent, who related according to these words:

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Saying, that they of Ptolemais, and of
Tyre, and of Sidon, were assembled against them, and all Galilee is
filled with strangers, in order to consume us.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Now when Judas and all the people heard
these words, a great assembly met together to consider what they should
do for their brethren that were in trouble, and were assaulted by them.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And Judas said to Simon his brother:
Choose thee men, and go, and deliver they brethren in Galilee: and I,
and my brother Jonathan will go into the country of Galaad.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And he left Joseph the son of Zacharias,
and Azarias captains of the people with the remnant of the army in Judea
to keep it:

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And he commanded them, saying: Take ye
the charge of this people: but make no war against the heathens, till we
return.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Now three thousand men were alloted to
Simon, to go into Gallilee: and eight thousand to Judas to go into the
land of Galaad.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And Simon went into Galilee, and fought
many battles with the heathens: and the heathens were discomfited before
his face, and he pursued them even to the gate of Ptolemais.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And there fell of the heathens almost
three thousand men, and he took the spoils of them,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And he took with him those that were in
Galilee and in Arbatis with their wives, and children, and all that they
had, and he brought them into Judea with great joy.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And Judas Machabeus, and Jonathan his
brother passed over the Jordan, and went three days' journey through the
desert.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And the Nabutheans met them, and received
them in a peaceable manner, and told them all that happened to their
brethren in the land of Galaad,

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And that many of them were shut up in
Barasa, and in Bosor, and in Alima, and in Casphor, and in Mageth, and
in Carnaim: all these strong and great cities.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Yea, and that they were kept shut up in
the rest of the cities of Galaad, and that they had appointed to bring
their army on the morrow near to these cities, and to take them and to
destroy them all in one day.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Then Judas and his army suddenly turned
their march into the desert, to Bosor, and took the city: and he slew
every male by the edge of the sword, and took all their spoils, and
burnt it with fire.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And they removed from thence by night,
and went till they came to the fortress.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And it came to pass that early in the
morning, when they lifted up their eyes, behold there were people
without number, carrying ladders and engines to take the fortress, and
assault them.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And Judas saw that the fight was begun,
and the cry of the battle went up to heaven like a trumpet, and a great
cry out of the city:

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And he said to his host: Fight ye to day
for your brethren.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> And he came with three companies behind
them, and they sounded their trumpets, and cried out in prayer.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> And the host of Timotheus understood that
it was Machabeus, and they fled away before his face: and they made a
great slaughter of them: and there fell of them in that day almost eight
thousand men.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> And Judas turned aside to Maspha, and
assaulted, and took it, and he slew every male thereof, and took the
spoils thereof, and burnt it with fire.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> From thence he marched, and took Casbon,
and Mageth, and Bosor, and the rest of the cities of Galaad.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> But after this Timotheus gathered another
army, and camped over against Raphon beyond the torrent.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And Judas sent men to view the army: and
they brought him word, saying: All the nations, that are round about us,
are assembled unto him an army exceeding great:

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> And they have hired the Arabians to help
them, and they have pitched their tents beyond the torrent, ready to
come to fight against thee. And Judas went to meet them.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And Timotheus said to the captains of his
army: When Judas and his army come near the torrent of water, if he pass
over unto us first, we shall not be able to withstand him: for he will
certainly prevail over us.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> But if he be afraid to pass over, and
camp on the other side of the river, we will pass over to them and shall
prevail against him.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> Now when Judas came near the torrent of
water, he set the scribes of the people by the torrent, and commanded
them, saying: Suffer no man to stay behind: but let all come to the
battle.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> And he passed over to them first, and all
the people after him, and all the heathens were discomfited before them,
and they threw away their weapons, and fled to the temple that was in
Carnaim.

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> And he took that city, and the temple he
burnt with fire, with all things that were therein: and Carnaim was
subdued, and could not stand against the face of Judas.

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> And Judas gathered together all the
Israelites that were in the land of Galaad, from the least even to the
greatest, and their wives, and children, and an army exceeding great, to
come into the land of Juda.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> And they came as far as Ephron: now this
was a great city situate in the way, strongly fortified, and there was
no means to turn from it on the right hand or on the left, but the way
was through the midst of it.

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> And they that were in the city, shut
themselves in, and stopped up the gates with stones: and Judas sent to
them with peaceable words,

<span id="an_5:48">5:48</span> Saying: Let us pass through your land, to
go into our country: and no man shall hurt you: we will only pass
through on foot. But they would not open to them.

<span id="an_5:49">5:49</span> Then Judas commanded proclamation to be
made in the camp, that they should make an assault every man in the
place where he was.

<span id="an_5:50">5:50</span> And the men of the army drew near, and he
assaulted that city all the day, and all the night, and the city was
delivered into his hands:

<span id="an_5:51">5:51</span> And they slew every male with the edge of
the sword, and he razed the city, and took the spoils thereof, and
passed through all the city over them that were slain.

<span id="an_5:52">5:52</span> Then they passed over the Jordan to the
great plain that is over against Bethsan.

<span id="an_5:53">5:53</span> And Judas gathered together the hindmost,
and he exhorted the people all the way through, till they came into the
land of Juda.

<span id="an_5:54">5:54</span> And they went up to mount Sion with joy
and gladness, and offered holocausts, because not one of them was slain,
till they had returned in peace.

<span id="an_5:55">5:55</span> Now in the days that Judas and Jonathan
were in the land of Galaad, and Simon his brother in Galilee before
Ptolemais,

<span id="an_5:56">5:56</span> Joseph the son of Zacharias, and Azarias
captain of the soldiers, heard of the good success, and the battles that
were fought.

<span id="an_5:57">5:57</span> And he said: Let us also get us a name,
and let us go fight against the Gentiles that are round about us.

<span id="an_5:58">5:58</span> And he gave charge to them that were in
his army, and they went towards Jamnia.

<span id="an_5:59">5:59</span> And Gorgias and his men went out of the
city, to give them battle.

<span id="an_5:60">5:60</span> And Joseph and Azarias were put to
flight, and were pursued unto the borders of Judea: and there fell, on
that day, of the people of Israel about two thousand men, and there was
a great overthrow of the people:

<span id="an_5:61">5:61</span> Because they did not hearken to Judas,
and his brethren, thinking that they should do manfully.

<span id="an_5:62">5:62</span> But they were not of the seed of those
men by whom salvation was brought to Israel.

<span id="an_5:63">5:63</span> And the men of Juda were magnified
exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and of all the nations where
their name was heard.

<span id="an_5:64">5:64</span> And people assembled to them with joyful
acclamations.

<span id="an_5:65">5:65</span> Then Judas and his brethren went forth
and attacked the children of Esau, in the land toward the south, and he
took Chebron, and her towns: and he burnt the walls thereof and the
towers all round it.

<span id="an_5:66">5:66</span> And he removed his camp to go into the
land of the aliens, and he went through Samaria.

<span id="an_5:67">5:67</span> In that day some priests fell in battle,
while desiring to do manfully they went out unadvisedly to fight.

<span id="an_5:68">5:68</span> And Judas turned to Azotus into the land
of the strangers, and he threw down their altars, and he burnt the
statues of their gods with fire: and he took the spoils of the cities,
and returned into the land of Juda.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now king Antiochus was going through the
higher countries, and he heard that the city of Elymais in Persia was
greatly renowned, and abounding in silver and gold.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And that there was in it a temple,
exceeding rich: and coverings of gold, and breastplates, and shields
which king Alexander, son of Philip the Macedonian that reigned first in
Greece, had left there.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Lo, he came, and sought to take the city
and to pillage it: But he was not able, because the design was known to
them that were in the city.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And they rose up against him in battle, and
he fled away from thence, and departed with great sadness, and returned
towards Babylonia.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And whilst he was in Persia, there came one
that told him, how the armies that were in the land of Juda were put to
flight:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And that Lysias went with a very great
power, and was put to flight before the face of the Jews, and that thy
were grown strong by the armour, and power, and store of spoils, which
they had gotten out of the camps which they had destroyed:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And that they had thrown down the
abomination which he had set up upon the altar in Jerusalem, and that
they had compassed about the sanctuary with high walls as before, and
Bethsura also his city.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And it came to pass when the king heard
these words, that he was struck with fear, and exceedingly moved: and he
laid himself down upon his bed, and fell sick for grief, because it had
not fallen out to him as he imagined.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And he remained there many days: for great
grief came more and more and more upon him, and he made account that he
should die.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he called for all his friends, and
said to them: Sleep is gone from my eyes, and I am fallen away, and my
heart is cast down for anxiety.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And I said in my heart: Into how much
tribulation am I come, and into what floods of sorrow, wherein now I am:
I that was pleasant and beloved in my power!

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> But now I remember the evils that I have
done in Jerusalem, from whence also I took away all the spoils of gold,
and of silver that were in it, and I sent to destroy the inhabitants of
Juda without cause.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I know therefore that for this cause
these evils have found me: and behold I perish with great grief in a
strange land.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Then he called Philip, one of his
friends, and he made him regent over all his kingdom.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And he gave him the crown, and his robe,
and his ring, that he should go to Antiochus his son, and should bring
him up for the kingdom.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> So king Antiochus died there in the year
one hundred and forty-nine.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And Lysias understood that the king was
dead, and he set up Antiochus his son to reign, whom he brought up
young: and he called his name Eupator.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Now they that were in the castle, had
shut up the Israelites round about the holy places: and they were
continually seeking their hurt, and to strengthen the Gentiles.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And Judas purposed to destroy them: and
he called together all the people, to besiege them.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And they came together, and besieged them
in the year one hundred and fifty, and they made battering slings and
engines.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And some of the besieged got out: and
some wicked men of Israel joined themselves unto them.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And they went to the king, and said: How
long dost thou delay to execute the judgment, and to revenge our
brethren?

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> We determined to serve thy father and to
do according to his orders, and obey his edicts:

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And for this they of our nation are
alienated from us, and have slain as many of us as they could find, and
have spoiled our inheritances.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Neither have they put forth their hand
against us only, but also against all our borders.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> And behold they have approached this day
to the castle of Jerusalem to take it, and they have fortified the
stronghold of Bethsura:

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And unless thou speedily prevent them,
they will do greater things than these, and thou shalt not be able to
subdue them.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Now when the king heard this, he was
angry: and he called together all his friends, and the captains of his
army, and them that were over the horsemen.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> There came also to him from other realms,
and from the islands of the sea hired troops.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And the number of his army was an hundred
thousand footmen, and twenty thousand horsemen, and thirty-two
elephants, trained to battle.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And they went through Idumea, and
approached to Bethsura, and fought many days, and they made engines: but
they sallied forth and burnt them with fire, and fought manfully.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> And Judas departed from the castle, and
removed the camp to Bethzacharam, over against the king's camp.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And the king rose before it was light,
and made his troops march on fiercely towards the way of Bethzacharam:
and the armies made themselves ready for the battle, and they sounded
the trumpets:

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> And they shewed the elephants the blood
of grapes, and mulberries to provoke them to fight.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And they distributed the beasts by the
legions: and there stood by every elephant a thousand men in coats of
mail, and with helmets of brass on their heads: and five hundred
horsemen set in order were chosen for every beast.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> These before the time wheresoever the
beast was, the were there: and withersoever it went, they went, and they
departed not from it.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> And upon the beast, there were strong
wooden towers, which covered every one of them: and engines upon them:
and upon every one thirty-two valiant men, who fought from above; and an
Indian to rule the beast.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> And the rest of the horsemen he placed on
this side and on that side at the two wings, with trumpets to stir up
the army, and to hasten them forward that stood thick together in the
legions thereof.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> Now when the sun shone upon the shields
of gold, and of brass, the mountains glittered therewith, and they shone
like lamps of fire.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> And part of the king's army was
distinguished by the high mountains, and the other part by the low
places: and they marched on warily and orderly.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> And all the inhabitants of the land were
moved at the noise of their multitude, and the marching of the company,
and the rattling of the armour, for the army was exceeding great and
strong.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> And Judas and his army drew near for
battle: and there fell of the king's army six hundred men.

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> And Eleazar the son of Saura saw one of
the beasts harnessed with the king's harness: and it was higher than the
other beasts: and it seemed to him that the king was on it:

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> And he exposed himself to deliver his
people and to get himself an everlasting name.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> And he ran up to it boldly in the midst
of the legion, killing on the right hand, and on the left, and they fell
by him on this side and that side.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> And he went between the feet of the
elephant, and put himself under it: and slew it, and it fell to the
ground upon him, and he died there.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> Then they seeing the strength of the king
and the fierceness of his army, turned away from them.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> But the king's army went up against them
to Jerusalem: and the king's army pitched their tents against Judea and
mount Sion.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> And he made peace with them that were in
Bethsura: and they came forth out of the city, because they had no
victuals, being shut up there, for it was the year of rest to the land.

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> And the king took Bethsura: and he placed
there a garrison to keep it.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> And he turned his army against the
sanctuary for many days: and he set up there battering slings, and
engines and instruments to cast fire, and engines to cast stones and
javelins, and pieces to shoot arrows, and slings.

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> And they also made engines against their
engines, and they fought for many days.

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> But there were no victuals in the city,
because it was the seventh year: and such as had stayed in Judea of them
that came from among the nations, had eaten the residue of all that
which had been stored up.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> And there remained in the holy places but
a few, for the famine had prevailed over them: and they were dispersed
every man to his own place.

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> Now Lysias heard that Philip, whom king
Antiochus while he lived had appointed to bring up his son Antiochus,
and to reign, to be king,

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> Was returned from Persia, and Media, with
the army that went with him, and that he sought to take upon him the
affairs of the kingdom:

<span id="an_6:57">6:57</span> Wherefore he made haste to go, and say to
the king and to the captains of the army: We decay daily, and our
provision of victuals is small, and the place that we lay siege to is
strong, and it lieth upon us to take order for the affairs of the
kingdom.

<span id="an_6:58">6:58</span> Now therefore let us come to an agreement
with these men, and make peace with them and with all their nation.

<span id="an_6:59">6:59</span> And let us covenant with them, that they
may live according to their own laws as before. For because of our
despising their laws, they have been provoked, and have done all these
things.

<span id="an_6:60">6:60</span> And the proposal was acceptable in the
sight of the king, and of the princes: and he sent to them to make
peace: and they accepted of it.

<span id="an_6:61">6:61</span> And the king and the princes swore to
them: and they came out of the stronghold.

<span id="an_6:62">6:62</span> Then the king entered into mount Sion,
and saw the strength of the place: and he quickly broke the oath that he
had taken, and gave commandment to throw down the wall round about.

<span id="an_6:63">6:63</span> And he departed in haste, and returned to
Antioch, where he found Philip master of the city: and he fought against
him, and took the city.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> In the hundred and fifty-first year
Demetrius the son of Seleucus departed from the city of Rome, and came
up with a few men into a city of the sea coast, and reigned there.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And it came to pass, as he entered into the
house of the kingdom of his fathers, that the army seized upon
Antiochus, and Lysias, to bring them unto him.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And when he knew it, he said: Let me not
see their face.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> So the army slew them. And Demetrius sat
upon the throne of his kingdom:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And there came to him the wicked and
ungodly men of Israel: And Alcimus was at the head of them, who desired
to be made high priest.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And they accused the people to the king,
saying: Judas and his brethren have destroyed all thy friends, and he
hath driven us out of our land.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Now therefore send some man whom thou
trustest, and let him go, and see all the havock he hath made amongst
us, and in the king's lands: and let him punish all his friends and
their helpers.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Then the king chose Bacchides, one of his
friends that ruled beyond the great river in the kingdom, and was
faithful to the king: and he sent him,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> To see the havock that Judas had made: and
the wicked Alcimus he made high priest, and commanded him to take
revenge upon the children of Israel.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And they arose, and came with a great
army into the land of Juda: and they sent messengers, and spoke to Judas
and his brethren with peaceable words deceitfully.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> But they gave no heed to their words: for
they saw that they were come with a great army.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Then there assembled to Alcimus and
Bacchides a company of the scribes to require things that are just:

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And first the Assideans that were among
the children of Israel, and they sought peace of them.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For they said: One that is a priest of
the seed of Aaron is come, he will not deceive us.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And he spoke to them peaceably: and he
swore to them, saying: We will do you no harm nor your friends.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And they believed him. And he took
threescore of them, and slew them in one day, according to the word that
is written:

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> The flesh of thy saints, and the blood of
them they have shed round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury
them.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Then fear and trembling fell upon all the
people: for they said: There is no truth, nor justice among them: for
they have broken the covenant, and the oath which they made.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And Bacchides removed the camp from
Jerusalem, and pitched in Bethzecha: and he sent, and took many of them
that were fled away from him, and some of the people he killed, and
threw them into a great pit.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Then he committed the country to Alcimus,
and left with him troops to help him. So Bacchides went away to the
king:

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> But Alcimus did what he could to maintain
his chief priesthood.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And they that disturbed the people
resorted to him, and they got the land of Juda into their power, and did
much hurt in Israel.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And Judas saw all the evils that Alcimus,
and they that were with him, did to the children of Israel, much more
than the Gentiles.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And he went out into all the coasts of
Juda round about, and took vengeance upon the men that had revolted, and
they ceased to go forth any more into the country.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And Alcimus saw that Judas, and they that
were with him prevailed: and he knew that he could not stand against
them, and he went back to the king, and accused them of many crimes.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And the king sent Nicanor one of his
principal lords, who was a great enemy to Israel: and he commanded him
to destroy the people.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And Nicanor came to Jerusalem with a
great army, and he sent to Judas and to his brethren deceitfully with
friendly words,

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Saying: Let there be no fighting between
me and you: I will come with a few men to see your faces with peace.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And he came to Judas, and they saluted
one another peaceably: and the enemies were prepared to take away Judas
by force.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And the thing was known to Judas that he
was come to him with deceit: and he was much afraid of him, and would
not see his face any more.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And Nicanor knew that his counsel was
discovered: and he went out to fight against Judas near Capharsalama.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And there fell of Nicanor's army almost
five thousand men, and they fled into the city of David.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And after this Nicanor went up into mount
Sion: and some of the priests and the people came out to salute him
peaceably, and to shew him the holocausts that were offered for the
king.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> But he mocked them and despised them, and
abused them: and he spoke proudly,

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And swore in anger, saying: Unless Judas
and his army be delivered into my hands, as soon as ever I return in
peace, I will burn this house. And he went out in a great rage.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And the priests went in, and stood before
the face of the altar and the temple: and weeping, they said:

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> Thou, O Lord, hast chosen this house for
thy name to be called upon therein, that it might be a house of prayer
and supplication for thy people.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> Be avenged of this man, and his army, and
let them fall by the sword: remember their blasphemies, and suffer them
not to continue any longer.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> Then Nicanor went out from Jerusalem, and
encamped near to Bethoron: and an army of Syria joined him.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> But Judas pitched in Adarsa with three
thousand men: and Judas prayed, and said:

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> O Lord, when they that were sent by king
Sennacherib blasphemed thee, an angel went out, and slew of them a
hundred and eighty-five thousand:

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> Even so destroy this army in our sight to
day, and let the rest know that he hath spoken ill against thy
sanctuary: and judge thou him according to his wickedness.

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> And the armies joined battle on the
thirteenth day of the month Adar: and the army of Nicanor was defeated,
and he himself was first slain in the battle.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> And when his army saw that Nicanor was
slain, they threw away their weapons, and fled:

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> And they pursued after them one day's
journey from Adazer, even till ye come to Gazara, and they sounded the
trumpets after them with signals.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> And they went forth out of all the towns
of Judea round about, and they pushed them with the horns, and they
turned again to them, and they were all slain with the sword, and there
was not left of them so much as one.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> And they took the spoils of them for a
booty, and they cut off Nicanor's head, and his right hand, which he had
proudly stretched out, and they brought it, and hung it up over against
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> And the people rejoiced exceedingly, and
they spent that day with great joy.

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> And he ordained that this day should be
kept every year, being the thirteenth of the month of Adar.

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> And the land of Juda was quiet for a
short time.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now Judas heard of the fame of the Romans,
that they are powerful and strong, and willingly agree to all things
that are requested of them: and that whosoever have come to them, they
have made amity with them, and that they are mighty in power.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And they heard of their battles, and their
noble acts, which they had done in Galatia, how they conquered them, and
brought them under tribute:

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And how great things they had done in the
land of Spain, and that they had brought under their power the mines of
silver and of gold that are there, and had gotten possession of all the
place by their counsel and patience:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And had conquered places that were very far
off from them, and kings that came against them from the ends of the
earth, and had overthrown them with great slaughter: and the rest pay
them tribute every year.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And that they had defeated in battle
Philip, and Perses the king of the Ceteans, and the rest that had borne
arms against them, and had conquered them:

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And how Antiochus the great king of Asia,
who went to fight against them, having a hundred and twenty elephants,
with horsemen, and chariots, and a very great army, was routed by them:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And how they took him alive, and appointed
to him, that both he and they that should reign after him, should pay a
great tribute, and that he should give hostages, and that which was
agreed upon,

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the country of the Indians, and of the
Medes, and of the Lydians, some of their best provinces: and those which
they had taken from them they gave to king Eumenes.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And that they who were in Greece had a mind
to go and to destroy them: and they had knowledge thereof,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And they sent a general against them, and
fought with them, and many of them were slain, and they carried away
their wives and their children captives, and spoiled them, and took
possession of their land, and threw down their walls, and brought them
to be their servants unto this day.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the other kingdoms, and islands, that
at any time had resisted them, they had destroyed and brought under
their power.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But with their friends, and such as
relied upon them, they kept amity, and had conquered kingdoms that were
near, and that were far off: for all that heard their name, were afraid
of them.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> That whom they had a mind to help to a
kingdom, those reigned: and whom they would, they deposed from a
kingdom: and they were greatly exalted.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And none of all these wore a crown, or
was clothed in purple, to be magnified thereby.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And that they made themselves a senate
house, and consulted daily three hundred and twenty men, that sat in
council always for the people, that they might do the things that were
right.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And that they committed their government
to one man every year, to rule over all their country, and they all obey
one, and there is no envy, nor jealousy amongst them.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> So Judas chose Eupolemus the son of John,
the son of Jacob, and Jason the son of Eleazar, and he sent them to Rome
to make a league of amity and confederacy with them.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And that they might take off from them
the yoke of the Grecians, for they saw that they oppressed the kingdom
of Israel with servitude.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And they went to Rome, a very long
journey, and they entered into the senate house, and said:

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Judas Machabeus, and his brethren, and
the people of the Jews have sent us to you, to make alliance and peace
with you, and that we may be registered your confederates and friends.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And the proposal was pleasing in their
sight.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And this is the copy of the writing that
they wrote back again, graven in tables of brass, and sent to Jerusalem,
that it might be with them there for a memorial of the peace and
alliance.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> GOOD SUCCESS BE TO THE ROMANS, and to the
people of the Jews, by sea and by land for ever: and far be the sword
and enemy from them.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> But if there come first any war upon the
Romans, or any of their confederates, in all their dominions:

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> The nation of the Jews shall help them
according as the time shall direct, with all their heart:

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> Neither shall they give them, whilst they
are fighting, or furnish them with wheat, or arms, or money, or ships,
as it hath seemed good to the Romans: and they shall obey their orders,
without taking any thing of them.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> In like manner also if war shall come
first upon the nation of the Jews, the Romans shall help them with all
their heart, according as the time shall permit them.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And there shall not be given to them that
come to their aid, either wheat, or arms, or money, or ships, as it hath
seemed good to the Romans: and they shall observe their orders without
deceit.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> According to these articles did the
Romans covenant with the people of the Jews.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And if after this one party or the other
shall have a mind to add to these articles, or take away anything, they
may do it at their pleasure: and whatsoever they shall add, or take
away, shall be ratified.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Moreover concerning the evils that
Demetrius the king hath done against them, we have written to him,
saying: Why hast thou made thy yoke heavy upon our friends, and allies,
the Jews?

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> If therefore they come again to us
complaining of thee, we will do them justice, and will make war against
thee by sea and land.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> In the mean time when Demetrius heard that
Nicanor and his army were fallen in battle, he sent again Bacchides and
Alcimus into Judea; and the right wing of his army with them.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And they took the road that leadeth to
Galgal, and they camped in Masaloth, which is in Arabella: and they made
themselves masters of it, and slew many people.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> In the first month of the hundred and
fifty-second year they brought the army to Jerusalem:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And they arose, and went to Berea with
twenty thousand men, and two thousand horsemen.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Now Judas had pitched his tents in Laisa,
and three thousand chosen men with him:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And they saw the multitude of the army that
they were many, and they were seized with great fear: and many withdrew
themselves out of the camp, and there remained of them no more than
eight hundred men.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And Judas saw that his army slipped away,
and the battle pressed upon him, and his heart was cast down: because he
had not time to gather them together, and he was discouraged.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Then he said to them that remained: Let us
arise, and go against our enemies, if we may be able to fight against
them.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> But they dissuaded him, saying: We shall
not be able, but let us save our lives now, and return to our brethren,
and then we will fight against them: for we are but few.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Then Judas said: God forbid we should do
this thing, and flee away from them: but if our time be come, let us die
manfully for our brethren, and let us not stain our glory.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the army removed out of the camp, and
they stood over against them: and the horsemen were divided into two
troops, and the slingers, and the archers went before the army, and they
that were in the front were all men of valour.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And Bacchides was in the right wing, and
the legion drew near on two sides, and they sounded the trumpets:

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And they also were on Judas' side, even
they also cried out, and the earth shook at the noise of the armies: and
the battle was fought from morning even unto the evening.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And Judas perceived that the stronger
part of the army of Bacchides was on the right side, and all the stout
of heart came together with him:

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And the right wing was discomfited by
them, and he pursued them even to the mount Azotus.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And they that were in the left wing saw
that the right wing was discomfited, and they followed after Judas, and
them that were with him, at their back:

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And the battle was hard fought, and there
fell many wounded of the one side and of the other.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And Judas was slain, and the rest fled
away.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And Jonathan and Simon took Judas their
brother, and buried him in the sepulchre of their fathers in the city of
Modin.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And all the people of Israel bewailed him
with great lamentation, and they mourned for him many days.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And said: How is the mighty man fallen,
that saved the people of Israel!

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But the rest of the words of the wars of
Judas, and of the noble acts that he did, and of his greatness, are not
written: for they were very many.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And it came to pass after the death of
Judas, that the wicked began to put forth their heads in all the
confines of Israel, and all the workers of iniquity rose up.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> In those days there was a very great
famine, and they and all their country yielded to Bacchides.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And Bacchides chose the wicked men, and
made them lords of the country:

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And they sought out, and made diligent
search after the friends of Judas, and brought them to Bacchides, and he
took vengeance of them, and abused them.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And there was a great tribulation in
Israel, such as was not since the day, that there was no prophet seen in
Israel.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And all the friends of Judas came
together, and said to Jonathan:

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Since thy brother Judas died, there is
not a man like him to go forth against our enemies, Bacchides, and them
that are the enemies of our nation.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Now therefore we have chosen thee this
day to be our prince, and captain in his stead to fight our battles.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> So Jonathan took upon him the government
at that time, and rose up in the place of Judas his brother.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And Bacchides had knowledge of it, and
sought to kill him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And Jonathan and Simon his brother, knew
it, and all that were with them: and they fled into the desert of
Thecua, and they pitched by the water of the lake of Asphar,

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And Bacchides understood it, and he came
himself with all his army over the Jordan on the sabbath day.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And Jonathan sent his brother a captain
of the people, to desire the Nabutheans his friends, that they would
lend them their equipage, which was copious.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And the children of Jambri came forth out
of Madaba, and took John, and all that he had, and went away with them.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> After this it was told Jonathan, and
Simon his brother, that the children of Jambri made a great marriage,
and were bringing the bride out of Madaba, the daughter of one of the
great princes of Chanaan, with great pomp.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And the remembered the blood of John
their brother: and they went up, and hid themselves under the covert of
the mountain.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> And they lifted up their eyes, and saw:
and behold a tumult, and great preparation: and the bridegroom came
forth, and his friends, and his brethren to meet them with timbrels, and
musical instruments, and many weapons.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> And they rose up against them from the
place where they lay in ambush, and slew them, and there fell many
wounded, and the rest fled into the mountains, and they took all their
spoils:

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> And the marriage was turned into
mourning, and the noise of their musical instruments into lamentation.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And they took revenge for the blood of
their brother: and they returned to the bank of the Jordan.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And Bacchides heard it, and he came on
the sabbath day even to the bank of the Jordan with a great power.

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> And Jonathan said to his company: Let us
arise, and fight against our enemies: for it is not now as yesterday,
and the day before.

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> And behold the battle is before us, and
the water of the Jordan on this side and on that side, and banks, and
marshes, and woods: and there is no place for us to turn aside.

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> Now therefore cry ye to heaven, that ye
may be delivered from the hand of your enemies. And they joined battle.

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> And Jonathan stretched forth his hand to
strike Bacchides, but he turned away from him backwards.

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> And Jonathan, and they that were with him
leaped into the Jordan, and swam over the Jordan to them:

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> And there fell of Bacchides' side that
day a thousand man: and they returned to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_9:50">9:50</span> And they built strong cities in Judea,
the fortress that was in Jericho, and in Ammaus, and in Bethoron, and in
Bethel, and Thamnata, and Phara, and Thopo, with high walls, and gates,
and bars.

<span id="an_9:51">9:51</span> And he placed garrisons in them, that
they might wage war against Israel:

<span id="an_9:52">9:52</span> And he fortified the city of Bethsura,
and Gazara, and the castle, and set garrisons in them, and provisions of
victuals:

<span id="an_9:53">9:53</span> And he took the sons of the chief men of
the country for hostages, and put them in the castle in Jerusalem in
custody.

<span id="an_9:54">9:54</span> Now in the year one hundred and
fifty-three, the second month, Alcimus commanded the walls of the inner
court of the sanctuary to be thrown down, and the works of the prophets
to be destroyed: and he began to be destroyed: and he began to destroy.

<span id="an_9:55">9:55</span> At that time Alcimus was struck: and his
works were hindered, and his mouth was stopped, and he was taken with a
palsy, so that he could no more speak a word, nor give order concerning
his house.

<span id="an_9:56">9:56</span> And Alcimus died at that time in great
torment.

<span id="an_9:57">9:57</span> And Bacchides saw that Alcimus was dead:
and he returned to the king, and the land was quiet for two years.

<span id="an_9:58">9:58</span> And all the wicked held a council,
saying: Behold Jonathan, and they that are with him, dwell at ease, and
without fear: now therefore let us bring Bacchides hither, and he shall
take them all in one night.

<span id="an_9:59">9:59</span> So they went, and gave him counsel.

<span id="an_9:60">9:60</span> And he arose to come with a great army:
and he sent secretly letters to his adherents that were in Judea, to
seize upon Jonathan, and them that were with him: but they could not,
for their design was known to them.

<span id="an_9:61">9:61</span> And he apprehended of the men of the
country, that were the principal authors of the mischief, fifty men, and
slew them.

<span id="an_9:62">9:62</span> And Jonathan, and Simon, and they that
were with him retired into Bethbessen, which is in the desert: and he
repaired the breaches thereof, and they fortified it.

<span id="an_9:63">9:63</span> And when Bacchides knew it, he gathered
together all his multitude: and sent word to them that were of Judea.

<span id="an_9:64">9:64</span> And he came, and camped above Bethbessen,
and fought against it many days, and made engines.

<span id="an_9:65">9:65</span> But Jonathan left his brother Simon in
the city, and went forth into the country: and came with a number of
men.

<span id="an_9:66">9:66</span> And struck Odares, and his brethren, and
the children of Phaseron in their tents, and he began to slay, and to
increase in forces.

<span id="an_9:67">9:67</span> But Simon and they that were with him,
sallied out of the city, and burnt the engines.

<span id="an_9:68">9:68</span> And they fought against Bacchides, and he
was discomfited by them: and they afflicted him exceedingly, for his
counsel, and his enterprise was in vain.

<span id="an_9:69">9:69</span> And he was angry with the wicked men that
had given him counsel to come into their country, and he slew many of
them: and he purposed to return with the rest into their country.

<span id="an_9:70">9:70</span> And Jonathan had knowledge of it, and he
sent ambassadors to him to make peace with him, and to restore to him
the prisoners.

<span id="an_9:71">9:71</span> And he accepted it willingly, and did
according to his words, and swore that the would do him no harm all the
days of his life.

<span id="an_9:72">9:72</span> And he restored to him the prisoners
which he before had taken out of the land of Juda: and he returned and
went away into his own country, and he came no more into their borders.

<span id="an_9:73">9:73</span> So the sword ceased from Israel: and
Jonathan dwelt in Machmas, and Jonathan began there to judge the people,
and he destroyed the wicked out of Israel.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now in the hundred and sixtieth year
Alexander the son of Antiochus, surnamed the Illustrious, came up and
took Ptolemais, and they received him, and he reigned there.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And king Demetrius heard of it, and
gathered together an exceeding great army, and went forth against him to
fight.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And Demetrius sent a letter to Jonathan
with peaceable words, to magnify him.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For he said: Let us first make a peace
with him, before he make one with Alexander against us.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> For he will remember all the evils that
we have done against him, and against his brother, and against his
nation.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And he gave him authority to gather
together an army, and to make arms, and that he should be his
confederate: and the hostages that were in the castle, he commanded to
be delivered to him.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And Jonathan came to Jerusalem, and read
the letters in the hearing of all the people, and of them that were in
the castle.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And they were struck with great fear,
because they heard that the king had given him authority to gather
together an army.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And the hostages were delivered to
Jonathan, and he restored them to their parents.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And Jonathan dwelt in Jerusalem, and
began to build, and to repair the city.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he ordered workmen to build the
walls, and mount Sion round about with square stones for fortification:
and so they did.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the strangers that were in the
strong holds, which Bacchides had built, fled away.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And every man left his place, and
departed into his own country:

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Only in Bethsura there remained some of
them, that had forsaken the law, and the commandments of God: for this
was a place of refuge for them.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And king Alexander heard of the
promises that Demetrius had made Jonathan: and they told him of the
battles, and the worthy acts that he, and his brethren had done, and the
labours that they had endured.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And he said: Shall we find such another
man? now therefore we will make him our friend and our confederate.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> So he wrote a letter, and sent it to
him according to these words, saying:

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> King Alexander to his brother Jonathan,
greeting.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> We have heard of thee, that thou art a
man of great power, and fit to be our friend:

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Now therefore we make thee this day
high priest of thy nation, and that thou be called the king's friend,
(and he sent him a purple robe, and a crown of gold,) and that thou be
of one mind with us in our affairs, and keep friendship with us.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Then Jonathan put on the holy vestment
in the seventh month, in the year one hundred and threescore, at the
feast day of the tabernacles: and he gathered together an army, and made
a great number of arms.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And Demetrius heard these words, and
was exceeding sorry, and said:

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> What is this that we have done, that
Alexander hath prevented us to gain the friendship of the Jews to
strengthen himself?

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> I also will write to them words of
request, and offer dignities, and gifts: that they may be with me to aid
me.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And he wrote to them in these words:
King Demetrius to the nation of the Jews, greeting.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Whereas you have kept covenant with us,
and have continued in our friendship, and have not joined with our
enemies, we have heard of it, and are glad.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> Wherefore now continue still to keep
fidelity towards us, and we will reward you with good things, for what
you have done in our behalf.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And we will remit to you many charges,
and will give you gifts.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And now I free you, and all the Jews
from tributes, and I release you from the customs of salt, and remit the
crowns, and the thirds of the seed:

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And the half of the fruit of trees,
which is my share, I leave to you from this day forward, so that it
shall not be taken of the land of Juda, and of the three cities that are
added thereto out of Samaria and Galilee, from this day forth and for
ever:

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And let Jerusalem be holy and free,
with the borders thereof: and let the tenths, and tributes be for
itself.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> I yield up also the power of the castle
that is in Jerusalem, and I give it to the high priest, to place therein
such men as he shall choose to keep it.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> And every soul of the Jews that hath
been carried captive from the land of Juda in all my kingdom, I set at
liberty freely, that all be discharged from tributes even of their
cattle.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And I will that all the feasts, and the
sabbaths, and the new moons, and the days appointed, and three days
before the solemn day, and three days after the solemn day, be all days
of immunity and freedom, for all the Jews that are in my kingdom:

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And no man shall have power to do any
thing against them, or to molest any of them, in any cause.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And let there be enrolled in the king's
army to the number of thirty thousand of the Jews: and allowance shall
be made them as is due to all the king's forces, and certain of them
shall be appointed to be in the fortresses of the great king:

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> And some of them shall be set over the
affairs of the kingdom, that are of trust, and let the governors be
taken from among themselves, and let them walk in their own laws, as the
king hath commanded in the land of Juda.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And the three cities that are added to
Judea, out of the country of Samaria, let them be accounted with Judea:
that they may be under one, and obey no other authority but that of the
high priest:

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> Ptolemais, and the confines thereof, I
give as a free gift to the holy places, that are in Jerusalem, for the
necessary charges of the holy things.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> And I give every year fifteen thousand
sicles of silver out of the king's accounts, of what belongs to me:

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> And all that is above, which they that
were over the affairs the years before, had not paid, from this time
they shall give it to the works of the house.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> Moreover the five thousand sicles of
silver which they received from the account of the holy places, every
year, shall also belong to the priests that execute the ministry.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> And whosoever shall flee into the
temple that is in Jerusalem, and in all the borders thereof, being
indebted to the king for any matter, let them be set at liberty, and all
that they have in my kingdom, let them have it free.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> For the building also, or repairing the
works of the holy places, the charges shall be given out of the king's
revenues:

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> For the building also of the walls of
Jerusalem, and the fortifying thereof round about, the charges shall be
given out of the king's account, as also for the building of the walls
in Judea.

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> Now when Jonathan, and the people heard
these words, they gave no credit to them nor received them: because they
remembered the great evil that he had done in Israel, for he had
afflicted them exceedingly.

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> And their inclinations were towards
Alexander, because he had been the chief promoter of peace in their
regard, and him they always helped.

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And king Alexander gathered together a
great army, and moved his camp near to Demetrius.

<span id="an_10:49">10:49</span> And the two kings joined battle, and
the army of Demetrius fled away, and Alexander pursued after him, and
pressed them close.

<span id="an_10:50">10:50</span> And the battle was hard fought till the
sun went down: and Demetrius was slain that day.

<span id="an_10:51">10:51</span> And Alexander sent ambassadors to
Ptolemee king of Egypt, with words to this effect, saying:

<span id="an_10:52">10:52</span> Forasmuch as I am returned into my
kingdom, and am set in the throne of my ancestors and have gotten the
dominion, and have overthrown Demetrius, and possessed our country,

<span id="an_10:53">10:53</span> And have joined battle with him, and
both he and his army have been destroyed by us, and we are placed in the
throne of his kingdom:

<span id="an_10:54">10:54</span> Now therefore let us make friendship
one with another: and give me now thy daughter to wife, and I will be
thy son in law, and I will give both thee and her gifts worthy of thee.

<span id="an_10:55">10:55</span> And king Ptolemee answered, saying:
Happy is the day wherein thou didst return to the land of thy fathers,
and sattest in the throne of their kingdom.

<span id="an_10:56">10:56</span> And now I will do to thee as thou hast
written: but meet me at Ptolemais, that we may see one another, and I
may give her to thee as thou hast said.

<span id="an_10:57">10:57</span> So Ptolemee went out of Egypt, with
Cleopatra his daughter, and he came to Ptolemais in the hundred and
sixty-second year.

<span id="an_10:58">10:58</span> And king Alexander met him, and he gave
him his daughter Cleopatra: and he celebrated her marriage at Ptolemais,
with great glory, after the manner of kings.

<span id="an_10:59">10:59</span> And king Alexander wrote to Jonathan,
that he should come and meet him.

<span id="an_10:60">10:60</span> And he went honourably to Ptolemais,
and he met there the two kings, and he gave them much silver, and gold,
and presents: and he found favour in their sight.

<span id="an_10:61">10:61</span> And some pestilent men of Israel, men
of a wicked life, assembled themselves against him to accuse him: and
the king gave no heed to them.

<span id="an_10:62">10:62</span> And he commanded that Jonathan's
garments should be taken off, and that he should be clothed with purple:
and they did so. And the king made him sit by himself.

<span id="an_10:63">10:63</span> And he said to his princes: Go out with
him into the midst of the city, and make proclamation, that no man
complain against him of any matter, and that no man trouble him for any
manner of cause.

<span id="an_10:64">10:64</span> So when his accusers saw his glory
proclaimed, and him clothed with purple, they all fled away.

<span id="an_10:65">10:65</span> And the king magnified him, and
enrolled him amongst his chief friends, and made him governor and
partaker of his dominion.

<span id="an_10:66">10:66</span> And Jonathan returned into Jerusalem
with peace and joy.

<span id="an_10:67">10:67</span> In the year one hundred and sixty-five
Demetrius the son of Demetrius came from Crete into the land of his
fathers.

<span id="an_10:68">10:68</span> And king Alexander heard of it, and was
much troubled, and returned to Antioch.

<span id="an_10:69">10:69</span> And king Demetrius made Apollonius his
general, who was governor of Celesyria: and he gathered together a great
army, and came to Jamnia: and he sent to Jonathan the high priest,

<span id="an_10:70">10:70</span> Saying: Thou alone standest against us,
and I am laughed at, and reproached, because thou shewest thy power
against us in the mountains.

<span id="an_10:71">10:71</span> Now therefore if thou trustest in thy
forces, come down to us into the plain, and there let us try one
another: for with me is the strength of war.

<span id="an_10:72">10:72</span> Ask, and learn who I am, and the rest
that help me, who also say that your foot cannot stand before our face,
for thy fathers have twice been put to flight in their own land:

<span id="an_10:73">10:73</span> And now how wilt thou be able to abide
the horsemen, and so great an army in the plain, where there is no
stone, nor rock, nor place to flee to?

<span id="an_10:74">10:74</span> Now when Jonathan heard the words of
Apollonius, he was moved in his mind: and he chose ten thousand men, and
went out of Jerusalem, and Simon his brother met him to help him.

<span id="an_10:75">10:75</span> And they pitched their tents near
Joppe, but they shut him out of the city: because a garrison of
Apollonius was in Joppe, and he laid siege to it.

<span id="an_10:76">10:76</span> And they that were in the city being
affrighted, opened the gates to him: so Jonathan took Joppe.

<span id="an_10:77">10:77</span> And Apollonius heard of it, and he took
three thousand horsemen, and a great army.

<span id="an_10:78">10:78</span> And he went to Azotus as one that was
making a journey, and immediately he went forth into the plain: because
he had a great number of horsemen, and he trusted in them. And Jonathan
followed after him to Azotus, and they joined battle.

<span id="an_10:79">10:79</span> And Apollonius left privately in the
camp a thousand horsemen behind them.

<span id="an_10:80">10:80</span> And Jonathan knew that there was an
ambush behind him, and they surrounded his army, and cast darts at the
people from morning till evening.

<span id="an_10:81">10:81</span> But the people stood still, as Jonathan
had commanded them: and so their horses were fatigued.

<span id="an_10:82">10:82</span> Then Simon drew forth his army, and
attacked the legion: for the horsemen were wearied: and they were
discomfited by him, and fled.

<span id="an_10:83">10:83</span> And they that were scattered about the
plain, fled into Azotus, and went into Bethdagon their idol's temple,
there to save themselves.

<span id="an_10:84">10:84</span> But Jonathan set fire to Azotus, and
the cities that were around it, and took the spoils of them, and the
temple of Dagon: and all them that were fled into it, he burnt with
fire.

<span id="an_10:85">10:85</span> So they that were slain by the sword,
with them that were burnt, were almost eight thousand men.

<span id="an_10:86">10:86</span> And Jonathan removed his army from
thence, and camped against Ascalon: and they went out of the city to
meet him with great honour.

<span id="an_10:87">10:87</span> And Jonathan returned into Jerusalem
with his people, having many spoils.

<span id="an_10:88">10:88</span> And it came to pass: When Alexander the
king heard these words, that he honoured Jonathan yet more.

<span id="an_10:89">10:89</span> And he sent him a buckle of gold, as
the custom is, to be given to such as are of the royal blood. And he
gave him Accaron and all the borders thereof in possession.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the king of Egypt gathered together
an army, like the sand that lieth upon the sea shore, and many ships:
and he sought to get the kingdom of Alexander by deceit, and join it to
his own kingdom.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And he went out into Syria with peaceable
words, and they opened to him the cities, and met him: for king
Alexander had ordered them to go forth to meet him, because he was his
father in law.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Now when Ptolemee entered into the
cities, he put garrisons of soldiers in every city.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And when he came near to Azotus, they
shewed him the temple of Dagon that was burnt with fire, and Azotus, and
the suburbs thereof that were destroyed, and the bodies that were cast
abroad, and the graves of them that were slain in the battle, which they
had made near the way.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And they told the king that Jonathan had
done these things, to make him odious: but the king held his peace.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And Jonathan came to meet the king at
Joppe with glory, and they saluted one another, and they lodged there.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And Jonathan went with the king as far as
the river, called Eleutherus: and he returned into Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And king Ptolemee got the dominion of the
cities by the sea side, even to Seleucia, and he devised evil designs
against Alexander.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And he sent ambassadors to Demetrius,
saying: Come, let us make a league between us, and I will give thee my
daughter whom Alexander hath, and thou shalt reign in the kingdom of thy
father.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For I repent that I have given him my
daughter: for he hath sought to kill me.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And he slandered him, because he
coveted his kingdom.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And he took away his daughter, and gave
her to Demetrius, and alienated himself from Alexander, and his enmities
were made manifest.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And Ptolemee entered into Antioch, and
set two crowns upon his head, that of Egypt, and that of Asia.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Now king Alexander was in Cilicia at
that time: because they that were in those places had rebelled.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And when Alexander heard of it, he came
to give him battle, and king Ptolemee brought forth his army, and met
him with a strong power, and put him to flight.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And Alexander fled into Arabia, there
to be protected: and king Ptolemee was exalted.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And Zabdiel the Arabian took off
Alexander's head, and sent it to Ptolemee.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And king Ptolemee died the third day
after: and they that were in the strong holds were destroyed by them
that were within the camp.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And Demetrius reigned in the hundred
and sixty-seventh year.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> In those days Jonathan gathered
together them that were in Judea, to take the castle that was in
Jerusalem: and they made many engines of war against it.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Then some wicked men that hated their
own nation, went away to king Demetrius, and told him that Jonathan was
besieging the castle.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And when he heard it, he was angry: and
forthwith he came to Ptolemais, and wrote to Jonathan, that he should
not besiege the castle, but should come to him in haste, and speak to
him.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> But when Jonathan heard this, he bade
them besiege it still: and he chose some of the ancients of Israel, and
of the priests, and put himself in danger.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And he took gold, and silver, and
raiment, and many other presents, and went to the king to Ptolemais, and
he found favour in his sight.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And certain wicked men of his nation
made complaints against him.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And the king treated him as his
predecessor had done before: and he exalted him in the sight of all his
friends.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And he confirmed him in the high
priesthood, and all the honours he had before, and he made him the chief
of his friends.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And Jonathan requested of the king that
he would make Judea free from tribute, and the three governments, and
Samaria, and the confines thereof: and he promised him three hundred
talents.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And the king consented: and he wrote
letters to Jonathan of all these things to this effect.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> King Demetrius to his brother Jonathan,
and to the nation of the Jews, greeting.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> We send you here a copy of the letter,
which we have written to Lasthenes our parent concerning you, that you
might know it.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> King Demetrius to Lasthenes his parent,
greeting.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> We have determined to do good to the
nation of the Jews who are our friends, and keep the things that are
just with us, for their good will which they bear towards us.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> We have ratified therefore unto them
all the borders of Judea, and the three cities, Apherema, Lydda, and
Ramatha, which are added to Judea, out of Samaria, and all their
confines, to be set apart to all them that sacrifice in Jerusalem,
instead of the payments which the king received of them every year, and
for the fruits of the land, and of the trees.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> And as for other things that belonged
to us of the tithes, and of the tributes, from this time we discharge
them of them: the saltpans also, and the crowns that were presented to
us.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> We give all to them, and nothing hereof
shall be revoked from this time forth and for ever.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> Now therefore see that thou make a copy
of these things, and let it be given to Jonathan, and set upon the holy
mountain, in a conspicuous place.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> And king Demetrius seeing that the land
was quiet before him, and nothing resisted him, sent away all his
forces, every man to his own place, except the foreign army, which he
had drawn together from the islands of the nations: so all the troops of
his fathers hated him.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> Now there was one Tryphon who had been
of Alexander's party before: who seeing that all the army murmured
against Demetrius, went to Emalchuel the Arabian, who brought up
Antiochus the son of Alexander.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> And he pressed him much to deliver him
to him, that he might be king in his father's place: and he told him all
that Demetrius had done, and how his soldiers hated him. And he remained
there many days.

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> And Jonathan sent to king Demetrius,
desiring that he would cast out them that were in the castle in
Jerusalem, and those that were in the strong holds: because they fought
against Israel.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> And Demetrius sent to Jonathan, saying:
I will not only do this for thee, and for thy people, but I will greatly
honour thee, and thy nation, when opportunity shall serve.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> Now therefore thou shalt do well if
thou send me men to help me: for all my army is gone from me.

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> And Jonathan sent him three thousand
valiant men to Antioch: and they came to the king, and the king was very
glad of their coming.

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> And they that were of the city
assembled themselves together, to the number of a hundred and twenty
thousand men, and would have killed the king.

<span id="an_11:46">11:46</span> And the king fled into the palace, and
they of the city kept the passages of the city, and began to fight.

<span id="an_11:47">11:47</span> And the king called the Jews to his
assistance: and they came to him all at once, and they all dispersed
themselves through the city.

<span id="an_11:48">11:48</span> And they slew in that day a hundred
thousand men, and they set fire to the city, and got many spoils that
day, and delivered the king.

<span id="an_11:49">11:49</span> And they that were of the city saw that
the Jews had got the city as they would: and they were discouraged in
their minds, and cried to the king, making supplication, and saying:

<span id="an_11:50">11:50</span> Grant us peace, and let the Jews cease
from assaulting us, and the city.

<span id="an_11:51">11:51</span> And they threw down their arms, and
made peace, and the Jews were glorified in the sight of the king, and in
the sight of all that were in his realm, and were renowned throughout
the kingdom, and returned to Jerusalem with many spoils.

<span id="an_11:52">11:52</span> So king Demetrius sat in the throne of
his kingdom: and the land was quiet before him.

<span id="an_11:53">11:53</span> And he falsified all whatsoever he had
said, and alienated himself from Jonathan, and did not reward him
according to the benefits he had received from him, but gave him great
trouble.

<span id="an_11:54">11:54</span> And after this Tryphon returned, and
with him Antiochus the young boy, who was made king, and put on the
diadem.

<span id="an_11:55">11:55</span> And there assembled unto him all the
hands which Demetrius had sent away, and they fought against Demetrius,
who turned his back and fled.

<span id="an_11:56">11:56</span> And Tryphon took the elephants, and
made himself master of Antioch.

<span id="an_11:57">11:57</span> And young Antiochus wrote to Jonathan,
saying: I confirm thee in the high priesthood, and I appoint thee ruler
over the four cities, and to be one of the king's friends.

<span id="an_11:58">11:58</span> And he sent him vessels of gold for his
service, and he gave him leave to drink in gold, and to be clothed in
purple, and to wear a golden buckle:

<span id="an_11:59">11:59</span> And he made his brother Simon governor
from the borders of Tyre even to the confines of Egypt.

<span id="an_11:60">11:60</span> Then Jonathan went forth and passed
through the cities beyond the river: and all the forces of Syria
gathered themselves to him to help him, and he came to Ascalon, and they
met him honourably out of the city.

<span id="an_11:61">11:61</span> And he went from thence to Gaza: and
they that were in Gaza shut him out: and he besieged it, and burnt all
the suburbs round about, and took the spoils.

<span id="an_11:62">11:62</span> And the men of Gaza made supplication
to Jonathan, and he gave them the right hand: and he took their sons for
hostages, and sent them to Jerusalem: and he went through the country as
far as Damascus.

<span id="an_11:63">11:63</span> And Jonathan heard that the generals of
Demetrius were come treacherously to Cades, which is in Galilee, with a
great army, purposing to remove him from the affairs of the kingdom:

<span id="an_11:64">11:64</span> And he went against them: but left his
brother Simon in the country.

<span id="an_11:65">11:65</span> And Simon encamped against Bethsura,
and assaulted it many days, and shut them up.

<span id="an_11:66">11:66</span> And they desired him to make peace, and
he granted it them: and he cast them out from thence, and took the city,
and placed a garrison in it.

<span id="an_11:67">11:67</span> And Jonathan, and his army encamped by
the water of Genesar, and before it was light they were ready in the
plain of Asor.

<span id="an_11:68">11:68</span> And behold the army of the strangers
met him in the plain, and they laid an ambush for him in the mountains:
but he went out against them.

<span id="an_11:69">11:69</span> And they that lay in ambush arose out
of their places, and joined battle.

<span id="an_11:70">11:70</span> And all that were on Jonathan's side
fled, and none was left of them, but Mathathias the son of Absalom, and
Judas the son of Calphi, chief captain of the army.

<span id="an_11:71">11:71</span> And Jonathan rent his garments, and
cast earth upon his head, and prayed.

<span id="an_11:72">11:72</span> And Jonathan turned again to them to
battle, and he put them to flight, and they fought.

<span id="an_11:73">11:73</span> And they of his part that fled saw
this, and they turned again to him, and they all with him pursued the
enemies even to Cades to their own camp, and they came even thither.

<span id="an_11:74">11:74</span> And there fell of the aliens in that
day three thousand men: and Jonathan returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Jonathan saw that the time served
him, and he chose certain men and sent them to Rome, to confirm and to
renew the amity with them:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And he sent letters to the Spartans, and
to other places according to the same form.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And they went to Rome, and entered into
the senate house, and said: Jonathan the high priest, and the nation of
the Jews have sent us to renew the amity, and alliance as it was before.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And they gave them letters to their
governors in every place, to conduct them into the land of Juda with
peace.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And this is a copy of the letters which
Jonathan wrote to the Spartans:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Jonathan the high priest, and the
ancients of the nation, and the priests, and the rest of the people of
the Jews, to the Spartans, their brethren, greeting.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> There were letters sent long ago to Onias
the high priest from Arius who reigned then among you, to signify that
you are our brethren, as the copy here underwritten doth specify.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And Onias received the ambassador with
honour: and received the letters wherein there was mention made of the
alliance, and amity.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> We, though we needed none of these
things, having for our comfort the holy books that are in our hands,

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Chose rather to send to you to renew
the brotherhood and friendship, lest we should become strangers to you
altogether: for there is a long time passed since you sent to us.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> We therefore at all times without
ceasing, both in our festivals, and other days, wherein it is
convenient, remember you in the sacrifices that we offer, and in our
observances, as it is meet, and becoming to remember brethren.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And we rejoice at your glory.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> But we have had many troubles and wars
on every side, and the kings that are round about us, have fought
against us.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But we would not be troublesome to you,
nor the rest of our allies and friends in these wars.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> For we have had help from heaven, and
we have been delivered, and our enemies are humbled.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> We have chosen therefore Numenius the
son of Antiochus, and Antipater the son of Jason, and have sent them to
the Romans to renew with them the former amity and alliance.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And we have commanded them to go also
to you, and to salute you, and to deliver you our letters, concerning
the renewing of our brotherhood.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And now you shall do well to give us an
answer hereto.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And this is the copy of the letter
which he had sent to Onias:

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Arius king of the Spartans to Onias the
high priest, greeting.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> It is found in writing concerning the
Spartans, and the Jews, that they are brethren, and that they are of the
stock of Abraham.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And now since this is come to our
knowledge, you do well to write to us of your prosperity.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And we also have written back to you:
That our cattle, and our possessions are yours: and yours, ours. We
therefore have commanded that these things should be told you.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Now Jonathan heard that the generals of
Demetrius were come again with a greater army than before to fight
against him.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> So he went out from Jerusalem, and met
them in the land of Amath: for he gave them no time to enter into his
country.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And he sent spies into their camp, and
they came back and brought him word that they designed to come upon them
in the night.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And when the sun was set, Jonathan
commanded his men to watch, and to be in arms all night long ready to
fight, and he set sentinels round about the camp.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And the enemies heard that Jonathan and
his men were ready for battle, and they were struck with fear, and dread
in their heart: and they kindled fires in their camp.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> But Jonathan and they that were with
him knew it not till the morning: for they saw the lights burning.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And Jonathan pursued after them, but
overtook them not: for they had passed the river Eleutherus.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And Jonathan turned upon the Arabians
that are called Zabadeans: and he defeated them, and took the spoils of
them.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And he went forward, and came to
Damascus, and passed through all that country.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> Simon also went forth, and came as far
as Ascalon, and the neighbouring fortresses, and he turned aside to
Joppe, and took possession of it,

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> (For he heard that they designed to
deliver the hold to them that took part with Demetrius,) and he put a
garrison there to keep it.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And Jonathan came back, and called
together the ancients of the people, and he took a resolution with them
to build fortresses in Judea,

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> And to build up walls in Jerusalem, and
raise a mount between the castle and the city, to separate it from the
city, that so it might have no communication, and that they might
neither buy nor sell.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> And they came together to build up the
city: for the wall that was upon the brook towards the east was broken
down, and he repaired that which is called Caphetetha:

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And Simon built Adiada in Sephela, and
fortified it, and set up gates and bars.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> Now when Tryphon had conceived a design
to make himself king of Asia, and to take the crown, and to stretch out
his hand against king Antiochus:

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> Fearing lest Jonathan would not suffer
him, but would fight against him: he sought to seize upon him, and to
kill him. So he rose up and came to Bethsan.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And Jonathan went out to meet him with
forty thousand men chosen for battle, and came to Bethsan.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> Now when Tryphon saw that Jonathan came
with a great army, he durst not stretch forth his hand against him,

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> But received him with honour, and
commended him to all his friends, and gave him presents: and he
commanded his troops to obey him, as himself.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> And he said to Jonathan: Why hast thou
troubled all the people, whereas we have no war?

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> Now therefore send them back to their
own houses: and choose thee a few men that may be with thee, and come
with me to Ptolemais, and I will deliver it to thee, and the rest of the
strong holds, and the army, and all that have any charge, and I will
return and go away: for this is the cause of my coming.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> And Jonathan believed him, and did as
he said: and sent away his army, and they departed into the land of
Juda:

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> But he kept with him three thousand
men: of whom he sent two thousand into Galilee, and one thousand went
with him.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> Now as soon as Jonathan entered into
Ptolemais, they of Ptolemais shut the gates of the city, and took him:
and all them that came in with him they slew with the sword.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> Then Tryphon sent an army and horsemen
into Galilee, and into the great plain to destroy all Jonathan's
company.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> But they, when they understood that
Jonathan and all that were with him were taken and slain, encouraged one
another, and went out ready for battle.

<span id="an_12:51">12:51</span> Then they that had come after them,
seeing that they stood for their lives, returned back.

<span id="an_12:52">12:52</span> Whereupon they all came peaceably into
the land of Juda. And they bewailed Jonathan, and them that had been
with him, exceedingly: and Israel mourned with great lamentation.

<span id="an_12:53">12:53</span> Then all the heathens that were round
about them, sought to destroy them. For they said:

<span id="an_12:54">12:54</span> They have no prince, nor any to help
them: now therefore let us make war upon them, and take away the memory
of them from amongst mem.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now Simon heard that Tryphon was
gathering together a very great army, to invade the land of Juda, and to
destroy it.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And seeing that the people was in dread,
and in fear, he went up to Jerusalem, and assembled the people:

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And exhorted them, saying: You know what
great battles I and my brethren, and the house of my father, have fought
for the laws, and the sanctuary, and the distresses that we have seen:

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> By reason whereof all my brethren have
lost their lives for Israel's sake, and I am left alone.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And now far be it from me to spare my
life in any time of trouble: for I am not better than my brethren.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> I will avenge then my nation and the
sanctuary, and our children, and wives: for all the heathens are
gathered together to destroy us out of mere malice.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And the spirit of the people was
enkindled as soon as they heard these words.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And they answered with a loud voice,
saying: Thou art our leader in the place of Judas, and Jonathan thy
brother.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Fight thou our battles, and we will do
whatsoever thou shalt say to us.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> So gathering together all the men of
war, he made haste to finish all the walls of Jerusalem, and he
fortified it round about.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And he sent Jonathan the son of
Absalom, and with him a new army into Joppe, and he cast out them that
were in it, and himself remained there.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And Tryphon removed from Ptolemais with
a great army, to invade the land of Juda, and Jonathan was with him in
custody.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> But Simon pitched in Addus, over
against the plain.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And when Tryphon understood that Simon
was risen up in the place of his brother Jonathan, and that he meant to
join battle with him, he sent messengers to him,

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Saying: We have detained thy brother
Jonathan for the money that he owed in the king's account, by reason of
the affairs which he had the management of.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> But now send a hundred talents of
silver, and his two sons for hostages, that when he is set at liberty he
may not revolt from us, and we will release him.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Now Simon knew that he spoke
deceitfully to him, nevertheless he ordered the money, and the children
to be sent: lest he should bring upon himself a great hatred of the
people of Israel, who might have said:

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Because he sent not the money, and the
children, therefore is he lost.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> So he sent the children, and the
hundred talents: and he lied, and did not let Jonathan go.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And after this Tryphon entered within
the country, to destroy it: and they went about by the way that leadeth
to Ador: and Simon and his army marched to every place whithersoever
they went.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And they that were in the castle, sent
messengers to Tryphon, that he should make haste to come through the
desert, and sent them victuals.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And Tryphon made ready all his horsemen
to come that night: but there fell a very great snow, and he came not
into the country of Galaad.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And when he approached to Bascama, he
slew Jonathan and his sons there.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And Tryphon returned, and went into his
own country.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And Simon sent, and took the bones of
Jonathan his brother, and buried them in Modin, in the city of his
fathers.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And all Israel bewailed him with great
lamentation: and they mourned for him many days.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And Simon built over the sepulchre of
his father and of his brethren, a building lofty to the sight, of
polished stone behind and before:

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And he set up seven pyramids one
against another for his father and his mother, and his four brethren:

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And round about these he set great
pillars: and upon the pillars arms for a perpetual memory: and by the
arms ships carved, which might be seen by all that sailed on the sea.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> This is the sepulchre that he made in
Modin even unto this day.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> But Tryphon when he was upon a journey
with the young king Antiochus, treacherously slew him.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And he reigned in his place, and put on
the crown of Asia: and brought great evils upon the land.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> And Simon built up the strong holds of
Judea, fortifying them with high towers, and great walls, and gates, and
bars: and he stored up victuals in the fortresses.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> And Simon chose men and sent to king
Demetrius, to the end that he should grant an immunity to the land: for
all that Tryphon did was to spoil.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> And king Demetrius in answer to this
request, wrote a letter in this manner:

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> King Demetrius to Simon the high
priest, and friend of kings, and to the ancients, and to the nation of
the Jews, greeting.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> The golden crown, and the palm, which
you sent, we have received: and we are ready to make a firm peace with
you, and to write to the king's chief officers to release you the things
that we have released.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> For all that we have decreed in your
favour, shall stand in force. The strong holds that you have built,
shall be your own.

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> And as for any oversight or fault
committed unto this day, we forgive it, and the crown which you owed:
and if any other thing were taxed in Jerusalem, now let it not be taxed.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> And if any of you be fit to be enrolled
among ours, let them be enrolled, and let there be peace between us.

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> In the year one hundred and seventy the
yoke of the Gentiles was taken off from Israel.

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And the people of Israel began to write
in the instruments, and public records, The first year under Simon the
high priest, the great captain and prince of the Jews.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> In those days Simon besieged Gaza, and
camped round about it, and he made engines, and set them to the city,
and he struck one tower, and took it.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> And they that were within the engine
leaped into the city: and there was a great uproar in the city.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> And they that were in the city went up
with their wives and children upon the wall, with their garments rent,
and they cried with a loud voice, beseeching Simon to grant them peace.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> And they said: Deal not with us
according to our evil deeds, but according to thy mercy.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> And Simon being moved, did not destroy
them: but yet he cast them out of the city, and cleansed the houses
wherein there had been idols, and then he entered into it with hymns,
blessing the Lord.

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> And having cast out of it all
uncleanness, he placed in it men that should observe the law: and he
fortified it, and made it his habitation.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> But they that were in the castle of
Jerusalem were hindered from going out and coming into the country, and
from buying and selling: and they were straitened with hunger, and many
of them perished through famine.

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> And they cried to Simon form peace, and
he granted it to them: and he cast them out from thence, and cleansed
the castle from uncleannesses.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> And they entered into it the three and
twentieth day of the second month, in the year one hundred and
seventy-one, with thanksgiving, and branches of palm trees, and harps,
and cymbals, and psalteries, and hymns, and canticles, because the great
enemy was destroyed out of Israel.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> And he ordained that these days should
be kept every year with gladness.

<span id="an_13:53">13:53</span> And he fortified the mountain of the
temple that was near the castle, and he dwelt there himself, and they
that were with him.

<span id="an_13:54">13:54</span> And Simon saw that John his son was a
valiant man for war: and he made him captain of all the forces: and he
dwelt in Gazara.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> In the year one hundred and seventy-two,
king Demetrius assembled has army, and went into Media to get him
succours to fight against Tryphon.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And Arsaces the king of Persia and Media
heard that Demetrius was entered within his borders, and he sent one of
his princes to take him alive, and bring him to him.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And he went and defeated the army of
Demetrius: and took him, and brought him to Arsaces, and he put him into
custody.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And all the land of Juda was at rest all
the days of Simon, and he sought the good of his nation: and his power,
and his glory pleased them well all his days.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And with all his glory he took Joppe for
a haven, and made an entrance to the isles of the sea.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And he enlarged the bounds of his nation,
and made himself master of the country.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And he gathered together a great number
of captives, and had the dominion of Gazara, and of Bethsura, and of the
castle: and took away all uncleanness out of it and there was none that
resisted him.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And every man tilled his land with peace:
and the land of Juda yielded her increase, and the trees of the fields
their fruit.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> The ancient men sat all in the streets,
and treated together of the good things of the land, and the young men
put on them glory, and the robes of war.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And he provided victuals for the
cities, and he appointed that they should be furnished with ammunition,
so that the fame of his glory was renowned even to the end of the earth.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> He made peace in the land, and Israel
rejoiced with great joy.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And every man sat under his vine, and
under his fig tree: and there was none to make them afraid.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> There was none left in the land to
fight against them: kings were discomfited in those days.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And he strengthened all those of his
people that were brought low, and he sought the law, and took away every
unjust and wicked man.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> He glorified the sanctuary, and
multiplied the vessels of the holy places.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And it was heard at Rome, and as far as
Sparta, that Jonathan was dead: and they were very sorry.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> But when they heard that Simon his
brother was made high priest in his place, and was possessed of all the
country, and the cities therein:

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> They wrote to him in tables of brass,
to renew the friendship and alliance which they had made with Judas, and
with Jonathan his brethren.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And they were read before the assembly
in Jerusalem. And this is the copy of the letters that the Spartans
sent.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> The princes and the cities of the
Spartans to Simon the high priest, and to the ancients, and the priests,
and the rest of the people of the Jews their brethren, greeting.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> The ambassadors that were sent to our
people, have told us of your glory, and honour, and joy: and we rejoice
at their coming.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And we registered what was said by them
in the councils of the people in this manner: Numenius the son of
Antiochus, and Antipater the son of Jason, ambassadors of the Jews, came
to us to renew the former friendship with us.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And it pleased the people to receive
the men honourably, and to put a copy of their words in the public
records, to be a memorial to the people of the Spartans. And we have
written a copy of them to Simon the high priest.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And after this Simon sent Numenius to
Rome, with a great shield of gold the weight of a thousand pounds, to
confirm the league with them. And when the people of Rome had heard

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> These words, they said: What thanks
shall we give to Simon, and his sons?

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> For he hath restored his brethren, and
hath driven away in fight the enemies of Israel from them: and they
decreed him liberty, and registered it in tables of brass, and set it
upon pillars in mount Sion.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And this is a copy of the writing: The
eighteenth day of the month Elul, in the year one hundred and
seventy-two, being the third year under Simon the high priest at
Asaramel,

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In a great assembly of the priests, and
of the people, and the princes of the nation, and the ancients of the
country, these things were notified: Forasmuch as there have often been
wars in our country,

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And Simon the son of Mathathias of the
children of Jarib, and his brethren have put themselves in danger, and
have resisted the enemies of their nation, for the maintenance of their
holy places, and the law: and have raised their nation to great glory.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And Jonathan gathered together his
nation, and was made their high priest, and he was laid to his people.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And their enemies desired to tread down
and destroy their country, and to stretch forth their hands against
their holy places.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> Then Simon resisted and fought for his
nation, and laid out much of his money, and armed the valiant men of his
nation, and gave them wages:

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And he fortified the cities of Judea,
and Bethsura that lieth in the borders of Judea, where the armour of the
enemies was before: and he placed there a garrison of Jews.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And he fortified Joppe which lieth by
the sea: and Gazara, which bordereth upon Azotus, wherein the enemies
dwelt before, and he placed Jews here: and furnished them with all
things convenient for their reparation.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And the people seeing the acts of
Simon, and to what glory he meant to bring his nation, made him their
prince, and high priest, because he had done all these things, and for
the justice, and faith, which he kept to his nation, and for that he
sought by all means to advance his people.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And in his days things prospered in his
hands, so that the heathens were taken away out of their country, and
they also that were in the city of David in Jerusalem in the castle, out
of which they issued forth, and profaned all places round about the
sanctuary, and did much evil to its purity.

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> And he placed therein Jews for the
defence of the country, and of the city, and he raised up the walls of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> And king Demetrius confirmed him in the
high priesthood.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> According to these things he made him
his friend, and glorified him with great glory.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> For he had heard that the Romans had
called the Jews their friends, and confederates, and brethren, and that
they had received Simon's ambassadors with honour:

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And that the Jews, and their priests,
had consented that he should be their prince, and high priest for ever,
till there should arise a faithful prophet:

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> And that he should be chief over them,
and that he should have the charge of the sanctuary, and that he should
appoint rulers over their works, and over the country, and over the
armour, and over the strong holds.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> And that he should have care of the
holy places: and that he should be obeyed by all, and that all the
writings in the country should be made in his name: and that he should
be clothed with purple, and gold:

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> And that it should not be lawful for
any of the people, or of the priests, to disannul any of these things,
or to gainsay his words, or to call together an assembly in the country
without him: or to be clothed with purple, or to wear a buckle of gold:

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> And whosoever shall do otherwise, or
shall make void any of these things shall be punished.

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> And it pleased all the people to
establish Simon, and to do according to these words.

<span id="an_14:47">14:47</span> And Simon accepted thereof, and was
well pleased to execute the office of the high priesthood, and to be
captain, and prince of the nation of the Jews, and of the priests, and
to be chief over all.

<span id="an_14:48">14:48</span> And they commanded that this writing
should be put in tables of brass, and that they should be set up within
the compass of the sanctuary, in a conspicuous place:

<span id="an_14:49">14:49</span> And that a copy thereof should be put
in the treasury, that Simon and his sons may have it.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And king Antiochus the son of Demetrius
sent letters from the isles of the sea to Simon the priest, and prince
of the nation of the Jews, and to all the people:

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And the contents were these: King
Antiochus to Simon the high priest, and to the nation of the Jews,
greeting.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Forasmuch as certain pestilent men have
usurped the kingdom of our fathers, and my purpose is to challenge the
kingdom, and to restore it to its former estate: and I have chosen a
great army, and have built ships of war.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And I design to go through the country
that I may take revenge of them that have destroyed our country, and
that have made many cities desolate in my realm.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Now therefore I confirm unto thee all the
oblations which all the kings before me remitted to thee, and what other
gifts soever they remitted to thee:

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And I give thee leave to coin thy own
money in thy country:

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And let Jerusalem be holy and free, and
all the armour that hath been made, and the fortresses which thou hast
built, and which thou keepest in thy hands, let them remain to thee.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And all that is due to the king, and what
should be the king's hereafter, from this present and for ever, is
forgiven thee.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And when we shall have recovered our
kingdom, we will glorify thee, and thy nation, and the temple with great
glory, so that your glory shall be made manifest in all the earth.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> In the year one hundred and
seventy-four Antiochus entered into the land of this fathers, and all
the forces assembled to him, so that few were left with Tryphon.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And king Antiochus pursued after him,
and he fled along by the sea coast and came to Dora.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> For he perceived that evils were
gathered together upon him, and his troops had forsaken him.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And Antiochus camped above Dora with a
hundred and twenty thousand men of war, and eight thousand horsemen:

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And he invested the city, and the ships
drew near by sea: and they annoyed the city by land, and by sea, and
suffered none to come in, or to go out.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And Numenius, and they that had been
with him, came from the city of Rome, having letters written to the
kings, and countries, the contents whereof were these:

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Lucius the consul of the Romans, to
king Ptolemee, greeting.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> The ambassadors of the Jews our friends
came to us, to renew the former friendship and alliance, being sent from
Simon the high priest, and the people of the Jews.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And they brought also a shield of gold
of a thousand pounds.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> It hath seemed good therefore to us to
write to the kings, and countries, that they should do them no harm, nor
fight against them, their cities, or countries: and that they should
give no aid to them that fight against them.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And it hath seemed good to us to
received the shield of them.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> If therefore any pestilent men are fled
out of their country to you, deliver them to Simon the high priest, that
he may punish them according to their law.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> These same things were written to king
Demetrius, and to Attalus, and to Ariarathes, and to Arsaces,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And to all the countries; and to
Lampsacus, and to the Spartans, and to Delus, and Myndus, and Sicyon,
and Caria, and Samus, and Pamphylia, and Lycia, and Alicarnassus, and
Cos, and Side, and Aradus, and Rhodes, and Phaselis, and Gortyna, and
Gnidus, and Cyprus, and Cyrene.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And they wrote a copy thereof to Simon
the high priest, and to the people of the Jews.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But king Antiochus moved his camp to
Dora the second time, assaulting it continually, and making engines: and
shut up Tryphon, that he could not go out.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And Simon sent to him two thousand
chosen men to aid him, silver also, and gold, and abundance of
furniture.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And he would not receive them, but
broke all the covenant that he had made with him before, and alienated
himself from him.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And he sent to him Athenobius one of
his friends, to treat with him, saying: You hold Joppe, and Gazara, and
the castle that is in Jerusalem, which are cities of my kingdom:

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Their borders you have wasted, and you
have made great havock in the land, and have got the dominion of many
places in my kingdom.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Now therefore deliver up the cities
that you have taken, and the tributes of the places whereof you have
gotten the dominion without the borders of Judea.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> But if not, give me for them five
hundred talents of silver, and for the havock that you have made, and
the tributes of the cities other five hundred talents: or else we will
come and fight against you.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> So Athenobius the king's friend came to
Jerusalem, and saw the glory of Simon and his magnificence in gold, and
silver, and his great equipage, and he was astonished, and told him the
king's words.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And Simon answered him, and said to
him: We have neither taken other men's land, neither do we hold that
which is other men's: but the inheritance of our fathers, which was for
some time unjustly possessed by our enemies.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> But we having opportunity claim the
inheritance of our fathers.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And as to thy complaints concerning
Joppe and Gazara, they did great harm to the people, and to our country:
yet for these we will give a hundred talents. And Athenobius answered
him not a word:

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> But returning in a rage to the king,
made report to him of these words, and of the glory of Simon, and of all
that he had seen, and the king was exceeding angry.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Tryphon fled away by ship to
Orthosias.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And the king appointed Cendebeus
captain of the sea coast, and gave him an army of footmen and horsemen.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And he commanded him to march with his
army towards Judea: and he commanded him to build up Gedor, and to
fortify the gates of the city, and to war against the people. But the
king himself pursued after Tryphon.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> And Cendebeus came to Jamnia, and began
to provoke the people, and to ravage Judea, and to take the people
prisoners, and to kill, and to build Gedor.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> And he placed there horsemen, and an
army: that they might issue forth, and make incursions upon the ways of
Judea, as the king had commanded him.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Then John came up from Gazara, and told
Simon his father what Cendebeus had done against their people.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And Simon called his two eldest sons,
Judas and John, and said to them: I and my brethren, and my father's
house, have fought against the enemies of Israel from our youth even to
this day: and things have prospered so well in our hands that we have
delivered Israel oftentimes.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And now I am old, but be you instead of
me, and my brethren, and go out, and fight for our nation: and the help
from heaven be with you.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Then he chose out of the country twenty
thousand fighting men, and horsemen, and they went forth against
Cendebeus: and they rested in Modin.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And they arose in the morning, and went
into the plain: and behold a very great army of footmen and horsemen
came against them, and there was a running river between them.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And he and his people pitched their camp
over against them, and he saw that the people were afraid to go over the
river, so he went over first: then the men seeing him, passed over after
him.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And he divided the people, and set the
horsemen in the midst of the footmen: but the horsemen of the enemies
were very numerous.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And they sounded the holy trumpets: and
Cendebeus and his army were put to flight: and there fell many of them
wounded, and the rest fled into the strong hold.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> At that time Judas John's brother was
wounded: but John pursued after them, till he came to Cedron, which he
had built:

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And they fled even to the towers that
were in the fields of Azotus, and he burnt them with fire. And there
fell of them two thousand men, and he returned into Judea in peace.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Now Ptolemee the son of Abobus was
appointed captain in the plain of Jericho, and he had abundance of
silver and gold,

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> For he was son in law of the high
priest.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And his heart was lifted up, and he
designed to make himself master of the country, and he purposed
treachery against Simon, and his sons, to destroy them.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Now Simon, as he was going through the
cities that were in the country of Judea, and taking care for the good
ordering of them, went down to Jericho, he and Mathathias and Judas his
sons, in the year one hundred and seventy-seven, the eleventh month: the
same is the month Sabath.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And the son of Abobus received them
deceitfully into a little fortress, that is called Doch which he had
built: and he made them a great feast, and hid men there.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And when Simon and his sons had drunk
plentifully, Ptolemee and his men rose up and took their weapons, and
entered into the banqueting place, and slew him, and his two sons, and
some of his servants.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And he committed a great treachery in
Israel, and rendered evil for good.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And Ptolemee wrote these things and
sent to the king that he should send him an army to aid him, and he
would deliver him the country, and their cities, and tributes.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And he sent others to Gazara to kill
John: and to the tribunes he sent letters to come to him, and that he
would give them silver, and gold, and gifts.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And he sent others to take Jerusalem,
and the mountain of the temple.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Now one running before, told John in
Gazara, that his father and his brethren were slain, and that he hath
sent men to kill thee also.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> But when he heard it he was exceedingly
afraid: and he apprehended the men that came to kill him, and he put
them to death: for he knew that they sought to make him away.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And as concerning the rest of the acts
of John, and his wars, and the worthy deeds, which he bravely achieved,
and the building of the walls, which he made, and the things that he
did:

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Behold these are written in the book of
the days of his priesthood, from the time he was made high priest after
his father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees](ma2)
