[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ma1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: 2 Macabees

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> To the brethren the Jews that are I
throughout Egypt, the brethren, the Jews that are in Jerusalem, and in
the land of Judea, send health, and good peace.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> May God be gracious to you, and remember
his covenant that he made with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, his
faithful servants:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And give you all a heart to worship him,
and to do his will with a great heart, and a willing mind.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> May he open your heart in his law, and in
his commandments, and send you peace.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> May he hear your prayers, and be reconciled
unto you, and never forsake you in the evil time.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And now here we are praying for you.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> When Demetrius reigned, in the year one
hundred and sixty-nine, we Jews wrote to you, in the trouble, and
violence, that came upon us in those years, after Jason withdrew himself
from the holy land, and from the kingdom.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> They burnt the gate, and shed innocent
blood: then we prayed to the Lord, and were heard, and we offered
sacrifices, and fine flour, and lighted the lamps, and set forth the
leaves.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And now celebrate ye the days of Scenopegia
in the month of Casleu.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> In the year one hundred and eighty-
eight, the people that is at Jerusalem, and in Judea, and the senate,
and Judas, to Aristobolus, the preceptor of king Ptolemee, who is of the
stock of the anointed priests, and to the Jews that are in Egypt, health
and welfare.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Having been delivered by God out of great
dangers, we give him great thanks, forasmuch as we have been in war with
such a king.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For he made numbers of men swarm out of
Persia that have fought against us, and the holy city.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For when the leader himself was in
Persia, and with him a very great army, he fell in the temple of Nanea,
being deceived by the counsel of the priests of Nanea.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> For Antiochus, with his friends, came to
the place as though he would marry her, and that he might receive great
sums of money under the title of a dowry.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And when the priests of Nanea had set it
forth, and he with a small company had entered into the compass of the
temple, they shut the temple,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> When Antiochus was came in: and opening a
secret entrance of the temple, they cast stones and slew the leader, and
them that were with him, and hewed them in pieces, and cutting off their
heads they threw them forth.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Blessed be God in all things, who hath
delivered up the wicked.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Therefore whereas we purpose to keep the
purification of the temple on the five and twentieth day of the month of
Casleu, we thought it necessary to signify it to you: that you also may
keep the day of Scenopegia, and the day of the fire, that was given when
Nehemias offered sacrifice, after the temple and the altar was built.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For when our fathers were led in Persia,
the priests that then were worshippers of God took privately the fire
from the altar, and hid it in a valley where there was a deep pit
without water, and there they kept it safe, so that the place was
unknown to all men.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But when many years had passed, and it
pleased God that Nehemias should be sent by the king of Persia, he sent
some of the posterity of those priests that had hid it, to seek for the
fire: and as they told us, they found no fire, but thick water.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Then he bade them draw it up, and bring
it to him: and the priest Nehemias commanded the sacrifices that were
laid on, to be sprinkled with the same water, both the wood, and the
things that were laid upon it.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And when this was done, and the time came
that the sun shone out, which before was in a cloud, there was a great
fire kindled, so that all wondered.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And all the priests made prayer, while
the sacrifice was consuming, Jonathan beginning, and the rest answering.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And the prayer of Nehemias was after this
manner: 0 Lord God, Creator of all things, dreadful and strong, just and
merciful, who alone art the goad king,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Who alone art gracious, who alone art
just, and almighty, and eternal, who deliverest Israel from all evil,
who didst choose the fathers and didst sanctify them :

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Receive the sacrifice for all thy people
Israel, and preserve thy own portion, and sanctify it.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Gather together our scattered people,
deliver them that are slaves to the Gentiles, and look upon them that
are despised and abhorred: that the Gentiles may know that thou art our
God.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Punish them that oppress us, and that
treat us injuriously with pride.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Establish thy people in thy holy place,
as Moses hath spoken.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> And the priests sung hymns till the
sacrifice was consumed.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And when the sacrifice was consumed,
Nehemias commanded the water that was left to be poured out upon the
great stones.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> Which being done, there -was kindled a
dame from them: but it was consumed by the light that shined from the
altar.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> And when this matter became public, it
was told to the king of Persia, that in the place where the priests that
were led away, had hid the fire, there appeared water, with which
Nehemias and they that were with him had purified the sacrifices.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And the king considering, and diligently
examining the matter, made a temple for it, that he might prove what had
happened.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And when he had proved it, he gave the
priests many goods, and divers presents, and he took end distributed
them to them with his own hand.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And Nehemias called this place Nephthar,
which is interpreted purification. But many call it Nephi.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now it is found in the descriptions of
Jeremias the prophet, that he commanded them that went into captivity,
to take the fire, as it hath been signified, and how he gave charge to
them that were carried away into captivity.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And how he gave them the law that they
should not forget the commandments of the Lord, and that they should not
err in their minds, seeing the idols of gold, and silver, and the
ornaments of them.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And with other such like speeches, he
exhorted them that they would not remove the law from their heart.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> It was also contained in the same writing,
how the prophet, being warned by God, commanded that the tabernacle and
the ark should accompany him, till he came forth to the mountain " where
Moses went up, and saw the inheritance of God.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And when Jeremias came thither he found a
hollow cave: and he carried in thither the tabernacle, and the ark, and
the altar of incense, and so stopped the door.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Then some of them that followed him, came
up to mark the place: but they could not And it.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And when Jeremias perceived it, he blamed
them, saying: The place shall be unknown, till God gather together the
congregation of the people, and receive them to mercy.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And then the Lord will shew these things,
and the majesty of the Lord shall appear, and there shall be a cloud as
it was also shewed to Moses, "and he shewed it when Solomon prayed that
the place might be sanctified to the great God.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For he treated wisdom in a magnificent
manner: and like a wise man, he offered the sacrifice of the dedication,
and of the finishing of the temple.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And as Moses prayed to the Lord and fire
came down from heaven, and consumed the holocaust: so Solomon also
prayed, and fire came down from heaven and consumed the holocaust.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And Moses said: Because the sin offering
was not eaten, it was consumed.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> So Solomon also celebrated the dedication
eight days.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And these same things were set down in
the memoirs and commentaries of Nehemias: and how he made a library, and
gathered together out of the countries, the books both of the prophets,
and of David, and the epistles of the kings. and concerning the holy
gifts.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And in like manner Judas also gathered
together all such things as were lost by the war we had, and they are in
our possession.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Wherefore if you want these things, send
some that may fetch them to you.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> As we are then about to celebrate the
purification, we have written unto you: and you shall do well, if you
keep the same days.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And we hope that God who hath delivered
his people, and hath rendered to all the inheritance, and the kingdom,
and the priesthood, and the sanctuary,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> As he promised in the law, will shortly
have mercy upon us, and will gather us together from every land under
heaven into the holy place.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For he hath delivered us out of great
perils, and hath cleansed the place.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Now as concerning Judas Machabeus. and
his brethren, and the purification of the great temple, and the
dedication o the altar:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> As also the wars against Antioch the
Illustrious, and his son Eupator:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And the manifestations that from heaven
to them, that behaved themselves manfully on the behalf of the Jews, so
that, being but a few, they made themselves masters of the whole
country, and put to flight; the barbarous multitude :

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And recovered again the most renowned
temple in all the world, and delivered the city, and restored the laws
that were abolished, the Lord with all clemency shewing mercy to them.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And all such things as have been
comprised in five books by Jason of Cyrene, we have attempted to abridge
in one book.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For considering the multitude of books,
and the difficulty that they find that desire to undertake the
narrations of histories, because of the multitude of the matter,

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> We have taken care for those indeed that
are willing to read, that it might be a pleasure of mind: and for the
studious, that they may more easily commit to memory: and that all that
read might receive profit.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And as to ourselves indeed, in under-
taking this work of abridging, we have taken in hand no easy task, yea
rather a business full of watching and sweat.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> But as they that prepare a feast, and
seek to satisfy the will of others: for the sake of many, we willingly
undergo the labour.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Leaving to the authors the exact handling
of every particular, and as for ourselves, according to the plan pro-
posed, studying to be brief.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> For as the master builder of a new house
must have care of the whole building: but he that taketh care to paint
it, must seek out fit things for the adorning of it: so must it be
judged for us.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> For to collect all that is to be known,
to put the discourse in order, and curiously to discuss every particular
point, is the duty of the author of a history:

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> But to pursue brevity of speech, and to
avoid nice declarations of things, is to be granted to him that maketh
an abridgment.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> Here then we will begin the narration:
let this be enough by way of a preface: for it is a foolish thing to
make a long prologue, and to be short in the story itself.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Therefore when the holy city was inhabited
with all peace, and the laws as yet were very well kept, because of the
godliness of Onias the high priest, and the hatred his soul had of evil,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> It came to pass that even the kings
themselves, and the princes esteemed the place worthy of the highest
honour, and glorified the temple with very great gifts:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> So that Seleucus king of Asia allowed out
of his revenues all the charges be- longing to the ministry of the
sacrifices.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But one Simon of the tribe of Benjamin, who
was appointed overseer of the temple, strove in opposition to the high
priest, to bring about some unjust thing in the city.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And when he could not overcome Onias he
went to Apollonius the son of Tharseas, who at that time was governor of
Celesyria and Phenicia:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And told him, that the treasury in
Jerusalem was full of immense sums of money, and the common store was
infinite, which did not belong to the account of the sacrifices: and
that it was possible to bring all into the king's hands.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Now when Apollonius had given the king
notice concerning the money that he was told of, he called for
Heliodorus, who had the charge over his affairs, and sent him with
commission to bring him the foresaid money.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> So Heliodorus forthwith began his journey,
under a colour of visiting the cities of Celesyria and Phenicia, but in-
deed to fulfil the king's purpose.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And when he was come to Jerusalem, and had
been courteously received in the city by the high priest, he told him
what information had been given concerning the money: and declared the
cause for which he was come: and asked if these things were so indeed.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Then the high priest told him that these
were sums deposited, and provisions for the subsistence of the widows
and the fatherless.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And that some part of that which wicked
Simon had given intelligence of, belonged to Hircanus son of Tobias, a
man of great dignity: and that the whole was four hundred talents of
silver, and two hundred of gold:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> But that to deceive them who had trusted
to the place and temple which is honoured throughout the whole world,
for the reverence and holiness of it, was a thing which could not by any
means be done.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But he, by reason of the orders he had
received from the king, said that by :all means the money must be
carried to the king.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> So on the day he had appointed,
Heliodorus entered in to order this mat- tar. But there was no small
terror throughout the whole city.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And the priests prostrated them- selves
before the altar in their priests' vestments, and called upon him from
heaven, who made the law concerning things given to be kept, that he
would preserve them safe, for them that had deposited them.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Now whosoever saw the countenance of the
high priest, was wounded in heart: for his face, and the changing of his
colour declared the inward sorrow of his mind.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For the man was so compassed with sadness
and horror of the body, that it was manifest to them that beheld him,
what sorrow he had in his heart.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Others also came hocking together out of
their houses, praying and making public supplication, because the place
was like to come into contempt.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And the women, girded with haircloth
about their breasts, came together in the streets. And the virgins also
that were shut up, came forth, some to Onias, and some to the walls, and
others looked out of the windows.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And all holding up their hands towards
heaven, made supplication.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> For the expectation of the mixed
multitude, and of the high priest who was in an agony, would have moved
any one to pity.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And these indeed called upon al- mighty
God, to preserve the things that had been committed to them, safe and
sure for those that had committed them.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> But Heliodorus executed that which he had
resolved on, himself being present in the same place with his guard
about the treasury.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> But the spirit of the almighty God gave a
great evidence of his presence, so that all that had presumed to obey
him, falling down by the power of God, were struck with fainting and
dread.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For there appeared to them a horse with a
terrible rider upon him, adorned with a very rich covering: and he ran
fiercely and struck Heliodorus with his fore feet, and he that sat upon
him seemed to have armour of gold.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Moreover there appeared two other young
men beautiful and strong, bright and glorious, and in comely apparel:
who stood by him, on either side, and scourged him without ceasing with
many stripes.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Arid Heliodorus suddenly fell to the
ground, and they took him up covered with great darkness, and having put
him into a litter they carried him out.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> So he that came with many servants, and
all his guard into the aforesaid treasury, was carried out, no one being
able to help him, the manifest power of God being known.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> And he indeed by the power of God lay
speechless, and without all hope of recovery.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> But they praised the Lord because he had
glorified his place: and the temple, that a little before was full of
fear and trouble, when the almighty Lord appeared, was filled with joy
and gladness.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Then some of the friends of Heliodorus
forthwith begged of Onias, that he would call upon the most High to
grant him his life, who was ready to give up the ghost.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> So the high priest considering that the
king might perhaps suspect that some mischief had been done to
Heliodorus by the Jews, offered a sacrifice of health for the recovery
of the man.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> And when the high priest was praying, the
same young men in the same clothing stood by Heliodorus, and said to
him: Give thanks to Onias the priest: because for his sake the Lord hath
granted thee life.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And thou having been scourged by God,
declare unto all men the great works and the power of God. And having
spoken thus, they appeared no more.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> So Heliodorus after he had offered a
sacrifice to God, and made great vows to him, that had granted him life,
and given thanks to Onias, taking his troops with him, returned to the
king.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> And he testified to all men the works of
the great God, which he had seen with his own eyes.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> And when the king asked Heliodorus, who
might be a fit man to be sent yet once more to Jerusalem, he said:

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> If thou hast any enemy or traitor to thy
kingdom, send him thither, and thou shalt receive him again scourged, if
so be he escape: for there is undoubtedly in that place a certain power
of God.

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> For he that hath his dwelling in the
heavens, is the visitor, and protector of that place, and he striketh
and destroyeth them that come to do evil to it.

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> And the things concerning Heliodorus, and
the keeping of the treasury fell out in this manner.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But Simon, of whom we spoke before, and of
his country, spoke ill of Onias, as though he had incited Heliodorus to
do these things, and had been the promoter of evils:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he presumed to call him a traitor to
the kingdom, who provided for the city, and defended his nation, and was
zealous for the law of God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> But when the enmities proceeded so far,
that murders also were committed by some of Simon's friends:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Onias considering the danger of this
contention, and that Apollonius, who was the governor of Celesyria and
Phenicia, was outrageous, which increased the malice of Simon, went to
the king,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Not to be an accuser of his countrymen, but
with a view to the common good of all the people.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For he saw that, except the king took care,
it was impossible that matters should be settled in peace, or that Simon
would cease from his folly.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But after the death of Seleucus, when
Antiochus, who was called the Illustrious, had taken possession of the
kingdom, Jason the brother of Onias ambitiously sought the high
priesthood:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And went to the king, promising him three
hundred and sixty talents of silver, and out of other revenues four-
score talents.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Besides this he promised also a hundred and
fifty more, if he might have license to set him up a place for exercise,
and a place for youth, and to entitle them, that were at Jerusalem,
Antiochians.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Which when the king had granted, and he
had gotten the rule into his hands, forthwith he began to bring over his
countrymen to the fashion of the heathens.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And abolishing those things, which had
been decreed of special favour by the kings in behalf of the Jews, by
the means of John the father of that Eupolemus, who went ambassador to
Rome to make amity and alliance, he disannulled the lawful ordinances of
the citizens, and brought in fashions that were perverse.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> For he had the boldness to set up, U
under the very castle, a place of exercise, and to put all the choicest
youths in brothel houses.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Now this was not the beginning, but an
increase, and progress of heathenish and foreign manners, through the
abominable and unheard of wickedness of Jason, that impious wretch and
no priest.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Insomuch that the priests were not now
occupied about the offices of the altar, but despising the temple and
neglecting the sacrifices, hastened to be partakers of the games, and of
the unlawful allowance thereof, and of the exercise of the discus.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And setting nought by the honours of
their fathers, they esteemed the Grecian glories for the best:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For the sake of which they incurred a
dangerous contention, and followed earnestly their ordinances, and in
all things they coveted to be like them, who were their enemies and
murderers.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For acting wickedly against the laws of
God doth not pass unpunished: but this the time following will declare.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Now when the game that was used every
fifth year was kept at Tyre, the king being present,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The wicked Jason sent from Jerusalem
sinful men to carry three hundred didrachmas of silver for the sacrifice
of Hercules; but the bearers thereof de- sired it might not be bestowed
on the sacrifices, because it was not necessary, but might be deputed
for other charges.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> So the money was appointed by him that
sent it to the sacrifice of Hercules: but because of them that carried
it was employed for the making of galleys.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Now when Apollonius the son of Mnestheus
was sent into Egypt to treat with the nobles of king Philometor, and
Antiochus understood that he was wholly excluded from the affairs of the
kingdom, consulting his own interest, he departed thence and came to
Joppe, and from thence to Jerusalem:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Where he was received in a, magnificent
manner by Jason, and the city, and came in with torch lights, and with
praises, end from thence he returned with his army into Phenicia.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Three years afterwards Jason sent
Menelaus, brother of the aforesaid Simon, to carry money to the king,
and to bring answers from him concerning certain necessary affairs.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> But he being recommended to the king,
when he had magnified the appearance of his power, got the high
priesthood for himself, by offering more than Jason by three hundred
talents of silver.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> So having received the king's man- date,
he returned bringing nothing worthy of the high priesthood: but having
the mind of a cruel tyrant, and the rage of a savage beast.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Then Jason, who had undermined his own
brother, being himself undermined, was driven out a fugitive into the
country of the Ammonites

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> So Menelaus got the principality: but as
for the money he had promised to the king he took no care, when
Sostratus the governor of the castle called for

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> For to him appertained the gathering of
the taxes: wherefore they were both called before the king.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And Menelaus was removed from the
priesthood, Lysimachus his brother succeeding: and Sostratus was made
governor of the Cyprians.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> When these things were in doing, it fell
out that they of Tharsus and Mallos raised a sedition, because they were
given for a gift to Antiochis, the king's concubine.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> The king therefore went in all haste to
appease them, leaving Andronicus, one of his nobles, for his deputy.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> Then Menelaus supposing that he had found
a convenient time, having stolen certain vessels of gold out of the
temple, gave them to Andronicus, and others he had sold at Tyre, and in
the neighbouring cities.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> Which when Onias understood most
certainly, he reproved him, keeping him- self in a safe place at Antioch
beside Daphne.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Whereupon Menelaus coming to Andronicus,
desired him to kill Onias. And he went to Onias, and gave him his right
hand with an oath, and (though he were suspected by him) persuaded him
to come forth out of the sanctuary, and immediately slew him, without
any regard to justice.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> For which cause not only the Jews, but
also the other nations, conceived indignation, and were much grieved for
the unjust murder of so great a man.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And when the king was come back from the
places of Cilicia, the Jews that were at Antioch, and also the Creaks
went to him: complaining of the unjust murder of Onias.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> Antiochus therefore was grieved in his
mind for Onias, and being moved to pity, shed tears, remembering the
sobriety and modesty of the deceased.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And being inflamed to anger, he commanded
Andronicus to be stripped of his purple, and to be led about through all
the city: and that in the same place wherein he had committed the
impiety against Onias, the sacrilegious wretch should be put to death,
the Lord repaying him his deserved punishment.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> Now when many sacrileges had been
committed by Lysimachus in the temple by the counsel of Menelaus, and
the rumour of it was spread abroad, the multitude gathered themselves
together against Lysimachus, a great quantity of gold being already
carried away.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> Wherefore the multitude making an
insurrection, and their minds being filled with anger, Lysimachus armed
about three thousand men, and began to use violence, one Tyrannus being
captain, a man far gone both in age, and in madness.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> But when they perceived the attempt of
Lysimachus, some caught up stones, some strong clubs: and some threw
ashes upon Lysimachus,

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> And many of them were wounded, and some
struck down to the ground, but all were put to flight: and as for the
sacrilegious fellow himself, they slew him beside the treasury.

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> Now concerning these matters, an
accusation was laid against Menelaus.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> And when the king was come to Tyre, three
men were sent from the ancients to plead the cause before him.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> But Menelaus being convicted, promised
Ptolemee to give him much money to persuade the king to favour him.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> So Ptolemee went to the king in a certain
court where he was, as it were to cool himself, and brought him to be of
another mind:

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> So Menelaus who was guilty of all the
evil, was acquitted by him of the accusations: and those poor men, who,
if they had pleaded their cause even before Scythians, should have been
judged innocent, were condemned to death.

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> Thus they that prosecuted the cause for
the city, and for the people, and the sacred vessels, did soon suffer
unjust punishment.

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> Wherefore even the Tyrians being moved
with indignation, were liberal towards their burial.

<span id="an_4:50">4:50</span> And so through the covetousness of them
that were in power, Menelaus continued in authority, increasing in
malice to the betraying of the citizens.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> At the same time Antiochus prepared for a
second journey into Egypt.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And it came to pass that through the whole
city of Jerusalem for the space of forty days there were seen horsemen
running in the air, in gilded raiment, and armed with spears, like bands
of soldiers.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And horses set in order by ranks, running
one against another, with the shakings of shields, and a multitude of
men in helmets, with drawn swords, and casting of darts, and glittering
of golden armour, and of harnesses of all sorts.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Wherefore all men prayed that these
prodigies might turn to good.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now when there was gone forth a false
rumour, as though Antiochus had been dead, Jason taking with him no
fewer than a thousand men, suddenly assaulted the city: and though the
citizens ran together to the wall, the city at length was taken, and
Menelaus fled into the castle.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> But Jason slew his countrymen without
mercy, not considering that prosperity against one's own kindred is a
very great evil, thinking they had been enemies, and not citizens, whom
he conquered.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Yet he did not gee the principality, but
received confusion at tile end, for the reward of his treachery, and
fled again into the country of the Ammonites.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> At the last having been shut up by Aretas
the king of the Arabians, in order for his destruction, flying from city
to city, hated by all men, as a forsaker of the laws, and execrable, as
an enemy of his country and countrymen, he was thrust out into Egypt:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And he that had driven many out of their
country, perished in a strange land, going to Lacedemon, as if for
kindred sake he should have refuge there:

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> But he that had cast out many unburied,
was himself cast forth both unlamented and unburied, neither having
foreign burial, nor being partaker of the sepulchre of his fathers.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Now when these things were done, the king
suspected that the Jews would forsake the alliance: whereupon departing
out of Egypt with a furious mind, he took the city by force of arms.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And commanded the soldiers to kill, and
not to spare any that came in their way, and to go up into the houses
slay.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Thus there was a slaughter of young and
old, a destruction of women children, and killing of virgins and
infants.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And there were slain in the space o three
whole days fourscore thousand, forty thousand were made prisoners, and
as many sold.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But this was not enough; he presumed also
to enter into the temple, the most holy in all the world, Menelaus, that
traitor to the laws, and to his country, being his guide.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And taking in his wicked hands the holy
vessels, which were given by other kings and cities, for the ornament
and the glory of the place, he unworthily handled and profaned them.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Thus Antiochus going astray in mind, did
not consider that God was angry for a while, because of the sins of the
habitants of the city: and therefore contempt had happened to the place:

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Otherwise had they not been involved in
many sins, as Heliodorus, who was sent by king Seleucus to rob treasury,
so this man also, as soon as had come, had been forthwith scourged, and
put back from his presumption.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But God did not choose the people for the
place's sake, but the place for the people's sake.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And therefore the place also itself was
made partaker of the evils of the people: but afterward shall
communicate in the good things thereof, and as it was forsaken in the
wrath of almighty God, shall be exalted again with great glory, when the
great Lord shall be reconciled.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> So when Antiochus had taken away out of
the temple a thousand and eight hundred talents, he went back in all
haste to Antioch, thinking through pride, that he might now make the
land navigable, and the sea passable on foot: such was the haughtiness
of his mind.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> He left also governors to afflict the
people: at Jerusalem, Philip, a Phrygian by birth, but in manners more
barbarous than he that set him there:

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And in Gazarim, Andronicus and Menelaus,
who bore a more heavy hand upon the citizens than the rest.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And whereas he was set against the Jews,
he sent that hateful prince Apollonius with an army of two and twenty
thousand men, commanding him to kill all that were of perfect age, and
to sell the women and the younger sort.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Who when he was come to Jerusalem,
pretending peace, rested till the holy day of the sabbath: and then the
Jews keeping holiday, he commanded his men to take arms.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And he slew all that were come forth to
see: and running through the city with armed men, he destroyed a very
great multitude.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> But Judas Machabeus, who was the tenth,
had withdrawn himself into a desert place, and there lived amongst wild
beasts in the mountains with his company: and they continued feeding on
herbs, that they might not be partakers of the pollution.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> But not long after the king sent a certain
old man of Antioch, to compel the Jews to depart from the laws of their
fathers and of God:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And to defile the temple that was in
Jerusalem, and to call it the temple of Jupiter Olympius: and that in
Gazarim of Jupiter Hospitalis, according as they were that inhabited the
place.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And very bad was this invasion of evils and
grievous to all.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For the temple was full of the riot and
revellings of the Gentiles: and of men lying with lewd women. And women
thrust themselves of their accord into the holy places, and brought in
things that were not lawful.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> The altar also was filled with unlawful
things, which were forbidden by the laws.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And neither were the sabbaths kept, nor the
solemn days of the fathers observed, neither did any man plainly profess
himself to be a Jew.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> But they were led by bitter constraint on
the king's birthday to the sacrifices: and when the feast of Bacchus was
kept, they wore compelled to go about crowned with ivy in honour of
Bacchus.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And there went out a decree into the
neighbouring cities of the Gentiles, by the suggestion of the
Ptolemeans, that they also should act in like manner against the Jews,
to oblige them to sacrifice:

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And whosoever would not conform themselves
to the ways of the Gentiles, should be put to death: then was misery to
be seen.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For two women were accused to have
circumcised their children: whom, when they had openly led about through
the city with the infants hanging at their breasts, they threw down
headlong from the walls.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And others that had met together in caves
that were near, and were keeping the sabbath day privately, being
discovered by Philip, were burnt with fire, because they made a
conscience to help themselves with their hands, by reason of the
religious observance of the day.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Now I beseech those that shall read this
book, that they be not shocked at these calamities, but that they
consider the things that happened, not as being for the destruction, but
for the correction of our nation.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For it is a token of great goodness when
sinners are not suffered to go on in their ways for a long time, but are
presently punished.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For, not as with other nations (whom the
Lord patiently expecteth, that when the day of judgment shall come, he
may punish them in the fulness of their sins:)

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Doth he also deal with us, so as to
suffer our sins to come to their height, and then take vengeance on us.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And therefore he never withdraweth his
mercy from us: but though he chastise his people with adversity, he
forsaketh them not.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But let this suffice in a few words for a
warning to the readers. And now we must come to the narration.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Eleazar one of the chief of the scribes,
a man advanced in years, and of a comely countenance, was pressed to
open his mouth to eat swine's flesh.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> But he, choosing rather a most glorious
death than a hateful life, went forward voluntarily to the torment.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And considering in what manner he was
come to ii;, patiently bearing, he determined not to do any unlawful
things for the love of life.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> But they that stood by, being moved with
wicked pity, for the old friendship they had with the man, taking him
aside, desired that flesh might be brought, which it was lawful for him
to eat, that he might make as if he had eaten, as the king had commanded
of the flesh of the sacrifice:

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> That by so doing he might be delivered
from death: and for the sake of their old friendship with the man they
did him this courtesy.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> But he began to consider the dignity of
his age, and his ancient years, and the inbred honour of his grey head,
and his good life and conversation from a child: and he answered without
delay, according to the ordinances of the holy law made by God, saying,
that he would rather be sent into the other world.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> For it doth not become our age, said he,
to dissemble: whereby many young persons might think that Eleazar, at
the age of fourscore and ten years, was gone over to the life of the
heathens:

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And so they, through my dissimulation,
and for a little time of a corruptible life, should be deceived, end
hereby I should bring a stain and a curse upon my old age.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> For though, for the present time, I
should be delivered from the punishments of men, yet should I not escape
the hand of the Almighty neither alive nor dead.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Wherefore by departing manfully out of
this life, I shall shew myself worthy of my old age:

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And I shall leave an example of fortitude
to young men, if with a ready mind and constancy I suffer an honourable
death, for the most venerable and most holy laws. And having spoken
thus, he was forthwith carried to execution.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And they that led him, and had been a
little before more mild, were changed to wrath for the words he had
spoken, which they thought were uttered out of arrogancy.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> But when he was now ready to die with the
stripes, he groaned, and said: O Lord, who hast the holy knowledge, thou
knowest manifestly that whereas I might be delivered from death, I
suffer grevious pains in body: but in soul am well content to suffer
these things be- cause I fear thee.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> Thus did this man die, leaving not only
to young men, but also to the whole nation, the memory of his death for
an example of virtue and fortitude.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> To came to pass also, that seven brethren,
together with their mother, were apprehended, and compelled by the king
to eat swine's flesh against the law, for which end they were tormented
with whips and scourges.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> But one of them, who was the eldest, said
thus: What wouldst thou ask, or learn of us? we are ready to die rather
than to transgress the laws of God, received from our fathers.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Then the king being angry commanded
fryingpans, and brazen caldrons to be made hot: which forthwith being
heated,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> He commanded to cut out the tongue of him
that had spoken first: and the skin of his head being drawn off, to chop
off also the extremities of his hands and feet, the rest of his
brethren, and his mother, looking on.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And when he was now maimed in all parts, he
commanded him, being yet alive, to be brought to the Are, and to be
fried in the fryingpan: and while he was suffering therein long
torments, the rest, together with the mother, exhorted one another to
die manfully,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Saying: The Lord God will look upon the
truth, and will take pleasure in us, "as Moses declared in the
profession of the canticle: And In his servants he will take pleasure.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> So when the first was dead after this
manner, they brought the next to make him a, mocking stock: and when
they had pulled off the skin of his head with the hair, they asked him
if he would eat, before he were punished throughout the whole body in
every limb.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> But he answered in his own language, and
said: I will not do it. Wherefore Ire also in the next place, received
the torments of the first:

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And when he was at the last gasp, he said
thus: Thou indeed, O most wicked man, destroyest us out of this present
life: but the King of the world will raise us up, who die for his laws,
in the resurrection of eternal life.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> After him the third was made a mocking
stock, and when he was required, he quickly put forth his tongue, and
courageously stretched out his hands:

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And said with confidence: These

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> have from heaven, but for the laws of God I
now despise them: because I hope to receive them again from him.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> So that the king, and they that were with
him, wondered at the young man's courage, because he esteemed the
torments as nothing.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And after he was thus dead, they
tormented the fourth in the like manner

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And when he was now ready to die, he
spoke thus: It is better, being put to death by men, to look for hope
from God, to be raised up again by him: for, as to thee thou shalt have
no resurrection unto life.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And when they had brought the fifth, they
tormented him. But he looking upon the king,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Said: Whereas thou hast power among men,
though thou art corruptible, thou dost what thou wilt: but think not
that our nation is forsaken by God.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> But stay patiently a while, and thou
shalt see his great power, in what manner he will torment thee and thy
seed.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> After him they brought the sixth, and he
being ready to die, spoke thus: Be not deceived without cause: for we
suffer these things for ourselves, having sinned against our God, and
things worthy of admiration are done to us:

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> But do not think that thou s escape
unpunished, for that thou attempted to fight against God.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Now the mother was to be ad above
measure, and worthy to be remembered by good men, who beheld seven sons
slain in the space of one day, and bore it with a good courage, for the
hope that she had in God:

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And she bravely exhorted every o of them
in her own language, being filled with wisdom: and joining a man's heart
to a woman's thought,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> She said to them: I know not how you were
formed in my womb: for I neither gave you breath, nor soul, nor life,
neither did I frame the limbs of every one of you.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But the Creator of the world, that formed
the nativity of man, and that found out the origin of all, he will re-
store to you again in his mercy, both breath and life, as now you
despise your- selves for the sake of his laws.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Now Antiochus, thinking himself despised,
and withal despising the voice of the upbraider, when the youngest was
yet alive, did not only exhort him by words, but also assured him with
an oath, that he would make him a rich and a happy man, and, if he would
turn from the laws of his fathers, would take him for a friend, and
furnish him with things necessary.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> But when the young man was not moved with
these things, the king called the mother, and counselled her to deal
with the young man to save his life.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And when he had exhorted her with many
words, she promised that she would counsel her son.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> So bending herself towards him, mocking
the cruel tyrant, she said her own language: My son, have pi upon me,
that bore thee nine months my womb, and save thee suck years, and
nourished thee, and b thee up unto this age.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> I beseech thee, my son, look upon heaven
and earth, and all that is in them: and consider that God made the out
of nothing, and mankind also:

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> So thou shalt not fear this tormentor,
but being made a worthy partner with thy brethren, receive death, that
in that mercy I may receive thee again with thy brethren.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> While she was yet speaking these words,
the young man said: For whom do you stay ? I will not obey the
commandment of the king, but the commandment of the law, which was given
us by Moses.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> But thou that hast been the author of all
mischief against the Hebrews, shalt not escape the hand of God.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> For we suffer thus for our sine.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And though the Lord our God is angry with
us a little while for our chastisement and correction: yet he will be
reconciled again to his servants.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> But thou, O wicked and of all men most
flagitious, be not lifted up without cause with vain hopes, whilst thou
art raging against his servants.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> For thou hast not yet escaped the
judgment of the almighty God, who beholdeth all things.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> For my brethren, having now undergone a
short pain, are under the covenant of eternal life: but thou by the
judgment of God shalt receive just punishment for thy pride.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> But I, like my brethren, offer up my life
and my body for the laws of our fathers: calling upon God to be speedily
merciful to our nation, and that thou by torments and stripes mayst
confess that he alone is God.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> But in me and in my brethren the wrath of
the Almighty, which hath justly been brought upon all our nation, shall
cease.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> Then the king being incensed with anger,
raged against him more cruelly than all the rest, taking it grievously
that he was mocked.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> So this man also died undefiled, wholly
trusting in the Lord.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> And last of all after the sons the mother
also was consumed.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> But now there is enough said of the
sacrifices, and of the excessive cruelties.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> But Judas Machabeus, and they that were
with him, went privately into the towns: and calling together their
kinsmen and friends, and taking unto them such as continued in the Jews'
religion, they assembled six thousand men.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And they called upon the Lord that he would
look upon his people that was trodden down by all, and would have pity
on the temple, that was defiled by the wicked:

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> That he would have pity also upon the city
that was destroyed, that was ready to be made even with the ground, and
would hear the voice of the blood that cried to him:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> That he would remember also the most unjust
deaths of innocent children, and the blasphemies offered to his name,
and would shew his indignation on this occasion.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Now when Machabeus had gathered a
multitude, he could not be withstood by the heathens: for the wrath of
the Lord was turned into mercy.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> So coming unawares upon the towns and
cities, he set them on fire, and taking possession of the most
commodious places, he made no small slaughter of the enemies ·

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And especially in the nights he went upon
these expeditions, and the fame of his valour was spread abroad every
where.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then Philip, seeing that the man gained
ground by little and little, and that things for the most part succeeded
prosperously with him, wrote to Ptolemee the governor of Celesyria and
Phenicia, to send aid to the king's affairs.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And he with all speed sent Nicanor the son
of Patroclus, one of his special friends, giving him no fewer than
twenty thousand armed men of different nations, to root out the whole
race of the Jews, joining also with him Gorgias, a good soldier, and of
great experience in matters of war.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And Nicanor purposed to raise for the
king the tribute of two thousand talents, that was to be given to the
Romans, by making so much money of the captive Jews:

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Wherefore he sent immediately to the
cities upon the sea coast, to invite men together to buy up the Jewish
slaves, promising that they should have ninety slaves for one talent,
not reflecting on the vengeance, which was to follow him from the
Almighty.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Now when Judas found that Nicanor was
coming, he imparted to the Jews that were with him, that the enemy was
at hand.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And some of them being afraid, and
distrusting the justice of God, fled away:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Others sold all that they had left, and
withal besought the Lord, that he would deliver them from the wicked
Nicanor, who had sold them before he came near them:

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And if not for their sakes, yet for the
covenant that he had made with their fathers, and for the sake of his
holy and glorious name that was invoked upon them.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> But Machabeus calling together seven
thousand that were with him, exhorted them not to be reconciled to the
enemies, nor to fear the multitude of the enemies who came wrongfully
against them, but to fight manfully:

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Setting before their eyes the injury they
had unjustly done the holy place, and also the injury they had done to
the city, which had been shamefully abused, besides their destroying the
ordinances of the fathers.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For, said he, they trust in their
weapons, and in their boldness: but we trust in the Almighty Lord, who
at a beck can utterly destroy both them that come against us, and the
whole world.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Moreover he put them in mind also of the
helps their fathers had received from God: and how under Sennacherib a
hundred and eighty-five thousand had been destroyed.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And of the battle that they had fought
against the Galatians in Babylonia, how they, being in all but six
thousand, when it came to the point, and Macedonians their companions
were a stand, slew a hundred and twenty thousand, because of the help
they had from heaven, and for this they received many favours.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> With these words they were greatly
encouraged, and disposed even to die for the laws and their country.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> So he appointed his brethren cap over
each division of his army, Simon, and Joseph, and Jonathan, giving to
one fifteen hundred men.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And after the holy Book had been read to
them by Esdras, and he had given them for a watchword, The help of God:
himself leading the first band, he joined battle with Nicanor:

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And the Almighty being their helper, they
slew above nine thousand men: and having wounded and disabled the
greater part of Nicanor's army, they obliged them to fly.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And they took the money of them that came
to buy them, and they pursued them on every side.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> But they came back for want of time: for
it was the day before the sabbath: and therefore they did not continue
the pursuit.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But when they had gathered together their
arms and their spoils, they kept the sabbath: blessing the Lord who had
delivered them that day, distilling the beginning of mercy upon them.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Then after the sabbath they divided the
spoils to the feeble and the orphans, and the widows: and the rest they
took for themselves and their servants.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> When this was done, and they had all made
a common supplication, they besought the merciful Lord to be reconciled
to his servants unto the end.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Moreover they slew above twenty thousand
of them that were with Timotheus and Bacchides who fought them, and they
made themselves masters of the high strong holds: and they divided
amongst them many spoils, giving equal portions to the feeble, the
fatherless and the widows, yea and the aged also.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And when they had carefully gathered
together their arms, they laid them all up in convenient places, and the
residue of their spoils they carried to Jerusalem :

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> They slew also Philarches who was with
Timotheus, a wicked man, who had many ways afflicted the Jews.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And when they kept the feast of the
victory at Jerusalem, they burnt Callisthenes, that had set fire to the
holy gates, who had taken refuge in a certain house, rendering to him a
worthy reward for his impieties:

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> But as for that most wicked man Nicanor,
who had brought a thousand merchants to the sale of the Jews,

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Being through the help of the Lord
brought down by them, of whom he had made no account, laying; aside his
garment of glory, fleeing through the midland country, he came alone to
Antioch, being rendered very unhappy by the destruction of his army.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And he that had promised to levy the
tribute for the Romans by the means of the captives of Jerusalem, now
professed that the Jews had God for their protector, and therefore they
could not be hurt, because they followed the laws appointed by him.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> At that time Antiochus returned with
dishonour out of Persia.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For he had entered into the city called
Persepolis, and attempted to rob the temple, and to oppress the city:
but the multitude running together to arms, put them to flight: and so
it fell out that Antiochus being put to flight returned with disgrace.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Now when he was come about Ecbatana, he
received the news of what had happened to Nicanor and Timotheus.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And swelling with anger he thought to
revenge upon the Jews the injury done by them that had put him to
flight. And therefore he commanded his chariot to be driven, without
stopping in his journey, the judgment of heaven urging him forward,
because he had spoken so proudly, that he would come to Jerusalem, and
make it a common burying place of the Jews.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> But the Lord the God of Israel, that seeth
all things, struck him with an in- curable and an invisible plague. For
as soon as he had ended these words, a dreadful pain in his bowels came
upon him, and bitter torments of the inner parts.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And indeed very justly, seeing he had
tormented the bowels of others with many and new torments, albeit he by
no means ceased from his malice.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Moreover being filled with pride, breathing
out fire in his rage against the Jews, and commanding the matter to be
hastened, it happened as he was going with violence that he fell from
the chariot, so that his limbs were much pained by a grievous bruising
of the body.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Thus he that seemed to himself to command
even the waves of the sea, being proud above the condition of man, and
to weigh the heights of the mountains in a balance, now being cast down
to the ground, was carried in a litter, bearing witness to the manifest
power of God in himself:

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> So that worms swarmed out of the body of
this man, and whilst he lived in sorrow and pain, his flesh fell off,
and the filthiness of his smell was noisome to the army.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And the man that thought a little to
before he could reach the stars of heaven, no man could endure to carry,
for the intolerable stench.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And by this means, being brought from his
great pride, he began to come to the knowledge of himself, being
admonished by the scourge of God, his pains increasing every moment

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And when he himself could not now abide
his own stench, he spoke thus: It is just to be subject to God, and that
a mortal man should not equal himself to God.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Then this wicked man prayed to the Lord,
of whom he was not like to obtain mercy.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And the city to which he was going in
haste to lay it even with the ground, and to make it a, common
buryingplace, he now desireth to make free.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And the Jews whom he said he would not
account worthy to be so much as buried, but would give them up to be
devoured by the birds and wild beasts, and would utterly destroy them
with their children, he now promiseth to make equal with the Athenians.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> The holy temple also which before he had
spoiled, he promiseth to adorn with goodly gifts, and to multiply the
holy vessels, and to allow out of his revenues the charges pertaining to
the sacrifices.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Yea also, that he would become a Jew
himself, and would go through every place of the earth, and declare the
power of God.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> But his pains not ceasing (for the just
judgment of God was come upon him) despairing of life he wrote to the
Jews in the manner of a supplication, a letter in these words:

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> To his very good subjects the Jews,
Antiochus king and ruler wisheth much health and welfare, and happiness.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> If you and your children are well, and if
all matters go with you to your mind, we give very great thanks.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> As for me, being infirm, but yet kindly
remembering you, returning out of the places of Persia, and being taken
with a grievous disease, I thought it necessary to take care for the
common good:

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Not distrusting my life, but having great
hope to escape the sickness.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> But considering that my father also, at
what time he led an army into the higher countries, appointed who should
reign after him:

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> To the end that if any thing contrary to
expectation should fall out, or ally bad tidings should be brought, they
that were in the countries, knowing to whom the whole government was
left, might not be troubled.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Moreover, considering that neighbouring
princes and borderers wait for opportunities, and expect what shall be
the event, I have appointed my son Antiochus king, whom I often
recommended to many of you, when I went into the higher provinces: and I
have written to him what I have joined here below.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> I pray you therefore, and request of you,
that remembering favours both public and private, you will every man of
you continue to be faithful to me and to my son.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> For I trust that he will behave with I
moderation and humanity, and following my intentions, will be gracious
unto you.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> Thus the murderer and blasphemer, being
grievously struck, as himself had treated others, died a miserable death
in a strange country among the mountains.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> But Philip that was brought up with him,
carried away his body: and out of fear of the son of Antiochus, went
into Egypt to Ptolemee Philometor.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> But Machabeus, and they that were with
him, by the protection of the Lord, recovered the temple and the city
again.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> But he threw down the altars, which the
heathens had set up in the streets, as also the temples of the idols.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And having purified the temple, they made
another altar: and taking fire out of the fiery stones, they offered
sacrifices after two years, and set forth incense, and lamps, and the
leaves of proposition.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And when they had done these things, they
besought the Lord, lying prostrate on the ground, that they might no
more fall into such evils; but if they should at any time sin, that they
might be chastised by him more gently, and not be delivered up to
barbarians and blasphemous men.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Now upon the same day that the temple had
been polluted by the strangers, on the very same day it was cleansed
again, to wit, on the five and twentieth day of the month of Casleu.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And they kept eight days with joy, after
the manner of the feast of the tabernacles, remembering that not long
before they had kept the feast of the tabernacles when they were in the
mountains, and in dens like wild beasts.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Therefore they now, carried boughs, and
green branches, and palms for Him that had given them good success in
cleansing his place.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And they ordained by a common statute,
and decree, that all the nation of the Jews should keep those days every
year.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And this was the end of Antiochus that
was called the Illustrious.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> But now we will relate the acts of
Eupator the son of that wicked Antiochus, abridging the account of the
evils that happened in the wars.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> For when he was come to the crown. he
appointed over the affairs of his realm one Lysias, general of the army
of Phenicia and Syria.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For Ptolemee that was called Macer, was
determined to be strictly just to the Jews, and especially by reason of
the wrong that had been done them, and to deal peaceably with them.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But being accused for this to Eupator
by his friends, and being oftentimes called traitor, because he had left
Cyprus which Philometor had committed to him, and coming over to
Antiochus the Illustrious, had revolted also from him, he put an end to
his life by poison.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But Gorgias, who was governor of the
holds, taking with him the strangers, often fought against the Jews.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the Jews that occupied the most
commodious hold, received those that were driven out of Jerusalem, and
at- tempted to make war.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Then they that were with Machabeus,
beseeching the Lord by prayers to be their helper, made a strong attack
upon the strong holds of the Idumeans:

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And assaulting them with great force,
won the holds, killed them that came in the way, and slew altogether no
fewer than twenty thousand.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And whereas some were fled into very
strong towers, having all manner of provision to sustain a siege,

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Machabeus left Simon and Joseph, and
Zacheus, and them that were with them in sufficient number to besiege
them, and departed to those expeditions which urged more.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Now they that were with Simon, being
led with covetousness, were persuaded For the sake of money by some that
were in the towers: and taking seventy thousand didrachmas, let some of
them escape.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> But when it was told Machabeus what was
done, he assembled the rulers of the people, and accused those men that
they had sold their brethren for money, having let their adversaries
escape.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> So he put these traitors to death, and
forthwith took the two towers.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And having good success in arms and in
all things he took in hand, he slew more than twenty thousand in the two
holds.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> But Timotheus who before had been
overcome by the Jews, having called together a multitude of foreign
troops, and assembled horsemen out of Asia, came as though he would take
Judea by force of arms.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> But Machabeus and they that were with
him, when he drew near, prayed to the Lord, sprinkling earth upon their
heads and girding their loins with hair- cloth,

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And lying prostrate at the foot of the
altar, besought him to be merciful to them, and to be an enemy to their
enemies, and an adversary to their adversaries, as the law saith.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And so after prayer taking their arms,
they went forth further from the city, and when they were come very near
the enemies they rested.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> But as soon as the sun was risen both
sides joined battle: the one part having with their valour the Lord for
a surety o victory and success: but the other side making their rage
their leader in battle.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> But when they were in the heat of the
engagement there appeared to the enemies from heaven five men upon
horses, comely with golden bridles, con- ducting the Jews:

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Two of whom took Machabeus between
them, and covered him on every side with their arms, and kept him safe:
but cast darts and fireballs against the enemy, so that they fell down,
being both confounded with blindness, and filled with trouble.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And there were slain twenty thousand
five hundred, and six hundred horsemen.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> But Timotheus fled into Gazara a strong
hold, where Chereas was governor.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Then Machabeus, and they that were with
him, cheerfully laid siege to the fortress four days.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> But they that were within, trusting to
the strength of the place, blasphemed exceedingly, and cast forth
abominable words.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> But when the fifth day appeared, twenty
young men of them that were with Machabeus, inflamed in their minds
because of the blasphemy, approached manfully to the wall, and pushing
forward with fierce courage got up upon it.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> Moreover others also getting up after
them, went to set Are to the towers and the gates, and to burn the
blasphemers alive.

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> And having for two days together
pillaged and sacked the fortress, they killed Timotheus, who was found
hid in a certain place: they slew also his brother Chereas, and
Apollophanes.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And when this was done, they blessed
the Lord with hymns and thanksgiving, who had done great things in
Israel, and given them the victory.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> A short time after this Lysias the king's
lieutenant, and cousin, and who had chief charge over all the affairs,
being greatly displeased with what had happened,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Gathered together fourscore thousand men,
and all the horsemen, and came against the Jews, thinking to take the
city, and make it a habitation of the Gentiles :

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And to make a gain of the temple, as of
the other temples of the Gentiles, and to set the high priesthood to
sale every year:

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Never considering the power of God, but
puffed up in mind, and trusting in the multitude of his foot soldiers,
and the thousands of his horsemen, and his four- score elephants.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> So he came into Judea, and approaching to
Bethsura, which was in a narrow place, the space of five furlongs from
Jerusalem, he laid siege to that fortress.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But when Machabeus and they that were
with him, understood that the strong holds were besieged, they and all
the people besought the Lord with lamentations and tears, that he would
send a good angel to save Israel.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then Machabeus himself, first taking his
arms, exhorted the rest to expose themselves together with him, to the
danger, and to succour their brethren.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And when they were going forth together
with a willing mind, there appeared at Jerusatem a horseman going before
them in white clothing, with golden armour, shaking a spear.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Then they all together blessed merciful
Lord, and took great courage, being ready to break through not only men,
but also the fiercest beasts, walls of iron.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> So they went on courageously, having a
helper from Peaven, and the who shewed mercy to them.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And rushing violently upon the my, like
lions, they slew of them eleven thousand footmen, and one thousand
hundred horsemen:

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And put all the rest to flight: many of
them being wounded, escaped naked: yea and Lysias himself fled away
shamefully, and escaped.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And as he was a man of understanding
considering with himself, the loss he had suffered, and perceiving that
the Hebrews could not be overcome, because they relied upon the help of
the Almighty God, he sent to them:

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And promised that he would agree to all
things that are just, and that he would persuade the king to be their
friend.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Then Machabeus consented to the request
of Lysias, providing for the common Food in all things, and whatsoever
Machabeus wrote to Lysias concerning the Jews, the king allowed of.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For there were letters written to the
Jews from Lysias, to this effect: Lysias to the people of the Jews,
greeting.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> John and Abesalom who were sent from
you, delivering your writings, re- quested that I would accomplish those
things which were signified by them.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Therefore whatsoever things could be
reported to the king I have represented to him: and he hath granted as
much as the matter permitted.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> If therefore you will keep yourselves
loyal in affairs, hereafter also I will endeavour to be a means of your
good.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But as concerning other particulars, I
have given orders by word both to these, and to them that are sent by
me, to commune with you.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Fare ye well. In the year one hundred
and forty-eight, the four and twentieth day of the month of Dioscorus.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> But the king's letter contained these
words: King Antiochus to Lysias his brother, greeting.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Our father being translated amongst the
gods, we are desirous that they that are in our realm should live
quietly, and apply themselves diligently to their own concerns,

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And we have heard that the Jews would
not consent to my father to turn to the rites of the Greeks, but that
they would keep to their own manner of living, and therefore that they
request us to allow them to live after their own laws.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Wherefore being desirous that this
nation also should be at rest, we have ordained and decreed, that the
temple should be restored to them, and that they may live according to
the custom of their ancestors.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Thou shalt do well therefore to send to
them, and grant them peace, that our pleasure being known, they may be
of good comfort, and look to their own affairs.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> But the king's letter to the Jews was
in this manner: King Antiochus to the senate of the Jews, and to the
rest of the Jews, greeting.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> If you are well, you are as we desire,
we ourselves also are well.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Menelaus came to us, saying that you
desired to come down to your countrymen, that are with us.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> We grant therefore a safe conduct to
all that come and go, until the thirtieth day of the month of Xanthicus,

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> That the Jews may use their own Bind of
meats, and their own laws as be- fore, and that none of them any manner
of ways be molested for things which have been done by ignorance.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And we have sent also Menelaus to speak
to you.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Fare ye well. In the year one hundred
and forty-eight, the fifteenth day of the month of Xanthicus.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> The Romans also sent them a letter, to
this effect. Quintus Memmius, and Titus Manilius, ambassadors of the
Romans, to the people of the Jews, greeting.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Whatsoever Lysias the king's cousin
hath granted you, we also have granted.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> But touching such things as he thought
should be referred to the king, after you have diligently conferred
among yourselves, send some one forthwith, that we may decree as it is
convenient for you: for we are going to Antioch.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> And therefore make haste to write back,
that we may know of what mind you are.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> Fare ye well. In the year one hundred
and forty-eight, the fifteenth day of the month of Xanthicus.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> When these covenants were made, Lyslas
went to the king, and the Jews gave themselves to husbandry.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> But they that were behind, namely,
Timotheus and Apollonius the son of Genneus, also Hieronymus, and
Demophon, and besides them Nicanor the governor of Cyprus, would not
suffer them to live in peace, and to be quiet.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> The men of Joppe also were guilty of this
kind of wickedness: they desired the Jews who dwelt among them to go
with their wives and children into the boats, which they had prepared,
as though they had no enmity to them.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Which when they had consented to,
according to the common decree of the city, suspecting nothing, because
of the peace : when they were gone forth into the deep, they drowned no
fewer than two hundred of them.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> But as soon as Judas heard of this
cruelty done to his countrymen, he commanded the men that were with him:
and after having called upon God the just judge,

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> He came against those murderers of his
brethren, and set the haven on fire in the night, burnt the boats, and
slew with the sword them that escaped from the fire.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And when he had done these things in this
manner, he departed as if he would return again, and root out all the
Joppites.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> But when he understood that the men of
Jamnia also designed to do in like manner to the Jews that dwelt among
them,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> He came upon the Jamnites also by night,
end set the haven on fire with the ships, so that the light of the fire
was seen at Jerusalem two hundred and forty furlongs off.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And when they were now gone from thence
nine furlongs, and were marching towards Timotheus, five thousand
footmen and Ave hundred horsemen of the Arabians set upon them.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And after a hard fight, in which by the
help of God they got the victory, the rest of the Arabians being
overcome, besought Judas for peace, promising to give him pastures, and
to assist him in other things.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And Judas thinking that they might be
profitable indeed in many things, promised them peace, and after having
joined hands, they departed to their tents.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> He also laid siege to a certain strong
city, encompassed with bridges and walls, and inhabited by multitudes of
different nations, the name of which is Casphin.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But they that were within it, trusting
in the strength of the walls, and the provision of victuals, behaved in
a more negligent manner, and provoked Judas with railing and
blaspheming, and uttering such words as were not to be spoken.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> But Machabeus calling upon the great
Lord of the world, who without any rams or engines of war threw down the
walls of Jericho in the time of Josue, fiercely assaulted the walls.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And having taken the city by the will
of the Lord, he made an unspeakable slaughter, so that a pool adjoining
of two furlongs broad seemed to run with the blood of the slain.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> From thence they departed seven hundred
and fifty furlongs, and came to Characa to the Jews that are called
Tubianites.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> But as for Timotheus, they found him
not in those places, for before he had dispatched any thing he went
back, having left a very strong garrison in a certain hold :

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> But Dositheus, and Sosipater, who were
captains with Machabeus, slew them that were left by Timotheus in the
hold, to the number of ten thousand men.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And Machabeus having set in order about
him six thousand men, and divided them by bands, went forth against
Timetheus, who had with him a hundred and twenty thousand footmen, and
two thousand five hundred horsemen.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Now when Timotheus had knowledge of the
coming of Judas, he sent the women and children, and the other baggage
before him into a fortress, called Carnion: for it was impregnable and
hard to come at, by reason of the straitness of the places.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> But when the first band of Judas came
in sight, the enemies were struck with fear, by the presence of God, who
seeth all things, and they were put to flight one from another, so that
they were often thrown down by their own companions, and wounded with
the strokes of their own swords.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> But Judas was vehemently earnest in
punishing the profane, of whom he slew thirty thousand men.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And Timotheus himself fell into the
hands of the band of Dositheus and Sosipater, and with many prayers he
besought them to let him go with his life, because he had the parents
and brethren of many of the Jews, who, by his death, might happen to be
deceived.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And when he had given his faith that he
would restore them according to the agreement, they let him go without
hurt, for the saving of their brethren.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Then Judas went away to Carnion, where
he slew five and twenty thousand persons.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And after he had put to flight and
destroyed these, he removed his army to Ephron, a strong city, wherein
there dwelt a multitude of divers nations: and stout young men standing
upon the walls made a vigorous resistance: and in this place there were
many engines of war, and a provision of darts.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> But when they had invocated the
Almighty, who with his power breaketh the strength of the enemies, they
took the city; and slew five and twenty thou- sand of them that were
within.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> From thence they departed to
Scythopolis, which lieth six hundred furlongs from Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> But the Jews that were among the
Scythopolitans testifying that they were used kindly by them, and that
even in the times of their adversity they had treated them with
humanity:

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> They gave them thanks exhorting them to
be still friendly to their nation, and so they came to Jerusalem, the
feast of the weeks being at hand.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And after Pentecost they marched
against Gorgias the governor of Idumea.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And he came out with three thousand
footmen, and four hundred horsemen.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> And when they had joined battle, it
happened that a few of the Jews were slain.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> But Dositheus, a horseman, one of
Bacenor's band, a valiant man, took hold of Gorgias: and when he would
have taken him alive, a certain horseman of the Thracians came upon him,
and cut off his shoulder: and so Gorgias escaped to Maresa.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> But when they that were with Esdrin had
fought long, and were weary, Judas called upon the Lord to be their
helper, and leader of the battle:

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> Then beginning in his own language, and
singing hymns with a loud voice, he put Gorgias' soldiers to flight.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> So Judas having gathered together his
army, came into the city Odollam: and when the seventh day came, they
purified themselves according to the custom, and kept the sabbath in the
place.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> And the day following Judas cam with
his company, to take away the bodies of them that were slain, and to
bury them with their kinsmen, in the sepulchres of their fathers.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> And they found under the coats of the
slain some of the donaries of the idols of Jamnia, which the law
forbiddeth the Jews: so that all plainly saw, for this cause they were
slain.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> Then they all blessed the just judgment
of the Lord, who had discovered the things that were hidden.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> And so betaking themselves to prayers,
they besought him, that the sin which had been committed might be
forgotten. But the most valiant Judas exhorted the people to keep
themselves from sin, forasmuch as they saw before their eyes what had
happened, because of the sins of those that were slain.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And making a gathering, he twelve
thousand drachms of silver to Jerusalem for sacrifice to be offered for
the sins of the dead, thinking well and religiously concerning the
resurrection,

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> (For if he had not hoped that the that
were slain should rise again, it would have seemed superfluous and vain
to pray for the dead,)

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> And because he considered that the who
had fallen asleep with godliness, had great grace laid up for them.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> It is therefore a holy and wholesome
thought to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed from sins.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> In the year one hundred and forty- nine,
Judas understood that Antiochus Eupator was coming with a multitude
against Judea,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And with him Lysias the regent, who had
charge over the affairs of the realm, having with him a hundred and ten
thousand footmen, five thousand horse- men, twenty-two elephants, and
three hundred chariots armed with hooks.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Menelaus also joined himself with them:
and with great deceitfulness besought Antiochus, not for the welfare of
his country, but in hopes that he should be appointed chief ruler.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> But the King of kings stirred up the mind
of Antiochus against the sinner, and upon Lysias suggesting that he was
the cause of all the evils, he commanded (as the custom is with them)
that he should be apprehended and put to death in the same place.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Now there was in that place a tower fifty
cubits high, having a heap of ashes on every side: this had a prospect
steep down.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> From thence he commanded the sacrilegious
wretch to be thrown down into the ashes, all men thrusting him forward
unto death.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And by such a law it happened that
Menelaus the transgressor of the law was put to death: not having so
much as burial in the earth.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And indeed very justly, for insomuch as
he had committed many sins against the altar of God, the fire and ashes
of which were holy: he was condemned to die in ashes.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But the king, with his mind full of rage,
came on to shew himself worse to the Jews than his father was.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Which, when Judas understood, he
commanded the people to call upon the Lord day and night, that as he had
always done, so now also he would help them:

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Because they were afraid to be deprived
of the law, and of their country, and of the holy temple: and that he
would not suffer the people, that had of late taken breath for a little
while, to be again in subjection to blasphemous nations.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> So when they had all done this
together, and had craved mercy of the Lord with weeping and fasting,
lying prostrate on the ground for three days continually, Judas exhorted
them to make themselves ready.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> But he with the ancients determined,
before the king should bring his army into Judea, and make himself
master of the city, to go out, and to commit the event of the thing to
the judgment of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> So committing all to God, the creator
of the world, and having exhorted his people to fight manfully, and to
stand up even to death for the laws, the temple, the city, their
country, and citizens: he placed his army about Modin.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And having given his company for a
watchword, The victory of God, with most valiant chosen young men, he
set upon the king's quarter by night, and slew four thousand men in the
camp, and the greatest of the elephants, with them that had been upon
him,

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And having filled the camp of the
enemies with exceeding greet fear and tumult, they went off with good
success.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Now this was done at the break of day,
by the protection and help of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> 18; But the king having taken

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> taste of the hardiness of the Jews,
attempted to take the strong places by policy:

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And he marched with his army to
Bethsura, which was a strong hold of the Jews: but he was repulsed, he
failed, he rest his men.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Now Judas sent necessaries to them that
were within.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But Rhodocus, one of the Jews' army,
disclosed the secrets to the enemies, so he was sought out, and taken
up, and put in prison.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Again the king treated with them that
were in Bethsura: gave his right hand: took theirs: and went away.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> He fought with Jucias: and was
overcome. And when he understood that Philip, who had been left over the
affairs, had rebelled at Antioch, he was in a consternation of mind, and
entreating the Jews, and yielding to them, he swore to all things that
seemed reasonable, and, being reconciled, offered sacrifices, honoured
the temple, and left gifts.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> He embraced Machabeus, and made him
governor and prince from Ptolemais unto the Cerrenians.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> But when he was come to Ptolemais, the
men of that city were much displeased with the conditions of the peace,
being angry for fear they should break the covenant.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Then Lysias went up to the judgment
seat, and set forth the reason, and appeased the people, and returned to
Antioch: and thus matters went with regard to the king's coming and his
return.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> But after the space of three years Judas,
and they that were with him, understood that Demetrius the son of
Seleucus was come up with a great power, and a navy by the haven of
Tripolis to places proper for his purpose.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And had made himself master of the
countries against Antiochus, and his general Lysias.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Now one Alcimus, who had been chief
priest, but had wilfully defiled himself in the time of mingling with
the heathens, seeing that there was no safety for him, nor access to the
altar,

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Came to king Demetrius in the year one
hundred and fifty, presenting unto him a crown of gold, and a palm, and
besides these, some boughs which seemed to belong to the temple. And
that day indeed he held his peace.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> But having gotten a convenient time to
further his madness, being called to counsel by Demetrius, and asked
what the Jews relied upon, and what were their counsels,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He answered thereunto: They among the
Jews that are called Assideans, of whom Judas Machabeus is captain,
nourish wars, and raise seditions, and will not suffer the realm to be
in peace.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For I also being deprived of my
ancestors' glory (I mean of the high priesthood) am now come hither:

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Principally indeed out of fidelity to the
king's interests, but in the next place also to provide for the good of
my countrymen: for all our nation suffereth much from the evil
proceedings of those men.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Wherefore, 0 king, seeing thou know- eat
all these things, take care, I beseech thee, both of the country, and of
our nation, according to thy humanity which is known to all men,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> For as long as Judas liveth, it is not
possible that the state should be quiet.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Now when this man had spoken to this
effect, the rest also of the king's friends, who were enemies of Judas,
incensed Demetrius against him.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And forthwith he sent Nicanor, the
commander over the elephants, governor into Judea:

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Giving him in charge, to take Judas
himself: and disperse all them that were with him, and to make Alcimus
the high priest of the great temple.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Then the Gentiles who had fled out of
Judea from Judas, came to Nicanor by docks, thinking the miseries and
calamities of the Jews to be the welfare of their affairs.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Now when the Jews heard of Nicanor's
coming, and that the nations were assembled against them, they cast
earth upon their heads, and made supplication to him, who chose his
people to keep them for ever, and who protected his portion by evident
signs.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Then at the commandment of their
captain, they forthwith removed from the place where they were, and went
to the town of Dessau, to meet them.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Now Simon the brother of Judas had
joined battle with Nicanor, but was frightened with the sudden coming of
the adversaries.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Nevertheless Nicanor hearing of the
valour of Judas' companions, and the greatness of courage with which
they fought for their country, was afraid to try the matter by the
sword.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Wherefore he sent Posidonius, and
Theodotius, and Matthias before to pre- sent and receive the right
hands.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And when there had been a consultation
thereupon, and the captain had acquainted the multitude with it, the)
were all of one mind to consent to covenants.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> So they appointed a day upon which they
might commune together by them- selves: and seats were brought out, and
set for each one.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> But Judas ordered men to be ready in
convenient places, lest some mischief might he suddenly practised by the
enemies: so they made an agreeable conference.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And Nicanor abode in Jerusalem, and did
no wrong, but sent away the flocks of the multitudes that had been
gathered together.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And Judas was always dear to him from
the heart, and he was well affected to the man.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And he desired him to marry a wife, and
to have children. So he married: he lived quietly, and they lived in
common.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> But Alcimus seeing the love they had
one to another, and the covenants, came to Demetrius, and told him that
Nicanor assented to the foreign interest, for that he meant to make
Judas, who was a traitor to the kingdom, his successor.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> Then the king being in a rage and
provoked with this man's wicked accusations, wrote to Nicanor,
signifying, that he was greatly displeased with the covenant of
friendship: and that he commanded him nevertheless to send Machabeus
prisoner in all haste to Antioch.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> When this was known, Nicanor was in a
consternation, and took it grievously that he should make void the
articles that were agreed upon, having received no injury from the man.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But because he could not oppose the
king, he watched an opportunity to comply with the orders.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> But when Machabeus perceived that
Nicanor was more stern to him, and that when they met together as usual
he behaved himself in a rough manner: and was sensible that this rough
behaviour came not of good, he gathered together a few of his men, and
hid himself from Nicanor.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> But he finding himself notably pre-
vented by the man, came to the great and holy temple: and commanded the
priests that were offering the accustomed sacrifices, to deliver him the
man.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And when they swore unto him, that they
knew not where the man was whom he sought, he stretched out his hand to
the temple,

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And swore, saying: Unless you de- liver
Judas prisoner to me, I will lay this temple of God even with the
ground, and will beat down the altar, and I will dedicate this temple to
Bacchus.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And when he had spoken thus he
departed. But the priests stretching forth their hands to heaven, called
upon him that was ever the defender of their nation, saying in this
manner:

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> Thou, O Lord of all things, who wantest
nothing, wast pleased that the temple of thy habitation should be
amongst us.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> Therefore now, 0 Lord the holy of all
holies, keep this house for ever undefiled which was lately cleansed.

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> Now Razias, one of the ancients of
Jerusalem, was accused to Nicanor, a man that was a lover of the city,
and of good report, who for his affection was called the father of the
Jews.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> This man, for a long time, had held
fast his purpose of keeping himself pure in the Jews' religion, and was
ready to expose his body and life, that he might persevere therein.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> So Nicanor being willing to declare the
hatred that he bore the Jews, sent five hundred soldiers to take him.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> For he thought by insnaring him to hurt
the Jews very much.

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> Now as the multitude sought to rush
into his house, and to break open the door, and to set fire to it, when
he was ready to be taken, he struck himself with his sword:

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> Choosing to die nobly rather than to
fall into the hands of the wicked, and to suffer abuses unbecoming his
noble birth.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> But whereas through haste he missed of
giving himself a sure wound, and the crowd was breaking into the doors,
he ran boldly to the wall, and manfully threw himself down to the crowd:

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> But they quickly making room for his
fall, he came upon the midst of the neck.

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> And as he had yet breath in him, being
inflamed in mind he arose: and while his blood ran down with a great
stream, and he was grievously wounded, he ran through the crowd:

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> And standing upon a steep rock, when he
was now almost without blood, grasping his bowels with both hands, he
cast them upon the throng, calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, to
restore these to him again: and so he departed this life.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> But when Nicanor understood that Judas
was in the places of Samaria, he purposed to set upon him with all
violence on the sabbath day.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And when the Jews that were constrained
to follow him, said: Do not act so fiercely and barbarously, but give
honour to the day that is sanctified: and reverence him that beholdeth
all things:

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> That unhappy man asked, if there were a
mighty One in heaven, that had commanded the sabbath day to be kept.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And when they answered: There is the
living Lord himself in heaven, the mighty One, that commanded the
seventh day to be kept,

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Then he said: And I am mighty upon the
earth, and I command to take arms, and to do the king's business.
Nevertheless he prevailed not to accomplish his design.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> So Nicanor being puffed up with exceeding
great pride, thought to set up a public monument of his victory over
Judas.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> But Machabeus ever trusted with all hope
that God would help them.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And he exhorted his people not to fear
the coming of the nations, but to remember the help they had before
received from heaven, and now to hope for victory from the Almighty.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And speaking to them out of the law, and
the prophets, and withal putting them in mind of the battles they had
fought before, he made them more cheerful:

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Then after he had encouraged them, he
shewed withal the falsehood of the Gentiles, and their breach of oaths.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> So he armed every one of them, not with
defence of shield and spear, but with very good speeches and
exhortations, and told them a dream worthy to be believed, whereby he
rejoiced them all.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Now the vision was in this manner:
Onias who had been high priest, a good and virtuous man, modest in his
looks, gentle in his manners, and graceful in his speech, and who from a
child was exercised in virtues, holding up his hands, prayed for all the
people of the Jews:

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> After this there appeared also an-
other man, admirable for age, and glory, and environed with great beauty
and majesty :

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Then Onias answering, Raid: This is a
lover of his brethren, and of the people of Israel: this is he that
prayeth much for the people, and for all the holy city, Jeremias the
prophet of God.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Whereupon Jeremias stretched forth his
right hand, and gave to Judas a sword of gold, saying:

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Take this holy sword a gift from God,
wherewith thou shalt overthrow the adversaries of my people Israel.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Thus being exhorted with the words of
Judas, which were very good, and proper to stir up the courage, and
strengthen the hearts of the young men, they resolved to fight, and to
set upon them manfully : that valour might decide the matter, because
the holy city and the temple were in danger.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> For their concern was less for their
wives, and children, and for their brethren, and kinsfolks: but their
greatest and principal fear was for the holiness of the temple.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> And they also that were in the city,
had no little concern for them that were to be engaged in battle.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And now when all expected what judgment
would be given, and the enemies were at hand, and the army was set in
array, the beasts and the horsemen ranged in convenient places,

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Machabeus considering the coming of the
multitude, and the divers preparations of armour, and the fierceness of
the beasts, stretching out his hands to heaven, called upon the Lord,
that worketh wonders, who giveth victory to them that are worthy, not
according to the power of their arms, but according as it seemeth good
to him.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And in his prayer he said after this
manner: Thou, O Lord, who didst send thy angel in the time of Ezechias
king of Juda, and didst kill a hundred and eighty-five thousand of the
army of Sennacherib:

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Send now also, 0 Lord of heaven, thy
good angel before us, for the fear and dread of the greatness of thy
arm,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> That they may be afraid, who come with
blasphemy against thy holy people. And thus he concluded his prayer.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But Nicanor, and they that were with
him came forward, with trumpets and songs.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> But Judas, and they that were with him,
encountered them, calling upon God by prayers:

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> So fighting with their hands, but
praying to the Lord with their hearts, they slew no less than five and
thirty thousand, being greatly cheered with the presence of God.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And when the battle was over, and they
were returning with joy, they understood that Nicanor was slain in his
armour.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Then making a shout, and a great noise,
they blessed the Almighty Lord in their own language.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And Judas, who was altogether ready, in
body and mind, to die for his countrymen, commanded that Nicanor's head,
and his hand with the shoulder should be cut off, and carried to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And when he was come thither, having
called together his countrymen, and the priests to the altar, he sent
also for them that were in the castle,

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And shewing them the head of Nicenor,
and the wicked hand, which he had stretched out, with proud boasts,
against the holy house of the Almighty God,

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> He commanded also, that the tongue of
the wicked Nicanor, should be cut out and given by pieces to birds, and
the hand of the furious man to be hanged up over against the temple.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> Then all blessed the Lord of heaven,
saying: Blessed be he that hath kept his own place undefiled.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And he hung up Nicanor's head in the
top of the castle, that it might be an evident and manifest sign of the
help of God.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And they all ordained by a common
decree, by no means to let this day pass without solemnity:

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> But to celebrate the thirteenth day of
the month of Adar, called, in the Syrian language, the day before
Mardochias' day.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> So these things being done with
relation to Nicanor, and from that time the city being possessed by the
Hebrews, I also will here make an end of my narration.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> Which if I have done well, and as it
becometh the history, it is what I desired: but if not so perfectly, it
must be pardoned me.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> For as it is hurtful to drink always
wine, or always water, but pleasant to use sometimes the one, and
sometimes the other: so if the speech be always nicely framed, it will
not be grateful to the readers. But here it shall be ended.
