[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mat)  [Next](luk) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Mark

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> THE beginning of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> As it is written in Isaias the prophet:
Behold I send my angel before thy face, who shall prepare the way before
thee.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> A voice of one crying in the desert:
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight his paths.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> John was in the desert baptizing, and
preaching the baptism of penance, unto remission of sins.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And there went out to him all the country
of Judea, and all they of Jerusalem, and were baptized by him in the
river of Jordan, confessing their sins.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And John was clothed with camel's hair, and
a leathern girdle about his loins; and he ate locusts and wild honey.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he preached, saying: There cometh after
me one mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to
stoop down and loose.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> I have baptized you with water; but he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And it came to pass, in those days, Jesus
came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by John in the Jordan.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And forthwith coming up out of he water,
he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit as a dove descending, and
remaining on him.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And there came a voice from heaven: Thou
art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And immediately the Spirit drove him out
into the desert.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And he was in the desert forty days and
forty nights, and was tempted by Satan; and he was with beasts, and the
angels ministered to him.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And after that John was delivered up,
Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And saying: The time is accomplished, and
the kingdom of God is at hand: repent, and believe the gospel.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And passing by the sea of Galilee, he saw
Simon and Andrew his brother, casting nets into the sea (for they were
fishermen).

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Jesus said to them: Come after me,
and I will make you to become fishers of men.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And immediately leaving their nets, they
followed him.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And going on from thence a little
farther, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also
were mending their nets in the ship:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And forthwith he called them. And leaving
their father Zebedee in the ship with his hired men, they followed him.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And they entered into Capharnaum, and
forthwith upon the sabbath days going into the synagogue, he taught
them.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And they were astonished at his doctrine.
For he was teaching them as one having power, and not as the scribes.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And there was in their synagogue a man
with an unclean spirit; and he cried out,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Saying: What have we to do with thee,
Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know who thou art, the
Holy One of God.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And Jesus threatened him, saying: Speak
no more, and go out of the man.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And the unclean spirit tearing him, and
crying out with a loud voice, went out of him.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And they were all amazed, insomuch that
they questioned among themselves, saying: What thing is this? what is
this new doctrine? for with power he commandeth even the unclean
spirits, and they obey him.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And the fame of him was spread forthwith
into all the country of Galilee.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And immediately going out of the
synagogue they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and
John.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> And Simon's wife's mother lay in a fit of
a fever: and forthwith they tell him of her.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And coming to her, he lifted her up,
taking her by the hand; and immediately the fever left her, and she
ministered unto them.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And when it was evening, after sunset,
they brought to him all that were ill and that were possessed with
devils.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> And all the city was gathered together at
the door.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And he healed many that were troubled
with divers diseases; and he cast out many devils, and he suffered them
not to speak, because they knew him.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And rising very early, going out, he went
into a desert place: and there he prayed.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And Simon, and they that were with him,
followed after him.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> And when they had found him, they said to
him: All seek for thee.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And he saith to them: Let us go into the
neighbouring towns and cities, that I may preach there also; for to this
purpose am I come.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And he was preaching in their synagogues,
and in all Galilee, and casting out devils.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> And there came a leper to him, beseeching
him, and kneeling down said to him: If thou wilt, thou canst make me
clean.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> And Jesus having compassion on him,
stretched forth his hand; and touching him, saith to him: I will. Be
thou made clean.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And when he had spoken, immediately the
leprosy departed from him, and he was made clean.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And he strictly charged him, and
forthwith sent him away.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And he saith to him: See thou tell no
one; but go, shew thyself to the high priest, and offer for thy
cleansing the things that Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> But he being gone out, began to publish
and to blaze abroad the word: so that he could not openly go into the
city, but was without in desert places: and they flocked to him from all
sides.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> AND again he entered into Capharnaum after
some days.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And it was heard that he was in the house,
and many came together, so that there was no room; no, not even at the
door; and he spoke to them the word.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And they came to him, bringing one sick of
the palsy, who was carried by four.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And when they could not offer him unto him
for the multitude, they uncovered the roof where he was; and opening it,
they let down the bed wherein the man sick of the palsy lay.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And when Jesus had seen their faith, he
saith to the sick of the palsy: Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And there were some of the scribes sitting
there, and thinking in their hearts:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Why doth this man speak thus? he
blasphemeth. Who can forgive sins, but God only?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Which Jesus presently knowing in his
spirit, that they so thought within themselves, saith to them: Why think
you these things in your hearts?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Which is easier, to say to the sick of the
palsy: Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say: Arise, take up thy bed,
and walk?

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But that you may know that the Son of man
hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the
palsy,)

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> I say to thee: Arise, take up thy bed,
and go into thy house.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And immediately he arose; and taking up
his bed, went his way in the sight of all; so that all wondered and
glorified God, saying: We never saw the like.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he went forth again to the sea side;
and all the multitude came to him, and he taught them.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And when he was passing by, he saw Levi
the son of Alpheus sitting at the receipt of custom; and he saith to
him: Follow me. And rising up, he followed him.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And it came to pass, that as he sat at
meat in his house, many publicans and sinners sat down together with
Jesus and his disciples. For they were many, who also followed him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the scribes and the Pharisees, seeing
that he ate with publicans and sinners, said to his disiples: Why doth
your master eat and drink with publicans and sinners?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Jesus hearing this, saith to them: They
that are well have no need of a physician, but they that are sick. For I
came not to call the just, but sinners.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And the disiples of John and the
Pharisees used to fast; and they come and say to him: Why do the
disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast; but thy disciples do not
fast?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Jesus saith to them: Can the children
of the marriage fast, as long as the bridegroom is with them? As long as
they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But the days will come when the
bridegroom shall be taken away from them; and then they shall fast in
those days.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> No man seweth a piece of raw cloth to an
old garment: otherwise the new piecing taketh away from the old, and
there is made a greater rent.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And no man putteth new wine into old
bottles: otherwise the wine will burst the bottles, and both the wine
will be spilled, and the bottles will be lost. But new wine must be put
into new bottles.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And it came to pass again, as the Lord
walked through the corn fields on the sabbath, that his disciples began
to go forward, and to pluck the ears of corn.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And the Pharisees said to him: Behold,
why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful?

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And he said to them: Have you never read
what David did when he had need, and was hungry himself, and they that
were with him?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> How he went into the house of God, under
Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the loaves of proposition, which
was not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave to them who were
with him?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And he said to them: The sabbath was made
for man, and not man for the sabbath.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Therefore the Son of man is Lord of the
sabbath also.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> AND he entered again into the synagogue,
and there was a man there who had a withered hand.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And they watched him whether he would heal
on the sabbath days; that they might accuse him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he said to the man who had the withered
hand: Stand up in the midst.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he saith to them: Is it lawful to do
good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy?
But they held their peace.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And looking round about on them with anger,
being grieved for the blindness of their hearts, he saith to the man:
Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth: and his hand was
restored unto him.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the Pharisees going out, immediately
made a consultation with the Herodians against him, how they might
destroy him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But Jesus retired with his disciples to the
sea; and a great multitude followed him from Galilee and Judea,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And from Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and
from beyond the Jordan. And they about Tyre and Sidon, a great
multitude, hearing the things which he did, came to him.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he spoke to his disciples that a small
ship should wait on him because of the multitude, lest they should
throng him.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For he healed many, so that they pressed
upon him for to touch him, as many as had evils.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And the unclean spirits, when they saw
him, fell down before him: and they cried, saying:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Thou art the Son of God. And he strictly
charged them that they should not make him known.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And going up into a mountain, he called
unto him whom he would himself: and they came to him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And he made that twelve should be with
him, and that he might send them to preach.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And he gave them power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out devils.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And to Simon he gave the name Peter:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And James the son of Zebedee, and John
the brother of James; and he named them Boanerges, which is, The sons of
thunder:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And Andrew and Philip, and Bartholomew
and Matthew, and Thomas and James of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon
the Cananean:

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed
him.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And they come to a house, and the
multitude cometh together again, so that they could not so much as eat
bread.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And when his friends had heard of it,
they went out to lay hold on him. For they said: He is become mad.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the scribes who were come down from
Jerusalem, said: He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of devils he
casteth out devils.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And after he had called them together, he
said to them in parables: How can Satan cast out Satan?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And if a kingdom be divided against
itself, that kingdom cannot stand.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And if a house be divided against itself,
that house cannot stand.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And if Satan be risen up against himself,
he is divided, and cannot stand, but hath an end.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> No man can enter into the house of a
strong man and rob him of his goods, unless he first bind the strong
man, and then shall he plunder his house.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Amen I say to you, that all sins shall be
forgiven unto the sons of men, and the blasphemies wherewith they shall
blaspheme:

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> But he that shall blaspheme against the
Holy Ghost, shall never have forgiveness, but shall be guilty of an
everlasting sin.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Because they said: He hath an unclean
spirit.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> And his mother and his bretheren came;
and standing without, sent unto him, calling him.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> And the multitude sat about him; and they
say to him: Behold thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> And answering them, he said: Who is my
mother and my brethren?

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And looking round about on them who sat
about him, he saith: Behold my mother and my brethren.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> For whosoever shall do the will of God,
he is my brother, and my sister, and mother.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> AND again he began to teach by the sea
side; and a great multitude was gathered together unto him, so that he
went up into a ship, and sat in the sea; and all the multitude was upon
the land by the sea side.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he taught them many things in parables,
and said unto them in his doctrine:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Hear ye: Behold, the sower went out to sow.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And whilst he sowed, some fell by the way
side, and the birds of the air came and ate it up.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And other some fell upon stony ground,
where it had not much earth; and it shot up immediately, because it had
no depth of earth.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And when the sun was risen, it was
scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And some fell among thorns; and the thorns
grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And some fell upon good ground; and brought
forth fruit that grew up, and increased and yielded, one thirty, another
sixty, and another a hundred.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And he said: He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And when he was alone, the twelve that
were with him asked him the parable.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he said to them: To you it is given
to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but to them that are without,
all things are done in parables:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> That seeing they may see, and not
perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand: lest at any
time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he saith to them: Are you ignorant of
this parable? and how shall you know all parables?

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> He that soweth, soweth the word.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And these are they by the way side, where
the word is sown, and as soon as they have heard, immediately Satan
cometh and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And these likewise are they that are sown
on the stony ground: who when they have heard the word, immediately
recieve it with joy.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And they have no root in themselves, but
are only for a time: and then when tribulation and persecution ariseth
for the word they are presently scandalized.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And others there are who are sown among
thorns: these are they that hear the word,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And the cares of the world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts after other things entering in
choke the word, and it is made fruitless.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And these are they who are sown upon the
good ground, who hear the word, and receive it, and yield fruit, the one
thirty, another sixty, and another a hundred.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And he said to them: Doth a candle come
in to be put under a bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a
candlestick?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For there is nothing hid, which shall not
be made manifest: neither was it made secret, but that it may come
abroad.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> If any man have ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And he said to them: Take heed what you
hear. In what measure you shall mete, it shall be measured to you again,
and more shall be given to you.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> For he that hath, to him shall be given:
and he that hath not, that also which he hath shall be taken away from
him.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And he said: So is the kingdom of God, as
if a man should cast seed into the earth,

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And should sleep, and rise, night and
day, and the seed should spring, and grow up whilst he knoweth not.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> For the earth of itself bringeth forth
fruit, first the blade, then the ear, afterwards the full corn in the
ear.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And when the fruit is brought forth,
immediately he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And he said: To what shall we liken the
kingdom of God? or to what parable shall we compare it?

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> It is as a grain of mustard seed: which
when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that are in the
earth:

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And when it is sown, it groweth up, and
becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great branches, so
that the birds of the air may dwell under the shadow thereof.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And with many such parables, he spoke to
them the word, according as they were able to hear.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And without parable he did not speak unto
them; but apart, he explained all things to his disciples.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And he saith to them that day, when
evening was come: Let us pass over to the other side.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And sending away the multitude, they take
him even as he was in the ship: and there were other ships with him.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And there arose a great storm of wind,
and the waves beat into the ship, so that the ship was filled.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And he was in the hinder part of the
ship, sleeping upon a pillow; and they awake him, and say to him:
Master, doth it not concern thee that we perish?

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> And rising up, he rebuked the wind, and
said to the sea: Peace, be still. And the wind ceased: and there was
made a great calm.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> And he said to them: Why are you fearful?
have you not faith yet? And they feared exceedingly: and they said one
to another: Who is this (thinkest thou) that both wind and sea obey him?

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> AND they came over the strait of the sea
into the country of the Gerasens.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And as he went out of the ship, immediately
there met him out of the monuments a man with an unclean spirit,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Who had his dwelling in the tombs, and no
man now could bind him, not even with chains.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For having been often bound with fetters
and chains, he had burst the chains, and broken the fetters in pieces,
and no one could tame him.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And he was always day and night in the
monuments and in the mountains, crying and cutting himself with stones.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And seeing Jesus afar off, he ran and
adored him.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And crying with a loud voice, he said: What
have I to do with thee, Jesus the Son of the most high God? I adjure
thee by God that thou torment me not.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For he said unto him: Go out of the man,
thou unclean spirit.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And he asked him: What is thy name? And he
saith to him: My name is Legion, for we are many.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And he besought him much, that he would
not drive him away out of the country.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And there was there near the mountain a
great herd of swine, feeding.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And the spirits besought him, saying:
Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And Jesus immediately gave them leave.
And the unclean spirits going out, entered into the swine: and the herd
with great violence was carried headlong into the sea, being about two
thousand, and were stifled in the sea.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And they that fed them fled, and told it
in the city and in the fields. And they went out to see what was done:

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And they came to Jesus, and they see him
that was troubled with the devil, sitting, clothed, and well in his
wits, and they were afraid.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And they that had seen it, told them, in
what manner he had been dealt with who had the devil; and concerning the
swine.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And they began to pray him that he would
depart from their coasts.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And when he went up into the ship, he
that had been troubled with the devil, began to beseech him that he
might be with him.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And he admitted him not, but saith to
him: Go into thy house to thy friends, and tell them how great things
the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had mercy on thee.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And he went his way, and began to publish
in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him: and all men
wondered.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And when Jesus had passed again in the
ship over the strait, a great multitude assembled together unto him, and
he was nigh unto the sea.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And there cometh one of the rulers of the
synagogue named Jairus: and seeing him, falleth down at his feet.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And he besought him much, saying: My
daughter is at the point of death, come, lay thy hand upon her, that she
may be safe, and may live.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And he went with him, and a great
multitude followed him, and they thronged him.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And a woman who was under an issue of
blood twelve years,

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And had suffered many things from many
physicians; and had spent all that she had, and was nothing the better,
but rather worse,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> When she had heard of Jesus, came in the
crowd behind him, and touched his garment.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> For she said: If I shall touch but his
garment, I shall be whole.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And forthwith the fountain of her blood
was dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of the evil.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And immediately Jesus knowing in himself
the virtue that had proceeded from him, turning to the multitude, said:
Who hath touched my garments?

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And his disciples said to him: Thou seest
the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou who hath touched me?

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And he looked about to see her who had
done this.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> But the woman fearing and trembling,
knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before him, and told
him all the truth.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> And he said to her: Daughter, thy faith
hath made thee whole: go in peace, and be thou whole of thy disease.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> While he was yet speaking, some come from
the ruler of the synagogue's house, saying: Thy daughter is dead: why
dost thou trouble the master any further?

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> But Jesus having heard the word that was
spoken, saith to the ruler of the synagogue: Fear not, only believe.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> And he admitted not any man to follow
him, but Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And they come to the house of the ruler
of the synagogue; and he seeth a tumult, and people weeping and wailing
much.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> And going in, he saith to them: Why make
you this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And they laughed him to scorn. But he
having put them all out, taketh the father and the mother of the damsel,
and them that were with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And taking the damsel by the hand, he
saith to her: Talitha cumi, which is, being interpreted: Damsel (I say
to thee) arise.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And immediately the damsel rose up, and
walked: and she was twelve years old: and they were astonished with a
great astonishment.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> And he charged them strictly that no man
should know it: and commanded that something should be given her to eat.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> AND going out from thence, he went into his
own country; and his disciples followed him.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And when the sabbath was come, he began to
teach in the synagogue: and many hearing him were in admiration at his
doctrine, saying: How came this man by all these things? and what wisdom
is this that is given to him, and such mighty works as are wrought by
his hands?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary,
the brother of James, and Joseph, and Jude, and Simon? are not also his
sisters here with us? And they were scandalized in regard of him.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And Jesus said to them: A prophet is not
without honor, but in his own country, and in his own house, and among
his own kindred.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And he could not do any miracles there,
only that he cured a few that were sick, laying his hands upon them.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And he wondered because of their unbelief,
and he went through the villages round about teaching.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he called the twelve; and began to send
them two and two, and gave them power over unclean spirits.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And he commanded them that they should take
nothing for the way, but a staff only: no scrip, no bread, nor money in
their purse,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But to be shod with sandals, and that they
should not put on two coats.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he said to them: Wheresoever you
shall enter into an house, there abide till you depart from that place.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear you; going forth from thence, shake off the dust from your feet for
a testimony to them.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And going forth they preached that men
should do penance:

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And they cast out many devils, and
anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And king Herod heard, (for his name was
made manifest,) and he said: John the Baptist is risen again from the
dead, and therefore mighty works shew forth themselves in him.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And others said: It is Elias. But others
said: It is a prophet, as one of the prophets.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Which Herod hearing, said: John whom I
beheaded, he is risen again from the dead.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For Herod himself had sent and
apprehended John, and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias the
wife of Philip his brother, because he had married her.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> For John said to Herod: It is not lawful
for thee to have thy brother's wife.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Now Herodias laid snares for him: and was
desirous to put him to death, and could not.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For Herod feared John, knowing him to be
a just and holy man: and kept him, and when he heard him, did many
things: and he heard him willingly.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And when a convenient day was come, Herod
made a supper for his birthday, for the princes, and tribunes, and chief
men of Galilee.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And when the daughter of the same
Herodias had come in, and had danced, and pleased Herod, and them that
were at table with him, the king said to the damsel: Ask of me what thou
wilt, and I will give it thee.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And he swore to her: Whatsoever thou
shalt ask I will give thee, though it be the half of my kingdom.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Who when she was gone out, said to her
mother, What shall I ask? But she said: The head of John the Baptist.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And when she was come in immediately with
haste to the king, she asked, saying: I will that forthwith thou give me
in a dish, the head of John the Baptist.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> And the king was struck sad. Yet because
of his oath, and because of them that were with him at table, he would
not displease her:

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> But sending an executioner, he commanded
that his head should be brought in a dish.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And he beheaded him in the prison, and
brought his head in a dish: and gave it to the damsel, and the damsel
gave it to her mother.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Which his disciples hearing came, and
took his body, and laid it in a tomb.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And the apostles coming together unto
Jesus, related to him all things that they had done and taught.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And he said to them: Come apart into a
desert place, and rest a little. For there were many coming and going:
and they had not so much as time to eat.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> And going up into a ship, they went into
a desert place apart.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And they saw them going away, and many
knew: and they ran flocking thither on foot from all the cities, and
were there before them.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> And Jesus going out saw a great
multitude: and he had compassion on them, because they were as sheep not
having a shepherd, and he began to teach them many things.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And when the day was now far spent, his
disciples came to him, saying: This is a desert place, and the hour is
now past:

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> Send them away, that going into the next
villages and towns, they may buy themselves meat to eat.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> And he answering said to them: Give you
them to eat. And they said to him: Let us go and buy bread for two
hundred pence, and we will give them to eat.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> And he saith to them: How many loaves
have you? go and see. And when they knew, they say: Five, and two fishes

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And he commanded them that they should
make them all sit down by companies upon the green grass.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds
and by fifties.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> And when he had taken the five loaves,
and the two fishes: looking up to heaven, he blessed, and broke the
loaves, and gave to his disciples to set before them: and the two fishes
he divided among them all.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> And they all did eat, and had their fill.

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> And they took up the leavings, twelve
full baskets of fragments, and of the fishes.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> And they that did eat, were five thousand
men.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> And immediately he obliged his disciples
to go up into the ship, that they might go before him over the water to
Bethsaida, whilst he dismissed the people.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> And when he had dismissed them, he went
up to the mountain to pray.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> And when it was late, the ship was in the
midst of the sea, and himself alone on the land.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> And seeing them labouring in rowing, (for
the wind was against them,) and about the fourth watch of the night, he
cometh to them walking upon the sea, and he would have passed by them.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> But they seeing him walking upon the sea,
thought it was an apparition, and they cried out.

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> For they all saw him, and were troubled.
And immediately he spoke with them, and said to them: Have a good heart,
it is I, fear ye not.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> And he went up to them into the ship, and
the wind ceased: and they were far more astonished within themselves:

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> For they understood not concerning the
loaves; for their heart was blinded.

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> And when they had passed over, they came
into the land of Genezareth, and set to the shore.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> And when they were gone out of the ship,
immediately they knew him:

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> And running through that whole country,
they began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard
he was.

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> And whithersoever he entered, into towns
or into villages or cities, they laid the sick in the streets, and
besought him that they might touch but the hem of his garment: and as
many as touched him were made whole.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> AND there assembled together unto him the
Pharisees and some of the scribes, coming from Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And when they had seen some of his
disciples eat bread with common, that is, with unwashed hands, they
found fault.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> For the Pharisees, and all the Jews eat not
without often washing their hands, holding the tradition of the
ancients:

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And when they come from the market, unless
they be washed, they eat not: and many other things there are that have
been delivered to them to observe, the washings of cups and of pots, and
of brazen vessels, and of beds.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And the Pharisees and scribes asked him:
Why do not thy disciples walk according to the tradition of the
ancients, but they eat bread with common hands?

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But he answering, said to them: Well did
Isaias prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written: This people
honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And in vain to they worship me, teaching
doctrines and precepts of men.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For leaving the commandment of God, you
hold the tradition of men, the washing of pots and of cups: and many
other things you do like to these.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And he said to them: Well do you make void
the commandment of God, that you may keep your own tradition.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For Moses said: Honor thy father and thy
mother; and He that shall curse father or mother, dying let him die.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> But you say: If a man shall say to his
father or mother, Corban, (which is a gift,) whatsoever is from me,
shall profit thee.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And further you suffer him not to do any
thing for his father or mother,

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Making void the word of God by your own
tradition, which you have given forth. And many other such like things
you do.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And calling again the multitude unto him,
he said to them: Hear ye me all, and understand.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> There is nothing from without a man that
entering into him, can defile him. But the things which come from a man,
those are they that defile a man.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> If any man have ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And when he was come into the house from
the multitude, his disciples asked him the parable.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And he saith to them: So are you also
without knowledge? understand you not that every thing from without,
entering into a man cannot defile him:

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Because it entereth not into his heart,
but goeth into the belly, and goeth out into the privy, purging all
meats?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> But he said that the things which come
out from a man, they defile a man.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> For from within out of the heart of men
proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> All these evil things come from within,
and defile a man.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And rising from thence he went into the
coasts of Tyre and Sidon: and entering into a house, he would that no
man should know it, and he could not be hid.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> For a woman as soon as she heard of him,
whose daughter had an unclean spirit, came in and fell down at his feet.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> For the woman was a Gentile, a
Syrophenician born. And she besought him that he would cast forth the
devil out of her daughter.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Who said to her: Suffer first the
children to be filled: for it is not good to take the bread of the
children, and cast it to the dogs.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> But she answered and said to him: Yea,
Lord; for the whelps also eat under the table of the crumbs of the
children.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And he said to her: For this saying go
thy way, the devil is gone out of thy daughter.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And when she was come into her house, she
found the girl lying upon the bed, and that the devil was gone out.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And again going out of the coasts of
Tyre, he came by Sidon to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the
coasts of Decapolis.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And they bring to him one deaf and dumb;
and they besought him that he would lay his hand upon him.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And taking him from the multitude apart,
he put his fingers into his ears, and spitting, he touched his tongue:

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> And looking up to heaven, he groaned, and
said to him: Ephpheta, which is, Be thou opened.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And immediately his ears were opened, and
the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke right.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And he charged them that they should tell
no man. But the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal did
they publish it.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> And so much the more did they wonder,
saying: He hath done all things well; he hath made both the deaf to
hear, and the dumb to speak.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> IN those days again, when there was a great
multitude, and had nothing to eat; calling his disciples together, he
saith to them:

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I have compassion on the multitude, for
behold they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And if I shall send them away fasting to
their home, they will faint in the way; for some of them came from afar
off.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And his disciples answered him: From whence
can any one fill them here with bread in the wilderness?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And he asked them: How many loaves have ye?
Who said: Seven.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And taking the seven loaves, giving thanks,
he broke, and gave to his disciples for to set before them; and they set
them before the people.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And they had a few little fishes; and he
blessed them, and commanded them to be set before them.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And they did eat and were filled; and they
took up that which was left of the fragments, seven baskets.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And they that had eaten were about four
thousand; and he sent them away.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And immediately going up into a ship with
his disciples, he came into the parts of Dalmanutha.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the Pharisees came forth, and began
to question with him, asking him a sign from heaven, tempting him.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And sighing deeply in spirit, he saith:
Why doth this generation seek a sign? Amen, I say to you, a sign shall
not be given to this generation.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And leaving them, he went up again into
the ship, and passed to the other side of the water.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And they forgot to take bread; and they
had but one loaf with them in the ship.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he charged them, saying: Take heed
and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And they reasoned among themselves,
saying: Because we have no bread.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Which Jesus knowing, saith to them: Why
do you reason, because you have no bread? do you not yet know nor
understand? have you still your heart blinded?

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Having eyes, see you not? and having
ears, hear you not? neither do you remember.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> When I broke the five loaves among five
thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took you up? They say to
him, Twelve.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> When also the seven loaves among four
thousand, how many baskets of fragments took you up? And they say to
him, Seven.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And he said to them: How do you not yet
understand?

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And they came to Bethsaida; and they
bring to him a blind man, and they besought him that he would touch him.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And taking the blind man by the hand, he
led him out of the town; and spitting upon his eyes, laying his hands on
him, he asked him if he saw any thing.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And looking up, he said: I see men as it
were trees, walking.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> After that again he laid his hands upon
his eyes, and he began to see, and was restored, so that he saw all
things clearly.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And he sent him into his house, saying:
Go into thy house, and if thou enter into the town, tell nobody.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And Jesus went out, and his disciples,
into the towns of Caesarea Philippi. And in the way, he asked his
disciples, saying to them: Whom do men say that I am?

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Who answered him, saying: John the
Baptist; but some Elias, and others as one of the prophets.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> Then he saith to them: But whom do you
say that I am? Peter answering said to him: Thou art the Christ.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And he strictly charged them that they
should not tell any man of him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And he began to teach them, that the Son
of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the ancients and by
the high priests, and the scribes, and be killed: and after three days
rise again.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And he spoke the word openly. And Peter
taking him, began to rebuke him.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Who turning about and seeing his
disciples, threatened Peter, saying: Go behind me, Satan, because thou
savorest not the things that are of God, but that are of men.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And calling the multitude together with
his disciples, he said to them: If any man will follow me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> For whosoever will save his life, shall
lose it: and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel,
shall save it.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> For what shall it profit a man, if he
gain the whole world, and suffer the loss of his soul?

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> Or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul?

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> For he that shall be ashamed of me, and
of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation: the Son of man
also will be ashamed of him, when he shall come in the glory of his
Father with the holy angels.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> And he said to them: Amen I say to you,
that there are some of them that stand here, who shall not taste death,
till they see the kingdom of God coming in power.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> AND after six days Jesus taketh with him
Peter and James and John, and leadeth them up into an high mountain
apart by themselves, and was transfigured before them.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And his garments became shining and
exceeding white as snow, so as no fuller upon earth can make white.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And there appeared to them Elias with
Moses; and they were talking with Jesus.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And Peter answering, said to Jesus: Rabbi,
it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles, one for
thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For he knew not what he said: for they were
struck with fear.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And there was a cloud overshadowing them:
and a voice came out of the cloud, saying: This is my most beloved son;
hear ye him.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And immediately looking about, they saw no
man any more, but Jesus only with them.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And as they came down from the mountain, he
charged them not to tell any man what things they had seen, till the Son
of man shall be risen again from the dead.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And they kept the word to themselves;
questioning together what that should mean, when he shall be risen from
the dead.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And they asked him, saying: Why then do
the Pharisees and scribes say that Elias must come first?

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Who answering, said to them: Elias, when
he shall come first, shall restore all things; and as it is written of
the Son of man, that he must suffer many things and be despised.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> But I say to you, that Elias also is
come, (and they have done to him whatsoever they would,) as it is
written of him.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And coming to his disciples, he saw a
great multitude about them, and the scribes disputing with them.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And presently all the people seeing
Jesus, were astonished and struck with fear; and running to him, they
saluted him.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And he asked them: What do you question
about among you?

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And one of the multitude, answering,
said: Master, I have brought my son to thee, having a dumb spirit.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Who, wheresoever he taketh him, dasheth
him, and he foameth, and gnasheth with the teeth, and pineth away; and I
spoke to thy disciples to cast him out, and they could not.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Who answering them, said: O incredulous
generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you?
bring him unto me.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And they brought him. And when he had
seen him, immediately the spirit troubled him; and being thrown down
upon the ground, he rolled about foaming.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And he asked his father: How long time is
it since this hath happened unto him? But he said: From his infancy:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And oftentimes hath he cast him into the
fire and into waters to destroy him. But if thou canst do any thing,
help us, having compassion on us.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Jesus saith to him: If thou canst
believe, all things are possible to him that believeth.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And immediately the father of the boy
crying out, with tears said: I do believe, Lord: help my unbelief.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And when Jesus saw the multitude running
together, he threatened the unclean spirit, saying to him: Deaf and dumb
spirit, I command thee, go out of him; and enter not any more into him.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And crying out, and greatly tearing him,
he went out of him, and he became as dead, so that many said: He is
dead.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> But Jesus taking him by the hand, lifted
him up; and he arose.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And when he was come into the house, his
disciples secretly asked him: Why could not we cast him out?

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And he said to them: This kind can go out
by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And departing from thence, they passed
through Galilee, and he would not that any man should know it.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And he taught his disciple, and said to
them: The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men, and they
shall kill him; and after that he is killed, he shall rise again the
third day.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> But they understood not the word, and
they were afraid to ask him.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And they came to Capharnaum. And when
they were in the house, he asked them: What did you treat of in the way?

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> But they held their peace, for in the way
they had disputed among themselves, which of them should be the
greatest.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And sitting down, he called the twelve,
and saith to them: If any man desire to be first, he shall be the last
of all, and the minister of all.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And taking a child, he set him in the
midst of them. Whom when he had embraced, he saith to them:

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> Whosoever shall receive one such child as
this in my name, receiveth me. And whosoever shall receive me, receiveth
not me, but him that sent me.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> John answered him, saying: Master, we saw
one casting out devils in thy name, who followeth not us, and we forbade
him.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> But Jesus said: Do not forbid him. For
there is no man that doth a miracle in my name, and can soon speak ill
of me.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> For he that is not against you, is for
you.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> For whosoever shall give you to drink a
cup of water in my name, because you belong to Christ: amen I say to
you, he shall not lose his reward.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> And whosoever shall scandalize one of
these little ones that believe in me; it were better for him that a
millstone were hanged around his neck, and he were cast into the sea.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And if thy hand scandalize thee, cut it
off: it is better for thee to enter into life, maimed, than having two
hands to go into hell, into unquenchable fire:

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> Where there worm dieth not, and the fire
is not extinguished.

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> And if thy foot scandalize thee, cut it
off. It is better for thee to enter lame into life everlasting, than
having two feet, to be cast into the hell of unquenchable fire:

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> Where their worm dieth not, and the fire
is not extinguished.

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> And if thy eye scandalize thee, pluck it
out. It is better for thee with one eye to enter into the kingdom of
God, than having two eyes to be cast into the hell of fire:

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> Where the worm dieth not, and the fire is
not extinguished.

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> For every one shall be salted with fire:
and every victim shall be salted with salt.

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> Salt is good. But if the salt became
unsavory; wherewith will you season it? Have salt in you, and have peace
among you.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> AND rising up from thence, he cometh into
the coasts of Judea beyond the Jordan: and the multitudes flock to him
again. And as he was accustomed, he taught them again.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And the Pharisees coming to him asked
him: Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife? tempting him.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> But he answering, saith to them: What did
Moses command you?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Who said: Moses permitted to write a bill
of divorce, and to put her away.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> To whom Jesus answering, said: Because of
the hardness of your heart he wrote you that precept.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But from the beginning of the creation,
God made them male and female.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> For this cause a man shall leave his
father and mother; and shall cleave to his wife.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And they two shall be in one flesh.
Therefore now they are not two, but one flesh.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> What therefore God hath joined together,
let not man put asunder.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And in the house again his disciples
asked him concerning the same thing.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he saith to them: Whosoever shall
put away his wife and marry another, committeth adultery against her.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And if the wife shall put away her
husband, and be married to another, she committeth adultery.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And they brought to him young children,
that he might touch them. And the disciples rebuked them that brought
them.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Whom when Jesus saw, he was much
displeased, and saith to them: Suffer the little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Amen I say to you, whosoever shall not
receive the kingdom of God as a little child, shall not enter into it.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And embracing them, and laying his
hands upon them, he blessed them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And when he was gone forth into the
way, a certain man running up and kneeling before him, asked him, Good
Master, what shall I do that I may receive life everlasting?

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And Jesus said to him, Why callest thou
me good? None is good but one, that is God.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Thou knowest the commandments: Do not
commit adultery, do not kill, do not steal, bear not false witness, do
no fraud, honour thy father and mother.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But he answering, said to him: Master,
all these things I have observed from my youth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Jesus looking on him, loved him,
and said to him: One thing is wanting unto thee: go, sell whatsoever
thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven;
and come, follow me.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Who being struck sad at that saying,
went away sorrowful: for he had great possessions.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And Jesus looking round about, saith to
his disciples: How hardly shall they that have riches, enter into the
kingdom of God!

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And the disciples were astonished at
his words. But Jesus again answering, saith to them: Children, how hard
is it for them that trust in riches, to enter into the kingdom of God?

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> It is easier for a camel to pass
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Who wondered the more, saying among
themselves: Who then can be saved?

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And Jesus looking on them, saith: With
men it is impossible; but not with God: for all things are possible with
God.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Peter began to say unto him:
Behold, we have left all things, and have followed thee.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Jesus answering, said: Amen I say to
you, there is no man who hath left house or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or children, or lands, for my sake and for the
gospel,

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Who shall not receive an hundred times
as much, now in this time; houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions: and in the world to
come life everlasting.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> But many that are first, shall be last:
and the last, first.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And they were in the way going up to
Jerusalem: and Jesus went before them, and they were astonished; and
following were afraid. And taking again the twelve, he began to tell
them the things that should befall him.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Saying: Behold we go up to Jerusalem,
and the Son of man shall be betrayed to the chief priests, and to the
scribes and ancients, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall
deliver him to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And they shall mock him, and spit on
him, and scourge him, and kill him: and the third day he shall rise
again.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And James and John the sons of Zebedee,
come to him, saying: Master, we desire that whatsoever we shall ask,
thou wouldst do it for us:

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> But he said to them: What would you
that I should do for you?

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> And they said: Grant to us, that we may
sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy
glory.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And Jesus said to them: You know not
what you ask. Can you drink of the chalice that I drink of: or be
baptized with the baptism wherewith I am baptized?

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> But they said to him: We can. And Jesus
saith to them: You shall indeed drink of the chalice that I drink of:
and with the baptism wherewith I am baptized, you shall be baptized.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> But to sit on my right hand, or on my
left, is not mine to give to you, but to them for whom it is prepared.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> And the ten hearing it, began to be
much displeased at James and John.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> But Jesus calling them, saith to them:
You know that they who seem to rule over the Gentiles, lord it over
them: and their princes have power over them.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> But it is not so among you: but
whosoever will be greater, shall be your minister.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> And whosoever will be first among you,
shall be the servant of all.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> For the Son of man also is not come to
be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a redemption
for many.

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> And they came to Jericho: and as he
went out of Jericho, with his disciples, and a very great multitude,
Bartimeus the blind man, the son of Timeus, sat by the way side begging.

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> Who when he had heard, that it was
Jesus of Nazareth, began to cry out, and to say: Jesus son of David,
have mercy on me.

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And many rebuked him, that he might
hold his peace; but he cried a great deal the more: Son of David, have
mercy on me.

<span id="an_10:49">10:49</span> And Jesus, standing still, commanded
him to be called. And they call the blind man, saying to him: Be of
better comfort: arise, he calleth thee.

<span id="an_10:50">10:50</span> Who casting off his garment leaped up,
and came to him.

<span id="an_10:51">10:51</span> And Jesus answering, said to him: What
wilt thou that I should do to thee? And the blind man said to him:
Rabboni, that I may see.

<span id="an_10:52">10:52</span> And Jesus saith to him: Go thy way, thy
faith hath made thee whole. And immediately he saw, and followed him in
the way.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> AND when they were drawing near to
Jerusalem and to Bethania at the mount of Olives, he sendeth two of his
disciples,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And saith to them: Go into the village
that is over against you, and immediately at your coming in thither, you
shall find a colt tied, upon which no man yet hath sat: loose him, and
bring him.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And if any man shall say to you, What are
you doing? say ye that the Lord hath need of him: and immediately he
will let him come hither.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And going their way, they found the colt
tied before the gate without, in the meeting of two ways: and they loose
him.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And some of them that stood there, said
to them: What do you loosing the colt?

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Who said to them as Jesus had commanded
them; and they let him go with them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And they brought the colt to Jesus; and
they lay their garments on him, and he sat upon him.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And many spread their garments in the
way: and others cut down boughs from the trees, and strewed them in the
way.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And they that went before and they that
followed, cried, saying: Hosanna, blessed is he that cometh in the name
of the Lord.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Blessed be the kingdom of our father
David that cometh: Hosanna in the highest.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And he entered into Jerusalem, into the
temple: and having viewed all things round about, when now the eventide
was come, he went out to Bethania with the twelve.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And the next day when they came out
from Bethania, he was hungry.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And when he had seen afar off a fig
tree having leaves, he came if perhaps he might find any thing on it.
And when he was come to it, he found nothing but leaves. For it was not
the time for figs.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And answering he said to it: May no man
hereafter eat fruit of thee any more for ever. And his disciples heard
it.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And they came to Jerusalem. And when he
was entered into the temple, he began to cast out them that sold and
bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and
the chairs of them that sold doves.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And he suffered not that any man should
carry a vessel through the temple;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And he taught, saying to them: Is it
not written, My house shall be called the house of prayer to all
nations? But you have made it a den of thieves.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Which when the chief priests and the
scribes had heard, they sought how they might destroy him. For they
feared him, because the whole multitude was in admiration at his
doctrine.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And when evening was come, he went
forth out of the city.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And when they passed by in the morning
they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And Peter remembering, said to him:
Rabbi, behold the fig tree, which thou didst curse, is withered away.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Jesus answering, saith to them:
Have the faith of God.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Amen I say to you, that whosoever shall
say to this mountain, Be thou removed and be cast into the sea, and
shall not stagger in his heart, but believe, that whatsoever he saith
shall be done; it shall be done unto him.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Therefore I say unto you, all things,
whatsoever you ask when ye pray, believe that you shall receive; and
they shall come unto you.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And when you shall stand to pray,
forgive, if you have aught against any man; that your Father also, who
is in heaven, may forgive you your sins.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> But if you will not forgive, neither
will your Father that is in heaven, forgive you your sins.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And they come again to Jerusalem. And
when he was walking in the temple, there come to him the chief priests
and the scribes and the ancients,

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And they say to him: By what authority
dost thou these things? and who hath given thee this authority that thou
shouldst do these things?

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Jesus answering, said to them: I
will also ask you one word, and answer you me, and I will tell you by
what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The baptism of John, was it from
heaven, or from men? Answer me.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> But they thought with themselves,
saying: If we say, From heaven; he will say, Why then did you not
believe him?

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> If we say, From men, we fear the
people. For all men counted John that he was a prophet indeed.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And they answering, say to Jesus: We
know not. And Jesus answering, saith to them: Neither do I tell you by
what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> AND he began to speak to them in
parables: A certain man planted a vineyard and made a hedge about it,
and dug a place for the winefat, and built a tower, and let it to
husbandmen; and went into a far country.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And at the season he sent to the
husbandmen a servant to receive of the husbandmen of the fruit of the
vineyard.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Who having laid hands on him, beat him,
and sent him away empty.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And again he sent to them another
servant; and him they wounded in the head, and used him reproachfully.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And again he sent another, and him they
killed: and many others, of whom some they beat, and others they killed.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Therefore having yet one son, most dear
to him; he also sent him unto them last of all, saying: They will
reverence my son.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But the husbandmen said one to another:
This is the heir; come let us kill him; and the inheritance shall be
ours.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And laying hold on him, they killed him,
and cast him out of the vineyard.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> What therefore will the lord of the
vineyard do? He will come and destroy those husbandmen; and will give
the vineyard to others.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And have you not read this scripture,
The stone which the builders rejected, the same is made the head of the
corner:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> By the Lord has this been done, and it
is wonderful in our eyes.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And they sought to lay hands on him,
but they feared the people. For they knew that he spoke this parable to
them. And leaving him, they went their way.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And they sent to him some of the
Pharisees and of the Herodians; that they should catch him in his words.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Who coming, say to him: Master, we know
that thou art a true speaker, and carest not for any man; for thou
regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth.
Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar; or shall we not give it?

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Who knowing their wiliness, saith to
them: Why tempt you me? bring me a penny that I may see it.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And they brought it him. And he saith
to them: Whose is this image and inscription? They say to him, Caesar's.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And Jesus answering, said to them:
Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are God's. And they marvelled at him.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And there came to him the Sadducees,
who say there is no resurrection; and they asked him, saying:

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Master, Moses wrote unto us, that if
any man's brother die, and leave his wife behind him, and leave no
children, his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed to his
brother.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now there were seven brethren; and the
first took a wife, and died leaving no issue.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And the second took her, and died: and
neither did he leave any issue. And the third in like manner.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And the seven all took her in like
manner; and did not leave issue. Last of all the woman also died.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> In the resurrection therefore, when
they shall rise again, whose wife shall she be of them? for the seven
had her to wife.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And Jesus answering, saith to them: Do
ye not therefore err, because you know not the scriptures, nor the power
of God?

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> For when they shall rise again from the
dead, they shall neither marry, nor be married, but are as the angels in
heaven.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And as concerning the dead that they
rise again, have you not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God
spoke to him, saying: I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> He is not the God of the dead, but of
the living. You therefore do greatly err.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And there came one of the scribes that
had heard them reasoning together, and seeing that he had answered them
well, asked him which was the first commandment of all.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And Jesus answered him: The first
commandment of all is, Hear, O Israel: the Lord thy God is one God.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And thou shalt love the Lord thy God,
with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind,
and with thy whole strength. This is the first commandment.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And the second is like to it: Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is no other commandment
greater than these.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And the scribe said to him: Well,
Master, thou hast said in truth, that there is one God, and there is no
other besides him.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And that he should be loved with the
whole heart, and with the whole understanding, and with the whole soul,
and with the whole strength; and to love one's neighbour as one's self,
is a greater thing than all holocausts and sacrifices.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> And Jesus seeing that he had answered
wisely, said to him: Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no
man after that durst ask him any question.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And Jesus answering, said, teaching in
the temple: How do the scribes say, that Christ is the son of David?

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> For David himself saith by the Holy
Ghost: The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on my right hand, until I make thy
enemies thy footstool.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> David therefore himself calleth him
Lord, and whence is he then his son? And a great multitude heard him
gladly.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And he said to them in his doctrine:
Beware of the scribes, who love to walk in long robes, and to be saluted
in the marketplace,

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> And to sit in the first chairs, in the
synagogues, and to have the highest places at suppers:

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> Who devour the houses of widows under
the pretence of long prayer: these shall receive greater judgment.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And Jesus sitting over against the
treasury, beheld how the people cast money into the treasury, and many
that were rich cast in much.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> And there came a certain poor widow,
and she cast in two mites, which make a farthing.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And calling his disciples together, he
saith to them: Amen I say to you, this poor widow hath cast in more than
all they who have cast into the treasury.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> For all they did cast in of their
abundance; but she of her want cast in all she had, even her whole
living.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> AND as he was going out of the temple,
one of his disciples said to him: Master, behold what manner of stones
and what buildings are here.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And Jesus answering, said to him: Seest
thou all these great buildings? There shall not be left a stone upon a
stone, that shall not be thrown down.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And as he sat on the mount of Olivet over
against the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him apart:

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Tell us, when shall these things be? and
what shall be the sign when all these things shall begin to be
fulfilled?

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And Jesus answering, began to say to
them, Take heed lest any man deceive you.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For many shall come in my name, saying, I
am he; and they shall deceive many.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And when you shall hear of wars and
rumours of wars, fear ye not. For such things must needs be, but the end
is not yet.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> For nation shall rise against nation and
kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be earthquakes in divers
places, and famines. These things are the beginning of sorrows.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But look to yourselves. For they shall
deliver you up to councils, and in the synagogues you shall be beaten,
and you shall stand before governors and kings for my sake, for a
testimony unto them.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And unto all nations the gospel must
first be preached.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And when they shall lead you and
deliver you up, be not thoughtful beforehand what you shall speak; but
whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye. For it is not
you that speak, but the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And the brother shall betray his
brother unto death, and the father his son; and children shall rise up
against the parents, and shall work their death.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And you shall be hated by all men for
my name's sake. But he that shall endure unto the end, he shall be
saved.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And when you shall see the abomination
of desolation, standing where it ought not: he that readeth let him
understand: then let them that are in Judea, flee unto the mountains:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And let him that is on the housetop,
not go down into the house, nor enter therein to take any thing out of
the house:

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And let him that shall be in the field,
not turn back to take up his garment.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And woe to them that are with child,
and that give suck in those days.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> But pray ye, that these things happen
not in winter.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> For in those days shall be such
tribulations, as were not from the beginning of the creation which God
created until now, neither shall be.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And unless the Lord had shortened the
days, no flesh should be saved: but for the sake of the elect which he
hath chosen, he hath shortened the days.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And then if any man shall say to you,
Lo, here is Christ; lo, he is here: do not believe.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> For there will rise up false Christs
and false prophets, and they shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce (if
it were possible) even the elect.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Take you heed therefore; behold I have
foretold you all things.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> But in those days, after that
tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And the stars of heaven shall be
falling down, and the powers that are in heaven, shall be moved.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And then shall they see the Son of man
coming in the clouds, with great power and glory.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And then shall he send his angels, and
shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost
part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Now of the fig tree learn ye a parable.
When the branch thereof is now tender, and the leaves are come forth,
you know that summer is very near.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> So you also when you shall see these
things come to pass, know ye that it is very nigh, even at the doors.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Amen I say to you, that this generation
shall not pass, until all these things be done.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
my word shall not pass away.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> But of that day or hour no man knoweth,
neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Take ye heed, watch and pray. For ye
know not when the time is.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> Even as a man who going into a far
country, left his house; and gave authority to his servants over every
work, and commanded the porter to watch.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Watch ye therefor, (for you know not
when the lord of the house cometh: at even, or at midnight, or at the
cockcrowing, or in the morning,)

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Lest coming on a sudden, he find you
sleeping.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> And what I say to you, I say to all:
Watch.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> NOW the feast of the pasch, and of the
Azymes was after two days; and the chief priests and the scribes sought
how they might by some wile lay hold on him, and kill him.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> But they said: Not on the festival day,
lest there should be a tumult among the people.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And when he was in Bethania, in the house
of Simon the leper, and was at meat, there came a woman having an
alabaster box of ointment of precious spikenard: and breaking the
alabaster box, she poured it out upon his head.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Now there were some that had indignation
within themselves, and said: Why was this waste of the ointment made?

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> For this ointment might have been sold
for more than three hundred pence, and given to the poor. And they
murmured against her.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But Jesus said: Let her alone, why do you
molest her? She hath wrought a good work upon me.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For the poor you have always with you:
and whensoever you will, you may do them good: but me you have not
always.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> She hath done what she could: she is come
beforehand to anoint my body for burial.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Amen, I say to you, wheresoever this
gospel shall be preached in the whole world, that also which she hath
done, shall be told for a memorial of her.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve,
went to the chief priests, to betray him to them.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Who hearing it were glad; and they
promised him they would give him money. And he sought how he might
conveniently betray him.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Now on the first day of the unleavened
bread, when they sacrificed the pasch, the disciples say to him: Whither
wilt thou that we go, and prepare for thee to eat the pasch?

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And he sendeth two of his disciples,
and saith to them: Go ye into the city; and there shall meet you a man
carrying a pitcher of water, follow him;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And whithersoever he shall go in, say
to the master of the house, The master saith, Where is my refectory,
where I may eat the pasch with my disciples?

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And he will shew you a large dining
room furnished; and there prepare ye for us.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And his disciples went their way, and
came into the city; and they found as he had told them, and they
prepared the pasch.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And when evening was come, he cometh
with the twelve.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And when they were at table and eating,
Jesus saith: Amen I say to you, one of you that eateth with me shall
betray me.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> But they began to be sorrowful, and to
say to him one by one: Is it I?

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Who saith to them: One of the twelve,
who dippeth with me his hand in the dish.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And the Son of man indeed goeth, as it
is written of him: but woe to that man by whom the Son of man shall be
betrayed. It were better for him, if that man had not been born.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And whilst they were eating, Jesus took
bread; and blessing, broke, and gave to them, and said: Take ye. This is
my body.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And having taken the chalice, giving
thanks, he gave it to them. And they all drank of it.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And he said to them: This is my blood
of the new testament, which shall be shed for many.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Amen I say to you, that I will drink no
more of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I shall drink it new
in the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And when they had said an hymn, they
went forth to the mount of Olives.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And Jesus saith to them: You will all
be scandalized in my regard this night; for it is written, I will strike
the shepherd, and the sheep shall be dispersed.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> But after I shall be risen again, I
will go before you into Galilee.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But Peter saith to him: Although all
shall be scandalized in thee, yet not I.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And Jesus saith to him: Amen I say to
thee, to day, even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shall
deny me thrice.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> But he spoke the more vehemently:
Although I should die together with thee, I will not deny thee. And in
like manner also said they all.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And they came to a farm called
Gethsemani. And he saith to his disciples: Sit you here, while I pray.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And he taketh Peter and James and John
with him; and he began to fear and to be heavy.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And he saith to them: My soul is
sorrowful even unto death; stay you here, and watch.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And when he was gone forward a little,
he fell flat on the ground; and he prayed, that if it might be, the hour
might pass from him.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And he saith: Abba, Father, all things
are possible to thee: remove this chalice from me; but not what I will,
but what thou wilt.

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> And he cometh, and findeth them
sleeping. And he saith to Peter: Simon, sleepest thou? couldst thou not
watch one hour?

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> Watch ye, and pray that you enter not
into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> A going away again, he prayed, saying
the same words.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> And when he returned, he found them
again asleep, (for their eyes were heavy,) and they knew not what to
answer him.

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And he cometh the third time, and saith
to them: Sleep ye now, and take your rest. It is enough: the hour is
come: behold the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners.

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> Rise up, let us go. Behold, he that
will betray me is at hand.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> And while he was yet speaking, cometh
Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve: and with him a great multitude with
swords and staves, from the chief priests and the scribes and the
ancients.

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> And he that betrayed him, had given
them a sign, saying: Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he; lay hold on
him, and lead him away carefully.

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> And when he was come, immediately going
up to him, he saith: Hail, Rabbi; and he kissed him.

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> But they laid hands on him, and held
him.

<span id="an_14:47">14:47</span> An one of them that stood by, drawing a
sword, struck a servant of the chief priest, and cut off his ear.

<span id="an_14:48">14:48</span> And Jesus answering, said to them: Are
you come out as to a robber, with swords and staves to apprehend me?

<span id="an_14:49">14:49</span> I was daily with you in the temple
teaching, and you did not lay hands on me. But that the scriptures may
be fulfilled.

<span id="an_14:50">14:50</span> Then his disciples leaving him, all
fled away.

<span id="an_14:51">14:51</span> And a certain young man followed him,
having a linen cloth cast about his naked body; and they laid hold on
him.

<span id="an_14:52">14:52</span> But he, casting off the linen cloth,
fled from them naked.

<span id="an_14:53">14:53</span> And they brought Jesus to the high
priest; and all the priests and the scribes and the ancients assembled
together.

<span id="an_14:54">14:54</span> And Peter followed him from afar off,
even into the court of the high priest; and he sat with the servants at
the fire, and warmed himself.

<span id="an_14:55">14:55</span> And the chief priests and all the
council sought for evidence against Jesus, that they might put him to
death, and found none.

<span id="an_14:56">14:56</span> For many bore false witness against
him, and their evidences were not agreeing.

<span id="an_14:57">14:57</span> And some rising up, bore false witness
against him, saying:

<span id="an_14:58">14:58</span> We heard him say, I will destroy this
temple made with hands, and within three days I will build another not
made with hands.

<span id="an_14:59">14:59</span> And their witness did not agree.

<span id="an_14:60">14:60</span> And the high priest rising up in the
midst, asked Jesus, saying: Answerest thou nothing to the things that
are laid to thy charge by these men?

<span id="an_14:61">14:61</span> But he held his peace, and answered
nothing. Again the high priest asked him, and said to him: Art thou the
Christ the Son of the blessed God?

<span id="an_14:62">14:62</span> And Jesus said to him: I am. And you
shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of the power of God,
and coming with the clouds of heaven.

<span id="an_14:63">14:63</span> Then the high priest rending his
garments, saith: What need we any further witnesses?

<span id="an_14:64">14:64</span> You have heard the blasphemy. What
think you? Who all condemned him to be guilty of death.

<span id="an_14:65">14:65</span> And some began to spit on him, and to
cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say unto him: Prophesy: and
the servants struck him with the palms of their hands.

<span id="an_14:66">14:66</span> Now when Peter was in the court below,
there cometh one of the maidservants of the high priest.

<span id="an_14:67">14:67</span> And when she had seen Peter warming
himself, looking on him she saith: Thou also wast with Jesus of
Nazareth.

<span id="an_14:68">14:68</span> But he denied, saying: I neither know
nor understand what thou sayest. And he went forth before the court; and
the cock crew.

<span id="an_14:69">14:69</span> And again a maidservant seeing him,
began to say to the standers by: This is one of them.

<span id="an_14:70">14:70</span> But he denied again. And after a while
they that stood by said again to Peter: Surely thou art one of them; for
thou art also a Galilean.

<span id="an_14:71">14:71</span> But he began to curse and to swear,
saying; I know not this man of whom you speak.

<span id="an_14:72">14:72</span> And immediately the cock crew again.
And Peter remembered the word that Jesus had said unto him: Before the
cock crow twice, thou shalt thrice deny me. And he began to weep.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> AND straightway in the morning, the chief
priests holding a consultation with the ancients and the scribes and the
whole council, binding Jesus, led him away, and delivered him to Pilate.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And Pilate asked him: Art thou the king
of the Jews? But he answering, saith to him: Thou sayest it.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And the chief priests accused him in many
things.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And Pilate again asked him, saying:
Answerest thou nothing? behold in how many things they accuse thee.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But Jesus still answered nothing; so that
Pilate wondered.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Now on the festival day he was wont to
release unto them one of the prisoners, whomsoever they demanded.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And there was one called Barabbas, who
was put in prison with some seditious men, who in the sedition had
committed murder.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And when the multitude was come up, they
began to desire that he would do, as he had ever done unto them.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And Pilate answered them, and said: Will
you that I release to you the king of the Jews?

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> For he knew that the chief priests had
delivered him up out of envy.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But the chief priests moved the people,
that he should rather release Barabbas to them.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And Pilate again answering, saith to
them: What will you then that I do to the king of the Jews?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> But they again cried out: Crucify him.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And Pilate saith to them: Why, what
evil hath he done? But they cried out the more: Crucify him.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And so Pilate being willing to satisfy
the people, released to them Barabbas, and delivered up Jesus, when he
had scourged him, to be crucified.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And the soldiers led him away into the
court of the palace, and they called together the whole band:

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And they clothe him with purple, and
platting a crown of thorns, they put it upon him.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And they began to salute him: Hail,
king of the Jews.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> And they struck his head with a reed:
and they did spit on him. And bowing their knees, they adored him.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And after they had mocked him, they
took off the purple from him, and put his own garments on him, and they
led him out to crucify him.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And they forced one Simon a Cyrenian
who passed by, coming out of the country, the father of Alexander and of
Rufus, to take up his cross.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And they bring him into the place
called Golgotha, which being interpreted is, The place of Calvary.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And they gave him to drink wine mingled
with myrrh; but he took it not.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And crucifying him, they divided his
garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should take.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And it was the third hour, and they
crucified him.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And the inscription of his cause was
written over: THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And with him they crucify two thieves;
the one on his right hand, and the other on his left.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And the scripture was fulfilled, which
saith: And with the wicked he was reputed.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And they that passed by blasphemed him,
wagging their heads, and saying: Vah, thou that destroyest the temple of
God, and in three days buildest it up again;

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Save thyself, coming down from the
cross.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> In like manner also the chief priests
mocking, said with the scribes one to another: He saved others; himself
he cannot save.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Let Christ the king of Israel come down
now from the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were
crucified with him reviled him.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And when the sixth hour was come, there
was darkness over the whole earth until the ninth hour.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried out
with a loud voice, saying: Eloi, Eloi, lamma sabacthani? Which is, being
interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And some of the standers by hearing,
said: Behold he calleth Elias.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And one running and filling a sponge
with vinegar, and putting it upon a reed, gave him to drink, saying:
Stay, let us see if Elias come to take him down.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Jesus having cried out with a loud
voice, gave up the ghost.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And the veil of the temple was rent in
two, from the top to the bottom.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And the centurion who stood over
against him, seeing that crying out in this manner he had given up the
ghost, said: Indeed this man was the son of God.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> And there were also women looking on
afar off: among whom was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James the
less and of Joseph, and Salome:

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> Who also when he was in Galilee
followed him, and ministered to him, and many other women that came up
with him to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> And when evening was now come, (because
it was the Parasceve, that is, the day before the sabbath,)

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> Joseph of Arimathea, a noble
counsellor, who was also himself looking for the kingdom of God, came
and went in boldly to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus.

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> But Pilate wondered that he should be
already dead. And sending for the centurion, he asked him if he were
already dead.

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> And when he had understood it by the
centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> And Joseph buying fine linen, and
taking him down, wrapped him up in the fine linen, and laid him in a
sepulchre which was hewed out of a rock. And he rolled a stone to the
door of the sepulchre.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> And Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother
of Joseph, beheld where he was laid.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> AND when the sabbath was past, Mary
Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, bought sweet spices,
that coming, they might anoint Jesus.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And very early in the morning, the first
day of the week, they come to the sepulchre, the sun being now risen.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And they said one to another: Who shall
roll us back the stone from the door of the sepulchre?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And looking, they saw the stone rolled
back. For it was very great.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And entering into the sepulchre, they saw
a young man sitting on the right side, clothed with a white robe: and
they were astonished.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Who saith to them: Be not affrighted; you
seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified: he is risen, he is not here,
behold the place where they laid him.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But go, tell his disciples and Peter that
he goeth before you into Galilee; there you shall see him, as he told
you.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> But they going out, fled from the
sepulchre. For a trembling and fear had seized them: and they said
nothing to any man; for they were afraid.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> But he rising early the first day of the
week, appeared first to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven
devils.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> She went and told them that had been
with him, who were mourning and weeping.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And they hearing that he was alive, and
had been seen by her, did not believe.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And after that he appeared in another
shape to two of them walking, as they were going into the country.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And they going told it to the rest:
neither did they believe them.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> At length he appeared to the eleven as
they were at table: and he upbraided them with their incredulity and
hardness of heart, because they did not believe them who had seen him
after he was risen again.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And he said to them: Go ye into the
whole world, and preach the gospel to every creature.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> He that believeth and is baptized,
shall be saved: but he that believeth not shall be condemned.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And these signs shall follow them that
believe: In my name they shall cast out devils: they shall speak with
new tongues.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> They shall take up serpents; and if
they shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall
lay their hands upon the sick, and they shall recover.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken
to them, was taken up into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> But they going forth preached every
where: the Lord working withal, and confirming the word with signs that
followed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke](luk)
