[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mic)  [Next](hab) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Nahum

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden of Ninive. The book of the
vision of Nahum the Elcesite.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The Lord is a jealous God, and a revenger:
the Lord is a revenger, and hath wrath: the Lord taketh vengeance on his
adversaries, and he is angry with his enemies.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The Lord is patient, and great in power,
and will not cleanse and acquit the guilty. The Lord's ways are in a
tempest, and a whirlwind, and clouds are the dust of his feet.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> He rebuketh the sea, and drieth it up: and
bringeth all the rivers to be a desert. Basan languisheth and Carmel:
and the dower of Libanus fadeth away.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The mountains tremble at him, and the hills
are made desolate: and the earth hath quaked at his presence, and the
world, and all that dwell therein.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Who can stand before the face of his
indignation? and who shall resist in the fierceness of his anger? his
indignation is poured out like fire: and the rocks are melted by him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The Lord is good and giveth strength in the
day of trouble: and knoweth them that hope in him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But with a flood that passeth by, he will
make an utter end of the place thereof: and darkness shall pursue his
enemies.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> What do ye devise against the Lord? he will
make an utter end: there shall not rise a double affliction.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For as thorns embrace one another: so
while they are feasting and drinking together, they shall be consumed as
stubble that is fully dry.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Out of thee shall come forth one that
imagineth evil against the Lord, contriving treachery in his mind.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Thus saith the Lord: Though they were
perfect: and many of them so, yet thus shall they be cut off, and he
shall pass: I have afflicted thee, and I will afflict thee no more.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And now I will break in pieces his rod
with which he struck thy back, and I will burst thy bonds asunder.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the Lord will give a commandment
concerning thee, that no more of thy name shall be sown: I will destroy
the graven and molten thing out of the house of thy God, I will make it
thy grave, for thou art disgraced.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Behold upon the mountains the feet of him
that bringeth good tidings, and that preacheth peace: O Juda, keep thy
festivals, and pay thy vows: for Belial shall no more pass through thee
again, he is utterly cut off.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> He is come up that shall destroy before thy
face, that shall keep the siege: watch the way, fortify thy loins,
strengthen thy power exceedingly.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For the Lord hath rendered the pride of
Jacob, as the pride of Israel: because the spoilers have laid them
waste, and have marred their vine branches.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> The shield of his mighty men is like fire,
the men of the army are clad in scarlet, the reins of the chariot are
flaming in the day of his preparation, and the drivers are stupefied.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> They are in confusion in the ways, the
chariots jostle one against another in the streets: their looks are like
torches, like lightning running to and fro.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> He will muster up his valiant men, they
shall stumble in their march: they shall quickly get upon the walls
thereof: and a covering shall be prepared.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The gates of the rivers are opened, and the
temple is thrown down to the ground.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the soldier is led away captive: and
her bondwomen were led away mourning as doves, murmuring in their
hearts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And as for Ninive, her waters are like a
great pool, but the men flee away. They cry: Stand, stand, but there is
none that will return back.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Take ye the spoil of the silver, take the
spoil of the gold: for there is no end of the riches of all the precious
furniture.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> She is destroyed, and rent, and torn: the
heart melteth, and the knees fail, and all the loins lose their
strength: and the faces of them all are as the blackness of a kettle.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Where is now the dwelling of the lions,
and the feeding place of the young lions, to which the lion went, to
enter in thither, the young lion, and there was none to make them
afraid?

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The lion caught enough for his whelps,
and killed for his lionesses: and he filled his holes with prey, and his
den with rapine.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Behold I come against thee, saith the
Lord of hosts, and I will burn thy chariots even to smoke, and the sword
shall devour thy young lions: and I will cut off thy prey out of the
land, and the voice of thy messengers shall be heard no more.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Woe to thee, O city of blood, all full of
lies and violence: rapine shall not depart from thee.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The noise of the whip, and the noise of the
rattling of the wheels, and of the neighing horse, and of the running
chariot, and of the horsemen coming up,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And of the shining sword, and of the
glittering spear, and of a multitude slain, and of a grievous
destruction: and there is no end of carcasses, and they shall fall down
on their dead bodies.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Because of the multitude of the
fornications of the harlot that was beautiful and agreeable, and that
made use of witchcraft, that sold nations through her fornications, and
families through her witchcrafts.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Behold I come against thee, saith the Lord
of hosts: and I will discover thy shame to thy face, and will shew thy
nakedness to the nations, and thy shame to kingdoms.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And I will cast abominations upon thee, and
will disgrace thee, and will make an example of thee.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And it shall come to pass that every one
that shall see thee, shall flee from thee, and shall say: Ninive is laid
waste: who shall bemoan thee? whence shall I seek a comforter for thee?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Art thou better than the populous
Alexandria, that dwelleth among the rivers? waters are round about it:
the sea is its riches, the waters are its walls.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Ethiopia and Egypt were the strength
thereof, and there is no end: Africa and the Libyans were thy helpers.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Yet she also was removed and carried into
captivity: her young children were dashed in pieces at the top of every
street, and they cast lots upon her nobles, and all her great men were
bound in fetters.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Therefore thou also shalt be made drunk,
and shalt be despised: and thou shalt seek help from the enemy.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> All thy strong holds shall be like fig
trees with their green figs: if they be shaken, they shall fall into the
mouth of the eater.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Behold thy people in the midst of thee
are women: the gates of thy land shall be set wide open to thy enemies,
the fire shall devour thy bars.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Draw thee water for the siege, build up
thy bulwarks: go into the clay, and tread, work it and make brick.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> There shall the fire devour thee: thou
shalt perish by the sword, it shall devour thee like the bruchus:
assemble together like the bruchus, make thyself many like the locust.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Thou hast multiplied thy merchandises
above the stars of heaven: the bruchus hath spread himself and flown
away.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Thy guards are like the locusts: and thy
little ones like the locusts of locusts which swarm on the hedges in the
day of cold: the sun arose, and they flew away, and their place was not
known where they were.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Thy shepherds have slumbered, O king of
Assyria, thy princes shall be buried: thy people are hid in the
mountains, and there is none to gather them together.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Thy destruction is not hidden, thy wound
is grievous: all that have heard the fame of thee, have clapped their
hands over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed
continually?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk](hab)
