[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](job)  [Next](pro) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Psalms

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Blessed is the man who hath not walked in
the counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in
the chair of pestilence.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> But his will is in the law of the Lord, and
on his law he shall meditate day and night.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And he shall be like a tree which is
planted near the running waters, which shall bring forth its fruit, in
due season. And his leaf shall not fall off: and all whosoever he shall
do shall prosper.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Not so the wicked, not so: but like the
dust, which the wind driveth from the face of the earth.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Therefore the wicked shall not rise again
in judgment: nor sinners in the council of the just.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For the Lord knoweth the way of the just:
and the way of the wicked shall perish.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Why have the Gentiles raged, and the people
devised vain things?

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> The kings of the earth stood up, and the
princes met together, against the Lord and against his Christ.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Let us break their bonds asunder: and let
us cast away their yoke from us.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He that dwelleth in heaven shall laugh at
them: and the Lord shall deride them.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Then shall he speak to them in his anger,
and trouble them in his rage.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But I am appointed king by him over Sion
his holy mountain, preaching his commandment.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The Lord hath said to me: Thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Ask of me, and I will give thee the
Gentiles for thy inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy
possession.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Thou shalt rule them with a rod of iron,
and shalt break them in pieces like a potter's vessel.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And now, O ye kings, understand: receive
instruction, you that judge the earth.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Serve ye the Lord with fear: and rejoice
unto him with trembling.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Embrace discipline, lest at any time the
Lord be angry, and you perish from the just way.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> When his wrath shall be kindled in a
short time, blessed are all they that trust in him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> The psalm of David when he fled from the
face of his son Absalom.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Why, O Lord, are they multiplied that
afflict me? many are they who rise up against me.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Many say to my soul: There is no salvation
for him in his God.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But thou, O Lord art my protector, my
glory, and the lifter up of my head.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> I have cried to the Lord with my voice: and
he hath heard me from his holy hill.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I have slept and taken my rest: and I have
risen up, because the Lord hath protected me.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> I will not fear thousands of the people,
surrounding me: arise, O Lord; save me, O my God.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For thou hast struck all them who are my
adversaries without cause: thou hast broken the teeth of sinners.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Salvation is of the Lord: and thy blessing
is upon thy people.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Unto the end, in verses. A psalm of David.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> When I called upon him, the God of my
justice heard me: when I was in distress, thou hast enlarged me. Have
mercy on me: and hear my prayer.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> O ye sons of men, how long will you be dull
of heart? why do you love vanity, and seek after lying?

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Know ye also that the Lord hath made his
holy one wonderful: the Lord will hear me when I shall cry unto him.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Be angry, and sin not: the things you say
in your hearts, be sorry for them upon your beds.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Offer up the sacrifice of justice, and
trust in the Lord: many say, Who sheweth us good things?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> The light of thy countenance O Lord, is
signed upon us: thou hast given gladness in my heart.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> By the fruit of their corn, their wine and
oil, they are multiplied.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> In peace in the selfsame I will sleep, and
I will rest:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> for thou, O Lord, singularly hast settled
me in hope.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Unto the end, for her that obtaineth the
inheritance. A psalm of David.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Give ear, O Lord, to my words, understand
my cry.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Hearken to the voice of my prayer, O my
King and my God.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For to thee will I pray: O Lord, in the
morning thou shalt hear my voice.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> In the morning I will stand before thee,
and will see: because thou art not a God that willest iniquity.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Neither shall the wicked dwell near thee:
nor shall the unjust abide before thy eyes.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Thou hatest all the workers of iniquity:
Thou wilt destroy all that speak a lie. The bloody and the deceitful man
the Lord will abhor.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But as for me in the multitude of thy
mercy, I will come into thy house; I will worship towards thy holy
temple, in thy fear.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Conduct me, O Lord, in thy justice: because
of my enemies, direct my way in thy sight.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> for there is no truth in their mouth;
their heart is vain.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Their throat is an open sepulchre: they
dealt deceitfully with their tongues: judge them, O God. Let them fall
from their devices: according to the multitude of their wickedness cast
them out: for they have provoked thee, O Lord.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But let all them be glad that hope in
thee: they shall rejoice for ever, and thou shalt dwell in them. And all
they that love thy name shall glory in thee:

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For thou wilt bless the just. O Lord,
thou hast crowned us, as with a shield of thy good will.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Unto the end, in verses, a psalm for David,
for the octave.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> O Lord, rebuke me not in thy indignation,
nor chastise me in thy wrath.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am weak:
heal me, O Lord, for my bones are troubled.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And my soul is troubled exceedingly: but
thou, O Lord, how long?

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Turn to me, O Lord, and deliver my soul: O
save me for thy mercy's sake.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For there is no one in death, that is
mindful of thee: and who shall confess to thee in hell?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> I have laboured in my groanings, every
night I will wash my bed: I will water my couch with my tears.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> My eye is troubled through indignation: I
have grown old amongst all my enemies.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity:
for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> The Lord hath heard my supplication: the
Lord hath received my prayer.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Let all my enemies be ashamed, and be
very much troubled: let them be turned back, and be ashamed very
speedily.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> The psalm of David which he sung to the
Lord for the words of Chusi the son of Jemini. \[2 Kings 16.\]

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust:
save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Lest at any time he seize upon my soul like
a lion, while there is no one to redeem me, nor to save.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> O Lord my God, if I have done this thing,
if there be iniquity in my hands:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> If I have rendered to them that repaid me
evils, let me deservedly fall empty before my enemies.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Let the enemy pursue my soul, and take it,
and tread down my life on the earth, and bring down my glory to the
dust.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Rise up, O Lord, in thy anger: and be thou
exalted in the borders of my enemies. And arise, O Lord my God, in the
precept which thou hast commanded:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> and a congregation of people shall surround
thee. And for their sakes return thou on high.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> The Lord judgeth the people. Judge me, O
Lord, according to my justice, and according to my innocence in me.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> The wickedness of sinners shall be
brought to nought: and thou shalt direct the just: the searcher of
hearts and reins is God.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Just is my help from the Lord: who saveth
the upright of heart.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> God is a just judge, strong and patient:
is he angry every day?

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Except you will be converted, he will
brandish his sword: he hath bent his bow and made it ready.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And in it he hath prepared the
instruments of death, he hath made ready his arrows for them that burn.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Behold he hath been in labour with
injustice; he hath conceived sorrow, and brought forth iniquity.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> He hath opened a pit and dug it; and he
is fallen into the hole he made.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> His sorrow shall be turned on his own
head: and his iniquity shall comedown upon his crown.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> I will give glory to the Lord according
to his justice: and will sing to the name of the Lord the most high.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Unto the end, for the presses: a psalm of
David.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> O Lord our Lord, how admirable is thy name
in the whole earth! For thy magnificence is elevated above the heavens.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Out of the mouth of infants and of
sucklings thou hast perfected praise, because of thy enemies, that thou
mayst destroy the enemy and the avenger.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> For I will behold thy heavens, the works of
thy fingers: the moon and the stars which thou hast founded.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> What is man that thou art mindful of him?
or the son of man that thou visitest him?

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Thou hast made him a little less than the
angels, thou hast crowned him with glory and honour:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> and hast set him over the works of thy
hands.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Thou hast subjected all things under his
feet, all sheep and oxen: moreover the beasts also of the fields.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> The birds of the air, and the fishes of the
sea, that pass through the paths of the sea.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> O Lord our Lord, how admirable is thy
name in all the earth!

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Unto the end, for the hidden things of the
Son. A psalm for David.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> I will give praise to thee, O Lord, with my
whole heart: I will relate all thy wonders.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> I will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will
sing to thy name, O thou most high.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> When my enemy shall be turned back: they
shall be weakened and perish before thy face.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For thou hast maintained my judgment and my
cause: thou hast sat on the throne, who judgest justice.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Thou hast rebuked the Gentiles, and the
wicked one hath perished: thou hast blotted out their name for ever and
ever.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> The swords of the enemy have failed unto
the end: and their cities thou hast destroyed. Their memory hath
perished with a noise.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> but the Lord remaineth for ever. He hath
prepared his throne in judgment:

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> and he shall judge the world in equity, he
shall judge the people in justice.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And the Lord is become a refuge for the
poor: a helper in due time in tribulation.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And let them trust in thee who know thy
name: for thou hast not forsaken them that seek thee, O Lord.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Sing ye to the Lord, who dwelleth in
Sion: declare his ways among the Gentiles:

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> For requiring their blood he hath
remembered the: he hath not forgotten the cry of the poor.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Have mercy on me, O Lord: see my
humiliation which I suffer from my enemies.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Thou that liftest me up from the gates of
death, that I may declare all thy praises in the gates of the daughter
of Sion.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> I will rejoice in thy salvation: the
Gentiles have stuck fast in the destruction which they have prepared.
Their foot hath been taken in the very snare which they hid.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> The Lord shall be known when he executeth
judgments: the sinner hath been caught in the works of his own hands.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> The wicked shall be turned into hell, all
the nations that forget God.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For the poor man shall not be forgotten
to the end: the patience of the poor shall not perish for ever.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Arise, O Lord, let not man be
strengthened: let the Gentiles be judged in thy sight.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Appoint, O Lord, a lawgiver over them:
that the Gentiles may know themselves to be but men.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Why, O Lord, hast thou retired afar off?
why dost thou slight us in our wants, in the time of trouble?

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Whilst the wicked man is proud, the poor
is set on fire: they are caught in the counsels which they devise.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For the sinner is praised in the desires
of his soul: and the unjust man is blessed.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> The sinner hath provoked the Lord
according to the multitude of his wrath he will not seek him:

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> God is not before his eyes: his ways are
filthy at all times. Thy judgments are removed from his sight: he shall
rule over all his enemies.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> For he hath said in his heart: I shall
not be moved from generation to generation, and shall be without evil.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> His mouth is full of cursing, and of
bitterness, and of deceit: under his tongue are labour and sorrow.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> He sitteth in ambush with the rich in
private places, that he may kill the innocent.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> His eyes are upon the poor man: He lieth
in wait in secret like a lion in his den. He lieth in ambush that he may
catch the poor man: to catch the poor, whilst he draweth him to him.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> In his net he will bring him down, he
will crouch and fall, when he shall have power over the poor.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> For he hath said in his heart: God hath
forgotten, he hath turned away his face not to see to the end.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Arise, O Lord God, let thy hand be
exalted: forget not the poor.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Wherefore hath the wicked provoked God?
for he hath said in his heart: He will not require it.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Thou seest it, for thou considerest
labour and sorrow: that thou mayst deliver them into thy hands. To thee
is the poor man left: thou wilt be a helper to the orphan.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Break thou the arm of the sinner and of
the malignant: his sin shall be sought, and shall not be found.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The Lord shall reign to eternity, yea,
for ever and ever: ye Gentiles shall perish from his land.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> The Lord hath heard the desire of the
poor: thy ear hath heard the preparation of their heart.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> To judge for the fatherless and for the
humble, that man may no more presume to magnify himself upon earth.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Unto the end. A psalm for David.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> In the Lord I put my trust: how then do
you say to my soul: Get thee away from hence to the mountain like a
sparrow?

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> For, lo, the wicked have bent their
bow; they have prepared their arrows in the quiver; to shoot in the dark
the upright of heart.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> For they have destroyed the things
which thou hast made: but what has the just man done?

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> The Lord is in his holy temple, the
Lord's throne is in heaven. His eyes look on the poor man: his eyelids
examine the sons of men.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> The Lord trieth the just and the
wicked: but he that loveth iniquity hateth his own soul.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> He shall rain snares upon sinners: fire
and brimstone and storms of winds shall be the portion of their cup.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> For the Lord is just, and hath loved
justice: his countenance hath beheld righteousness.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Unto the end; for the octave, a psalm for
David.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Save me, O Lord, for there is now no
saint: truths are decayed from among the children of men.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> They have spoken vain things every one to
his neighbour: with deceitful lips, and with a double heart have they
spoken.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> May the Lord destroy all deceitful lips,
and the tongue that speaketh proud things.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Who have said: We will magnify our
tongue; our lips are our own; who is Lord over us?

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> By reason of the misery of the needy, and
the groans of the poor, now will I arise, saith the Lord. I win set him
in safety; I will deal confidently in his regard.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> The words of the Lord are pure words: as
silver tried by the fire, purged from the earth refined seven times.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Thou, O Lord, wilt preserve us.: and keep
us from this generation for ever.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> The wicked walk round about: according to
thy highness, thou best multiplied the children of men.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David. How
long, O Lord, wilt thou forget me unto the end? how long dost thou turn
away thy face from me?

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> How long shall I take counsels in my
soul, sorrow in my heart all the day?

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> How long shall my enemy be exalted over
me?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Consider, and hear me, O Lord my God.
Enlighten my eyes that I never sleep in death:

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> lest at any time my enemy say: I have
prevailed against him. They that trouble me will rejoice when I am
moved:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> but I have trusted in thy mercy. My heart
shall rejoice in thy salvation: I will sing to the Lord, who giveth me
good things: yea I will sing to the name of the Lord the most high.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David. The fool
hath said in his heart: There is no God, They are corrupt, and are
become abominable in their ways: there is none that doth good, no not
one.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> The Lord hath looked down from heaven
upon the children of men, to see if there be any that understand and
seek God.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> They are all gone aside, they are become
unprofitable together: there is none that doth good, no not one. Their
throat is an open sepulchre: with their tongues they acted deceitfully;
the poison of asps is under their lips. Their mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness; their feet are swift to shed blood. Destruction and
unhappiness in their ways: and the way of peace they have not known:
there is no fear of God before their eyes.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Shall not all they know that work
iniquity, who devour my people as they eat bread ?

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> They have not called upon the Lord: there
have they trembled for fear, where there was no fear.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For the Lord is in the just generation:
you have confounded the counsel of the poor man, but the Lord is his
hope.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Who shall give out of Sion the salvation
of Israel? when the Lord shall have turned away the captivity of his
people, Jacob shall rejoice and Israel shall be glad.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> A psalm of David. Lord, who shall dwell
in thy tabernacle? or who shall rest in thy holy hill?

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He that walketh without blemish, and
worketh justice:

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> He that speaketh truth in his heart, who
hath not used deceit in his tongue: Nor hath done evil to his neighbour:
nor taken up a reproach against his neighbours.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> In his sight the malignant is brought to
nothing: but he glorifieth them that fear the Lord. He that sweareth to
his neighbour, and deceiveth not;

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> he that hath not put out his money to
usury, nor taken bribes against the innocent: He that doth these things
shall not be moved for ever.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> The inscription of a title to David
himself. Preserve me, O Lord, for I have put trust in thee.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> I have said to the Lord, thou art my God,
for thou hast no need of my goods.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> To the saints, who are in his land, he
hath made wonderful all my desires in them.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Their infirmities were multiplied:
afterwards they made haste. I will not gather together their meetings
for blood offerings: nor will I be mindful of their names by my lips.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> The Lord is the portion of my inheritance
and of my cup: it is thou that wilt restore my inheritance to me.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> The lines are fallen unto me in goodly
places: for my inheritance is goodly to me.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> I will bless the Lord, who hath given me
understanding: moreover my reins also have corrected me even till night.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> I set the Lord always in my sight: for he
is at my right hand, that I be not moved.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Therefore my heart hath been glad, and my
tongue hath rejoiced: moreover my flesh also shall rest in hope.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Because thou wilt not leave my soul in
hell; nor wilt then give thy holy one to see corruption.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Thou hast made known to me the ways of
life, thou shalt fill me with joy with thy countenance: at thy right
hand are delights even to the end.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The prayer of David. Hear, O Lord, my
justice: attend to my supplication. Give ear unto my prayer, which
proceedeth not from deceitful lips.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Let my judgment come forth from thy
countenance: let thy eyes behold the things that are equitable.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Thou hast proved my heart, and visited it
by night, thou hast tried me by fire: and iniquity hath not been found
in me.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> That my mouth may not speak the works of
men: for the sake of the words of thy lips, I have kept hard ways.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Perfect thou my goings in thy paths: that
my footsteps be not moved.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> I have cried to thee, for thou, O God,
hast heard me: O incline thy ear unto me, and hear my words.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Shew forth thy wonderful mercies; thou
who savest them that trust in thee.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> From them that resist thy right hand keep
me, as the apple of thy eye. Protect me under the shadow of thy wings.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> From the face of the wicked who have
afflicted me. My enemies have surrounded my soul:

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> they have shut up their fat: their
mouth hath spoken proudly.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> They have cast me forth and now they
have surrounded me: they have set their eyes bowing down to the earth.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> They have taken me, as a lion prepared
for the prey; and as a young lion dwelling in secret places.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Arise, O Lord, disappoint him and
supplant him; deliver my soul from the wicked one: thy sword

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> from the enemies of thy hand. O Lord,
divide them from the few of the earth in their life: their belly is
filled from thy hidden stores. They are full of children: and they have
left to their little ones the rest of their substance.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> But as for me, I will appear before thy
sight in justice: I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Unto the end, for David the servant of
the Lord, who spoke to the Lord the words of this canticle, in the day
that the Lord delivered him from the hands of all his enemies, and from
the hand of Saul. \[2 Kings 22.\]

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> I will love thee, O Lord, my strength:

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The Lord is my firmament, my refuge, and
my deliverer. My God is my helper, and in him will I put my trust. My
protector and the horn of my salvation, and my support.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> Praising I will call upon the Lord: and I
shall be saved from my enemies.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> The sorrows of death surrounded me: and
the torrents of iniquity troubled me.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> The sorrows of hell encompassed me: and
the snares of death prevented me.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> In my affliction I called upon the Lord,
and I cried to my God: And he heard my voice from his holy temple: and
my cry before him came into his ears.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> The earth shook and trembled: the
foundations of the mountains were troubled and were moved, because he
was angry with them.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> There went up a smoke in his wrath: and a
fire flamed from his face: coals were kindled by it.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> He bowed the heavens, and came down:
and darkness was under his feet.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And he ascended upon the cherubim, and
he flew; he flew upon the wings of the winds.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And he made darkness his covert, his
pavilion round about him: dark waters in the clouds of the air.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> At the brightness that was before him
the clouds passed, hail and coals of fire.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And the Lord thundered from heaven, and
the highest gave his voice: hail and coals of fire.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And he sent forth his arrows, and he
scattered them: he multiplied lightnings, and troubled them.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Then the fountains of waters appeared,
and the foundations of the world were discovered: At thy rebuke, O Lord,
at the blast of the spirit of thy wrath.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> He sent from on high, and took me: and
received me out of many waters.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> He delivered me from my strongest
enemies, and from them that hated me: for they were too strong for me.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> They prevented me in the day of my
affliction: and the Lord became my protector.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And he brought me forth into a large
place: he saved me, because he was well pleased with me.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> And the Lord will reward me according
to my justice; and will repay me according to the cleanness of my hands:

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Because I have kept the ways of the
Lord; and have not done wickedly against my God.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> For till his judgments are in my sight:
and his justices I have not put away from me.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And I shall be spotless with him: and
shall keep myself from my iniquity.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And the Lord will reward me according
to my justice; and according to the cleanness of my hands before his
eyes.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> With the holy, thou wilt be holy; and
with the innocent man thou wilt be innocent.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> And with the elect thou wilt be elect:
and with the perverse thou wilt be perverted.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> For thou wilt save the humble people;
but wilt bring down the eyes of the proud.

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> For thou lightest my lamp, O Lord: O my
God enlighten my darkness.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> For by thee I shall be delivered from
temptation; and through my God I shall go over a wall.

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> As for my God, his way is undefiled:
the words of the Lord are fire tried: he is the protector of all that
trust in him.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> For who is God but the Lord? or who is
God but our God?

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> God who hath girt me with strength; and
made my way blameless.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> Who hath made my feet like the feet of
harts: and who setteth me upon high places.

<span id="an_17:35">17:35</span> Who teacheth my hands to war: and thou
hast made my arms like a brazen bow.

<span id="an_17:36">17:36</span> And thou hast given me the protection
of thy salvation: and thy right hand hath held me up: And thy discipline
hath corrected me unto the end: and thy discipline, the same shall teach
me.

<span id="an_17:37">17:37</span> Thou hast enlarged my steps under me;
and my feet are not weakened.

<span id="an_17:38">17:38</span> I will pursue after my enemies, and
overtake them: and I will not turn again till they are consumed.

<span id="an_17:39">17:39</span> I will break them, and they shall not
be able to stand: they shall fall under my feet.

<span id="an_17:40">17:40</span> And thou hast girded me with strength
unto battle; and hast subdued under me them that rose up against me.

<span id="an_17:41">17:41</span> And thou hast made my enemies turn
their back upon me, and hast destroyed them that hated me.

<span id="an_17:42">17:42</span> They cried, but there was none to save
them, to the Lord: but he heard them not.

<span id="an_17:43">17:43</span> And I shall beat them as small as the
dust before the wind; I shall bring them to nought, like the dirt in the
streets.

<span id="an_17:44">17:44</span> Thou wilt deliver me from the
contradictions of the people: thou wilt make me head of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_17:45">17:45</span> A people, which I knew not, hath served
me: at the hearing of the ear they have obeyed me.

<span id="an_17:46">17:46</span> The children that are strangers have
lied to me, strange children have faded away, and have halted from their
paths.

<span id="an_17:47">17:47</span> The Lord liveth, and blessed be my God,
and let the God of my salvation be exalted :

<span id="an_17:48">17:48</span> O God, who avengest me, and subduest
the people under me, my deliverer from my enemies.

<span id="an_17:49">17:49</span> And thou wilt lift me up above them
that rise up against me: from the unjust man thou wilt deliver me.

<span id="an_17:50">17:50</span> Therefore will I give glory to thee, O
Lord, among the nations, and I will sing a psalm to thy name.

<span id="an_17:51">17:51</span> Giving great deliverance to his king,
and shewing mercy to David his anointed : and to his seed for ever.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Unto the end. A psalm for David.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> The heavens shew forth the glory of God,
and the firmament declareth the work of his hands.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Day to day uttereth speech, and night to
night sheweth knowledge.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> There are no speeches nor languages,
where their voices are not heard.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Their sound hath gone forth into all the
earth: and their words unto the ends of the world.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> He hath set his tabernacle in the sun:
and he, as a bridegroom coming out of his bride chamber, Hath rejoiced
as a giant to run the way:

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> His going out is from the end of heaven,
And his circuit even to the end thereof: and there is no one that can
hide himself from his heat.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> The law of the Lord is unspotted,
converting souls: the testimony of the Lord is faithful, giving wisdom
to little ones.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> The justices of the Lord are right,
rejoicing hearts: the commandment of the Lord is lightsome, enlightening
the eyes.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The fear of the Lord is holy, enduring
for ever and ever: the judgments of the Lord are true, justified in
themselves.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> More to be desired than gold and many
precious stones: and sweeter than honey and the honeycomb.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> For thy servant keepeth them, and in
keeping them there is a great reward.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Who can understand sins? from my secret
ones cleanse me, O Lord:

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> and from those of others spare thy
servant. If they shall have no dominion over me, then shall I be without
spot: and I shall be cleansed from the greatest sin.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And the words of my mouth shall be such
as may please: and the meditation of my heart always in thy sight. O
Lord, my helper, and my redeemer.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Unto the end. A psalm for David.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> May the Lord hear thee in the day of
tribulation: may the name of the God of Jacob protect thee.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> May he send thee help from the sanctuary:
and defend thee out of Sion.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> May he be mindful of all thy sacrifices:
and may thy whole burnt offering be made fat.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> May he give thee according to thy own
heart; and confirm all thy counsels.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> We will rejoice in thy salvation; and in
the name of our God we shall be exalted.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> The Lord fulfil all thy petitions: now
have I known that the Lord hath saved his anointed. He will hear him
from his holy heaven: the salvation of his right hand is in powers.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Some trust in chariots, and some in
horses: but we will call upon the name of the Lord our God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> They are bound, and have fallen; but we
are risen, and are set upright. O Lord, save the king: and hear us in
the day that we shall call upon thee.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Unto the end. A psalm for David.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> In thy strength, O Lord, the king shall
joy; and in thy salvation he shall rejoice exceedingly.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Thou hast given him his heart's desire:
end hast not withholden from him the will of his lips.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> For thou hast prevented him with
blessings of sweetness: thou hast set on his head a crown of precious
stones.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> He asked life of thee: and thou hast
given him length of days for ever and ever.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> His glory is great in thy salvation:
glory and great beauty shalt thou lay upon him.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> For thou shalt give him to be a blessing
for ever and ever: thou shalt make him joyful in gladness with thy
countenance.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> For the king hopeth in the Lord: and
through the mercy of the most High he shall not be moved.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Let thy hand be found by all thy enemies:
let thy right hand find out all them that hate thee.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Thou shalt make them as an oven of
fire, in the time of thy anger: the Lord shall trouble them in his
wrath, and fire shall devour them.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the
earth: and their seed from among the children of men.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> For they have intended evils against
thee: they have devised counsels which they have not been able to
establish.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> For thou shalt make them turn their
back: in thy remnants thou shalt prepare their face.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Be thou exalted, O Lord, in thy own
strength: we will sing and praise thy power.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Unto the end, for the morning protection,
a psalm for David.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> O God my God, look upon me: why hast thou
forsaken me? Far from my salvation are the words of my sins.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> O my God, I shall cry by day, and thou
wilt not hear: and by night, and it shall not be reputed as folly in me.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> But thou dwellest in the holy place, the
praise of Israel.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> In thee have our fathers hoped: they have
hoped, and thou hast delivered them.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> They cried to thee, and they were saved:
they trusted in thee, and were not confounded.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> But I am a worm, and no man: the reproach
of men, and the outcast of the people.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> All they that saw me have laughed me to
scorn: they have spoken with the lips, and wagged the head.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> He hoped in the Lord, let him deliver
him: let him save him, seeing he delighteth in him.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> For thou art he that hast drawn me out
of the womb: my hope from the breasts of my mother.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> I was cast upon thee from the womb.
From my mother's womb thou art my God,

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> depart not from me. For tribulation is
very near: for there is none to help me.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Many calves have surrounded me: fat
bulls have besieged me.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> They have opened their mouths against
me, as a lion ravening and roaring.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> I am poured out like water; and all my
bones are scattered. My heart is become like wax melting in the midst of
my bowels.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> My strength is dried up like a
potsherd, and my tongue hath cleaved to my jaws: and thou hast brought
me down into the dust of death.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> For many dogs have encompassed me: the
council of the malignant hath besieged me. They have dug my hands and
feet.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> They have numbered all my bones. And
they have looked and stared upon me.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> They parted my garments amongst them;
and upon my vesture they cast lots.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> But thou, O Lord, remove not thy help
to a distance from me; look towards my defence.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Deliver, O God, my soul from the sword:
my only one from the hand of the dog.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Save me from the lion's mouth; and my
lowness from the horns of the unicorns.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> I will declare thy name to my brethren:
in the midst of the church will I praise thee.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Ye that fear the Lord, praise him: all
ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> Let all the seed of Israel fear him:
because he hath not slighted nor despised the supplication of the poor
man. Neither hath he turned away his face from me: and when I cried to
him he heard me.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> With thee is my praise in a great
church: I will pay my vows in the sight of them that fear him.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> The poor shall eat and shall be filled:
and they shall praise the Lord that seek him: their hearts shall live
for ever and ever.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> All the ends of the earth shall
remember, and shall be converted to the Lord: And all the kindreds of
the Gentiles shall adore in his sight.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> For the kingdom is the Lord's; and he
shall have dominion over the nations.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> All the fat ones of the earth have
eaten and have adored: all they that go down to the earth shall fall
before him.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And to him my soul shall live: and my
seed shall serve him.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> There shall be declared to the Lord a
generation to come: and the heavens shall shew forth his justice to a
people that shall be born, which the Lord hath made.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> A psalm for David. The Lord ruleth me:
and I shall want nothing.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> He hath set me in a place of pasture. He
hath brought me up, on the water of refreshment:

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> he hath converted my soul. He hath led me
on the paths of justice, for his own name's sake.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> For though I should walk in the midst of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evils, for thou art with me. Thy rod
and thy staff, they have comforted me.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Thou hast prepared a table before me
against them that afflict me. Thou hast anointed my head with oil; and
my chalice which inebriateth me, how goodly is it!

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And thy mercy will follow me all the days
of my life. And that I may dwell in the house of the Lord unto length of
days.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> On the first day of the week, a psalm for
David. The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof: the world, and
all they that dwell therein.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> For he hath founded it upon the seas; and
hath prepared it upon the rivers.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Who shall ascend into the mountain of the
Lord: or who shall stand in his holy place?

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> The innocent in hands, and clean of
heart, who hath not taken his soul in vain, nor sworn deceitfully to his
neighbour.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> He shall receive a blessing from the
Lord, and mercy from God his Saviour.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> This is the generation of them that seek
him, of them that seek the face of the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Lift up your gates, O ye princes, and be
ye lifted up, O eternal gates: and the King of Glory shall enter in.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Who is this King of Glory? the Lord who
is strong and mighty: the Lord mighty in battle.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Lift up your gates, O ye princes, and be
ye lifted up, O eternal gates: and the King of Glory shall enter in.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Who is this King of Glory? the Lord of
hosts, he is the King of Glory.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David. To thee,
O Lord, have I lifted up my soul.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> In thee, O my God, I put my trust; let me
not be ashamed.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Neither let my enemies laugh at me: for
none of them that wait on thee shall be confounded.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Let all them be confounded that act
unjust things without cause. Shew, O Lord, thy ways to me, and teach me
thy paths.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Direct me in thy truth, and teach me; for
thou art God my Saviour; and on thee have I waited all the day long.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Remember, O Lord, thy bowels of
compassion; and thy mercies that are from the beginning of the world.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> The sins of my youth and my ignorances do
not remember. According to thy mercy remember thou me: for thy goodness'
sake, O Lord.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> The Lord is sweet and righteous:
therefore he will give a law to sinners in the way.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> He will guide the mild in judgment: he
will teach the meek his ways.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> All the ways of the Lord are mercy and
truth, to them that seek after his covenant and his testimonies.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> For thy name's sake, O Lord, thou wilt
pardon my sin: for it is great.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Who is the man that feareth the Lord?
He hath appointed him a law in the way he hath chosen.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> His soul shall dwell in good things:
and his seed shall inherit the land.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> The Lord is a firmament to them that
fear him: and his covenant shall be made manifest to them.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> My eyes are ever towards the Lord: for
he shall pluck my feet out of the snare.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Look thou upon me, and have mercy on
me; for I am alone and poor.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> The troubles of my heart are
multiplied: deliver me from my necessities.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> See my abjection and my labour; and
forgive me all my sins.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Consider my enemies for they are
multiplied, and have hated me with an unjust hatred.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Keep thou my soul, and deliver me: I
shall not be ashamed, for I have hoped in thee.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> The innocent and the upright have
adhered to me: because I have waited on thee.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> Deliver Israel, O God, from all his
tribulations.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David. Judge
me, O Lord, for I have walked in my innocence: and I have put my trust
in the Lord, and shall not be weakened.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Prove me, O Lord, and try me; burn my
reins and my heart.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> For thy mercy is before my eyes; and I am
well pleased with thy truth.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> I have not sat with the council of
vanity: neither will I go in with the doers of unjust things.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> I have hated the assembly of the
malignant; and with the wicked I will not sit.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> I will wash my hands among the innocent;
and will compass thy altar, O Lord:

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> That I may hear the voice of thy praise:
and tell of all thy wondrous works.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> I have loved, O Lord, the beauty of thy
house; and the place where thy glory dwelleth.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Take not away my soul, O God, with the
wicked: nor my life with bloody men:

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> In whose hands are iniquities: their
right hand is filled with gifts.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> But as for me, I have walked in my
innocence: redeem me, and have mercy on me.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> My foot hath stood in the direct way:
in the churches I will bless thee, O Lord.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> The psalm of David before he was
anointed. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The
Lord is the protector of my life: of whom shall I be afraid?

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Whilst the wicked draw near against me,
to eat my flesh. My enemies that trouble me, have themselves been
weakened, and have fallen.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> If armies in camp should stand together
against me, my heart shall not fear. If a battle should rise up against
me, in this will I be confident.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> One thing I have asked of the Lord, this
will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life. That I may see the delight of the Lord, and may visit
his temple.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> For he hath hidden me in his tabernacle;
in the day of evils, he hath protected me in the secret place of his
tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> He hath exalted me upon a rock: and now
he hath lifted up my head above my enemies. I have gone round, and have
offered up in his tabernacle a sacrifice of jubilation: I will sing, and
recite a psalm to the Lord.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> Hear, O Lord, my voice, with which I have
cried to thee: have mercy on me and hear me.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> My heart hath said to thee: My face hath
sought thee: thy face, O Lord, will I still seek.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Turn not away thy face from me; decline
not in thy wrath from thy servant. Be thou my helper, forsake me not; do
not thou despise me, O God my Saviour.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> For my father and my mother have left
me: but the Lord hath taken me up.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Set me, O Lord, a law in thy way, and
guide me in the right path, because of my enemies.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Deliver me not over to the will of them
that trouble me; for unjust witnesses have risen up against me; and
iniquity hath lied to itself.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> I believe to see the good things of the
Lord in the land of the living.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Expect the Lord, do manfully, and let
thy heart take courage, and wait thou for the Lord.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> A psalm for David himself. Unto thee will
I cry, O Lord: O my God, be not thou silent to me: lest thou be silent
to me, I become like them that go down into the pit.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Hear, O Lord, the voice of my
supplication, when I pray to thee; when I lift up my hands to thy holy
temple.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Draw me not away together with the
wicked; and with the workers of iniquity destroy me not: Who speak peace
with their neighbour, but evils are in their hearts.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Give them according to their works, and
according to the wickedness of their inventions. According to the works
of their hands give thou to them: render to them their reward.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Because they have not understood the
works of the Lord, and the operations of his hands: thou shalt destroy
them, and shalt not build them up.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Blessed be the Lord, for he hath heard
the voice of my supplication.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> The Lord is my helper and my protector:
in him hath my heart confided, and I have been helped. And my flesh hath
flourished again, and with my will I will give praise to him.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> The Lord is the strength of his people,
and the protector of the salvation of his anointed.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Save, O Lord, thy people, and bless thy
inheritance: and rule them and exalt them for ever.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> A psalm for David, at the finishing of
the tabernacle. Bring to the Lord, O ye children of God: bring to the
Lord the offspring of rams.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Bring to the Lord glory and honour: bring
to the Lord glory to his name: adore ye the Lord in his holy court.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> The voice of the Lord is upon the waters;
the God of majesty hath thundered, The Lord is upon many waters.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> The voice of the Lord is in power; the
voice of the Lord in magnificence.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> The voice of the Lord breaketh the
cedars: yea, the Lord shall break the cedars of Libanus.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And shall reduce them to pieces, as a
calf of Libanus, and as the beloved son of unicorns.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> The voice of the Lord divideth the flame
of fire:

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The voice of the Lord shaketh the desert:
and the Lord shall shake the desert of Cades.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> The voice of the Lord prepareth the
stags: and he will discover the thick woods: and in his temple all shall
speak his glory.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> The Lord maketh the hood to dwell: and
the Lord shall sit king for ever. The Lord will give strength to his
people: the Lord will bless his people with peace.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> A psalm of a canticle, at the dedication
of David's house.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou hast
upheld me: and hast not made my enemies to rejoice over me.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> O Lord my God, I have cried to thee, and
then hast healed me.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> Thou hast brought forth, O Lord, my soul
from hell: thou hast saved me from them that go down into the pit.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Sing to the Lord, O ye his saints: and
give praise to the memory of his holiness.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> For wrath is in his indignation; and life
in his good will. In the evening weeping shall have place, and in the
morning gladness.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And in my abundance I said: I shall never
be moved.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> O Lord, in thy favour, thou gavest
strength to my beauty. Thou turnedst away thy face from me, and I became
troubled.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> To thee, O Lord, will I cry: and I will
make supplication to my God.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> What profit is there in my blood,
whilst I go down to corruption? Shall dust confess to thee, or declare
thy truth?

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> The Lord hath heard, and hath had mercy
on me: the Lord became my helper.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> Thou hast turned for me my mourning
into joy: thou hast cut my sackcloth, and hast compassed me with
gladness:

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> To the end that my glory may sing to
thee, and I may not regret: O Lord my God, I will give praise to thee
for ever.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David, in an
ecstasy.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> In thee, O Lord, have I hoped, Iet me
never be confounded: deliver me in thy justice.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> Bow down thy ear to me: make haste to
deliver me. Be thou unto me a God, a protector, and a house of refuge,
to save me.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> For thou art my strength and my refuge;
and for thy name's sake thou wilt lead me, and nourish me.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Thou wilt bring me out of this snare,
which they have hidden for me: for thou art my protector.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Into thy hands I commend my spirit: thou
hast redeemed me, O Lord, the God of truth.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Thou hast hated them that regard
vanities, to no purpose. But I have hoped in the Lord:

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy.
For thou best regarded my humility, thou hast saved my soul out of
distresses.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And thou hast not shut me up in the hands
of the enemy: thou hast set my feet in a spacious place.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am
afflicted: my eye is troubled with wrath, my soul, and my belly:

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For my life is wasted with grief: and
my years in sighs. My strength is weakened through poverty and my bones
are disturbed.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> I am become a reproach among all my
enemies, and very much to my neighbours; and a fear to my acquaintance.
They that saw me without fled from me.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> I am forgotten as one dead from the
heart. I am become as a vessel that is destroyed.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> For I have heard the blame of many that
dwell round about. While they assembled together against me, they
consulted to take away my life.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> But I have put my trust in thee, O
Lord: I said: Thou art my God.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> My lots are in thy hands. Deliver me
out of the hands of my enemies; and from them that persecute me.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> Make thy face to shine upon thy
servant; save me in thy mercy.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Let me not be confounded, O Lord, for I
have called upon thee. Let the wicked be ashamed, and be brought down to
hell.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Let deceitful lips be made dumb. Which
speak iniquity against the just, with pride and abuse.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> O how great is the multitude of thy
sweetness, O Lord, which thou hast hidden for them that fear thee! Which
thou hast wrought for them that hope in thee, in the sight of the sons
of men.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Thou shalt hide them in the secret of
thy face, from the disturbance of men. Thou shalt protect them in thy
tabernacle from the contradiction of tongues.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Blessed be the Lord, for he hath shewn
his wonderful mercy to me in a fortified city.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> But I said in the excess of my mind: I
am cast away from before thy eyes. Therefore thou hast heard the voice
of my prayer, when I cried to thee.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> O love the Lord, all ye his saints: for
the Lord will require truth, and will repay them abundantly that act
proudly.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> Do ye manfully, and let your heart be
strengthened, all ye that hope in the Lord.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> To David himself, understanding. Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Blessed is the man to whom the Lord hath
not imputed sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Because I was silent my bones grew old;
whilst I cried out all the day long.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> For day and night thy hand was heavy upon
me: I am turned in my anguish, whilst the thorn is fastened.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> I have acknowledged my sin to thee, and
my injustice I have not concealed. I said I will confess against myself
my injustice to the Lord: and thou hast forgiven the wickedness of my
sin.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> For this shall every one that is holy
pray to thee in a seasonable time. And yet in a flood of many waters,
they shall not come nigh unto him.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Thou art my refuge from the trouble which
hath encompassed me: my joy, deliver me from them that surround me.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> I will give thee understanding, and I
will instruct thee in this way, in which thou shalt go: I will fix my
eyes upon thee.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Do not become like the horse and the
mule, who have no understanding. With bit and bridle bind fast their
jaws, who come not near unto thee.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Many are the scourges of the sinner,
but mercy shall encompass him that hopeth in the Lord.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye
just, and glory, all ye right of heart.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> A psalm for David. Rejoice in the Lord, O
ye just: praise becometh the upright.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Give praise to the Lord on the harp; sing
to him with the psaltery, the instrument of ten strings.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Sing to him a new canticle, sing well
unto him with a loud noise.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> For the word of the Lord is right, and
all his works are done with faithfulness.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> He loveth mercy and judgment; the earth
is full of the mercy of the Lord.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> By the word of the Lord the heavens were
established; and all the power of them by the spirit of his mouth:

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Gathering together the waters of the sea,
as in a vessel; laying up the depths in storehouses.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> Let all the earth fear the Lord, and let
all the inhabitants of the world be in awe of him.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> For he spoke and they were made: he
commanded and they were created.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> The Lord bringeth to naught the
counsels of nations; and he rejecteth the devices of people, and casteth
away the counsels of princes.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> But the counsel of the Lord standeth
for ever: the thoughts of his heart to all generations.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Blessed is the nation whose God is the
Lord: the people whom he hath chosen for his inheritance.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> The Lord hath looked from heaven: he
hath beheld all the sons of men.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> From his habitation which he hath
prepared, he hath looked upon all that dwell on the earth.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> He who hath made the hearts of every
one of them: who understandeth all their works.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> The king is not saved by a great army:
nor shall the giant be saved by his own great strength.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> Vain is the horse for safety: neither
shall he be saved by the abundance of his strength.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Behold the eyes of the Lord are on them
that fear him: and on them that hope in his mercy.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> To deliver their souls from death; and
feed them in famine.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Our soul waiteth for the Lord: for he
is our helper and protector.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> For in him our heart shall rejoice: and
in his holy name we have trusted.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, as
we have hoped in thee.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> For David, when he changed his
countenance before Achimelech, who dismissed him, and he went his way.
\[1 Kings 21.\]

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> I will bless the Lord at all times, his
praise shall be always in my mouth.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> In the Lord shall my soul be praised: let
the meek hear and rejoice.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> O magnify the Lord with me; and let us
extol his name together.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> I sought the Lord, and he heard me; and
he delivered me from all my troubles.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Come ye to him and be enlightened: and
your faces shall not be confounded.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> This poor man cried, and the Lord heard
him: and saved him out of all his troubles.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> The angel of the Lord shall encamp round
about them that fear him: and shall deliver them.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> O taste, and see that the Lord is sweet:
blessed is the man that hopeth in him.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Fear the Lord, all ye his saints: for
there is no want to them that fear him.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> The rich have wanted, and have suffered
hunger: but they that seek the Lord shall not be deprived of any good.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Come, children, hearken to me: I will
teach you the fear of the Lord.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Who is the man that desireth life: who
loveth to see good days?

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips
from speaking guile.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> Turn away from evil and do good: seek
after peace and pursue it.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> The eyes of the Lord are upon the just:
and his ears unto their prayers.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> But the countenance of the Lord is
against them that do evil things: to cut off the remembrance of them
from the earth.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> The just cried, and the Lord heard
them: and delivered them out of all their troubles.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> The Lord is nigh unto them that are of
a contrite heart: and he will save the humble of spirit.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Many are the afflictions of the just;
but out of them all will the Lord deliver them.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> The Lord keepeth all their bones, not
one of them shall be broken.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> The death of the wicked is very evil:
and they that hate the just shall be guilty.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> The Lord will redeem the souls of his
servants: and none of them that trust in him shall offend.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> For David himself. Judge thou, O Lord,
them that wrong me : overthrow them that fight against me.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Take hold of arms and shield : and rise
up to help me.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Bring out the sword, and shut up the way
against them that persecute me : say to my soul : I am thy salvation.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Let them be confounded and ashamed that
seek after my soul. Let them be turned back and be confounded that
devise against me.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> Let them become as dust before the wind :
and let the angel of the Lord straiten them.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> Let their way become dark and slippery;
and let the angel of the Lord pursue them.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> For without cause they have hidden their
net for me unto destruction : without cause they have upbraided my soul.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> Let the snare which he knoweth not come
upon him : and let the net which he hath hidden catch him : and let the
net which he hath hidden catch him : and into that very snare let them
fall.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> But my soul shall rejoice in the Lord;
and shall be delighted in his salvation.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> All my bones shall say : Lord, who is
like to thee? Who deliverest the poor from the hand of them that are
stronger than he; the needy and the poor from them that strip him.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> Unjust witnesses rising up have asked
me things I knew not.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> They repaid me evil for good : to the
depriving me of my soul.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> But as for me, when they were
troublesome to me, I was clothed with haircloth. I humbled my soul with
fasting; and my prayer shall be turned into my bosom.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> As a neighbour and as an own brother,
so did I please : as one mourning and sorrowful so was I humbled.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> But they rejoiced against me, and came
together : scourges were gathered together upon me, and I knew not.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> They were separated, and repented not :
they tempted me, they scoffed at me with scorn : they gnashed upon me
with their teeth.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Lord, when wilt thou look upon me?
rescue thou soul from their malice : my only one from the lions.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> I will give thanks to thee in a great
church; I will praise thee in a strong people.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> Let not them that are my enemies
wrongfully rejoice over me : who have hated me without cause, and wink
with the eyes.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> For they spoke indeed peaceably to me;
and speaking in the anger of the earth they devised guile.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> And they opened their mouth wide
against me; they said : Well done, well done, our eyes have seen it.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> Thou hast seen, O Lord, be not thou
silent : O Lord, depart not from me.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> Arise, and be attentive to my judgment
: to my cause, my God, and my Lord.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> Judge me, O Lord my God according to
thy justice, and let them not rejoice over me.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Let them not say in their hearts : It
is well, it is well, to our mind : neither let them say : We have
swallowed him up.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> Let them blush : and be ashamed
together, who rejoice at my evils. Let them be clothed with confusion
and shame, who speak great things against me.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> Let them rejoice and be glad, who are
well pleased with my justice, and let them say always : The Lord be
magnified, who delights in the peace of his servant.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> Any my tongue shall meditate thy
justice, thy praise all the day long.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Unto the end, for the servant of God,
David himself.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> The unjust hath said within himself, that
he would sin : there is no fear of God before his eyes.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> For in his sight he hath done
deceitfully, that his iniquity may be found unto hatred.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> The words of his mouth are iniquity and
guile : he would not understand that he might do well.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> He hath devised iniquity on his bed, he
hath set himself on every way that is not good : but evil he hath not
hated.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> O Lord, thy mercy is in heaven, and thy
truth reacheth, even to the clouds.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> Thy justice is as the mountains of God,
thy judgments are a great deep. Men and beasts thou wilt preserve, O
Lord :

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> O how hast thou multiplied thy mercy, O
God! But the children of men shall put their trust under the covert of
thy wings.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> They shall be inebriated with the plenty
of thy house; and thou shalt make them drink of the torrent of thy
pleasure.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> For with thee is the fountain of life;
and in thy light we shall see light.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> Extend thy mercy to them that know
thee, and thy justice to them that are right in heart.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> Let not the foot of pride come to me,
and let not the hand of the sinner move me.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> There the workers of iniquity are
fallen, they are cast out, and could not stand.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> A psalm for David himself. Be not emulous
of evildoers; nor envy them that work iniquity.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> For they shall shortly wither away as
grass, and as the green herbs shall quickly fall.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> Trust in the Lord, and do good, and dwell
in the land, and thou shalt be fed with its riches.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> Delight in the Lord, and he will give
thee the requests of thy heart.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Commit thy way to the Lord, and trust in
him, and he will do it.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> And he will bring forth thy justice as
the light, and thy judgment as the noonday.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> Be subject to the Lord and pray to him
Envy not the man who prospereth in his way; the man who doth unjust
things.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> Cease from anger, and leave rage; have no
emulation to do evil.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> For the evildoers shall be cut off : but
they that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the land.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> For yet a little while, and the wicked
shall not be : and thou shalt seek his place, and shalt not find it.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> But the meek shall inherit the land,
and shall delight in abundance of peace.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> The sinner shall watch the just man :
and shall gnash upon him with his teeth.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> But the Lord shall laugh at him : for
he foreseeth that his day shall come.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> The wicked have drawn out the sword :
they have bent their bow. To cast down the poor and needy, to kill the
upright of heart.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> Let their sword enter into their own
hearts, and let their bow be broken.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Better is a little to the just, than
the great riches of the wicked.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> For the arms of the wicked shall be
broken in pieces; but the Lord strengtheneth the just.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> The Lord knoweth the days of undefiled;
and their inheritance shall be for ever.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> They shall not be confounded in the
evil time; and in the days of famine they shall be filled :

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> because the wicked shall perish. And
the enemies of the Lord, presently after they shall be honoured and
exalted, shall come to nothing and vanish like smoke.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> The sinner shall borrow, and not pay
again; but the just sheweth mercy and shall give.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> For such as bless him shall inherit the
land : but such as curse him shall perish.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> With the Lord shall the steps of a man
be directed, and he shall like well his way.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> When he shall fall he shall not be
bruised, for the Lord putteth his hand under him.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> I have been young, and now am old; and
I have not seen the just forsaken, nor his seed seeking bread.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> He sheweth mercy, and lendeth all the
day long; and his seed shall be in blessing.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> Decline from evil and do good, and
dwell for ever and ever.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> For the Lord loveth judgment, and will
not forsake his saints : they shall be preserved for ever. The unjust
shall be punished, and the seed of the wicked shall perish.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> But the just shall inherit the land,
and shall dwell therein for evermore.

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> The mouth of the just shall meditate
wisdom : and his tongue shall speak judgment.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> The law of his God is in his heart, and
his steps shall not be supplanted.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> The wicked watcheth the just man, and
seeketh to put him to death,

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> But the Lord will not leave in his
hands; nor condemn him when he shall be judged.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> Expect the Lord and keep his way : and
he will exalt thee to inherit the land : when the sinners shall perish
thou shalt see.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> I have seen the wicked highly exalted,
and lifted up like the cedars of Libanus.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> And I passed by, and lo, he was not :
and I sought him and his place was not found.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> Keep innocence, and behold justice :
for there are remnants for the peaceable man.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> But the unjust shall be destroyed
together : the remnants of the wicked shall perish.

<span id="an_36:39">36:39</span> But the salvation of the just is from
the Lord, and he is their protector in the time of trouble.

<span id="an_36:40">36:40</span> And the Lord will help them and deliver
them : and he will rescue them from the wicked, and save them, because
they have hoped in him.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> A psalm for David, for a remembrance of
the sabbath.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> Rebuke me not, O Lord, in thy
indignation; nor chastise me in thy wrath.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> For thy arrows are fastened in me : and
thy hand hath been strong upon me.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> There is no health in my flesh, because
of thy wrath : there is no peace for my bones, because of my sins.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> For my iniquities are gone over my head :
and as a heavy burden are become heavy upon me.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> My sores are putrified and corrupted,
because of my foolishness.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> I am become miserable, and am bowed down
even to the end : I walked sorrowful all the day long.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> For my loins are filled with illusions;
and there is no health in my flesh.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> I am afflicted and humbled exceedingly :
I roared with the groaning of my heart.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> Lord, all my desire is before thee, and
my groaning is not hidden from thee.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> My heart is troubled, my strength hath
left me, and the light of my eyes itself is not with me.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> My friends and my neighbours have drawn
near, and stood against me. And they that were near me stood afar off :

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And they that sought my soul used
violence. And they that sought evils to me spoke vain things, and
studied deceits all the day long.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> But I, as a deaf man, heard not : and
as a dumb man not opening his mouth.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And I became as a man that heareth not
: and that hath no reproofs in his mouth.

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> For in thee, O Lord, have I hoped :
thou wilt hear me, O Lord my God.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> For I said: Lest at any time my enemies
rejoice over me : and whilst my feet are moved, they speak great things
against me.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> For I am ready for scourges : and my
sorrow is continually before me.

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> For I will declare my inequity : and I
will think for my sin.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> But my enemies live, and are stronger
that I : and they hate me wrongfully are multiplied.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> They that render evil for good, have
detracted me, because I followed goodness.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> Forsake me not, O Lord my God : do not
thou depart from me.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> Attend unto my help, O Lord, the God of
my salvation.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> Unto the end, for Idithun himself, a
canticle of David.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> I said: I will take heed to my ways :
that I sin not with my tongue. I have set guard to my mouth, when the
sinner stood against me.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> I was dumb, and was humbled, and kept
silence from good things : and my sorrow was renewed.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> My heart grew hot within me : and in my
meditation a fire shall flame out.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> I spoke with my tongue : O Lord, make me
know my end. And what is the number of my days : that I may know what is
wanting to me.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Behold thou hast made my days measurable
: and my substance is as nothing before thee. And indeed all things are
vanity : every man living.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> Surely man passeth as an image : yea, and
he is disquieted in vain. He storeth up : and he knoweth not for whom he
shall gather these things.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> And now what is my hope? is it not the
Lord? and my substance is with thee.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> Deliver thou me from all my iniquities :
thou hast made me a reproach to the fool.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> I was dumb, and I opened not my mouth,
because thou hast done it.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> Remove thy scourges from me. The
strength of thy hand hath made me faint in rebukes:

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> thou hast corrected man for iniquity.
And thou hast made his soul to waste away like a spider : surely in vain
is any man disquieted.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> Hear my prayer, O Lord, and my
supplication : give ear to my tears. Be not silent : for I am a stranger
with thee, and a sojourner as all my fathers were.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> O forgive me, that I may be refreshed,
before I go hence, and be no more.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David himself.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> With expectation I have waited for the
Lord, and he was attentive to me.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> And he heard my prayers, and brought me
out of the pit of misery and the mire of dregs. And he set my feet upon
a rock, and directed my steps.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And he put a new canticle into my mouth,
a song to our God. Many shall see, and shall fear : and they shall hope
in the Lord.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Blessed is the man whose trust is in the
name of the Lord; and who hath not had regard to vanities, and lying
follies.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Thou hast multiplied thy wonderful works,
O Lord my God : and in thy thoughts there is no one like to thee. I have
declared and I have spoken they are multiplied above number.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> Sacrifice and oblation thou didst not
desire; but thou hast pierced ears for me. Burnt offering and sin
offering thou didst not require :

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> then said I, Behold I come. In the head
of the book it is written of me

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> that I should do thy will : O my God, I
have desired it, and thy law in the midst of my heart.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> I have declared thy justice in a great
church, lo, I will not restrain my lips : O Lord, thou knowest it.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> I have not hid thy justice within my
heart : I have declared thy truth and thy salvation. I have not
concealed thy mercy and thy truth from a great council.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Withhold not thou, O Lord, thy tender
mercies from me : thy mercy and thy truth have always upheld me.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> For evils without number have
surrounded me; my iniquities have overtaken me, and I was not able to
see. They are multiplied above the hairs of my head : and my heart hath
forsaken me.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me, look
down, O Lord, to help me.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> Let them be confounded and ashamed
together, that seek after my soul to take it away. Let them be turned
backward and be ashamed that desire evils to me.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> Let them immediately bear their
confusion, that say to me : 'T is well, 't is well.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> Let all that seek thee rejoice and be
glad in thee : and let such as love thy salvation say always : The Lord
be magnified.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> But I am a beggar and poor : the Lord
is careful for me. Thou art my helper and my protector : O my God, be
not slack.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David himself.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Blessed is he that understandeth
concerning the needy and the poor : the Lord will deliver him in the
evil day.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> The Lord preserve him and give him life,
and make him blessed upon the earth : and deliver him not up to the will
of his enemies.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> The Lord help him on his bed of sorrow :
thou hast turned all his couch in his sickness.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> I said: O Lord, be thou merciful to me :
heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> My enemies have spoken evils against me:
when shall he die and his name perish?

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And if he came in to see me, he spoke
vain things : his heart gathered together iniquity to itself. He went
out and spoke to the same purpose.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> All my enemies whispered together against
me : they devised evils to me.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> They determined against me an unjust word
: shall he that sleepeth rise again no more?

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> For even the man of peace, in whom I
trusted, who ate my bread, hath greatly supplanted me.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> But thou, O Lord, have mercy on me, and
raise me up again : and I will requite them.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> By this I know, that thou hast had a
good will for me : because my enemy shall not rejoice over me.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> But thou hast upheld me by reason of my
innocence : and hast established me in thy sight for ever.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> Blessed by the Lord the God of Israel
from eternity to eternity. So be it. So be it.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Unto the end, understanding for the sons
of Core.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> As the hart panteth after the fountains
of water; so my soul panteth after thee, O God.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> My soul hath thirsted after the strong
living God; when shall I come and appear before the face of God?

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> My tears have been any bread day and
night, whilst it is said to me daily : Where is thy God?

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> These things I remembered, and poured out
my soul in me : for I shall go over into the place of the wonderful
tabernacle, even to the house of God : With the voice of joy and praise;
the noise of one feasting.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> Why art thou sad, O my soul? and why dost
thou trouble me? Hope in God, for I will still give praise to him : the
salvation of my countenance,

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> and my God. My soul is troubled within
myself : therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan and
Hermoniim, from the little hill.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> Deep calleth on deep, at the noise of thy
flood-gates. All thy heights and thy billows have passed over me.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> In the daytime the Lord hath commanded
his mercy; and a canticle to him in the night. With me is prayer to the
God of my life.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> I will say to God : Thou art my
support. Why hast thou forgotten me? and why go I mourning, whilst my
enemy afflicteth me?

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Whilst my bones are broken, my enemies
who trouble me have reproached me; Whilst they say to me day be day :
Where is thy God?

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and
why dost thou disquiet me? Hope thou in God, for I will still give
praise to him : the salvation of my countenance, and my God.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> A psalm for David. Judge me, O God, and
distinguish my cause from the nation that is not holy : deliver me from
the unjust and deceitful man.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> For thou art God my strength : why hast
thou cast me off? and why do I go sorrowful whilst the enemy afflicteth
me?

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Send forth thy light and thy truth : they
have conducted me, and brought me unto thy holy hill, and into thy
tabernacles.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> And I will go in to the altar of God : to
God who giveth joy to my youth.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> To thee, O God my God, I will give praise
upon the harp : why art thou sad, O my soul? and why dost thou disquiet
me?

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Hope in God, for I will still give praise
to him : the salvation of my countenance, and my God.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> Unto the end, for the sons of Core, to
give understanding.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> We have heard, O God, with our ears : our
fathers have declared to us, The work, thou hast wrought in their days,
and in the days of old.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> Thy hand destroyed the Gentiles, and thou
plantedst them : thou didst afflict the people and cast them out.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> For they got not the possession of the
land by their own sword : neither did their own arm save them. But thy
right hand and thy arm, and the light of thy countenance : because thou
wast pleased with them.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> Thou art thyself my king and my God, who
commandest the saving of Jacob.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> Through thee we will push down our
enemies with the horn : and through thy name we will despise them that
rise up against us.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> For I will not trust in my bow : neither
shall my sword save me.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> But thou hast saved us from them that
afflict us : and hast put them to shame that hate us.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> In God shall we glory all the day long :
and in thy name we will give praise for ever.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> But now thou hast cast us off, and put
us to shame : and thou, O God, wilt not go out with our armies.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> Thou hast made us turn our back to our
enemies : and they that hated us plundered for themselves.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> Thou hast given us up like sheep to be
eaten : thou hast scattered us among the nations.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> Thou hast sold thy people for no price
: and there was no reckoning in the exchange of them.

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> Thou hast made us a reproach to our
neighbours, a scoff and derision to them that are round about us.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> Thou hast made us a byword among the
Gentiles : a shaking of the head among the people.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> All the day long my shame is before me
: and the confusion of my face hath covered me,

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> At the voice of him that reproacheth
and detracteth me : at the face of the enemy and persecutor.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> All these things have come upon us, yet
we have not forgotten thee : and we have not done wickedly in they
covenant.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> And our heart hath not turned back :
neither hast thou turned aside our steps from thy way.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> For thou hast humbled us in the place
of affliction : and the shadow of death hath covered us.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> If we have forgotten the name of our
God, and if we have spread forth our hands to a strange god :

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> Shall not God search out these things :
for he knoweth the secrets of the heart. Because for thy sake we are
killed all the day long : we are counted as sheep for the slaughter.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> Arise, why sleepest thou, O Lord?
arise, and cast us not off to the end.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> Why turnest thou face away? and
forgettest our want and our trouble?

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> For our soul is humbled down to the
dust : our belly cleaveth to the earth.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Arise, O Lord, help us and redeem us
for thy name's sake.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> Unto the end, for them that shall be
changed, for the sons of Core, for understanding. A canticle for the
Beloved.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> My heart hath uttered a good word I speak
my works to the king; My tongue is the pen of a scrivener that writeth
swiftly.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> Thou art beautiful above the sons of men:
grace is poured abroad in thy lips; therefore hath God blessed thee for
ever

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou
most mighty.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> With thy comeliness and thy beauty set
out, proceed prosperously, and reign. Because of truth and meekness and
justice: and thy right hand shall conduct thee wonderfully.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> Thy arrows are sharp: under thee shall
people fall, into the hearts of the king's enemies.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever:
the sceptre of thy kingdom is a sceptre of uprightness.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> Thou hast loved justice, and hated
iniquity: therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows.

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> Myrrh and stacte and cassia perfume thy
garments, from the ivory houses: out of which

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> the daughters of kings have delighted
thee in thy glory. The queen stood on thy right hand, in gilded
clothing; surrounded with variety.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Hearken, O daughter, and see, and
incline thy ear: and forget thy people and thy father's house.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> And the king shall greatly desire thy
beauty; for he is the Lord thy God, and him they shall adore.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> And the daughters of Tyre with gifts,
yea, all the rich among the people, shall entreat thy countenance.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> All the glory of the king's daughter is
within in golden borders,

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> clothed round about with varieties.
After her shall virgins be brought to the king: her neighbours shall be
brought to thee.

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> They shall be brought with gladness and
rejoicing: they shall be brought into the temple of the king.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> Instead of thy fathers, sons are born
to thee: thou shalt make them princes over all the earth.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They shall remember thy name throughout
all generations. Therefore shall people praise thee for ever; yea, for
ever and ever.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> Unto the end, for the sons of Core, for
the hidden.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> Our God is our refuge and strength: a
helper in troubles, which have found us exceedingly.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> Therefore we will not fear, when the
earth shall be troubled; and the mountains shall be removed into the
heart of the sea.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> Their waters roared and were troubled:
the mountains were troubled with his strength.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> The stream of the river maketh the city
of God joyful: the most High hath sanctified his own tabernacle.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> God is in the midst thereof, it shall not
be moved: God will help it in the morning early.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> Nations were troubled, and kingdoms were
bowed down: he uttered his voice, the earth trembled.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> The Lord of armies is with us: the God of
Jacob is our protector.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Come and behold ye the works of the Lord:
what wonders he hath done upon earth,

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> making wars to cease even to the end of
the earth. He shall destroy the bow, and break the weapons: and the
shield he shall burn in the fire.

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> Be still and see that I am God; I will
be exalted among the nations, and I will be exalted in the earth.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> The Lord of armies is with us: the God
of Jacob is our protector.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> Unto the end, for the sons of Core.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> O clap your hands, all ye nations: shout
unto God with the voice of Joy,

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> For the Lord is high, terrible: a great
king over all the earth.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> He hath subdued the people under us; and
the nations under our feet.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> He hath chosen for us his inheritance the
beauty of Jacob which he hath loved.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> God is ascended with jubilee, and the
Lord with the sound of trumpet.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> Sing praises to our God, sing ye: sing
praises to our king, sing ye.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> For God is the king of all the earth:
sing ye wisely.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> God shall reign over the nations: God
sitteth on his holy throne.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> The princes of the people are gathered
together, with the God of Abraham: for the strong gods of the earth are
exceedingly exalted.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> A psalm of a canticle, for the sons of
Core, on the second day of the week.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be
praised in the city of our God, in his holy mountain.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> With the joy of the whole earth is mount
Sion founded, on the sides of the north, the city of the great king.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> In her houses shall God be known, when he
shall protect her.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> For behold the kings of the earth
assembled themselves: they gathered together.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> So they saw, and they wondered, they were
troubled, they were moved:

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> trembling took hold of them. There were
pains as of a woman in labour.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> With a vehement wind thou shalt break in
pieces the ships of Tharsis.

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> As we have heard, so have we seen, in the
city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God: God hath founded it
for ever.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> We have received thy mercy, O God, in
the midst of thy temple.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> According to thy name, O God, so also
is thy praise unto the ends of the earth: thy right hand is full of
justice.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> Let mount Sion rejoice, and the
daughters of Juda be glad; because of thy judgments, O Lord.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> Surround Sion, and encompass her: tell
ye in her towers.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> Set your hearts on her strength; and
distribute her houses, that ye may relate it in another generation.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> For this is God, our God unto eternity,
and for ever and ever: he shall rule us for evermore.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for the sons of
Core.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> Hear these things, all ye nations: give
ear, all ye inhabitants of the world.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> All you that are earthborn, and you sons
of men: both rich and poor together.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> My mouth shall speak wisdom: and the
meditation of my heart understanding.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> I will incline my ear to a parable; I
will open my proposition on the psaltery.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> Why shall I fear in the evil day? the
iniquity of my heel shall encompass me.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> They that trust in their own strength,
and glory in the multitude of their riches,

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> No brother can redeem, nor shall man
redeem: he shall not give to God his ransom,

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> Nor the price of the redemption of his
soul: and shall labour for ever,

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> and shall still live unto the end.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> He shall not see destruction, when he
shall see the wise dying: the senseless and the fool shall perish
together: And they shall leave their riches to strangers:

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> and their sepulchres shall be their
houses for ever. Their dwelling places to all generations: they have
called their lands by their names.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And man when he was in honour did not
understand; he is compared to senseless beasts, and is become like to
them.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> This way of theirs is a stumblingblock
to them: and afterwards they shall delight in their mouth.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> They are laid in hell like sheep: death
shall feed upon them. And the just shall have dominion over them in the
morning; and their help shall decay in hell from their glory.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> But God will redeem my soul from the
hand of hell, when he shall receive me.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> Be not thou afraid, when a man shall be
made rich, and when the glory of his house shall be increased.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> For when he shall die he shall take
nothing away; nor shall his glory descend with him.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> For in his lifetime his soul will be
blessed: and he will praise thee when thou shalt do well to him.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> He shall go in to the generations of
his fathers: and he shall never see light.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> Man when he was in honour did not
understand: he hath been compared to senseless beasts, and made like to
them.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> A psalm for Asaph. The God of gods, the
Lord hath spoken: and he hath called the earth. From the rising of the
sun, to the going down thereof:

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> out of Sion the loveliness of his beauty.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> God shall come manifestly: our God shall
come, and shall not keep silence. A fire shall burn before him: and a
mighty tempest shall be round about him.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> He shall call heaven from above, and the
earth, to judge his people.

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> Gather ye together his saints to him: who
set his covenant before sacrifices.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> And the heavens shall declare his
justice: for God is judge.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Hear, O my people, and I will speak: O
Israel, and I will testify to thee: I am God, thy God.

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> I will not reprove thee for thy
sacrifices: and thy burnt offerings are always in my sight.

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> I will not take calves out of thy house:
nor he goats out of thy flocks.

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> For all the beasts of the woods are
mine: the cattle on the hills, and the oxen.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> I know all the fowls of the air: and
with me is the beauty of the field.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> If I should be hungry, I would not tell
thee: for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> Shall I eat the flesh of bullocks? or
shall I drink the blood of goats?

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> Offer to God the sacrifice of praise:
and pay thy vows to the most High.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> And call upon me in the day of trouble:
I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> But to the sinner God hath said: Why
dost thou declare my justices, and take my covenant in thy mouth ?

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Seeing thou hast hated discipline: and
hast cast my words behind thee.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> If thou didst see a thief thou didst
run with him: and with adulterers thou hast been a partaker.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> Thy mouth hath abounded with evil, and
thy tongue framed deceits.

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> Sitting thou didst speak against thy
brother, and didst lay a scandal against thy mother's son:

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> these things hast thou done, and I was
silent. Thou thoughtest unjustly that I should be like to thee: but I
will reprove thee, and set before thy face.

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Understand these things, you that
forget God; lest he snatch you away, and there be none to deliver you.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> The sacrifice of praise shall glorify
me: and there is the way by which I will shew him the salvation of God.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm of David,

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> when Nathan the prophet came to him after
he had sinned with Bethsabee.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy
great mercy. And according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot
out my iniquity.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> Wash me yet more from my iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin.

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> For I know my iniquity, and my sin is
always before me.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> To thee only have I sinned, and have done
evil before thee: that thou mayst be justified in thy words and mayst
overcome when thou art judged.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> For behold I was conceived in iniquities;
and in sins did my mother conceive me.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> For behold thou hast loved truth: the
uncertain and hidden things of thy wisdom thou hast made manifest to me.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I
shall be cleansed: thou shalt wash me, and I shall be made whiter than
snow.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> To my hearing thou shalt give joy and
gladness: and the bones that have been humbled shall rejoice.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> Turn away thy face from my sins, and
blot out all my iniquities.

<span id="an_50:12">50:12</span> Create a clean heart in me, O God: and
renew a right spirit within my bowels.

<span id="an_50:13">50:13</span> Cast me not away from thy face; and
take not thy holy spirit from me.

<span id="an_50:14">50:14</span> Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation, and strengthen me with a perfect spirit.

<span id="an_50:15">50:15</span> I will teach the unjust thy ways: and
the wicked shall be converted to thee.

<span id="an_50:16">50:16</span> Deliver me from blood, O God, thou God
of my salvation: and my tongue shall extol thy justice.

<span id="an_50:17">50:17</span> O Lord, thou wilt open my lips: and my
mouth shall declare thy praise.

<span id="an_50:18">50:18</span> For if thou hadst desired sacrifice, I
would indeed have given it: with burnt offerings thou wilt not be
delighted.

<span id="an_50:19">50:19</span> A sacrifice to God is an afflicted
spirit: a contrite and humbled heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

<span id="an_50:20">50:20</span> Deal favourably, O Lord, in thy good
will with Sion; that the walls of Jerusalem may be built up.

<span id="an_50:21">50:21</span> Then shalt thou accept the sacrifice of
justice, oblations and whole burnt offerings: then shall they lay calves
upon thy altar.

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> Unto the end, understanding for David,

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul
David went to the house of Achimelech

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> Why dost thou glory in malice, thou that
art mighty in iniquity?

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> All the day long thy tongue hath devised
injustice: as a sharp razor, thou hast wrought deceit.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> Thou hast loved malice more than
goodness: and iniquity rather than to speak righteousness.

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> Thou hast loved all the words of ruin, O
deceitful tongue.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> Therefore will God destroy thee for ever:
he will pluck thee out, and remove thee from thy dwelling place: and thy
root out of the land of the living.

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> The just shall see and fear, and shall
laugh at him, and say:

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> Behold the man that made not God his
helper: But trusted in the abundance of his riches: and prevailed in his
vanity.

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> But I, as a fruitful olive tree in the
house of God, have hoped in the mercy of God for ever, yea for ever and
ever.

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> I will praise thee for ever, because
thou hast done it: and I will wait on thy name, for it is good in the
sight of thy saints.

<span id="an_52:1">52:1</span> Unto the end, for Maeleth, understandings
to David. The fool said in his hear t: There is no God.

<span id="an_52:2">52:2</span> They are corrupted, and become abominable
in iniquities: there is none that doth good.

<span id="an_52:3">52:3</span> God looked down from heaven on the
children of men: to see if there were any that did understand, or did
seek God.

<span id="an_52:4">52:4</span> All have gone aside, they are become
unprofitable together, there is none that doth good, no not one.

<span id="an_52:5">52:5</span> Shall not all the workers of iniquity
know, who eat up my people as they eat bread?

<span id="an_52:6">52:6</span> They have not called upon God: there have
they trembled for fear, where there was no fear. For God hath scattered
the bones of them that please men: they have been confounded, because
God hath despised them.

<span id="an_52:7">52:7</span> Who will give out of Sion the salvation
of Israel? when God shall bring back the captivity of his people, Jacob
shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

<span id="an_53:1">53:1</span> Unto the end, In verses, understanding
for David.

<span id="an_53:2">53:2</span> When the men of Ziph had come and said to
Saul: Is not David hidden with us?

<span id="an_53:3">53:3</span> Save me, O God, by thy name, and judge me
in thy strength.

<span id="an_53:4">53:4</span> O God, hear my prayer: give ear to the
words of my mouth.

<span id="an_53:5">53:5</span> For strangers have risen up against me;
and the mighty have sought after my soul: and they have not set God
before their eyes.

<span id="an_53:6">53:6</span> For behold God is my helper: and the Lord
is the protector of my soul.

<span id="an_53:7">53:7</span> Turn back the evils upon my enemies; and
cut them off in thy truth.

<span id="an_53:8">53:8</span> I will freely sacrifice to thee, and will
give praise, O God, to thy name: because it is good:

<span id="an_53:9">53:9</span> For thou hast delivered me out of all
trouble: and my eye hath looked down upon my enemies.

<span id="an_54:1">54:1</span> Unto the end, in verses, understanding
for David.

<span id="an_54:2">54:2</span> Hear, O God, my prayer, and despise not
my supplication:

<span id="an_54:3">54:3</span> be attentive to me and hear me. I am
grieved in my exercise; and am troubled,

<span id="an_54:4">54:4</span> at the voice of the enemy, and at the
tribulation of the sinner. For they have cast iniquities upon me: and in
wrath they were troublesome to me.

<span id="an_54:5">54:5</span> My heart is troubled within me: and the
fear of death is fallen upon me.

<span id="an_54:6">54:6</span> Fear and trembling are come upon me: and
darkness hath covered me.

<span id="an_54:7">54:7</span> And I said: Who will give me wings like a
dove, and I will fly and be at rest?

<span id="an_54:8">54:8</span> Lo, I have gone far off flying away; and
I abode in the wilderness.

<span id="an_54:9">54:9</span> I waited for him that hath saved me from
pusillanimity of spirit, and a storm.

<span id="an_54:10">54:10</span> Cast down, O Lord, and divide their
tongues; for I have seen iniquity and contradiction in the city.

<span id="an_54:11">54:11</span> Day and night shall iniquity surround
it upon its walls: and in the midst thereof are labour,

<span id="an_54:12">54:12</span> and injustice. And usury and deceit
have not departed from its streets.

<span id="an_54:13">54:13</span> For if my enemy had reviled me, I would
verily have borne with it. And if he that hated me had spoken great
things against me, I would perhaps have hidden myself from him.

<span id="an_54:14">54:14</span> But thou a man of one mind, my guide,
and my familiar,

<span id="an_54:15">54:15</span> Who didst take sweetmeats together with
me: in the house of God we walked with consent.

<span id="an_54:16">54:16</span> Let death come upon them, and let them
go down alive into hell. For there is wickedness in their dwellings: in
the midst of them.

<span id="an_54:17">54:17</span> But I have cried to God: and the Lord
will save me.

<span id="an_54:18">54:18</span> Evening and morning, and at noon I will
speak and declare: and he shall hear my voice.

<span id="an_54:19">54:19</span> He shall redeem my soul in peace from
them that draw near to me: for among many they were with me.

<span id="an_54:20">54:20</span> God shall hear, and the Eternal shall
humble them. For there is no change with them, and they have not feared
God:

<span id="an_54:21">54:21</span> he hath stretched forth his hand to
repay. They have defiled his covenant,

<span id="an_54:22">54:22</span> they are divided by the wrath Of his
countenance, and his heart hath drawn near. His words are smoother than
oil, and the same are darts.

<span id="an_54:23">54:23</span> Cast thy care upon the Lord, and he
shall sustain thee: he shall not suffer the just to waver for ever.

<span id="an_54:24">54:24</span> But thou, O God, shalt bring them down
into the pit of destruction. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out
half their days; but I will trust in thee, O Lord.

<span id="an_55:1">55:1</span> Unto the end, for a people that is
removed at a distance from the sanctuary for David, for an inscription
of a title (or pillar ) when the Philistines held him in Geth.

<span id="an_55:2">55:2</span> Have mercy on me, O God, for man hath
trodden me under foot; all the day long he hath afflicted me fighting
against me.

<span id="an_55:3">55:3</span> My enemies have trodden on me all the day
long; for they are many that make war against me.

<span id="an_55:4">55:4</span> From the height of the day I shall fear:
but I will trust in thee.

<span id="an_55:5">55:5</span> In God I will praise my words, in God I
have put my trust: I will not fear what flesh can do against me.

<span id="an_55:6">55:6</span> All the day long they detested my words:
all their thoughts were against me unto evil.

<span id="an_55:7">55:7</span> They will dwell and hide themselves: they
will watch my heel. As they have waited for my soul,

<span id="an_55:8">55:8</span> for nothing shalt thou save them: in thy
anger thou shalt break the people in pieces, O God,

<span id="an_55:9">55:9</span> I have declared to thee my life: thou
hast set my tears in thy sight, As also in thy promise.

<span id="an_55:10">55:10</span> Then shall my enemies be turned back.
In what day soever I shall call upon thee, behold I know thou art my
God.

<span id="an_55:11">55:11</span> In God will I praise the word, in the
Lord will I praise his speech. In God have I hoped, I will not fear what
man can do to me.

<span id="an_55:12">55:12</span> In me, O God, are vows to thee, which I
will pay, praises to thee:

<span id="an_55:13">55:13</span> Because thou hast delivered my soul
from death, my feet from falling: that I may please in the sight of God,
in the light of the living.

<span id="an_56:1">56:1</span> Unto the end, destroy not, for David, for
an inscription of a title, when he fled from Saul into the cave

<span id="an_56:2">56:2</span> Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on
me: for my soul trusteth in thee. And in the shadow of thy wings will I
hope, until iniquity pass away.

<span id="an_56:3">56:3</span> I will cry to God the most High; to God
who hath done good to me.

<span id="an_56:4">56:4</span> He hath sent from heaven and delivered
me: he hath made them a reproach that trod upon me. God hath sent his
mercy and his truth,

<span id="an_56:5">56:5</span> and he hath delivered my soul from the
midst of the young lions. I slept troubled. The sons of men, whose teeth
are weapons and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.

<span id="an_56:6">56:6</span> Be thou exalted, O God, above the
heavens, and thy glory above all the earth.

<span id="an_56:7">56:7</span> They prepared a snare for my feet; and
they bowed down my soul. They dug a pit before my face, and they are
fallen into it.

<span id="an_56:8">56:8</span> My heart is ready, O God, my heart is
ready: I will Sing, and rehearse a psalm.

<span id="an_56:9">56:9</span> Arise, O my glory, arise psaltery and
harp: I will arise early.

<span id="an_56:10">56:10</span> I will give praise to thee, O Lord,
among the people: I will sing a psalm to thee among the nations.

<span id="an_56:11">56:11</span> For thy mercy is magnified even to the
heavens: and thy truth unto the clouds.

<span id="an_56:12">56:12</span> Be thou exalted, O God, above the l
heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.

<span id="an_57:1">57:1</span> Unto the end, destroy not, for David, for
an inscription of a title.

<span id="an_57:2">57:2</span> If in very deed you speak justice: judge
right things, ye sons of men.

<span id="an_57:3">57:3</span> For in your heart you work iniquity: your
hands forge injustice in the earth.

<span id="an_57:4">57:4</span> The wicked are alienated from the womb;
they have gone astray from the womb: they have spoken false things.

<span id="an_57:5">57:5</span> Their madness is according to the
likeness of a serpent: like the deaf asp that stoppeth her ears:

<span id="an_57:6">57:6</span> Which will not hear the voice of the
charmers; nor of the wizard that charmeth wisely.

<span id="an_57:7">57:7</span> God shall break in pieces their teeth in
their mouth: the Lord shall break the grinders of the lions.

<span id="an_57:8">57:8</span> They shall come to nothing, like water
running down; he hath bent his bow till they be weakened.

<span id="an_57:9">57:9</span> Like wax that melteth they shall be taken
away: fire hath fallen on them, and they shall not see the sun.

<span id="an_57:10">57:10</span> Before your thorns could know the
brier; he swalloweth them up, as alive, in his wrath.

<span id="an_57:11">57:11</span> The just shall rejoice when he shall
see the revenge: he shall wash his hands in the blood of the sinner.

<span id="an_57:12">57:12</span> And man shall say: If indeed there be
fruit to the just: there is indeed a God that judgeth them on the earth.

<span id="an_58:1">58:1</span> Unto the end, destroy not, for David for
an inscription of It title, when Saul sent and watched his house to kill
him.

<span id="an_58:2">58:2</span> Deliver me from my enemies, O my God; and
defend me from them that rise up against me.

<span id="an_58:3">58:3</span> Deliver me from them that work iniquity,
and save me from bloody men.

<span id="an_58:4">58:4</span> For behold they have caught my soul: the
mighty have rushed in upon me:

<span id="an_58:5">58:5</span> Neither is it my iniquity, nor my sin, O
Lord: without iniquity have I run, and directed my steps.

<span id="an_58:6">58:6</span> Rise up thou to meet me, and behold: even
thou, O Lord, the God of hosts, the God of Israel. Attend to visit all
the nations: have no mercy on all them that work iniquity.

<span id="an_58:7">58:7</span> They shall return at evening, and shall
suffer hunger like dogs: and shall go round about the city.

<span id="an_58:8">58:8</span> Behold they shall speak with their mouth,
and a sword is in their lips: for who, say they, hath heard us ?

<span id="an_58:9">58:9</span> But thou, O Lord, shalt laugh at them:
thou shalt bring all the nations to nothing.

<span id="an_58:10">58:10</span> I will keep my strength to thee: for
thou art my protector:

<span id="an_58:11">58:11</span> my God, his mercy shall prevent me.

<span id="an_58:12">58:12</span> God shall let me see over my enemies:
slay them not, lest at any time my people forget. Scatter them by thy
power; and bring them down, O Lord, my protector:

<span id="an_58:13">58:13</span> For the sin of their mouth, and the
word of their lips: and let them be taken in their pride. And for their
cursing and lying they shall be talked of,

<span id="an_58:14">58:14</span> when they are consumed: when they are
consumed by thy wrath, and they shall be no more. And they shall know
that God will rule Jacob, and all the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_58:15">58:15</span> They shall return at evening and shall
suffer hunger like dogs: and shall go round about the city.

<span id="an_58:16">58:16</span> They shall be scattered abroad to eat,
and shall murmur if they be not filled.

<span id="an_58:17">58:17</span> But I will sing thy strength: and will
extol thy mercy in the morning. For thou art become my support, and my
refuge, in the day of my trouble.

<span id="an_58:18">58:18</span> Unto thee, O my helper, will I sing,
for thou art God my defence: my God my mercy.

<span id="an_59:1">59:1</span> Unto the end, for them that shall be
changed, for the inscription of a title, to David himself, for doctrine,

<span id="an_59:2">59:2</span> when he set fire to Mesopotamia of Syria
and Sobal and Joab returned and slew of Edom, in the vale of the
saltpits, twelve thousand men.

<span id="an_59:3">59:3</span> O God, thou hast cast us off, and hast
destroyed us; thou hast been angry, and hast had mercy on us.

<span id="an_59:4">59:4</span> Thou hast moved the earth, and hast
troubled it: heal thou the breaches thereof, for it has been moved.

<span id="an_59:5">59:5</span> Thou hast shewn thy people hard things;
thou hast made us drink wine of sorrow.

<span id="an_59:6">59:6</span> Thou hast given a warning to them that
fear thee: that they may flee from before the bow: That thy beloved may
be delivered.

<span id="an_59:7">59:7</span> Save me with thy right hand, and hear me.

<span id="an_59:8">59:8</span> God hath spoken in his holy place: I will
rejoice, and I will divide Sichem; and will mete out the vale of
tabernacles.

<span id="an_59:9">59:9</span> Galaad is mine, and Manasses is mine: and
Ephraim is the strength of my head. Juda is my king:

<span id="an_59:10">59:10</span> Moab is the pot of my hope. Into Edom
will I stretch out my shoe: to me the foreigners are made subject.

<span id="an_59:11">59:11</span> Who will bring me into the strong city?
who will lead me into Edom?

<span id="an_59:12">59:12</span> Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us
off? and wilt not thou, O God, go out with our armies?

<span id="an_59:13">59:13</span> Give us help from trouble: for vain is
the salvation of man.

<span id="an_59:14">59:14</span> Through God we shall do mightily: and
he shall bring to nothing them that afflict us.

<span id="an_60:1">60:1</span> Unto the end, in hymns, for David.

<span id="an_60:2">60:2</span> Hear, O God, my supplication: be
attentive to my prayer,

<span id="an_60:3">60:3</span> To thee have I cried from the ends of the
earth: when my heart was in anguish, thou hast exalted me on a rock.
Thou hast conducted me;

<span id="an_60:4">60:4</span> for thou hast been my hope; a tower of
strength against the face of the enemy.

<span id="an_60:5">60:5</span> In thy tabernacle I shall dwell for ever:
I shall be protected under the covert of thy wings.

<span id="an_60:6">60:6</span> For thou, my God, hast heard my prayer:
thou hast given an inheritance to them that fear thy name.

<span id="an_60:7">60:7</span> Thou wilt add days to the days of the
king: his years even to generation and generation.

<span id="an_60:8">60:8</span> He abideth for ever in the sight of God:
his mercy and truth who shall search ?

<span id="an_60:9">60:9</span> So will I sing a psalm to thy name for
ever and ever: that I may pay my vows from day to day.

<span id="an_61:1">61:1</span> Unto the end, for Idithun, a psalm of
David.

<span id="an_61:2">61:2</span> Shall not my soul be subject to God? for
from him is my salvation.

<span id="an_61:3">61:3</span> For he is my God and my saviour: he is my
protector, I shall be moved no more.

<span id="an_61:4">61:4</span> How long do you rush in upon a man? you
all kill, as if you were thrusting down a leaning wall, and a tottering
fence.

<span id="an_61:5">61:5</span> But they have thought to cast away my
price; I ran in thirst: they blessed with their mouth, but cursed with
their heart.

<span id="an_61:6">61:6</span> But be thou, O my soul, subject to God:
for from him is my patience.

<span id="an_61:7">61:7</span> For he is my God and my saviour: he is my
helper, I shall not be moved.

<span id="an_61:8">61:8</span> In God is my salvation and my glory: he
is the God of my help, and my hope is in God.

<span id="an_61:9">61:9</span> Trust in him, all ye congregation of
people: pour out your hearts before him. God is our helper for ever.

<span id="an_61:10">61:10</span> But vain are the sons of men, the sons
of men are liars in the balances: that by vanity they may together
deceive.

<span id="an_61:11">61:11</span> Trust not in iniquity, and cover not
robberies: if riches abound, set not your heart upon them.

<span id="an_61:12">61:12</span> God hath spoken once, these two things
have I heard, that power belongeth to God,

<span id="an_61:13">61:13</span> and mercy to thee, O Lord; for thou
wilt render to every man according to his works.

<span id="an_62:1">62:1</span> A psalm of David when he was in the
desert of Edom.

<span id="an_62:2">62:2</span> O God, my God, to thee do I watch at
break of day. For thee my soul hath thirsted; for thee my flesh, O how
many ways!

<span id="an_62:3">62:3</span> In a desert land, and where there is no
way, and no water: so in the sanctuary have I come before thee, to see
thy power and thy glory.

<span id="an_62:4">62:4</span> For thy mercy is better than lives: thee
my lips shall praise.

<span id="an_62:5">62:5</span> Thus will I bless thee all my life long:
and in thy name I will lift up my hands.

<span id="an_62:6">62:6</span> Let my soul be filled as with marrow and
fatness: and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips.

<span id="an_62:7">62:7</span> If I have remembered thee upon my bed, I
will meditate on thee in the morning:

<span id="an_62:8">62:8</span> because thou hast been my helper. And I
will rejoice under the covert of thy wings:

<span id="an_62:9">62:9</span> my soul hath stuck close to thee: thy
right hand hath received me.

<span id="an_62:10">62:10</span> But they have sought my soul in vain,
they shall go into the lower parts of the earth:

<span id="an_62:11">62:11</span> They shall be delivered into the hands
of the sword, they shall be the portions of foxes.

<span id="an_62:12">62:12</span> But the king shall rejoice in God, all
they shall be praised that swear by him: because the mouth is stopped of
them that speak wicked things.

<span id="an_63:1">63:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David.

<span id="an_63:2">63:2</span> Hear, O God, my prayer, when I make
supplication to thee : deliver my soul from the fear of the enemy.

<span id="an_63:3">63:3</span> Thou hast protected me from the assembly
of the malignant; from the multitude of the workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_63:4">63:4</span> For they have whetted their tongues like
a sword; they have bent their bow a bitter thing,

<span id="an_63:5">63:5</span> to shoot in secret the undefiled.

<span id="an_63:6">63:6</span> They will shoot at him on a sudden, and
will not fear: they are resolute in wickedness. They have talked of
hiding snares; they have said: Who shall see them?

<span id="an_63:7">63:7</span> They have searched after iniquities: they
have failed in their search. Man shall come to a deep heart:

<span id="an_63:8">63:8</span> and God shall be exalted. The arrows of
children are their wounds:

<span id="an_63:9">63:9</span> and their tongues against them are made
weak. All that saw them were troubled;

<span id="an_63:10">63:10</span> and every man was afraid. And they
declared the works of God: and understood his doings.

<span id="an_63:11">63:11</span> The just shall rejoice in the Lord, and
shall hope in him: and all the upright in heart shall be praised.

<span id="an_64:1">64:1</span> To the end, a psalm of David. The
canticle of Jeremias and Ezechiel to the people of the captivity, when
they began to go out.

<span id="an_64:2">64:2</span> A Hymn, O God, becometh thee in Sion: and
a vow shall be paid to thee in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_64:3">64:3</span> O hear my prayer: all flesh shall come to
thee.

<span id="an_64:4">64:4</span> The words of the wicked have prevailed
over us: and thou wilt pardon our transgressions.

<span id="an_64:5">64:5</span> Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and
taken to thee: he shall dwell in thy courts. We shall be filled with the
good things of thy house; holy is thy temple,

<span id="an_64:6">64:6</span> wonderful in justice. Hear us, O God our
saviour, who art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and in the sea
afar off.

<span id="an_64:7">64:7</span> Thou who preparest the mountains by thy
strength, being girded with power:

<span id="an_64:8">64:8</span> who troublest the depth of the sea, the
noise of its waves. The Gentiles shall be troubled,

<span id="an_64:9">64:9</span> and they that dwell in the uttermost
borders shall be afraid at thy signs: thou shalt make the outgoings of
the morning and of the evening to be joyful.

<span id="an_64:10">64:10</span> Thou hast visited the earth, and hast
plentifully watered it; thou hast many ways enriched it. The river of
God is filled with water, thou hast prepared their food: for so is its
preparation.

<span id="an_64:11">64:11</span> Fill up plentifully the streams
thereof, multiply its fruits; it shall spring up and rejoice in its
showers.

<span id="an_64:12">64:12</span> Thou shalt bless the crown of the year
of thy goodness: and thy fields shall be filled with plenty.

<span id="an_64:13">64:13</span> The beautiful places of the wilderness
shall grow fat: and the hills shall be girded about with joy,

<span id="an_64:14">64:14</span> The rams of the flock are clothed, and
the vales shall abound with corn: they shall shout, yea they shall sing
a hymn.

<span id="an_65:1">65:1</span> Unto the end, a canticle of a psalm of
the resurrection. Shout with joy to God, all the earth,

<span id="an_65:2">65:2</span> sing ye a psalm to his name; give glory
to his praise.

<span id="an_65:3">65:3</span> Say unto God, How terrible are thy works,
O Lord! in the multitude of thy strength thy enemies shall lie to thee.

<span id="an_65:4">65:4</span> Let all the earth adore thee, and sing to
thee: let it sing a psalm to thy name.

<span id="an_65:5">65:5</span> Come and see the works of God; who is
terrible in his counsels over the sons of men.

<span id="an_65:6">65:6</span> Who turneth the sea into dry land, in the
river they shall pass on foot: there shall we rejoice in him.

<span id="an_65:7">65:7</span> Who by his power ruleth for ever: his
eyes behold the nations; let not them that provoke him he exalted in
themselves.

<span id="an_65:8">65:8</span> O bless our God, ye Gentiles: and make
the voice of his praise to be heard.

<span id="an_65:9">65:9</span> Who hath set my soul to live: and hath
not suffered my feet to be moved:

<span id="an_65:10">65:10</span> For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou
hast tried us by fire, as silver is tried.

<span id="an_65:11">65:11</span> Thou hast brought us into a net, thou
hast laid afflictions on our back:

<span id="an_65:12">65:12</span> thou hast set men over our heads. We
have passed through tire and water, and thou hast brought us out into a
refreshment.

<span id="an_65:13">65:13</span> I will go into thy house with burnt
offerings: I will pay thee my vows,

<span id="an_65:14">65:14</span> which my lips have uttered, And my
mouth hath spoken, when I was in trouble.

<span id="an_65:15">65:15</span> I will offer up to thee holocausts full
of marrow, with burnt offerings of rams: I will offer to thee bullocks
with goats.

<span id="an_65:16">65:16</span> Come and hear, all ye that fear God,
and I will tell you what great things he hath done for my soul.

<span id="an_65:17">65:17</span> I cried to him with my mouth: and I
extolled him with my tongue.

<span id="an_65:18">65:18</span> If I have looked at iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me.

<span id="an_65:19">65:19</span> Therefore hath God heard me, and hath
attended to the voice of my supplication.

<span id="an_65:20">65:20</span> Blessed be God, who hath not turned
away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.

<span id="an_66:1">66:1</span> Unto the end, in, hymns, a psalm of a
canticle for David.

<span id="an_66:2">66:2</span> May God have mercy on us, and bless us:
may he cause the light of his countenance to shine upon us, and may he
have mercy on us.

<span id="an_66:3">66:3</span> That we may know thy way upon earth: thy
salvation in all nations.

<span id="an_66:4">66:4</span> Let people confess to thee, O God: let
all people give praise to thee.

<span id="an_66:5">66:5</span> Let the nations be glad and rejoice: for
thou judgest the people with justice, and directest the nations upon
earth.

<span id="an_66:6">66:6</span> Let the people, O God, confess to thee:
let all the people give praise to thee:

<span id="an_66:7">66:7</span> the earth hath yielded her fruit. May
God, our God bless us,

<span id="an_66:8">66:8</span> may God bless us: and all the ends of the
earth fear him.

<span id="an_67:1">67:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm of a canticle for
David himself.

<span id="an_67:2">67:2</span> Let God arise, and let his enemies be
scattered: and let them that hate him flee from before his face.

<span id="an_67:3">67:3</span> As smoke vanisheth, so let them vanish
away: as wax melteth before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the
presence of God.

<span id="an_67:4">67:4</span> And let the just feast, and rejoice
before God: and be delighted with gladness.

<span id="an_67:5">67:5</span> Sing ye to God, sing a psalm to his name,
make a way for him who ascendeth upon the west: the Lord is his name.
Rejoice ye before him: but the wicked shall be troubled at his presence,

<span id="an_67:6">67:6</span> who is the father of orphans, and the
judge of widows. God in his holy place:

<span id="an_67:7">67:7</span> God who maketh men of one manner to dwell
in a house: Who bringeth out them that were bound in strength; in like
manner them that provoke, that dwell in sepulchres.

<span id="an_67:8">67:8</span> O God, when thou didst go forth in the
sight of thy people, when thou didst pass through the desert:

<span id="an_67:9">67:9</span> The earth was moved, and the heavens
dropped at the presence of the God of Sina, at the presence of the God
of Israel.

<span id="an_67:10">67:10</span> Thou shalt set aside for thy
inheritance a free rain, O God: and it was weakened, but thou hast made
it perfect.

<span id="an_67:11">67:11</span> In it shall thy animals dwell; in thy
sweetness, O God, thou hast provided for the poor.

<span id="an_67:12">67:12</span> The Lord shall give the word to them
that preach good tidings with great power.

<span id="an_67:13">67:13</span> The king of powers is of the beloved,
of the beloved; and the beauty of the house shall divide spoils.

<span id="an_67:14">67:14</span> If you sleep among the midst of lots,
you shall be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and the hinder
parts of her back with the paleness of gold.

<span id="an_67:15">67:15</span> When he that is in heaven appointeth
kings over her, they shall be whited with snow in Selmon.

<span id="an_67:16">67:16</span> The mountain of God is a fat mountain.
A curdled mountain, a fat mountain.

<span id="an_67:17">67:17</span> Why suspect, ye curdled mountains? A
mountain in which God is well pleased to dwell: for there the Lord shall
dwell unto the end.

<span id="an_67:18">67:18</span> The chariot of God is attended by ten
thousands; thousands of them that rejoice: the Lord is among them in
Sina, in the holy place.

<span id="an_67:19">67:19</span> Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast
led captivity captive; thou hast received gifts in men. Yea for those
also that do not believe, the dwelling of the Lord God.

<span id="an_67:20">67:20</span> Blessed be the Lord day by day: the God
of our salvation will make our journey prosperous to us.

<span id="an_67:21">67:21</span> Our God is the God of salvation: and of
the Lord, of the Lord are the issues from death.

<span id="an_67:22">67:22</span> But God shall break the heads of his
enemies: the hairy crown of them that walk on in their sins.

<span id="an_67:23">67:23</span> The Lord said: I will turn them from
Basan, I will turn them into the depth of the sea:

<span id="an_67:24">67:24</span> That thy foot may be dipped in the
blood of thy enemies; the tongue of thy dogs be red with the same.

<span id="an_67:25">67:25</span> They have seen thy goings, O God, the
goings of my God: of my king who is in his sanctuary.

<span id="an_67:26">67:26</span> Princes went before joined with
singers, in the midst of young damsels playing on timbrels.

<span id="an_67:27">67:27</span> In the churches bless ye God the Lord,
from the fountains of Israel.

<span id="an_67:28">67:28</span> There is Benjamin a youth, in ecstasy
of mind. The princes of Juda are their leaders: the princes of Zabulon,
the princes of Nephthali.

<span id="an_67:29">67:29</span> Command thy strength, O God: confirm, O
God, what thou hast wrought in us.

<span id="an_67:30">67:30</span> From thy temple in Jerusalem, kings
shall offer presents to thee.

<span id="an_67:31">67:31</span> Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds,
the congregation of bulls with the kine of the people; who seek to
exclude them who are tried with silver. Scatter thou the nations that
delight in wars:

<span id="an_67:32">67:32</span> ambassadors shall come out of Egypt:
Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands to God.

<span id="an_67:33">67:33</span> Sing to God, ye kingdoms of the earth:
sing ye to the Lord: Sing ye to God,

<span id="an_67:34">67:34</span> who mounteth above the heaven of
heavens, to the east. Behold he will give to his voice the voice of
power:

<span id="an_67:35">67:35</span> give ye glory to God for Israel, his
magnificence, and his power is in the clouds.

<span id="an_67:36">67:36</span> God is wonderful in his saints: the God
of Israel is he who will give power and strength to his people. Blessed
be God.

<span id="an_68:1">68:1</span> Unto the end, for them that shall be
changed; for David.

<span id="an_68:2">68:2</span> Save me, O God: for the waters are come
in even unto my soul.

<span id="an_68:3">68:3</span> I stick fast in the mire of the deep: and
there is no sure standing. I am come into the depth of the sea: and a
tempest hath overwhelmed me.

<span id="an_68:4">68:4</span> I have laboured with crying; my jaws are
become hoarse: my eyes have failed, whilst I hope in my God.

<span id="an_68:5">68:5</span> They are multiplied above the hairs of my
head, who hate me without cause. My enemies are grown strong who have
wrongfully persecuted me: then did I pay that which I took not away.

<span id="an_68:6">68:6</span> O God, thou knowest my foolishness; and
my offences are not hidden from thee:

<span id="an_68:7">68:7</span> Let not them be ashamed for me, who look
for thee, O Lord, the Lord of hosts. Let them not be confounded on my
account, who seek thee, O God of Israel.

<span id="an_68:8">68:8</span> Because for thy sake I have borne
reproach; shame hath covered my face.

<span id="an_68:9">68:9</span> I am become a stranger to my brethren,
and an alien to the sons of my mother.

<span id="an_68:10">68:10</span> For the zeal of thy house hath eaten me
up: and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.

<span id="an_68:11">68:11</span> And I covered my soul in fasting: and
it was made a reproach to me.

<span id="an_68:12">68:12</span> And I made haircloth my garment: and I
became a byword to them.

<span id="an_68:13">68:13</span> They that sat in the gate spoke against
me: and they that drank wine made me their song.

<span id="an_68:14">68:14</span> But as for me, my prayer is to thee, O
Lord; for the time of thy good pleasure, O God. In the multitude of thy
mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.

<span id="an_68:15">68:15</span> Draw me out of the mire, that I may not
stick fast: deliver me from them that hate me, and out of the deep
waters.

<span id="an_68:16">68:16</span> Let not the tempest of water drown me,
nor the deep swallow me up: and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

<span id="an_68:17">68:17</span> Hear me, O Lord, for thy mercy is kind;
look upon me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

<span id="an_68:18">68:18</span> And turn not away thy face from thy
servant: for I am in trouble, hear me speedily.

<span id="an_68:19">68:19</span> Attend to my soul, and deliver it: save
me because of my enemies.

<span id="an_68:20">68:20</span> Thou knowest my reproach, and my
confusion, and my shame.

<span id="an_68:21">68:21</span> In thy sight are all they that afflict
me; my heart hath expected reproach and misery. And I looked for one
that would grieve together with me, but there was none: and for one that
would comfort me, and I found none.

<span id="an_68:22">68:22</span> And they gave me gall for my food, and
in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.

<span id="an_68:23">68:23</span> Let their table become as a snare
before them, and a recompense, and a stumblingblock.

<span id="an_68:24">68:24</span> Let their eyes be darkened that they
see not; and their back bend thou down always.

<span id="an_68:25">68:25</span> Pour out thy indignation upon them: and
let thy wrathful anger take hold of them.

<span id="an_68:26">68:26</span> Let their habitation be made desolate:
and let there be none to dwell in their tabernacles.

<span id="an_68:27">68:27</span> Because they have persecuted him whom
thou hast smitten; and they have added to the grief of my wounds.

<span id="an_68:28">68:28</span> Add thou iniquity upon their iniquity:
and let them not come into thy justice.

<span id="an_68:29">68:29</span> Let them be blotted out of the book of
the living; and with the just let them not be written.

<span id="an_68:30">68:30</span> But I am poor and sorrowful: thy
salvation, O God, hath set me up.

<span id="an_68:31">68:31</span> I will praise the name of God with a
canticle: and I will magnify him with praise.

<span id="an_68:32">68:32</span> And it shall please God better than a
young calf, that bringeth forth horns and hoofs.

<span id="an_68:33">68:33</span> Let the poor see and rejoice: seek ye
God, and your soul shall live.

<span id="an_68:34">68:34</span> For the Lord hath heard the poor: and
hath not despised his prisoners.

<span id="an_68:35">68:35</span> Let the heavens and the earth praise
him; the sea, and every thing that creepeth therein.

<span id="an_68:36">68:36</span> For God will save Sion, and the cities
of Juda shall be built up. And they shall dwell there, and acquire it by
inheritance.

<span id="an_68:37">68:37</span> And the seed of his servants shall
possess it; and they that love his name shall dwell therein.

<span id="an_69:1">69:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David, to bring
to remembrance that the Lord saved him.

<span id="an_69:2">69:2</span> O God, come to my assistance; O Lord,
make haste to help me.

<span id="an_69:3">69:3</span> Let them be confounded and ashamed that
seek my soul:

<span id="an_69:4">69:4</span> Let them be turned backward, and blush
for shame that desire evils to me: Let them be presently turned away
blushing for shame that say to me: 'T is well, 't is well.

<span id="an_69:5">69:5</span> Let all that seek thee rejoice and be
glad in thee; and let such as love thy salvation say always: The Lord be
magnified.

<span id="an_69:6">69:6</span> But I am needy and poor; O God, help me.
Thou art my helper and my deliverer: O Lord, make no delay.

<span id="an_70:1">70:1</span> A psalm for David. Of the sons of
Jonadab, and the former captives. In thee, O Lord, I have hoped, let me
never be put to confusion:

<span id="an_70:2">70:2</span> deliver me in thy justice, and rescue me.
Incline thy ear unto me, and save me.

<span id="an_70:3">70:3</span> Be thou unto me a God, a protector, and a
place of strength: that thou mayst make me safe. For thou art my
firmament and my refuge.

<span id="an_70:4">70:4</span> Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of
the sinner, and out of the hand of the transgressor of the law and of
the unjust.

<span id="an_70:5">70:5</span> For thou art my patience, O Lord: my
hope, O Lord, from my youth;

<span id="an_70:6">70:6</span> By thee have I been confirmed from the
womb: from my mother's womb thou art my protector. Of thee shall I
continually sing:

<span id="an_70:7">70:7</span> I run become unto many as a wonder, but
thou art a strong helper.

<span id="an_70:8">70:8</span> Let my mouth be filled with praise, that
I may sing thy glory; thy greatness all the day long.

<span id="an_70:9">70:9</span> Cast me not off in the time of old age:
when my strength shall fail, do not thou forsake me.

<span id="an_70:10">70:10</span> For my enemies have spoken against me;
and they that watched my soul have consulted together,

<span id="an_70:11">70:11</span> Saying: God hath forsaken him: pursue
and take him, for there is none to deliver him.

<span id="an_70:12">70:12</span> O God, be not thou far from me: O my
God, make haste to my help.

<span id="an_70:13">70:13</span> Let them be confounded and come to
nothing that detract my soul; let them be covered with confusion and
shame that seek my hurt.

<span id="an_70:14">70:14</span> But I will always hope; and will add to
all thy praise.

<span id="an_70:15">70:15</span> My mouth shall shew forth thy justice;
thy salvation all the day long. Because I have not knows learning,

<span id="an_70:16">70:16</span> I will enter into the powers of the
Lord: O Lord, I will be mindful of thy justice alone.

<span id="an_70:17">70:17</span> Thou hast taught me, O God, from my
youth: and till now I will declare thy wonderful works.

<span id="an_70:18">70:18</span> And unto old age and grey hairs: O God,
forsake me not, Until I shew forth thy arm to all the generation that is
to come: Thy power,

<span id="an_70:19">70:19</span> and thy justice, O God, even to the
highest great things thou hast done: O God, who is like to thee?

<span id="an_70:20">70:20</span> How great troubles hast thou shewn me,
many and grievous: and turning thou hast brought me to life, and hast
brought me back again from the depths of the earth :

<span id="an_70:21">70:21</span> Thou hast multiplied thy magnificence;
and turning to me thou hast comforted me.

<span id="an_70:22">70:22</span> For I will also confess to thee thy
truth with the instruments of psaltery: O God, I will sing to thee with
the harp, thou holy one of Israel.

<span id="an_70:23">70:23</span> My lips shall greatly rejoice, when I
shall sing to thee; and my soul which thou hast redeemed.

<span id="an_70:24">70:24</span> Yea and my tongue shall meditate on thy
justice all the day; when they shall be confounded and put to shame that
seek evils to me.

<span id="an_71:1">71:1</span> A psalm on Solomon.

<span id="an_71:2">71:2</span> Give to the king thy judgment, O God: and
to the king's son thy justice: To judge thy people with justice, and thy
poor with judgment.

<span id="an_71:3">71:3</span> Let the mountains receive peace for the
people: and the hills justice.

<span id="an_71:4">71:4</span> He shall judge the poor of the people,
and he shall save the children of the poor: and he shall humble the
oppressor.

<span id="an_71:5">71:5</span> And he shall continue with the sun, and
before the moon, throughout all generations.

<span id="an_71:6">71:6</span> He shall come down like rain upon the
fleece; and as showers falling gently upon the earth.

<span id="an_71:7">71:7</span> In his days shall justice spring up, and
abundance of peace, till the moon be taken sway.

<span id="an_71:8">71:8</span> And he shall rule from sea to sea, and
from the river unto the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_71:9">71:9</span> Before him the Ethiopians shall fall
down: and his enemies shall lick the ground.

<span id="an_71:10">71:10</span> The kings of Tharsis and the islands
shall offer presents: the kings of the Arabians and of Saba shall bring
gifts:

<span id="an_71:11">71:11</span> And all kings of the earth shall adore
him: all nations shall serve him.

<span id="an_71:12">71:12</span> For he shall deliver the poor from the
mighty: and the needy that had no helper.

<span id="an_71:13">71:13</span> He shall spare the poor and needy: and
he shall save the souls of the poor.

<span id="an_71:14">71:14</span> He shall redeem their souls from
usuries and iniquity: and their names shall be honourable in his sight.

<span id="an_71:15">71:15</span> And he shall live, and to him shall be
given of the gold of Arabia, for him they shall always adore: they shall
bless him all the day.

<span id="an_71:16">71:16</span> And there shall be a firmament on the
earth on the tops of mountains, above Libanus shall the fruit thereof be
exalted : and they of the city shall flourish like the grass of the
earth.

<span id="an_71:17">71:17</span> Let his name be blessed for evermore :
his name continueth before the sun. And in him shall all the tribes of
the earth be blessed: all nations shall magnify him.

<span id="an_71:18">71:18</span> Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel,
who alone doth wonderful things.

<span id="an_71:19">71:19</span> And blessed be the name of his majesty
for ever: and the whole earth shall be filled with his majesty. So be
it. So be it.

<span id="an_71:20">71:20</span> The praises of David, the son of Jesse,
are ended.

<span id="an_72:1">72:1</span> A psalm for Asaph. How good is God to
Israel, to them that are of a right heart!

<span id="an_72:2">72:2</span> But my feet were almost moved; my steps
had well nigh slipped.

<span id="an_72:3">72:3</span> Because I had a zeal on occasion of the
wicked, seeing the prosperity of sinners.

<span id="an_72:4">72:4</span> For there is no regard to their death,
nor is there strength in their stripes.

<span id="an_72:5">72:5</span> They are not in the labour of men:
neither shall they be scourged like other men.

<span id="an_72:6">72:6</span> Therefore pride hath held them fast: they
are covered with their iniquity and their wickedness.

<span id="an_72:7">72:7</span> Their iniquity hath come forth, as it
were from fatness: they have passed into the affection of the heart.

<span id="an_72:8">72:8</span> They have thought and spoken wickedness:
they have spoken iniquity on high.

<span id="an_72:9">72:9</span> They have set their mouth against heaven:
and their tongue hath passed through the earth.

<span id="an_72:10">72:10</span> Therefore will my people return here
and full days shall be found in them.

<span id="an_72:11">72:11</span> And they said: How doth God know? and
is there knowledge in the most High?

<span id="an_72:12">72:12</span> Behold these are sinners; and yet
abounding in the world they have obtained riches.

<span id="an_72:13">72:13</span> And I said: Then have I in vain
justified my heart, and washed my hands among the innocent.

<span id="an_72:14">72:14</span> And I have been scourged all the day;
and my chastisement hath been in the mornings.

<span id="an_72:15">72:15</span> If I said: I will speak thus; behold I
should condemn the generation of thy children.

<span id="an_72:16">72:16</span> I studied that I might know this thing,
it is a labour in my sight:

<span id="an_72:17">72:17</span> Until I go into the sanctuary of God,
and understand concerning their last ends.

<span id="an_72:18">72:18</span> But indeed for deceits thou hast put it
to them: when they were lifted up thou hast cast them down.

<span id="an_72:19">72:19</span> How are they brought to desolation?
they have suddenly ceased to be: they have perished by reason of their
iniquity.

<span id="an_72:20">72:20</span> As the dream of them that awake, O
Lord; so in thy city thou shalt bring their image to nothing.

<span id="an_72:21">72:21</span> For my heart hath been inflamed, and my
reins have been changed:

<span id="an_72:22">72:22</span> and I am brought to nothing, and I knew
not.

<span id="an_72:23">72:23</span> I am become as a beast before thee: and
I am always with thee.

<span id="an_72:24">72:24</span> Thou hast held me by my right hand; and
by thy will thou hast conducted me, and with thy glory thou hast
received me.

<span id="an_72:25">72:25</span> For what have I in heaven? and besides
thee what do I desire upon earth?

<span id="an_72:26">72:26</span> For thee my flesh and my heart hath
fainted away: thou art the God of my heart, and the God that is my
portion for ever.

<span id="an_72:27">72:27</span> For behold they that go far from thee
shall perish: thou hast destroyed all them that are disloyal to thee.

<span id="an_72:28">72:28</span> But it is good for me to adhere to my
God, to put my hope in the Lord God: That I may declare all thy praises,
in the gates of the daughter of Sion.

<span id="an_73:1">73:1</span> Understanding for Asaph. O God, why hast
thou cast us off unto the end: why is thy wrath enkindled against the
sheep of thy pasture?

<span id="an_73:2">73:2</span> Remember thy congregation, which thou
hast possessed from the beginning. The sceptre of thy inheritance which
thou hast redeemed: mount Sion in which thou hast dwelt.

<span id="an_73:3">73:3</span> Lift up thy hands against their pride
unto the end; see what things the enemy hath done wickedly in the
sanctuary.

<span id="an_73:4">73:4</span> And they that hate thee have made their
boasts, in the midst of thy solemnity. They have set up their ensigns
for signs,

<span id="an_73:5">73:5</span> and they knew not both in the going out
and on the highest top. As with axes in a wood of trees,

<span id="an_73:6">73:6</span> they have cut down at once the gates
thereof, with axe and hatchet they have brought it down.

<span id="an_73:7">73:7</span> They have set fire to thy sanctuary: they
have defiled the dwelling place of thy name on the earth.

<span id="an_73:8">73:8</span> They said in their heart, the whole
kindred of them together: Let us abolish all the festival days of God
from the land.

<span id="an_73:9">73:9</span> Our signs we have not seen, there is now
no prophet: and he will know us no more.

<span id="an_73:10">73:10</span> How long, O God, shall the enemy
reproach: is the adversary to provoke thy name for ever?

<span id="an_73:11">73:11</span> Why dost thou turn away thy hand: and
thy right hand out of the midst of thy bosom for ever ?

<span id="an_73:12">73:12</span> But God is our king before ages: he
hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

<span id="an_73:13">73:13</span> Thou by thy strength didst make the sea
firm: thou didst crush the heads of the dragons in the waters.

<span id="an_73:14">73:14</span> Thou hast broken the heads of the
dragon: thou hast given him to be meat for the people of the Ethiopians.

<span id="an_73:15">73:15</span> Thou hast broken up the fountains and
the torrents: thou hast dried up the Ethan rivers.

<span id="an_73:16">73:16</span> Thine is the day, and thine is the
night: thou hast made the morning light and the sun.

<span id="an_73:17">73:17</span> Thou hast made all the borders of the
earth: the summer and the spring were formed by thee.

<span id="an_73:18">73:18</span> Remember this, the enemy hath
reproached the Lord: and a foolish people hath provoked thy name.

<span id="an_73:19">73:19</span> Deliver not up to beasts the souls that
confess to thee: and forget not to the end the souls of thy poor.

<span id="an_73:20">73:20</span> Have regard to thy covenant: for they
that are the obscure of the earth have been filled with dwellings of
iniquity.

<span id="an_73:21">73:21</span> Let not the humble be turned away with
confusion: the poor and needy shall praise thy name.

<span id="an_73:22">73:22</span> Arise, O God, judge thy own cause:
remember thy reproaches with which the foolish man hath reproached thee
all the day.

<span id="an_73:23">73:23</span> Forget not the voices of thy enemies:
the pride of them that hate thee ascendeth continually.

<span id="an_74:1">74:1</span> Unto the end, corrupt not, a psalm of a
canticle for Asaph.

<span id="an_74:2">74:2</span> We will praise thee, O God: we will
praise, and we will call upon thy name. We will relate thy wondrous
works:

<span id="an_74:3">74:3</span> when I shall take a time, I will judge
justices.

<span id="an_74:4">74:4</span> The earth is melted, and all that dwell
therein: I have established the pillars thereof.

<span id="an_74:5">74:5</span> I said to the wicked: Do not act
wickedly: and to the sinners: Lift not up the horn.

<span id="an_74:6">74:6</span> Lift not up your horn on high: speak not
iniquity against God.

<span id="an_74:7">74:7</span> For neither from the east, nor from the
west, nor from the desert hills:

<span id="an_74:8">74:8</span> for God is the judge. One he putteth
down, and another he lifteth up:

<span id="an_74:9">74:9</span> for in the hand of the Lord there is a
cup of strong wine full of mixture. And he hath poured it out from this
to that: but the dregs thereof are not emptied: all the sinners of the
earth shall drink.

<span id="an_74:10">74:10</span> But I will declare for ever: I will
sing to the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_74:11">74:11</span> And I will break all the horns of
sinners: but the horns of the just shall be exalted.

<span id="an_75:1">75:1</span> Unto the end, in praises, a psalm for
Asaph: a canticle to the Assyrians.

<span id="an_75:2">75:2</span> In Judea God is known: his name is great
in Israel.

<span id="an_75:3">75:3</span> And his place is in peace: and his abode
in Sion:

<span id="an_75:4">75:4</span> There hath he broken the powers of bows,
the shield, the sword, and the battie.

<span id="an_75:5">75:5</span> Thou enlightenest wonderfully from the
everlasting hills.

<span id="an_75:6">75:6</span> All the foolish of heart were troubled.
They have slept their sleep; and all the men of riches have found
nothing in their hands.

<span id="an_75:7">75:7</span> At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, they have
all slumbered that mounted on horseback.

<span id="an_75:8">75:8</span> Thou art terrible, and who shall resist
thee? from that time thy wrath.

<span id="an_75:9">75:9</span> Thou hast caused judgment to be heard
from heaven: the earth trembled and was still,

<span id="an_75:10">75:10</span> When God arose in judgment, to save all
the meek of the earth.

<span id="an_75:11">75:11</span> For the thought of man shall give
praise to thee: and the remainders of the thought shall keep holiday to
thee.

<span id="an_75:12">75:12</span> Vow ye, and pay to the Lord your God:
all you that are round about him bring presents. To him that is
terrible,

<span id="an_75:13">75:13</span> even to him who taketh away the spirit
of princes: to the terrible with the kings of the earth.

<span id="an_76:1">76:1</span> Unto the end, for Idithun, a psalm of
Asaph.

<span id="an_76:2">76:2</span> I cried to the Lord with my voice; to God
with my voice, and he gave ear to me.

<span id="an_76:3">76:3</span> In the day of my trouble I sought God,
with my hands lifted up to him in the night, and I was not deceived. My
soul refused to be comforted:

<span id="an_76:4">76:4</span> I remembered God, and was delighted, and
was exercised, and my spirit swooned away.

<span id="an_76:5">76:5</span> My eyes prevented the watches: I was
troubled, and I spoke not.

<span id="an_76:6">76:6</span> I thought upon the days of old: and I had
in my mind the eternal years.

<span id="an_76:7">76:7</span> And I meditated in the night with my own
heart: and I was exercised and I swept my spirit.

<span id="an_76:8">76:8</span> Will God then cast off for ever? or will
he never be more favourable again?

<span id="an_76:9">76:9</span> Or will he cut off his mercy for ever,
from generation to generation?

<span id="an_76:10">76:10</span> Or will God forget to shew mercy? or
will he in his anger shut up his mercies?

<span id="an_76:11">76:11</span> And I said, Now have I begun: this is
the change of the right hand of the most High.

<span id="an_76:12">76:12</span> I remembered the works of the Lord: for
I will be mindful of thy wonders from the beginning.

<span id="an_76:13">76:13</span> And I will meditate on all thy works:
and will be employed in thy inventions.

<span id="an_76:14">76:14</span> Thy way, O God, is in the holy place:
who is the great God like our God?

<span id="an_76:15">76:15</span> Thou art the God that dost wonders.
Thou hast made thy power known among the nations:

<span id="an_76:16">76:16</span> with thy arm thou hast redeemed thy
people the children of Jacob and of Joseph.

<span id="an_76:17">76:17</span> The waters saw thee, O God, the waters
saw thee: and they were afraid, and the depths were troubled.

<span id="an_76:18">76:18</span> Great was the noise of the waters: the
clouds sent out a sound. For thy arrows pass:

<span id="an_76:19">76:19</span> the voice of thy thunder in a wheel.
Thy lightnings enlightened the world: the earth shook and trembled.

<span id="an_76:20">76:20</span> Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in
many waters: and thy footsteps shall not be known.

<span id="an_76:21">76:21</span> Thou hast conducted thy people like
sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron

<span id="an_77:1">77:1</span> Understanding for Asaph. Attend, O my
people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_77:2">77:2</span> I will open my mouth in parables: I will
utter propositions from the beginning.

<span id="an_77:3">77:3</span> How great things have we heard and known,
and our fathers have told us.

<span id="an_77:4">77:4</span> They have not been hidden from their
children, in another generation. Declaring the praises of the Lord, and
his powers, and his wonders which he hath done.

<span id="an_77:5">77:5</span> And he set up a testimony in Jacob: and
made a law in Israel. How great things he commanded our fathers, that
they should make the same known to their children:

<span id="an_77:6">77:6</span> that another generation might know them.
The children that should be born and should rise up, and declare them to
their children.

<span id="an_77:7">77:7</span> That they may put their hope in God and
may not forget the works of God: and may seek his commandments.

<span id="an_77:8">77:8</span> That they may not become like their
fathers, a perverse end exasperating generation. A generation that set
not their heart aright: and whose spirit was not faithful to God.

<span id="an_77:9">77:9</span> The sons of Ephraim who bend and shoot
with the bow: they have turned back in the day of battle.

<span id="an_77:10">77:10</span> They kept not the covenant of God: and
in his law they would not walk.

<span id="an_77:11">77:11</span> And they forgot his benefits, and his
wonders that he had shewn them.

<span id="an_77:12">77:12</span> Wonderful things did he do in the sight
of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the field of Tanis.

<span id="an_77:13">77:13</span> He divided the sea and brought them
through: and he made the waters to stand as in a vessel.

<span id="an_77:14">77:14</span> And he conducted them with a cloud by
day: and all the night with a light of

<span id="an_77:15">77:15</span> He struck the rock in the wilderness:
and gave them to drink, as out of the great deep.

<span id="an_77:16">77:16</span> He brought forth water out of the rock:
and made streams run down as rivers.

<span id="an_77:17">77:17</span> And they added yet more sin against
him: they provoked the most High to wrath in the place without water.

<span id="an_77:18">77:18</span> And they tempted God in their hearts,
by asking meat for their desires.

<span id="an_77:19">77:19</span> And they spoke ill of God: they said:
Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?

<span id="an_77:20">77:20</span> Because he struck the rock, and the
waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed. Can he also give bread,
or provide a table for his people?

<span id="an_77:21">77:21</span> Therefore the Lord heard, and was
angry: and a fire was kindled against Jacob, and wrath came up against
Israel.

<span id="an_77:22">77:22</span> Because they believed not in God: and
trusted not in his salvation.

<span id="an_77:23">77:23</span> And he had commanded the clouds from
above, and had opened the doors of heaven.

<span id="an_77:24">77:24</span> And had rained down manna upon them to
eat, and had given them the bread of heaven.

<span id="an_77:25">77:25</span> Man ate the bread of angels: he sent
them provisions in abundance.

<span id="an_77:26">77:26</span> He removed the south wind from heaven:
and by his power brought in the southwest wind.

<span id="an_77:27">77:27</span> And he rained upon them flesh as dust:
and feathered fowls like as the sand of the sea.

<span id="an_77:28">77:28</span> And they fell in the midst of their
camp, round about their pavilions.

<span id="an_77:29">77:29</span> So they did eat, and were filled
exceedingly, and he gave them their desire:

<span id="an_77:30">77:30</span> they were not defrauded of that which
they craved. As yet their meat was in their mouth:

<span id="an_77:31">77:31</span> and the wrath of God came upon them.
And he slew the fat ones amongst them, and brought down the chosen men
of Israel.

<span id="an_77:32">77:32</span> In all these things they sinned still:
and they believed not for his wondrous works.

<span id="an_77:33">77:33</span> And their days were consumed in vanity,
and their years in haste.

<span id="an_77:34">77:34</span> When he slew them, then they sought
him: and they returned, and came to him early in the morning.

<span id="an_77:35">77:35</span> And they remembered that God was their
helper: and the most high God their redeemer.

<span id="an_77:36">77:36</span> And they loved him with their mouth:
and with their tongue they lied unto him:

<span id="an_77:37">77:37</span> But their heart was not right with him:
nor were they counted faithful in his covenant.

<span id="an_77:38">77:38</span> But he is merciful, and will forgive
their sins: and will not destroy them. And many a time did he turn away
his anger: and did not kindle all his wrath.

<span id="an_77:39">77:39</span> And he remembered that they are flesh:
a wind that goeth and returneth not.

<span id="an_77:40">77:40</span> How often did they provoke him in the
desert: and move him to wrath in the place without water?

<span id="an_77:41">77:41</span> And they turned back and tempted God:
and grieved the holy one of Israel.

<span id="an_77:42">77:42</span> They remembered not his hand, in the
day that he redeemed them from the hand of him that afflicted them:

<span id="an_77:43">77:43</span> How he wrought his signs in Egypt, and
his wonders in the field of Tanis.

<span id="an_77:44">77:44</span> And he turned their rivers into blood,
and their showers that they might, not drink.

<span id="an_77:45">77:45</span> He sent amongst them divers sores of
flies, which devoured them: and frogs which destroyed them.

<span id="an_77:46">77:46</span> And he gave up their fruits to the
blast, and their labours to the locust.

<span id="an_77:47">77:47</span> And he destroyed their vineyards with
hail, and their mulberry trees with hoarfrost.

<span id="an_77:48">77:48</span> And he gave up their cattle to the
hail, and their stock to the fire.

<span id="an_77:49">77:49</span> And he sent upon them the wrath of his
indignation: indignation and wrath and trouble, which he sent by evil
angels.

<span id="an_77:50">77:50</span> He made a way for a path to his anger:
he spared not their souls from death, and their cattle he shut up in
death.

<span id="an_77:51">77:51</span> And he killed all the firstborn in the
land of Egypt: the firstfruits of all their labour in the tabernacles of
Cham.

<span id="an_77:52">77:52</span> And he took away his own people as
sheep: and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.

<span id="an_77:53">77:53</span> And he brought them out in hope, and
they feared not: and the sea overwhelmed their enemies.

<span id="an_77:54">77:54</span> And he brought them into the mountain
of his sanctuary: the mountain which his right hand had purchased. And
he cast out the Gentiles before them: and by lot divided to them their
land by a line of distribution.

<span id="an_77:55">77:55</span> And he made the tribes of Israel to
dwell in their tabernacles.

<span id="an_77:56">77:56</span> Yet they tempted, and provoked the most
high God: and they kept not his testimonies.

<span id="an_77:57">77:57</span> And they turned away, and kept not the
covenant: even like their fathers they were turned aside as a crooked
bow.

<span id="an_77:58">77:58</span> They provoked him to anger on their
hills: and moved him to jealousy with their graven things.

<span id="an_77:59">77:59</span> God heard, and despised them, and he
reduced Israel exceedingly as it were to nothing.

<span id="an_77:60">77:60</span> And he put away the tabernacle of Silo,
his tabernacle where he dwelt among men.

<span id="an_77:61">77:61</span> And he delivered their strength into
captivity: and their beauty into the hands of the enemy.

<span id="an_77:62">77:62</span> And he shut up his people under the
sword: and he despised his inheritance.

<span id="an_77:63">77:63</span> Fire consumed their young men: and
their maidens were not lamented.

<span id="an_77:64">77:64</span> Their priests fell by the sword: and
their widows did not mourn.

<span id="an_77:65">77:65</span> And the Lord was awaked as one out of
sleep, and like a mighty man that hath been surfeited with wine.

<span id="an_77:66">77:66</span> And he smote his enemies on the hinder
parts: he put them to an everlasting reproach.

<span id="an_77:67">77:67</span> And he rejected the tabernacle of
Joseph: and chose not the tribe of Ephraim:

<span id="an_77:68">77:68</span> But he chose the tribe of Juda, mount
Sion which he loved.

<span id="an_77:69">77:69</span> And he built his sanctuary as of
unicorns, in the land which he founded for ever.

<span id="an_77:70">77:70</span> And he chose his servant David, and
took him from the hocks of sheep: he brought him from following the ewes
great with young,

<span id="an_77:71">77:71</span> To feed Jacob his servant, and Israel
his inheritance.

<span id="an_77:72">77:72</span> And he fed them in the innocence of his
heart: and conducted them by the skilfulness of his hands.

<span id="an_78:1">78:1</span> A psalm for Asaph. O God, the heathens
are come into thy inheritance, they have defiled thy holy temple: they
have made Jerusalem as a place to keep fruit.

<span id="an_78:2">78:2</span> They have given the dead bodies of thy
servants to be meat for the fowls of the air: the flesh of thy saints
for the beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_78:3">78:3</span> They have poured out their blood as
water, round about Jerusalem and there was none to bury them.

<span id="an_78:4">78:4</span> We are become a reproach to our
neighbours: a scorn and derision to them that are round about us.

<span id="an_78:5">78:5</span> How long, O Lord, wilt thou be angry for
ever: shall thy zeal be kindled like a fire?

<span id="an_78:6">78:6</span> Pour out thy wrath upon the nations that
have not known thee: and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy
name.

<span id="an_78:7">78:7</span> Because they have devoured Jacob; and
have laid waste his place.

<span id="an_78:8">78:8</span> Remember not our former iniquities: let
thy mercies speedily prevent us, for we are become exceeding poor.

<span id="an_78:9">78:9</span> Help us, O God, our saviour: and for the
glory of thy name, O Lord, deliver us: and forgive us our sins for thy
name's sake:

<span id="an_78:10">78:10</span> Lest they should say among the
Gentiles: Where is their God? And let him be made known among the
nations before our eyes, By the revenging the blood of thy servants,
which hath been shed:

<span id="an_78:11">78:11</span> let the sighing of the prisoners come
in before thee. According to the greatness of thy arm, take possession
of the children of them that have been put to death.

<span id="an_78:12">78:12</span> And render to our neighbours sevenfold
in their bosom: the reproach wherewith they have reproached thee, O
Lord.

<span id="an_78:13">78:13</span> But we thy people, and the sheep of thy
pasture, will give thanks to thee for ever. We will shew forth thy
praise, unto generation and generation.

<span id="an_79:1">79:1</span> Unto the end, for them that shall he
changed, a testimony for Asaph, a psalm.

<span id="an_79:2">79:2</span> Give ear, O thou that rulest Israel: thou
that leadest Joseph like a sheep. Thou that sittest upon the cherubims,
shine forth

<span id="an_79:3">79:3</span> before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses.
Stir up thy might, and come to save us.

<span id="an_79:4">79:4</span> Convert us, O God: and shew us thy face,
and we shall be saved.

<span id="an_79:5">79:5</span> O Lord God of hosts, how long wilt thou
be angry against the prayer of thy servant?

<span id="an_79:6">79:6</span> How long wilt thou feed us with the bread
of tears: and give us for our drink tears in measure?

<span id="an_79:7">79:7</span> Thou hast made us to be a contradiction
to our neighbours: and our enemies have scoffed at us.

<span id="an_79:8">79:8</span> O God of hosts, convert us: and shew thy
face, and we shall be saved.

<span id="an_79:9">79:9</span> Thou hast brought a vineyard out of
Egypt: thou hast cast cut the Gentiles and planted it.

<span id="an_79:10">79:10</span> Thou wast the guide of its journey in
its sight: thou plantedst the roots thereof, and it filled the land.

<span id="an_79:11">79:11</span> The shadow of it covered the hills: and
the branches thereof the cedars of God.

<span id="an_79:12">79:12</span> It stretched forth its branches unto
the sea, and its boughs unto the river.

<span id="an_79:13">79:13</span> Why hast thou broken down the hedge
thereof, so that all they who pass by the way do pluck it?

<span id="an_79:14">79:14</span> The boar out of the wood hath laid it
waste: and a singular wild beast hath devoured it.

<span id="an_79:15">79:15</span> Turn again, O God of hosts, look down
from heaven, and see, and visit this vineyard:

<span id="an_79:16">79:16</span> And perfect the same which thy right
hand hath planted: and upon the son of man whom thou hast confirmed for
thyself.

<span id="an_79:17">79:17</span> Things set on fire and dug down shall
perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.

<span id="an_79:18">79:18</span> Let thy hand be upon the man of thy
right hand: and upon the son of man whom thou hast confirmed for
thyself.

<span id="an_79:19">79:19</span> And we depart not from thee, thou shalt
quicken us: and we will call upon thy name.

<span id="an_79:20">79:20</span> O Lord God of hosts, convert us: and
shew thy face, and we shall be saved.

<span id="an_80:1">80:1</span> Unto the end, for the winepresses, a
psalm for Asaph himself.

<span id="an_80:2">80:2</span> Rejoice to God our helper: sing aloud to
the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_80:3">80:3</span> Take a psalm, and bring hither the
timbrel: the pleasant psaltery with the harp.

<span id="an_80:4">80:4</span> Blow up the trumpet on the new moon, on
the noted day of your solemnity.

<span id="an_80:5">80:5</span> For it is a commandment in Israel, and a
judgment to the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_80:6">80:6</span> He ordained it for a testimony in Joseph,
when he came out of the land of Egypt: he heard a tongue which he knew
not.

<span id="an_80:7">80:7</span> He removed his back from the burdens: his
hands had served in baskets.

<span id="an_80:8">80:8</span> Thou calledst upon me in affliction, and
I delivered thee: I heard thee in the secret place of tempest: I proved
thee at the waters of contradiction.

<span id="an_80:9">80:9</span> Hear, O my people, and I will testify to
thee: O Israel, if thou wilt hearken to me,

<span id="an_80:10">80:10</span> there shall be no new god in thee:
neither shalt thou adore a strange god.

<span id="an_80:11">80:11</span> For I am the Lord thy God, who brought
thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

<span id="an_80:12">80:12</span> But my people heard not my voice: and
Israel hearkened not to me.

<span id="an_80:13">80:13</span> So I let them go according to the
desires of their heart: they shall walk in their own inventions.

<span id="an_80:14">80:14</span> If my people had heard me: if Israel
had walked in my ways:

<span id="an_80:15">80:15</span> I should soon have humbled their
enemies, and laid my hand on them that troubled them.

<span id="an_80:16">80:16</span> The enemies of the Lord have lied to
him: and their time shall be for ever.

<span id="an_80:17">80:17</span> And he fed them with the fat of wheat,
and filled them with honey out of the rock.

<span id="an_81:1">81:1</span> A psalm for Asaph. God hath stood in the
congregation of gods: and being in the midst of them he judgeth gods.

<span id="an_81:2">81:2</span> How long will you judge unjustly: and
accept the persons of the wicked?

<span id="an_81:3">81:3</span> Judge for the needy and fatherless: do
justice to the humble and the poor.

<span id="an_81:4">81:4</span> Rescue the poor; and deliver the needy
out of the hand of the sinner.

<span id="an_81:5">81:5</span> They have not known nor understood: they
walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth shall be moved.

<span id="an_81:6">81:6</span> I have said: You are gods and all of you
the sons of the most High.

<span id="an_81:7">81:7</span> But you like men shall die: and shall
fall like one of the princes.

<span id="an_81:8">81:8</span> Arise, O God, judge thou the earth: for
thou shalt inherit among all the nations.

<span id="an_82:1">82:1</span> A canticle of a psalm for Asaph.

<span id="an_82:2">82:2</span> O God, who shall be like to thee? hold
not thy peace, neither be thou still, O God.

<span id="an_82:3">82:3</span> For lo, thy enemies have made a noise:
and they that hate thee have lifted up the head.

<span id="an_82:4">82:4</span> They have taken a malicious counsel
against thy people, and have consulted against thy saints.

<span id="an_82:5">82:5</span> They have said: Come and let us destroy
them, so that they be not a nation: and let the name of Israel be
remembered no more.

<span id="an_82:6">82:6</span> For they have contrived with one consent:
they have made a covenant together against thee,

<span id="an_82:7">82:7</span> the tabernacles of the Edomites, and the
Ismahelites: Moab, and the Agarens,

<span id="an_82:8">82:8</span> Gebal, and Ammon and Amalec: the
Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tyre.

<span id="an_82:9">82:9</span> Yea, and the Assyrian also is joined with
them: they are come to the aid of the sons of Lot.

<span id="an_82:10">82:10</span> Do to them as thou didst to Madian and
to Sisara: as to Jabin at the brook of Cisson.

<span id="an_82:11">82:11</span> Who perished at Endor: and became as
dung for the earth.

<span id="an_82:12">82:12</span> Make their princes like Oreb, and Zeb,
and Zebee, and Salmana. All their princes,

<span id="an_82:13">82:13</span> who have said: Let us possess the
sanctuary of God for an inheritance.

<span id="an_82:14">82:14</span> O my God, make them like a wheel; and
as stubble before the wind.

<span id="an_82:15">82:15</span> As fire which burneth the wood: and as
a flame burning mountains:

<span id="an_82:16">82:16</span> So shalt thou pursue them with thy
tempest: and shalt trouble them in thy wrath.

<span id="an_82:17">82:17</span> Fill their faces with shame; and they
shall seek thy name, O Lord.

<span id="an_82:18">82:18</span> Let them be ashamed and troubled for
ever and ever: and let them be confounded and perish.

<span id="an_82:19">82:19</span> And let them know that the Lord is thy
name: thou alone art the most High over all the earth.

<span id="an_83:1">83:1</span> Unto the end, for the winepresses, a
psalm for the sons of Core.

<span id="an_83:2">83:2</span> How lovely are thy tabernacles, O Lord of
host!

<span id="an_83:3">83:3</span> my soul longeth and fainteth for the
courts of the Lord. My heart and my flesh have rejoiced in the living
God.

<span id="an_83:4">83:4</span> For the sparrow hath found herself a
house, and the turtle a nest for herself where she may lay her young
ones: Thy altars, O Lord of hosts, my king and my God.

<span id="an_83:5">83:5</span> Blessed are they that dwell in thy house,
O Lord: they shall praise thee for ever and ever.

<span id="an_83:6">83:6</span> Blessed is the man whose help is from
thee: in his heart he hath disposed to ascend by steps,

<span id="an_83:7">83:7</span> in the vale of tears, in the place which
be hath set.

<span id="an_83:8">83:8</span> For the lawgiver shall give a blessing,
they shall go from virtue to virtue: the God of gods shall be seen in
Sion.

<span id="an_83:9">83:9</span> O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give
ear, O God of Jacob.

<span id="an_83:10">83:10</span> Behold, O God our protector: and look
on the face of thy Christ.

<span id="an_83:11">83:11</span> For better is one day in thy courts
above thousands. I have chosen to be an abject in the house of my God,
rather than to dwell in the tabernacles of sinners.

<span id="an_83:12">83:12</span> For God loveth mercy and truth: the
Lord will give grace and glory.

<span id="an_83:13">83:13</span> He will not deprive of good things them
that walk in innocence : O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that
trusteth in thee.

<span id="an_84:1">84:1</span> Unto the end, for the sons of Core, a
psalm.

<span id="an_84:2">84:2</span> Lord, thou hast blessed thy land: thou
hast turned away the captivity of Jacob.

<span id="an_84:3">84:3</span> Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy
people: thou hast covered all their sins.

<span id="an_84:4">84:4</span> Thou hast mitigated all thy anger: thou
best turned away from the wrath of thy indignation.

<span id="an_84:5">84:5</span> Convert us, O God our saviour: and turn
off thy anger from us.

<span id="an_84:6">84:6</span> Wilt thou be angry with us for ever: or
wilt thou extend thy wrath from generation to generation?

<span id="an_84:7">84:7</span> Thou wilt turn, O God, and bring us to
life: and thy people shall rejoice in thee.

<span id="an_84:8">84:8</span> Shew us, O Lord, thy mercy; and grant us
thy salvation.

<span id="an_84:9">84:9</span> I will hear what the Lord God will speak
in me: for he will speak peace unto his people: And unto his saints: and
unto them that are converted to the heart.

<span id="an_84:10">84:10</span> Surely his salvation is near to them
that fear him: that glory may dwell in our land.

<span id="an_84:11">84:11</span> Mercy and truth have met each other:
justice and peace have kissed.

<span id="an_84:12">84:12</span> Truth is sprung out of the earth: and
justice hath looked down from heaven.

<span id="an_84:13">84:13</span> For the Lord will give goodness: and
our earth shall yield her fruit.

<span id="an_84:14">84:14</span> Justice shall walk before him: and
shall set his steps in the way.

<span id="an_85:1">85:1</span> A prayer for David himself. Incline thy
ear, O Lord, and hear me: for I am needy and poor.

<span id="an_85:2">85:2</span> Preserve my soul, for I am holy: save thy
servant, O my God, that trusteth in thee.

<span id="an_85:3">85:3</span> Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I have
cried to thee all the day.

<span id="an_85:4">85:4</span> Give joy to the soul of thy servant, for
to thee, O Lord, I have lifted up my soul.

<span id="an_85:5">85:5</span> For thou, O Lord, art sweet and mild: and
plenteous in mercy to all that call upon thee.

<span id="an_85:6">85:6</span> Give ear, O Lord, to my prayer: and
attend to the voice of my petition.

<span id="an_85:7">85:7</span> I have called upon thee in the day of my
trouble: because thou hast heard me.

<span id="an_85:8">85:8</span> There is none among the gods like unto
thee, O Lord: and there is none according to thy works.

<span id="an_85:9">85:9</span> All the nations thou hast made shall come
and adore before thee, O Lord: and they shall glorify thy name.

<span id="an_85:10">85:10</span> For thou art great and dost wonderful
things: thou art God alone.

<span id="an_85:11">85:11</span> Conduct me, O Lord, in thy way, and I
will walk in thy truth: let my heart rejoice that it may fear thy name.

<span id="an_85:12">85:12</span> I will praise thee, O Lord my God: with
my whole heart, and I will glorify thy name for ever:

<span id="an_85:13">85:13</span> For thy mercy is great towards me: and
thou hast delivered my soul out of the lower hell.

<span id="an_85:14">85:14</span> O God, the wicked are risen up against
me, and the assembly of the mighty have sought my soul: and they have
not set thee before their eyes.

<span id="an_85:15">85:15</span> And thou, O Lord, art a God of
compassion, and merciful, patient, and of much mercy, and true.

<span id="an_85:16">85:16</span> O look upon me, and have mercy on me:
give thy command to thy servant, and save the son of thy handmaid.

<span id="an_85:17">85:17</span> Shew me a token for good: that they who
hate me may see, and be confounded, because thou, O Lord, hast helped me
and hast comforted me.

<span id="an_86:1">86:1</span> For the sons of Core, a psalm of a
canticle. The foundations thereof are in the holy mountains:

<span id="an_86:2">86:2</span> The Lord loveth the gates of Sion above
all the tabernacles of Jacob.

<span id="an_86:3">86:3</span> Glorious things are said of thee, O city
of God.

<span id="an_86:4">86:4</span> I will be mindful of Rahab and of Babylon
knowing me. Behold the foreigners, and Tyre, and the people of the
Ethiopians, these were there.

<span id="an_86:5">86:5</span> Shall not Sion say: This man and that man
is born in her? and the Highest himself hath founded her.

<span id="an_86:6">86:6</span> The Lord shall tell in his writings of
peoples and of princes, of them that have been in her.

<span id="an_86:7">86:7</span> The dwelling in thee is as it were of all
rejoicing.

<span id="an_87:1">87:1</span> A canticle of a psalm for the sons of
Core: unto the end, for Maheleth, to answer understanding of Eman the
Ezrahite.

<span id="an_87:2">87:2</span> O Lord, the God of my salvation: I have
cried in the day, and in the night before thee.

<span id="an_87:3">87:3</span> Let my prayer come in before thee:
incline thy ear to my petition.

<span id="an_87:4">87:4</span> For my soul is filled with evils: and my
life hath drawn nigh to hell.

<span id="an_87:5">87:5</span> I am counted among them that go down to
the pit: I am become as a man without help,

<span id="an_87:6">87:6</span> free among the dead. Like the slain
sleeping in the sepulchres, whom thou rememberest no more: and they are
cast off from thy hand.

<span id="an_87:7">87:7</span> They have laid me in the lower pit: in
the dark places, and in the shadow of death.

<span id="an_87:8">87:8</span> Thy wrath is strong over me: and all thy
waves thou hast brought in upon me.

<span id="an_87:9">87:9</span> Thou hast put away my acquaintance far
from me: they have set me an abomination to themselves. I was delivered
up, and came not forth:

<span id="an_87:10">87:10</span> my eyes languished through poverty. All
the day I cried to thee, O Lord: I stretched out my hands to thee.

<span id="an_87:11">87:11</span> Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? or
shall physicians raise to life, and give praise to thee?

<span id="an_87:12">87:12</span> Shall any one in the sepulchre declare
thy mercy: and thy truth in destruction?

<span id="an_87:13">87:13</span> Shall thy wonders be known in the dark;
and thy justice in the land of forgetfulness?

<span id="an_87:14">87:14</span> But I, O Lord, have cried to thee: and
in the morning my prayer shall prevent thee.

<span id="an_87:15">87:15</span> Lord, why castest thou off my prayer:
why turnest thou away thy face from me?

<span id="an_87:16">87:16</span> I am poor, and in labours from my
youth: and being exalted have been humbled and troubled.

<span id="an_87:17">87:17</span> Thy wrath hath come upon me: and thy
terrors have troubled me.

<span id="an_87:18">87:18</span> They have come round about me like
water all the day: they have compassed me about together.

<span id="an_87:19">87:19</span> Friend and neighbour thou hast put far
from me: and my acquaintance, because of misery.

<span id="an_88:1">88:1</span> Of understanding, for Ethan the Ezrahite.

<span id="an_88:2">88:2</span> The mercies of the Lord I will sing for
ever. I will shew forth thy truth with my mouth to generation and
generation.

<span id="an_88:3">88:3</span> For thou hast said: Mercy shall be built
up for ever in the heavens: thy truth shall be prepared in them.

<span id="an_88:4">88:4</span> I have made a covenant with my elect: I
have sworn to David my servant:

<span id="an_88:5">88:5</span> Thy seed will I settle for ever. And I
will build up thy throne unto generation and generation.

<span id="an_88:6">88:6</span> The heavens shall confess thy wonders, O
Lord: and thy truth in the church of the saints.

<span id="an_88:7">88:7</span> For who in the clouds can be compared to
the Lord: or who among the sons of God shall be like to God?

<span id="an_88:8">88:8</span> God, who is glorified in the assembly of
the saints: great and terrible above all them that are about him.

<span id="an_88:9">88:9</span> O Lord God of hosts, who is like to thee?
thou art mighty, O Lord, and thy truth is round about thee.

<span id="an_88:10">88:10</span> Thou rulest the power of the sea: and
appeasest the motion of the waves thereof.

<span id="an_88:11">88:11</span> Thou hast humbled the proud one, as one
that is slain: with the arm of thy strength thou hast scattered thy
enemies.

<span id="an_88:12">88:12</span> Thine are the heavens, and thine is the
earth: the world and the fulness thereof thou hast founded:

<span id="an_88:13">88:13</span> the north and the sea thou hast
created. Thabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy name:

<span id="an_88:14">88:14</span> thy arm is with might. Let thy hand be
strengthened, and thy right hand exalted:

<span id="an_88:15">88:15</span> justice and judgment are the
preparation of thy throne. Mercy and truth shall go before thy face:

<span id="an_88:16">88:16</span> blessed is the people that knoweth
jubilation. They shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance:

<span id="an_88:17">88:17</span> and in thy name they shall rejoice all
the day, and in thy justice they shall be exalted.

<span id="an_88:18">88:18</span> For thou art the glory of their
strength: and in thy good pleasure shall our horn be exalted.

<span id="an_88:19">88:19</span> For our protection is of the Lord, and
of our king the holy one of Israel.

<span id="an_88:20">88:20</span> Then thou spokest in a vision to thy
saints, and saidst: I have laid help upon one that is mighty, and have
exalted one chosen out of my people.

<span id="an_88:21">88:21</span> I have found David my servant: with my
holy oil I have anointed him.

<span id="an_88:22">88:22</span> For my hand shall help him: and my arm
shall strengthen him.

<span id="an_88:23">88:23</span> The enemy shall have no advantage over
him: nor the son of iniquity have power to hurt him.

<span id="an_88:24">88:24</span> And I will cut down his enemies before
his face; and them that hate him I will put to flight.

<span id="an_88:25">88:25</span> And my truth and my mercy shall be with
him: and in my name shall his horn be exalted.

<span id="an_88:26">88:26</span> And I will set his hand in the sea; and
his right hand in the rivers.

<span id="an_88:27">88:27</span> He shall cry out to me: Thou art my
father: my God, and the support of my salvation.

<span id="an_88:28">88:28</span> And I will make him my firstborn, high
above the kings of the earth.

<span id="an_88:29">88:29</span> I will keep my mercy for him for ever:
and my covenant faithful to him.

<span id="an_88:30">88:30</span> And I will make his seed to endure for
evermore: and his throne as the days of heaven.

<span id="an_88:31">88:31</span> And if his children forsake my law, and
walk not in my judgments:

<span id="an_88:32">88:32</span> If they profane my justices: and keep
not my commandments:

<span id="an_88:33">88:33</span> I will visit their iniquities with a
rod: and their sins with stripes.

<span id="an_88:34">88:34</span> But my mercy I will not take away from
him: nor will I suffer my truth to fail.

<span id="an_88:35">88:35</span> Neither will I profane my covenant: and
the words that proceed from my mouth I will not make void.

<span id="an_88:36">88:36</span> Once have I sworn by my holiness: I
will not lie unto David:

<span id="an_88:37">88:37</span> his seed shall endure for ever.

<span id="an_88:38">88:38</span> And his throne as the sun before me:
and as the moon perfect for ever, and a faithful witness in heaven.

<span id="an_88:39">88:39</span> But thou hast rejected and despised:
thou hast been angry with thy anointed.

<span id="an_88:40">88:40</span> Thou hast overthrown the covenant of
thy servant: thou hast profaned his sanctuary on the earth.

<span id="an_88:41">88:41</span> Thou hast broken down all his hedges:
thou hast made his strength fear.

<span id="an_88:42">88:42</span> All that pass by the way have robbed
him: he is become a reproach to his neighbours.

<span id="an_88:43">88:43</span> Thou hast set up the right hand of them
that oppress him: thou hast made all his enemies to rejoice.

<span id="an_88:44">88:44</span> Thou hast turned away the help of his
sword; and hast not assisted him in battle.

<span id="an_88:45">88:45</span> Thou hast made his purification to
cease: and thou hast cast his throne down to the ground.

<span id="an_88:46">88:46</span> Thou hast shortened the days of his
time: thou hast covered him with confusion.

<span id="an_88:47">88:47</span> How long, O Lord, turnest thou away
unto the end? shall thy anger burn like fire?

<span id="an_88:48">88:48</span> Remember what my substance is for hast
thou made all the children of men in vain?

<span id="an_88:49">88:49</span> Who is the man that shall live, and not
see death: that shall deliver his soul from the hand of hell?

<span id="an_88:50">88:50</span> Lord, where are thy ancient mercies,
according to what thou didst swear to David in thy truth?

<span id="an_88:51">88:51</span> Be mindful, O Lord, of the reproach of
thy servants (which I have held in my bosom) of many nations:

<span id="an_88:52">88:52</span> Wherewith thy enemies have reproached,
O Lord; wherewith they have reproached the change of thy anointed.

<span id="an_88:53">88:53</span> Blessed be the Lord for evermore. So be
it. So be it.

<span id="an_89:1">89:1</span> A prayer of Moses the man of God. Lord,
thou hast been our refuge from generation to generation.

<span id="an_89:2">89:2</span> Before the mountains were made, or the
earth and the world was formed; from eternity and to eternity thou art
God.

<span id="an_89:3">89:3</span> Turn not man away to be brought low: and
thou hast said: Be converted, O ye sons of men.

<span id="an_89:4">89:4</span> For a thousand years in thy sight are as
yesterday, which is past. And as a watch in the night,

<span id="an_89:5">89:5</span> things that are counted nothing, shall
their years be.

<span id="an_89:6">89:6</span> In the morning man shall grow up like
grass; in the morning he shall flourish and pass away: in the evening he
shall fall, grow dry, and wither.

<span id="an_89:7">89:7</span> For in thy wrath we have fainted away:
and are troubled in thy indignation.

<span id="an_89:8">89:8</span> Thou hast set our iniquities before thy
eyes: our life in the light of thy countenance.

<span id="an_89:9">89:9</span> For all our days are spent; and in thy
wrath we have fainted away. Our years shall be considered spider:

<span id="an_89:10">89:10</span> the days of our years in them are
threescore and ten years. But if in the strong they be fourscore years:
and what is more of them is labour and sorrow. For mildness is come upon
us: and we shall be corrected.

<span id="an_89:11">89:11</span> Who knoweth the power of thy anger, and
for thy fear

<span id="an_89:12">89:12</span> can number thy wrath? So make thy right
hand known: and men learned in heart, in wisdom.

<span id="an_89:13">89:13</span> Return, O Lord, how long? and be
entreated in favour of thy servants.

<span id="an_89:14">89:14</span> We are filled in the morning with thy
mercy: and we have rejoiced, and are delighted all our days.

<span id="an_89:15">89:15</span> We have rejoiced for the days in which
thou hast humbled us: for the years in which we have seen evils.

<span id="an_89:16">89:16</span> Look upon thy servants and upon their
works: and direct their children.

<span id="an_89:17">89:17</span> And let the brightness of the Lord our
God be upon us: and direct thou the works of our hands over us; yea, the
work of our hands do thou direct.

<span id="an_90:1">90:1</span> The praise of a canticle for David. He
that dwelleth in the aid of the most High, shall abide under the
protection of the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_90:2">90:2</span> He shall say to the Lord: Thou art my
protector, and my refuge: my God, in him will I trust.

<span id="an_90:3">90:3</span> For he hath delivered me from the snare
of the hunters: and from the sharp word.

<span id="an_90:4">90:4</span> He will overshadow thee with his
shoulders: and under his wings thou shalt trust.

<span id="an_90:5">90:5</span> His truth shall compass thee with a
shield: thou shalt not be afraid of the terror of the night.

<span id="an_90:6">90:6</span> Of the arrow that flieth in the day, of
the business that walketh about in the dark: of invasion, or of the
noonday devil.

<span id="an_90:7">90:7</span> A thousand shall fall at thy side, and
ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come nigh thee.

<span id="an_90:8">90:8</span> But thou shalt consider with thy eyes:
and shalt see the reward of the wicked.

<span id="an_90:9">90:9</span> Because thou, O Lord, art my hope: thou
hast made the most High thy refuge.

<span id="an_90:10">90:10</span> There shall no evil come to thee: nor
shall the scourge come near thy dwelling.

<span id="an_90:11">90:11</span> For he hath given his angels charge
over thee; to keep thee in all thy ways.

<span id="an_90:12">90:12</span> In their hands they shall bear thee up:
lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.

<span id="an_90:13">90:13</span> Thou shalt walk upon the asp and the
basilisk: and thou shalt trample under foot the lion and the dragon.

<span id="an_90:14">90:14</span> Because he hoped in me I will deliver
him: I will protect him because he hath known my name.

<span id="an_90:15">90:15</span> He shall cry to me, and I will hear
him: I am with him in tribulation, I will deliver him, and I will
glorify him.

<span id="an_90:16">90:16</span> I will fill him with length of days;
and I will shew him my salvation.

<span id="an_91:1">91:1</span> A psalm of a canticle on the sabbath day.

<span id="an_91:2">91:2</span> It is good to give praise to the Lord:
and to sing to thy name, O most High.

<span id="an_91:3">91:3</span> To shew forth thy mercy in the morning,
and thy truth in the night:

<span id="an_91:4">91:4</span> Upon an instrument of ten strings, upon
the psaltery: with a canticle upon the harp.

<span id="an_91:5">91:5</span> For thou hast given me, O Lord, a delight
in thy doings: and in the works of thy hands I shall rejoice.

<span id="an_91:6">91:6</span> O Lord, how great are thy works! thy
thoughts are exceeding deep.

<span id="an_91:7">91:7</span> The senseless man shall not know: nor
will the fool understand these things.

<span id="an_91:8">91:8</span> When the wicked shall spring up as grass:
and all the workers of iniquity shall appear: That they may perish for
ever and ever:

<span id="an_91:9">91:9</span> but thou, O Lord, art most high for
evermore.

<span id="an_91:10">91:10</span> For behold thy enemies, O Lord, for
behold thy enemies shall perish: and all the workers of iniquity shall
be scattered.

<span id="an_91:11">91:11</span> But my horn shall be exalted like that
of the unicorn: and my old age in plentiful mercy.

<span id="an_91:12">91:12</span> My eye also hath looked down upon my
enemies: and my ear shall hear of the downfall of the malignant that
rise up against me.

<span id="an_91:13">91:13</span> The just shall flourish like the palm
tree: he shall grow up like the cedar of Libanus.

<span id="an_91:14">91:14</span> They that are planted in the house of
the Lord shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God.

<span id="an_91:15">91:15</span> They shall still increase in a fruitful
old age: and shall be well treated,

<span id="an_91:16">91:16</span> that they may shew, That the Lord our
God is righteous, and there is no iniquity in him.

<span id="an_92:1">92:1</span> The Lord hath reigned, he is clothed with
beauty: the Lord is clothed with strength, and hath girded himself. For
he hath established the world which shall not be moved.

<span id="an_92:2">92:2</span> Thy throne is prepared from of old: thou
art from everlasting.

<span id="an_92:3">92:3</span> The floods have lifted up, O Lord: the
floods have lifted up their voice. The floods have lifted up their
waves,

<span id="an_92:4">92:4</span> with the noise of many waters. Wonderful
are the surges of the sea: wonderful is the Lord on high.

<span id="an_92:5">92:5</span> Thy testimonies are become exceedingly
credible: holiness becometh thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.

<span id="an_93:1">93:1</span> The Lord is the God to whom revenge
belongeth: the God of revenge hath acted freely.

<span id="an_93:2">93:2</span> Lift up thyself, thou that judgest the
earth: render a reward to the proud.

<span id="an_93:3">93:3</span> How long shall sinners, O Lord: how long
shall sinners glory?

<span id="an_93:4">93:4</span> Shall they utter, and speak iniquity:
shall all speak who work injustice?

<span id="an_93:5">93:5</span> Thy people, O Lord, they have brought
low: and they have afflicted thy inheritance.

<span id="an_93:6">93:6</span> They have slain the widow and the
stranger: and they have murdered the fatherless.

<span id="an_93:7">93:7</span> And they have said: The Lord shall not
see: neither shall the God of Jacob understand.

<span id="an_93:8">93:8</span> Understand, ye senseless among the
people: and, you fools, be wise at last.

<span id="an_93:9">93:9</span> He that planted the ear, shall he not
hear? or he that formed the eye, doth he not consider?

<span id="an_93:10">93:10</span> He that chastiseth nations, shall he
not rebuke: he that teacheth man knowledge?

<span id="an_93:11">93:11</span> The Lord knoweth the thoughts of men,
that they are vain.

<span id="an_93:12">93:12</span> Blessed is the man whom thou shalt
instruct, O Lord: and shalt teach him out of thy law.

<span id="an_93:13">93:13</span> That thou mayst give him rest from the
evil days: till a pit be dug for the wicked.

<span id="an_93:14">93:14</span> For the Lord will not cast off his
people: neither will he forsake his own inheritance.

<span id="an_93:15">93:15</span> Until justice be turned into judgment:
and they that are near it are all the upright in heart.

<span id="an_93:16">93:16</span> Who shall rise up for me against the
evildoers? or who shall stand with me against the workers of iniquity?

<span id="an_93:17">93:17</span> Unless the Lord had been my helper, my
soul had almost dwelt in hell.

<span id="an_93:18">93:18</span> If I said: My foot is moved: thy mercy,
O Lord, assisted me.

<span id="an_93:19">93:19</span> According to the multitude of my
sorrows in my heart, thy comforts have given joy to my soul.

<span id="an_93:20">93:20</span> Doth the seat of iniquity stick to
thee, who framest labour in commandment?

<span id="an_93:21">93:21</span> They will hunt after the soul of the
just, and will condemn innocent blood.

<span id="an_93:22">93:22</span> But the Lord is my refuge: and my God
the help of my hope.

<span id="an_93:23">93:23</span> And he will render them their iniquity:
and in their malice he will destroy them: the Lord our God will destroy
them.

<span id="an_94:1">94:1</span> Come let us praise the Lord with joy: let
us joyfully sing to God our saviour.

<span id="an_94:2">94:2</span> Let us come before his presence with
thanksgiving; and make a joyful noise to him with psalms.

<span id="an_94:3">94:3</span> For the Lord is a great God, and a great
King above all gods.

<span id="an_94:4">94:4</span> For in his hand are all the ends of the
earth: and the heights of the mountains are his.

<span id="an_94:5">94:5</span> For the sea is his, and he made it: and
his hands formed the dry land.

<span id="an_94:6">94:6</span> Come let us adore and fall down: and weep
before the Lord that made us.

<span id="an_94:7">94:7</span> For he is the Lord our God: and we are
the people of his pasture and the sheep of his hand.

<span id="an_94:8">94:8</span> To day if you shall hear his voice,
harden not your hearts:

<span id="an_94:9">94:9</span> As in the provocation, according to the
day of temptation in the wilderness: where your fathers tempted me, they
proved me, and saw my works.

<span id="an_94:10">94:10</span> Forty years long was I offended with
that generation, and I said: These always err in heart.

<span id="an_94:11">94:11</span> And these men have not known my ways:
so I swore in my wrath that they shall not enter into my rest.

<span id="an_95:1">95:1</span> A canticle for David himself, when the
house was built after the captivity. Sing ye to the Lord a new canticle:
sing to the Lord, all the earth.

<span id="an_95:2">95:2</span> Sing ye to the Lord and bless his name:
shew forth his salvation from day to day.

<span id="an_95:3">95:3</span> Declare his glory among the Gentiles: his
wonders among all people.

<span id="an_95:4">95:4</span> For the Lord is great, and exceedingly to
be praised: he is to be feared above all gods.

<span id="an_95:5">95:5</span> For all the gods of the Gentiles are
devils: but the Lord made the heavens.

<span id="an_95:6">95:6</span> Praise and beauty are before him:
holiness and majesty in his sanctuary.

<span id="an_95:7">95:7</span> Bring ye to the Lord, O ye kindreds of
the Gentiles, bring ye to the Lord glory and honour:

<span id="an_95:8">95:8</span> bring to the Lord glory unto his name.
Bring up sacrifices, and come into his courts:

<span id="an_95:9">95:9</span> adore ye the Lord in his holy court. Let
all the earth be moved at his presence.

<span id="an_95:10">95:10</span> Say ye among the Gentiles, the Lord
hath reigned. For he hath corrected the world, which shall not be moved:
he will judge the people with justice.

<span id="an_95:11">95:11</span> Let the heavens rejoice, and let the
earth be glad, let the sea be moved, and the fulness thereof:

<span id="an_95:12">95:12</span> the fields and all things that are in
them shall be joyful. Then shall all the trees of the woods rejoice

<span id="an_95:13">95:13</span> before the face of the Lord, because he
cometh: because he cometh to judge the earth. He shall judge the world
with justice, and the people with his truth.

<span id="an_96:1">96:1</span> For the same David, when his land was
restored again to him. The Lord hath reigned, let the earth rejoice: let
many islands be glad.

<span id="an_96:2">96:2</span> Clouds and darkness are round about him:
justice and judgment are the establishment of his throne.

<span id="an_96:3">96:3</span> A fire shall go before him, and shall
burn his enemies round about.

<span id="an_96:4">96:4</span> His lightnings have shone forth to the
world: the earth saw and trembled.

<span id="an_96:5">96:5</span> The mountains melted like wax, at the
presence of the Lord: at the presence of the Lord of all the earth.

<span id="an_96:6">96:6</span> The heavens declared his justice: and all
people saw his glory.

<span id="an_96:7">96:7</span> Let them be all confounded that adore
graven things, and that glory in their idols. Adore him, all you his
angels:

<span id="an_96:8">96:8</span> Sion heard, and was glad. And the
daughters of Juda rejoiced, because of thy judgments, O Lord.

<span id="an_96:9">96:9</span> For thou art the most high Lord over all
the earth: thou art exalted exceedingly above all gods.

<span id="an_96:10">96:10</span> You that love the Lord, hate evil: the
Lord preserveth the souls of his saints, he will deliver them out of the
hand of the sinner.

<span id="an_96:11">96:11</span> Light is risen to the just, and joy to
the right of heart.

<span id="an_96:12">96:12</span> Rejoice, ye just, in the Lord: and give
praise to the remembrance of his holiness.

<span id="an_97:1">97:1</span> A psalm for David himself. Sing ye to the
Lord anew canticle: because he hath done wonderful things. His right
hand hath wrought for him salvation, and his arm is holy.

<span id="an_97:2">97:2</span> The Lord hath made known his salvation:
he hath revealed his justice in the sight of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_97:3">97:3</span> He hath remembered his mercy his truth
toward the house of Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the
salvation of our God.

<span id="an_97:4">97:4</span> Sing joyfully to God, all the earth; make
melody, rejoice and sing.

<span id="an_97:5">97:5</span> Sing praise to the Lord on the harp, on
the harp, and with the voice of a psalm:

<span id="an_97:6">97:6</span> with long trumpets, and sound of comet.
Make a joyful noise before the Lord our king:

<span id="an_97:7">97:7</span> let the sea be moved and the fulness
thereof: the world end they that dwell therein.

<span id="an_97:8">97:8</span> The rivers shall clap their hands, the
mountains shall rejoice together

<span id="an_97:9">97:9</span> at the presence of the Lord: because he
cometh to judge the earth. He shall judge the world with justice, and
the people with equity.

<span id="an_98:1">98:1</span> A psalm for David himself. The Lord hath
reigned, let the people be angry: he that sitteth on the cherubims: let
the earth be moved.

<span id="an_98:2">98:2</span> The Lord is great in Sion, and high above
all people.

<span id="an_98:3">98:3</span> Let them give praise to thy great name:
for it is terrible and holy:

<span id="an_98:4">98:4</span> and the king's honour loveth judgment.
Thou hast prepared directions: thou hast done judgment and justice in
Jacob.

<span id="an_98:5">98:5</span> Exalt ye the Lord our God, and adore his
footstool, for it is holy.

<span id="an_98:6">98:6</span> Moses and Aaron among his priests: and
Samuel among them that call upon his name. They called upon the Lord,
and he heard them:

<span id="an_98:7">98:7</span> he spoke to them in the pillar of the
cloud. They kept his testimonies, and the commandment which he gave
them.

<span id="an_98:8">98:8</span> Thou didst hear them, O Lord our God:
thou wast a merciful God to them, and taking vengeance on all their
inventions.

<span id="an_98:9">98:9</span> Exalt ye the Lord our God, and adore at
his holy mountain: for the Lord our God is holy.

<span id="an_99:1">99:1</span> A psalm of praise.

<span id="an_99:2">99:2</span> Sing joyfully to God, all the earth:
serve ye the Lord with gladness. Come in before his presence with
exceeding great joy.

<span id="an_99:3">99:3</span> Know ye that the Lord he is God: he made
us, and not we ourselves. We are his people and the sheep of his
pasture.

<span id="an_99:4">99:4</span> Go ye into his gates with praise, into
his courts with hymns: and give glory to him. Praise ye his name:

<span id="an_99:5">99:5</span> for the Lord is sweet, his mercy endureth
for ever, and his truth to generation and generation.

<span id="an_100:1">100:1</span> A psalm for David himself. Mercy and
judgment I will sing to thee, O Lord: I will sing,

<span id="an_100:2">100:2</span> and I will understand in the unspotted
way, when thou shalt come to me. I walked in the innocence of my heart,
in the midst of my house.

<span id="an_100:3">100:3</span> I did not set before my eyes any unjust
thing: I hated the workers of iniquities.

<span id="an_100:4">100:4</span> The perverse heart did not cleave to
me: and the malignant, that turned aside from me, I would not know.

<span id="an_100:5">100:5</span> The man that in private detracted his
neighbour, him did I persecute. With him that had a proud eye, and an
unsatiable heart, I would not eat.

<span id="an_100:6">100:6</span> My eyes were upon the faithful of the
earth, to sit with me: the man that walked in the perfect way, he served
me.

<span id="an_100:7">100:7</span> He that worketh pride shall not dwell
in the midst of my house: he that speaketh unjust things did not prosper
before my eyes.

<span id="an_100:8">100:8</span> In the morning I put to death all the
wicked of the land: that I might cut off all the workers of iniquity
from the city of the Lord.

<span id="an_101:1">101:1</span> The prayer of the poor man, when he was
anxious, and poured out his supplication before the Lord.

<span id="an_101:2">101:2</span> Hear, O Lord, my prayer: and let my cry
come to thee.

<span id="an_101:3">101:3</span> Turn not away thy face from me: in the
day when I am in trouble, incline thy ear to me. In what day soever I
shall call upon thee, hear me speedily.

<span id="an_101:4">101:4</span> For my days are vanished like smoke:
and my bones are grown dry like fuel for the fire.

<span id="an_101:5">101:5</span> I am smitten as grass, and my heart is
withered: because I forgot to eat my bread.

<span id="an_101:6">101:6</span> Through the voice of my groaning, my
bone hath cleaved to my flesh.

<span id="an_101:7">101:7</span> I am become like to a pelican of the
wilderness: I am like a night raven in the house.

<span id="an_101:8">101:8</span> I have watched, and am become as a
sparrow all alone on the housetop.

<span id="an_101:9">101:9</span> All the day long my enemies reproached
me: and they that praised me did swear against me.

<span id="an_101:10">101:10</span> For I did eat ashes like bread, and
mingled my drink with weeping.

<span id="an_101:11">101:11</span> Because of thy anger and indignation:
for having lifted me up thou hast thrown me down.

<span id="an_101:12">101:12</span> My days have declined like a shadow,
and I am withered like grass.

<span id="an_101:13">101:13</span> But thou, O Lord, endurest for ever:
and thy memorial to all generations.

<span id="an_101:14">101:14</span> Thou shalt arise and have mercy on
Sion: for it is time to have mercy on it, for the time is come.

<span id="an_101:15">101:15</span> For the stones thereof have pleased
thy servants: and they shall have pity on the earth thereof.

<span id="an_101:16">101:16</span> And the Gentiles shall fear thy name,
O Lord, and all the kings of the earth thy glory.

<span id="an_101:17">101:17</span> For the Lord hath built up Sion: and
he shall be seen in his glory.

<span id="an_101:18">101:18</span> He hath had regard to the prayer of
the humble: and he hath not despised their petition.

<span id="an_101:19">101:19</span> Let these things be written unto
another generation: and the people that shall be created shall praise
the Lord:

<span id="an_101:20">101:20</span> Because he hath looked forth from his
high sanctuary: from heaven the Lord hath looked upon the earth.

<span id="an_101:21">101:21</span> That he might hear the groans of them
that are in fetters: that he might release the children of the slain:

<span id="an_101:22">101:22</span> That they may declare the name of the
Lord in Sion: and his praise in Jerusalem;

<span id="an_101:23">101:23</span> When the people assemble together,
and kings, to serve the Lord.

<span id="an_101:24">101:24</span> He answered him in the way of his
strength: Declare unto me the fewness of my days.

<span id="an_101:25">101:25</span> Call me not away in the midst of my
days: thy years are unto generation and generation.

<span id="an_101:26">101:26</span> In the beginning, O Lord, thou
foundedst the earth: end the heavens are the works of thy hands.

<span id="an_101:27">101:27</span> They shall perish but thou remainest:
and all of them shall grow old like a garment: And as a vesture thou
shalt change them, and they shall be changed.

<span id="an_101:28">101:28</span> But thou art always the selfsame, and
thy years shall not fail.

<span id="an_101:29">101:29</span> The children of thy servants shall
continue: and their seed shall be directed for ever.

<span id="an_102:1">102:1</span> For David himself. Bless the Lord, O my
soul: and let all that is within me bless his holy name.

<span id="an_102:2">102:2</span> Bless the Lord, O my soul, and never
forget all he hath done for thee.

<span id="an_102:3">102:3</span> Who forgiveth all thy iniquities: who
healeth all thy diseases.

<span id="an_102:4">102:4</span> Who redeemeth thy life from
destruction: who crowneth thee with mercy and compassion.

<span id="an_102:5">102:5</span> Who satisfieth thy desire with good
things: thy youth shall be renewed like the eagle's.

<span id="an_102:6">102:6</span> The Lord doth mercies, and judgment for
all that suffer wrong.

<span id="an_102:7">102:7</span> He hath made his ways known to Moses:
his wills to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_102:8">102:8</span> The ford is compassionate and merciful:
longsuffering and plenteous in mercy.

<span id="an_102:9">102:9</span> He will not always be angry: nor will
he threaten for ever.

<span id="an_102:10">102:10</span> He hath not dealt with us according
to our sins: nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.

<span id="an_102:11">102:11</span> For according to the height of the
heaven above the earth: he hath strengthened his mercy towards them that
fear him.

<span id="an_102:12">102:12</span> As far as the east is from the west,
so far hath he removed our iniquities from us.

<span id="an_102:13">102:13</span> As a father hath compassion on his
children, so hath the Lord compassion on them that fear him:

<span id="an_102:14">102:14</span> for he knoweth our frame. He
remembereth that we are dust:

<span id="an_102:15">102:15</span> man's days are as grass, as the
flower of the field so shall he flourish.

<span id="an_102:16">102:16</span> For the spirit shall pass in him, and
he shall not be: and he shall know his place no more.

<span id="an_102:17">102:17</span> But the mercy of the Lord is from
eternity and unto eternity upon them that fear him: And his justice unto
children's children,

<span id="an_102:18">102:18</span> to such as keep his covenant, And are
mindful of his commandments to do them.

<span id="an_102:19">102:19</span> The Lord hath prepared his throne in
heaven: and his kingdom shall rule over all.

<span id="an_102:20">102:20</span> Bless the Lord, all ye his angels:
you that are mighty in strength, and execute his word, hearkening to the
voice of his orders.

<span id="an_102:21">102:21</span> Bless the Lord, all ye his hosts: you
ministers of his that do his will.

<span id="an_102:22">102:22</span> Bless the Lord, all his works: in
every place of his dominion, O my soul, bless thou the Lord.

<span id="an_103:1">103:1</span> For David himself. Bless the Lord, O my
soul: O Lord my God, thou art exceedingly great. Thou hast put on praise
and beauty:

<span id="an_103:2">103:2</span> and art clothed with light as with a
garment. Who stretchest out the heaven like a pavilion:

<span id="an_103:3">103:3</span> who coverest the higher rooms thereof
with water. Who makest the clouds thy chariot: who walkest upon the
wings of the winds.

<span id="an_103:4">103:4</span> Who makest thy angels spirits: and thy
ministers a burning fire.

<span id="an_103:5">103:5</span> Who hast founded the earth upon its own
bases: it shall not be moved for ever and ever.

<span id="an_103:6">103:6</span> The deep like a garment is its
clothing: above the mountains shall the waters stand.

<span id="an_103:7">103:7</span> At thy rebuke they shall flee: at the
voice of thy thunder they shall fear.

<span id="an_103:8">103:8</span> The mountains ascend, and the plains
descend into the place which thou hast founded for them.

<span id="an_103:9">103:9</span> Thou hast set a bound which they shall
not pass over; neither shall they return to cover the earth.

<span id="an_103:10">103:10</span> Thou sendest forth springs in the
vales: between the midst of the hills the waters shall pass.

<span id="an_103:11">103:11</span> All the beasts of the field shall
drink: the wild asses shall expect in their thirst.

<span id="an_103:12">103:12</span> Over them the birds of the air shall
dwell: from the midst of the rocks they shall give forth their voices.

<span id="an_103:13">103:13</span> Thou waterest the hills from thy
upper rooms: the earth shall be filled with the fruit of thy works:

<span id="an_103:14">103:14</span> Bringing forth grass for cattle, and
herb for the service of men. That thou mayst bring bread out of the
earth:

<span id="an_103:15">103:15</span> and that wine may cheer the heart of
man. That he may make the face cheerful with oil: and that bread may
strengthen man's heart.

<span id="an_103:16">103:16</span> The trees of the field shall be
filled, and the cedars of Libanus which he hath planted:

<span id="an_103:17">103:17</span> there the sparrows shall make their
nests. The highest of them is the house of the heron.

<span id="an_103:18">103:18</span> The high hills are a refuge for the
harts, the rock for the irchins.

<span id="an_103:19">103:19</span> He hath made the moon for seasons:
the sun knoweth his going down.

<span id="an_103:20">103:20</span> Thou hast appointed darkness, and it
is night: in it shall all the beasts of the woods go about:

<span id="an_103:21">103:21</span> The young lions roaring after their
prey, and seeking their meat from God.

<span id="an_103:22">103:22</span> The sun ariseth, and they are
gathered together: and they shall lie down in their dens.

<span id="an_103:23">103:23</span> Man shall go forth to his work, and
to his labour until the evening.

<span id="an_103:24">103:24</span> How great are thy works, O Lord? thou
hast made all things in wisdom: the earth is filled with thy riches.

<span id="an_103:25">103:25</span> So is this great sea, which
stretcheth wide its arms: there are creeping things without number:
Creatures little and great.

<span id="an_103:26">103:26</span> There the ships shall go. This sea
dragon which thou hast formed to play therein.

<span id="an_103:27">103:27</span> All expect of thee that thou give
them food in season.

<span id="an_103:28">103:28</span> What thou givest to them they shall
gather up: when thou openest thy hand, they shall all be filled with
good.

<span id="an_103:29">103:29</span> But if thou turnest away thy face,
they shall be troubled: thou shalt take away their breath, and they
shall fail, and shall return to their dust.

<span id="an_103:30">103:30</span> Thou shalt send forth thy spirit, and
they shall be created: and thou shalt renew the face of the earth.

<span id="an_103:31">103:31</span> May the glory of the Lord endure for
ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works.

<span id="an_103:32">103:32</span> He looketh upon the earth, and maketh
it tremble: he toucheth the mountains, and they smoke.

<span id="an_103:33">103:33</span> I will sing to the Lord as long as I
live: I will sing praise to my God while I have my being.

<span id="an_103:34">103:34</span> Let my speech be acceptable to him:
but I will take delight in the Lord.

<span id="an_103:35">103:35</span> Let sinners be consumed out of the
earth, and the unjust, so that they be no more: O my soul, bless thou
the Lord.

<span id="an_104:1">104:1</span> Alleluia. Give glory to the Lord, and
call upon his name: declare his deeds among the Gentiles.

<span id="an_104:2">104:2</span> Sing to him, yea sing praises to him:
relate all his wondrous works.

<span id="an_104:3">104:3</span> Glory ye in his holy name: let the
heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.

<span id="an_104:4">104:4</span> Seek ye the Lord, and be strengthened:
seek his face evermore.

<span id="an_104:5">104:5</span> Remember his marvellous works which he
hath done; his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth.

<span id="an_104:6">104:6</span> O ye seed of Abraham his servant; ye
sons of Jacob his chosen.

<span id="an_104:7">104:7</span> He is the Lord our God: his judgments
are in all the earth.

<span id="an_104:8">104:8</span> He hath remembered his covenant for
ever: the word which he commanded to a thousand generations.

<span id="an_104:9">104:9</span> Which he made to Abraham; and his oath
to Isaac:

<span id="an_104:10">104:10</span> And he appointed the same to Jacob
for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting testament:

<span id="an_104:11">104:11</span> Saying: To thee will I give the land
of Chanaan, the lot of your inheritance.

<span id="an_104:12">104:12</span> When they were but a small number:
yea very few, and sojourners therein:

<span id="an_104:13">104:13</span> And they passed from nation to
nation, and from one kingdom to another people.

<span id="an_104:14">104:14</span> He suffered no man to hurt them: and
he reproved kings for their sakes.

<span id="an_104:15">104:15</span> Touch ye not my anointed: and do no
evil to my prophets.

<span id="an_104:16">104:16</span> And he called a famine upon the land:
and he broke in pieces all the support of bread.

<span id="an_104:17">104:17</span> He sent a man before them: Joseph,
who was sold for a slave.

<span id="an_104:18">104:18</span> They humbled his feet in fetters: the
iron pierced his soul,

<span id="an_104:19">104:19</span> until his word came. The word of the
Lord inflamed him.

<span id="an_104:20">104:20</span> The king sent, and he released him:
the ruler of the people, and he set him at liberty.

<span id="an_104:21">104:21</span> He made him master of his house, and
ruler of all his possession.

<span id="an_104:22">104:22</span> That he might instruct his princes as
himself, and teach his ancients wisdom.

<span id="an_104:23">104:23</span> And Israel went into Egypt: and Jacob
was a sojourner in the land of Cham.

<span id="an_104:24">104:24</span> And he increased his people
exceedingly: and strengthened them over their enemies,

<span id="an_104:25">104:25</span> He turned their heart to hate his
people: and to deal deceitfully with his servants.

<span id="an_104:26">104:26</span> He sent Moses his servant: Aaron the
man whom he had chosen.

<span id="an_104:27">104:27</span> He gave them power to shew his signs,
and his wonders in the land of Cham.

<span id="an_104:28">104:28</span> He sent darkness, and made it
obscure: and grieved not his words.

<span id="an_104:29">104:29</span> He turned their waters into blood,
and destroyed their fish.

<span id="an_104:30">104:30</span> Their land brought forth frogs, in
the inner chambers of their kings.

<span id="an_104:31">104:31</span> He spoke, and there came divers sorts
of flies and sciniphs in all their coasts.

<span id="an_104:32">104:32</span> He gave them hail for rain, a burning
fire in the land.

<span id="an_104:33">104:33</span> And he destroyed their vineyards and
their fig trees: and he broke in pieces the trees of their coasts.

<span id="an_104:34">104:34</span> He spoke, and the locust came, and
the bruchus, of which there was no number.

<span id="an_104:35">104:35</span> And they devoured all the grass in
their land, and consumed all the fruit of their ground.

<span id="an_104:36">104:36</span> And he slew all the firstborn in
their land: the firstfruits of all their labour.

<span id="an_104:37">104:37</span> And he brought them out with silver
and gold: and there was not among their tribes one that was feeble.

<span id="an_104:38">104:38</span> Egypt was glad when they departed:
for the fear of them lay upon them.

<span id="an_104:39">104:39</span> He spread a cloud for their
protection, and fire to give them light in the night.

<span id="an_104:40">104:40</span> They asked, and the quail came: and
he filled them with the bread of heaven.

<span id="an_104:41">104:41</span> He opened the rock, and waters
flowed: rivers ran down in the dry land.

<span id="an_104:42">104:42</span> Because he remembered his holy word,
which he had spoken to his servant Abraham.

<span id="an_104:43">104:43</span> And he brought forth his people with
joy, and his chosen with gladness.

<span id="an_104:44">104:44</span> And he gave them the lands of the
Gentiles: and they possessed the labours of the people:

<span id="an_104:45">104:45</span> That they might observe his
justifications, and seek after his law.

<span id="an_105:1">105:1</span> Alleluia. Give glory to the Lord, for
he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_105:2">105:2</span> Who shall declare the powers of the
Lord? who shall set forth all his praises?

<span id="an_105:3">105:3</span> Blessed are they that keep judgment,
and do justice at all times.

<span id="an_105:4">105:4</span> Remember us, O Lord, in the favour of
thy people: visit us with thy salvation.

<span id="an_105:5">105:5</span> That we may see the good of thy chosen,
that we may rejoice in the joy of thy nation: that thou mayst be praised
with thy inheritance.

<span id="an_105:6">105:6</span> We have sinned with our fathers: we
have acted unjustly, we have wrought iniquity.

<span id="an_105:7">105:7</span> Our fathers understood not thy wonders
in Egypt: they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies: And they
provoked to wrath going up to the sea, even the Red Sea.

<span id="an_105:8">105:8</span> And he saved them for his own name's
sake: that he might make his power known.

<span id="an_105:9">105:9</span> And he rebuked the Red Sea, and it was
dried up: and he led them through the depths, as in a wilderness.

<span id="an_105:10">105:10</span> And he saved them from the hand of
them that hated them: and he redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.

<span id="an_105:11">105:11</span> And the water covered them that
afflicted them: there was not one of them left.

<span id="an_105:12">105:12</span> And they believed his words: and they
sang his praises.

<span id="an_105:13">105:13</span> They had quickly done, they forgot
his works: and they waited not for his counsels.

<span id="an_105:14">105:14</span> And they coveted their desire in the
desert: and they tempted God in the place without water.

<span id="an_105:15">105:15</span> And he gave them their request: and
sent fulness into their souls.

<span id="an_105:16">105:16</span> And they provoked Moses in the camp,
Aaron the holy one of the Lord.

<span id="an_105:17">105:17</span> The earth opened and swallowed up
Dathan: and covered the congregation of Abiron.

<span id="an_105:18">105:18</span> And a fire was kindled in their
congregation: the flame burned the wicked.

<span id="an_105:19">105:19</span> They made also a calf in Horeb: and
they adored the graven thing.

<span id="an_105:20">105:20</span> And they changed their glory into the
likeness of a calf that eateth grass.

<span id="an_105:21">105:21</span> They forgot God, who saved them, who
had done great things in Egypt,

<span id="an_105:22">105:22</span> wondrous works in the land of Cham:
terrible things in the Red Sea.

<span id="an_105:23">105:23</span> And he said that he would destroy
them: had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach: To turn
away his wrath, lest he should destroy them.

<span id="an_105:24">105:24</span> And they set at nought the desirable
land. They believed not his word,

<span id="an_105:25">105:25</span> and they murmured in their tents:
they hearkened not to the voice of the Lord.

<span id="an_105:26">105:26</span> And he lifted up his hand over them:
to overthrow them in the desert;

<span id="an_105:27">105:27</span> And to cast down their seed among the
nations, and to scatter them in the countries.

<span id="an_105:28">105:28</span> They also were initiated to
Beelphegor: and ate the sacrifices of the dead.

<span id="an_105:29">105:29</span> And they provoked him with their
inventions: and destruction was multiplied among them.

<span id="an_105:30">105:30</span> Then Phinees stood up, and pacified
him: and the slaughter ceased.

<span id="an_105:31">105:31</span> And it was reputed to him unto
justice, to generation and generation for evermore.

<span id="an_105:32">105:32</span> They provoked him also at the waters
of contradiction: and Moses was afflicted for their sakes:

<span id="an_105:33">105:33</span> because they exasperated his spirit.
And he distinguished with his lips.

<span id="an_105:34">105:34</span> They did not destroy the nations of
which the Lord spoke unto them.

<span id="an_105:35">105:35</span> And they were mingled among the
heathens, and learned their works:

<span id="an_105:36">105:36</span> and served their idols, and it became
a stumblingblock to them.

<span id="an_105:37">105:37</span> And they sacrificed their sons, and
their daughters to devils.

<span id="an_105:38">105:38</span> And they shed innocent blood: the
blood of their sons and of their daughters which they sacrificed to the
idols of Chanaan. And the land was polluted with blood,

<span id="an_105:39">105:39</span> and was defiled with their works: and
they went aside after their own inventions.

<span id="an_105:40">105:40</span> And the Lord was exceedingly angry
with his people: and he abhorred his inheritance.

<span id="an_105:41">105:41</span> And he delivered them into the hands
of the nations: and they that hated them had dominion over them.

<span id="an_105:42">105:42</span> And their enemies afflicted them: and
they were humbled under their hands:

<span id="an_105:43">105:43</span> many times did he deliver them. But
they provoked him with their counsel: and they were brought low by their
iniquities.

<span id="an_105:44">105:44</span> And he saw when they were in
tribulation: and he heard their prayer.

<span id="an_105:45">105:45</span> And he was mindful of his covenant:
and repented according to the multitude of his mercies.

<span id="an_105:46">105:46</span> And he gave them unto mercies, in the
sight of all those that had made them captives.

<span id="an_105:47">105:47</span> Save us, O Lord, our God: and gather
us from among nations: That we may give thanks to thy holy name, and may
glory in thy praise.

<span id="an_105:48">105:48</span> Blessed be the Lord the God of
Israel, from everlasting to everlasting: and let all the people say: So
be it, so be it.

<span id="an_106:1">106:1</span> Give glory to the Lord, for he is good:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_106:2">106:2</span> Let them say so that have been redeemed
by the Lord, whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy: and
gathered out of the countries.

<span id="an_106:3">106:3</span> From the rising and the setting of the
sun, from the north and from the sea.

<span id="an_106:4">106:4</span> They wandered in a wilderness, in a
place without water: they found not the way of a city for their
habitation.

<span id="an_106:5">106:5</span> They were hungry and thirsty: their
soul fainted in them.

<span id="an_106:6">106:6</span> And they cried to the Lord in their
tribulation: and he delivered them out of their distresses.

<span id="an_106:7">106:7</span> And he led them into the right way:
that they might go to a city of habitation.

<span id="an_106:8">106:8</span> Let the mercies of the Lord give glory
to him: and his wonderful works to the children of men.

<span id="an_106:9">106:9</span> For he hath satisfied the empty soul,
and hath filled the hungry soul with good things.

<span id="an_106:10">106:10</span> Such as sat in darkness and in the
shadow of death: bound in want and in iron.

<span id="an_106:11">106:11</span> Because they had exasperated the
words of God: and provoked the counsel of the most High:

<span id="an_106:12">106:12</span> And their heart was humbled with
labours: they were weakened, and their was none to help them.

<span id="an_106:13">106:13</span> Then they cried to the Lord in their
affliction: and he delivered them out of their distresses.

<span id="an_106:14">106:14</span> And he brought them out of darkness,
and the shadow of death; and broke their bonds in sunder.

<span id="an_106:15">106:15</span> Let the mercies of the Lord give
glory to him, and his wonderful works to the children of men.

<span id="an_106:16">106:16</span> Because he hath broken gates of
brass, and burst the iron bars.

<span id="an_106:17">106:17</span> He took them out of the way of their
iniquity: for they were brought low for their injustices.

<span id="an_106:18">106:18</span> Their soul abhorred all manner of
meat: and they drew nigh even to the gates of death.

<span id="an_106:19">106:19</span> And they cried to the Lord in their
affliction: and he delivered them out of their distresses.

<span id="an_106:20">106:20</span> He sent his word, and healed them:
and delivered them from their destructions.

<span id="an_106:21">106:21</span> Let the mercies of the Lord give
glory to him: and his wonderful works to the children of men.

<span id="an_106:22">106:22</span> And let them sacrifice the sacrifice
of praise: and declare his works with joy.

<span id="an_106:23">106:23</span> They that go down to the sea in
ships, doing business in the great waters:

<span id="an_106:24">106:24</span> These have seen the works of the
Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

<span id="an_106:25">106:25</span> He said the word, and there arose a
storm of wind: and the waves thereof were lifted up.

<span id="an_106:26">106:26</span> They mount up to the heavens, and
they go down to the depths: their soul pined away with evils.

<span id="an_106:27">106:27</span> They were troubled, and reeled like a
drunken man; and all their wisdom was swallowed up.

<span id="an_106:28">106:28</span> And they cried to the Lord in their
affliction: and he brought them out of their distresses.

<span id="an_106:29">106:29</span> And he turned the storm into a
breeze: and its waves were still.

<span id="an_106:30">106:30</span> And they rejoiced because they were
still: and he brought them to the haven which they wished for.

<span id="an_106:31">106:31</span> Let the mercies of the Lord give
glory to him, and his wonderful works to the children of men.

<span id="an_106:32">106:32</span> And let them exalt him in the church
of the people: and praise him in the chair of the ancients.

<span id="an_106:33">106:33</span> He hath turned rivers into a
wilderness: and the sources of water into dry ground:

<span id="an_106:34">106:34</span> A fruitful land into barrenness, for
the wickedness of them that dwell therein.

<span id="an_106:35">106:35</span> He hath turned a wilderness into
pools of water, and a dry land into water springs.

<span id="an_106:36">106:36</span> And hath placed there the hungry; and
they made a city for their habitation.

<span id="an_106:37">106:37</span> And they sowed fields, and planted
vineyards: and they yielded fruit of birth.

<span id="an_106:38">106:38</span> And he blessed them, and they were
multiplied exceedingly: and their cattle he suffered not to decrease.

<span id="an_106:39">106:39</span> Then they were brought to be few: and
they were afflicted through the trouble of evils and sorrow.

<span id="an_106:40">106:40</span> Contempt was poured forth upon their
princes: and he caused them to wander where there was no passing, and
out of the way.

<span id="an_106:41">106:41</span> And he helped the poor out of
poverty: and made him families like a flock of sheep.

<span id="an_106:42">106:42</span> The just shall see, and shall
rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop their mouth.

<span id="an_106:43">106:43</span> Who is wise, and will keep these
things: and will understand the mercies of the Lord?

<span id="an_107:1">107:1</span> A canticle of a psalm for David
himself.

<span id="an_107:2">107:2</span> My heart is ready, O God, my heart is
ready: I will sing, and will give praise, with my glory.

<span id="an_107:3">107:3</span> Arise, my glory; arise, psaltery and
harp: I will arise in the morning early.

<span id="an_107:4">107:4</span> I will praise thee, O Lord, among the
people: and I will sing unto thee among the populations.

<span id="an_107:5">107:5</span> For thy mercy is great above the
heavens: and thy truth even unto the clouds.

<span id="an_107:6">107:6</span> Be thou exalted, O God, above the
heavens, and thy glory over all the earth:

<span id="an_107:7">107:7</span> that thy beloved may be delivered. Save
with thy right hand and hear me.

<span id="an_107:8">107:8</span> God hath spoken in his holiness. I will
rejoice, and I will divide Sichem and I will mete out the vale of
tabernacles.

<span id="an_107:9">107:9</span> Galaad is mine, and Manasses is mine
and Ephraim the protection of my head. Juda is my king:

<span id="an_107:10">107:10</span> Moab the pot of my hope. Over Edom I
will stretch out my shoe: the aliens are become my friends.

<span id="an_107:11">107:11</span> Who will bring me into the strong
city? who will lead me into Edom?

<span id="an_107:12">107:12</span> Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast
us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our armies?

<span id="an_107:13">107:13</span> O grant us help from trouble: for
vain is the help of man.

<span id="an_107:14">107:14</span> Through God we shall do mightily: and
he will bring our enemies to nothing.

<span id="an_108:1">108:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David.

<span id="an_108:2">108:2</span> O God, be not thou silent in thy
praise: for the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful man
is opened against me.

<span id="an_108:3">108:3</span> They have spoken against with deceitful
tongues; and they have compassed me about with words of hatred; and have
fought against me without cause.

<span id="an_108:4">108:4</span> Instead of making me a return of love,
they detracted me: but I gave myself to prayer.

<span id="an_108:5">108:5</span> And they repaid me evil for good: and
hatred for my love.

<span id="an_108:6">108:6</span> Set thou the sinner over him: and may
the devil stand at his right hand.

<span id="an_108:7">108:7</span> When he is judged, may he go out
condemned; and may his prayer be turned to sin.

<span id="an_108:8">108:8</span> May his days be few: and his bishopric
let another take.

<span id="an_108:9">108:9</span> May his children be fatherless, and his
wife a widow.

<span id="an_108:10">108:10</span> Let his children be carried about
vagabonds, and beg; and let them be cast out of their dwellings.

<span id="an_108:11">108:11</span> May the userer search all his
substance: and let strangers plunder his labours.

<span id="an_108:12">108:12</span> May there be none to help him: nor
none to pity his fatherless offspring.

<span id="an_108:13">108:13</span> May his posterity be cut off; in one
generation may his name be blotted out.

<span id="an_108:14">108:14</span> May the iniquity of his fathers be
remembered in the sight of the Lord: and let not the sin of his mother
be blotted out.

<span id="an_108:15">108:15</span> May they be before the lord
continually, and let the memory of them perish from the earth:

<span id="an_108:16">108:16</span> because he remembered not to show
mercy,

<span id="an_108:17">108:17</span> But persecuted the poor man and the
beggar; and the broken in heart, to put him to death.

<span id="an_108:18">108:18</span> And he loved cursing, and it shall
come unto him: and he would not have blessing, and it shall be far from
him. And he put on cursing, like a garment: and it went in like water
into his entrails, and like oil in his bones.

<span id="an_108:19">108:19</span> May it be unto him like a garment
which covereth him; and like a girdle with which he is girded
continually.

<span id="an_108:20">108:20</span> This is the work of them who detract
me before the Lord; and who speak evils against my soul.

<span id="an_108:21">108:21</span> But thou, O Lord, do with for thy
names sake: because thy mercy is sweet. Do thou deliver me.

<span id="an_108:22">108:22</span> for I am poor and needy, and my heart
is troubled within me.

<span id="an_108:23">108:23</span> I am taken away like the shadow when
it declineth: and I am shaken off as locusts.

<span id="an_108:24">108:24</span> My knees are weakened through
fasting: and my flesh is changed for oil.

<span id="an_108:25">108:25</span> And I am become a reproach to them:
they saw me and they shaked their heads,

<span id="an_108:26">108:26</span> Help me, O Lord my God; save me
according to thy mercy.

<span id="an_108:27">108:27</span> And let them know that this is thy
hand: and that thou, O Lord, hast done it.

<span id="an_108:28">108:28</span> They will curse and thou will bless:
let them that rise up against me be confounded: but thy servant shall
rejoice.

<span id="an_108:29">108:29</span> Let them that detract me be clothed
with shame: and let them be covered with the their confusion as with a
double cloak.

<span id="an_108:30">108:30</span> I will give great thanks to the Lord
with my mouth: and in the midst of many I will praise him.

<span id="an_108:31">108:31</span> Because he hath stood at the right
hand of the poor, to save my soul from persecutors

<span id="an_109:1">109:1</span> The Lord said to my Lord: Sit thou at
my right hand: Until I make thy enemies thy footstool.

<span id="an_109:2">109:2</span> The Lord will send forth the sceptre of
thy power out of Sion: rule thou in the midst of thy enemies.

<span id="an_109:3">109:3</span> With thee is the principality in the
day of thy strength: in the brightness of the saints: from the womb
before the day star I begot thee.

<span id="an_109:4">109:4</span> The Lord hath sworn, and he will not
repent: Thou art a priest for ever according to the order of
Melchisedech.

<span id="an_109:5">109:5</span> The Lord at thy right hand hath broken
kings in the day of his wrath.

<span id="an_109:6">109:6</span> He shall judge among nations, he shall
fill ruins: he shall crush the heads in the land of the many.

<span id="an_109:7">109:7</span> He shall drink of the torrent in the
way: therefore shall he lift up the head.

<span id="an_110:1">110:1</span> I will praise thee, O Lord, with my
whole heart; in the council of the just: and in the congregation.

<span id="an_110:2">110:2</span> Great are the works of the Lord: sought
out according to all his wills

<span id="an_110:3">110:3</span> His work is praise and magnificence:
and his justice continueth for ever and ever.

<span id="an_110:4">110:4</span> He hath made a remembrance of his
wonderful works, being a merciful and gracious Lord:

<span id="an_110:5">110:5</span> he hath given food to them that fear
him. He will be mindful for ever of his covenant:

<span id="an_110:6">110:6</span> he will shew forth to his people the
power of his works.

<span id="an_110:7">110:7</span> That he may give them the inheritance
of the Gentiles: the works of his hands are truth and judgment.

<span id="an_110:8">110:8</span> All his commandments are faithful:
confirmed for ever and ever, made in truth and equity.

<span id="an_110:9">110:9</span> He hath sent redemption to his people:
he hath commanded his covenant for ever. Holy and terrible is his name:

<span id="an_110:10">110:10</span> the fear of the Lord is the beginning
of wisdom. A good understanding to all that do it: his praise continueth
for ever and ever.

<span id="an_111:1">111:1</span> Blessed is the man that feareth the
Lord: he shall delight exceedingly in his commandments.

<span id="an_111:2">111:2</span> His seed shall be mighty upon earth:
the generation of the righteous shall be blessed.

<span id="an_111:3">111:3</span> Glory and wealth shall be in his house:
and his justice remaineth for ever and ever.

<span id="an_111:4">111:4</span> To the righteous a light is risen up in
darkness: he is merciful, and compassionate and just.

<span id="an_111:5">111:5</span> Acceptable is the man that showeth
mercy and lendeth: he shall order his words with judgment:

<span id="an_111:6">111:6</span> because he shall not be moved for ever.

<span id="an_111:7">111:7</span> The just shall be in everlasting
remembrance: he shall not hear the evil hearing. His heart is ready to
hope in the Lord:

<span id="an_111:8">111:8</span> his heart is strengthened, he shall not
be moved until he look over his enemies.

<span id="an_111:9">111:9</span> He hath distributed, he hath given to
the poor: his justice remaineth for ever and ever: his horn shall be
exalted in glory.

<span id="an_111:10">111:10</span> The wicked shall see, and shall be
angry, he shall gnash with his teeth and pine away: the desire of the
wicked shall perish.

<span id="an_112:1">112:1</span> Praise the Lord, ye children: praise ye
the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_112:2">112:2</span> Blessed be the name of the Lord, from
henceforth now and for ever.

<span id="an_112:3">112:3</span> From the rising of the sun unto the
going down of the same, the name of the Lord is worthy of praise.

<span id="an_112:4">112:4</span> The Lord is high above all nations; and
his glory above the heavens.

<span id="an_112:5">112:5</span> Who is as the Lord our God, who
dwelleth on high:

<span id="an_112:6">112:6</span> and looketh down on the low things in
heaven and in earth?

<span id="an_112:7">112:7</span> Raising up the needy from the earth,
and lifting up the poor out of the dunghill::

<span id="an_112:8">112:8</span> That he may place him with princes,
with the princes of his people.

<span id="an_112:9">112:9</span> Who maketh a barren woman to dwell in a
house, the joyful mother of children.

<span id="an_113:1">113:1</span> When Israel went out of Egypt, the
house of Jacob from a barbarous people:

<span id="an_113:2">113:2</span> Judea made his sanctuary, Israel his
dominion.

<span id="an_113:3">113:3</span> The sea saw and fled: Jordan was turned
back.

<span id="an_113:4">113:4</span> The mountains skipped like rams, and
the hills like the lambs of the flock.

<span id="an_113:5">113:5</span> What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou
didst flee: and thou, O Jordan, that thou wast turned back?

<span id="an_113:6">113:6</span> Ye mountains, that ye skipped like
rams, and ye hills, like lambs of the flock?

<span id="an_113:7">113:7</span> At the presence of the Lord the earth
was moved, at the presence of the God of Jacob:

<span id="an_113:8">113:8</span> Who turned the rock into pools of
water, and the stony hill into fountains of waters.

<span id="an_113:9">113:9</span> Not to us, O Lord, not to us; but to
thy name give glory.

<span id="an_113:10">113:10</span> For thy mercy, and for thy truth's
sake: lest the gentiles should say: Where is their God?

<span id="an_113:11">113:11</span> But our God is in heaven: he hath
done all things whatsoever he would.

<span id="an_113:12">113:12</span> The idols of the gentiles are silver
and gold, the works of the hands of men.

<span id="an_113:13">113:13</span> They have mouths and speak not: they
have eyes and see not.

<span id="an_113:14">113:14</span> They have ears and hear not: they
have noses and smell not.

<span id="an_113:15">113:15</span> They have hands and feel not: they
have feet and walk not: neither shall they cry out through their throat.

<span id="an_113:16">113:16</span> Let them that make them become like
unto them: and all such as trust in them.

<span id="an_113:17">113:17</span> The house of Israel hath hoped in the
Lord: he is their helper and their protector.

<span id="an_113:18">113:18</span> The house of Aaron hath hoped in the
Lord: he is their helper and their protector.

<span id="an_113:19">113:19</span> They that fear the Lord hath hoped in
the Lord: he is their helper and their protector.

<span id="an_113:20">113:20</span> The Lord hath been mindful of us, and
hath blessed us. He hath blessed the house of Israel: he hath blessed
the house of Aaron.

<span id="an_113:21">113:21</span> He hath blessed all that fear the
Lord, both little and great.

<span id="an_113:22">113:22</span> May the Lord add blessings upon you:
upon you, and upon your children.

<span id="an_113:23">113:23</span> Blessed be you of the Lord, who made
heaven and earth.

<span id="an_113:24">113:24</span> The heaven of heaven is the Lord's:
but the earth he has given to the children of men.

<span id="an_113:25">113:25</span> The dead shall not praise thee, O
Lord: nor any of them that go down to hell.

<span id="an_113:26">113:26</span> But we that live bless the Lord: from
this time now and for ever.

<span id="an_114:1">114:1</span> I have loved, because the Lord will
hear the voice of my prayer.

<span id="an_114:2">114:2</span> Because he hath inclined his ear unto
me: and in my days I will call upon him.

<span id="an_114:3">114:3</span> The sorrows of death have encompassed
me: and the perils of hell have found me. I met with trouble and sorrow:

<span id="an_114:4">114:4</span> and I called upon the name of the Lord.
O Lord, deliver my soul.

<span id="an_114:5">114:5</span> The Lord is merciful and just, and our
God sheweth mercy.

<span id="an_114:6">114:6</span> The Lord is the keeper of little ones:
I was little and he delivered me.

<span id="an_114:7">114:7</span> Turn, O my soul, into thy rest: for the
Lord hath been bountiful to thee.

<span id="an_114:8">114:8</span> For he hath delivered my soul from
death: my eyes from tears, my feet from falling.

<span id="an_114:9">114:9</span> I will please the Lord in the land of
the living.

<span id="an_115:10">115:10</span> I have believed, therefore have I
spoken; but I have been humbled exceedingly.

<span id="an_115:11">115:11</span> I said in my excess: Every man is a
liar.

<span id="an_115:12">115:12</span> What shall I render to the Lord, for
all the things he hath rendered unto me?

<span id="an_115:13">115:13</span> I will take the chalice of salvation;
and I will call upon the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_115:14">115:14</span> I will pay my vows to the Lord before
all his people:

<span id="an_115:15">115:15</span> precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his saints.

<span id="an_115:16">115:16</span> O Lord, for I am thy servant: I am
thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid. Thou hast broken my bonds:

<span id="an_115:17">115:17</span> I will sacrifice to thee the
sacrifice of praise, and I will call upon the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_115:18">115:18</span> I will pay my vows to the Lord in the
sight of all his people:

<span id="an_115:19">115:19</span> in the courts of the house of the
Lord, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.

<span id="an_116:1">116:1</span> O praise the Lord, all ye nations:
praise him, all ye people.

<span id="an_116:2">116:2</span> For his mercy is confirmed upon us: and
the truth of the Lord remaineth for ever.

<span id="an_117:1">117:1</span> Give praise to Lord, for he is good:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_117:2">117:2</span> Let Israel now say that he is good:
that his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_117:3">117:3</span> Let the house of Aaron now say, that
his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_117:4">117:4</span> Let them that fear the Lord now say,
that his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_117:5">117:5</span> In my trouble I called upon the Lord:
and the Lord heard me, and enlarged me.

<span id="an_117:6">117:6</span> The Lord is my helper, I will not fear
what man can do unto me.

<span id="an_117:7">117:7</span> The Lord is my helper: and I will look
over my enemies.

<span id="an_117:8">117:8</span> It is good to confide in the Lord,
rather than to have confidence in man.

<span id="an_117:9">117:9</span> It is good to trust in the Lord, rather
than to trust in princes.

<span id="an_117:10">117:10</span> All nations compassed me about; and
in the name of the Lord I have been revenged on them.

<span id="an_117:11">117:11</span> Surrounding me they compassed me
about: and in the name of the Lord I have been revenged on them.

<span id="an_117:12">117:12</span> They surrounded me like bees, and
they burned like fire among thorns: and in the name of the Lord I was
revenged on them

<span id="an_117:13">117:13</span> Being pushed I was overturned that I
might fall: but the Lord supported me.

<span id="an_117:14">117:14</span> The Lord is my strength and my
praise: and he is become my salvation.

<span id="an_117:15">117:15</span> The voice of rejoicing and of
salvation is in the tabernacles of the just.

<span id="an_117:16">117:16</span> The right hand of the Lord hath
wrought strength: the right hand of the Lord hath exulted me: the right
hand of the Lord hath wrought strength.

<span id="an_117:17">117:17</span> I shall not die, but live: and shall
declare the works of the Lord.

<span id="an_117:18">117:18</span> The Lord chastising hath chastised
me: but he hath not delivered me over to death.

<span id="an_117:19">117:19</span> Open ye to me the gates of justice: I
will go into them, and give praise to the Lord.

<span id="an_117:20">117:20</span> This is the gate of the Lord, the
just shall enter into it.

<span id="an_117:21">117:21</span> I will give glory to thee because
thou hast heard me: and art become my salvation.

<span id="an_117:22">117:22</span> The stone which the builders
rejected; the same is become the head of the corner.

<span id="an_117:23">117:23</span> This is the Lord's doing: and it is
wonderful in our eyes.

<span id="an_117:24">117:24</span> This is the day which the Lord hath
made: let us be glad and rejoice therein.

<span id="an_117:25">117:25</span> O Lord, save me: O Lord, give good
success.

<span id="an_117:26">117:26</span> Blessed be he that cometh in the name
Lord. We have blessed you out of the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_117:27">117:27</span> The Lord is God, and he hath shone
upon us. Appoint a solemn day, with shady boughs, even to the horn of
the alter.

<span id="an_117:28">117:28</span> Thou art my God, and I will praise
thee: thou art my God, and I will exalt thee. I will praise thee,
because thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation.

<span id="an_117:29">117:29</span> O praise ye the Lord, for he is good:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_118:1">118:1</span> \[ALEPH\] Blessed are the undefiled in
the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.

<span id="an_118:2">118:2</span> Blessed are they who search his
testimonies: that seek him with their whole heart.

<span id="an_118:3">118:3</span> For they that work iniquity, have not
walked in his ways.

<span id="an_118:4">118:4</span> Thou hast commanded thy commandments to
be kept most diligently.

<span id="an_118:5">118:5</span> O! that my ways may be directed to keep
thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:6">118:6</span> Then shall I not be confounded, when I
shall look into all thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:7">118:7</span> I will praise thee with uprightness of
heart, when I shall have learned the judgments of thy justice.

<span id="an_118:8">118:8</span> I will keep thy justifications: O! do
not thou utterly forsake me.

<span id="an_118:9">118:9</span> \[BETH\] By what doth a young man
correct his way? by observing thy words.

<span id="an_118:10">118:10</span> With my whole heart have I sought
after thee: let me not stray from thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:11">118:11</span> Thy words have I hidden in my heart,
that I may not sin against thee.

<span id="an_118:12">118:12</span> Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me
thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:13">118:13</span> With my lips I have pronounced all
the judgments of thy mouth.

<span id="an_118:14">118:14</span> I have been delighted in the way of
thy testimonies, as in all riches.

<span id="an_118:15">118:15</span> I will meditate on thy commandments:
and I will consider thy ways.

<span id="an_118:16">118:16</span> I will think of thy justifications: I
will not forget thy words.

<span id="an_118:17">118:17</span> \[GIMEL\] Give bountifully to thy
servant, enliven me: and I shall keep thy words.

<span id="an_118:18">118:18</span> Open thou my eyes: and I will
consider the wondrous things of thy law.

<span id="an_118:19">118:19</span> I am a sojourner on the earth: hide
not thy commandments from me.

<span id="an_118:20">118:20</span> My soul hath coveted to long for thy
justifications, at all times.

<span id="an_118:21">118:21</span> Thou hast rebuked the proud: they are
cursed who decline from thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:22">118:22</span> Remove from reproach and contempt:
because I have sought after thy testimonies.

<span id="an_118:23">118:23</span> For princes sat, and spoke against
me: but thy servant was employed in thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:24">118:24</span> For thy testimonies are my
meditation: and thy justifications my counsel.

<span id="an_118:25">118:25</span> \[DALETH\] My soul hath cleaved to
the pavement: quicken thou me according to thy word.

<span id="an_118:26">118:26</span> I have declared my ways, and thou
hast heard me: tech me thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:27">118:27</span> Make me to understand the way of thy
justifications: and I shall be exercised in thy wondrous works.

<span id="an_118:28">118:28</span> My soul hath slumbered through
heaviness: strengthen thou me in thy words.

<span id="an_118:29">118:29</span> Remove from me the way of iniquity:
and out of thy law have mercy on me.

<span id="an_118:30">118:30</span> I have chosen the way of truth: thy
judgments I have not forgotten.

<span id="an_118:31">118:31</span> I have stuck to thy testimonies, O
Lord: put me not to shame.

<span id="an_118:32">118:32</span> I have run the way of thy
commandments, when thou didst enlarge my heart.

<span id="an_118:33">118:33</span> \[HE\] Set before me for a law the
way of thy justifications, O Lord: and I will always seek after it.

<span id="an_118:34">118:34</span> Give me understanding, and I will
search thy law ; and I will keep it with my whole heart.

<span id="an_118:35">118:35</span> Lead me into the path of thy
commandments; for this same I have desired.

<span id="an_118:36">118:36</span> Incline my heart into thy testimonies
and not to covetousness.

<span id="an_118:37">118:37</span> Turn away my eyes that they may not
behold vanity: quicken me in thy way.

<span id="an_118:38">118:38</span> Establish thy word to thy servant, in
thy fear.

<span id="an_118:39">118:39</span> Turn away my reproach, which I have
apprehended: for thy judgments are delightful.

<span id="an_118:40">118:40</span> Behold I have longed after thy
precepts: quicken me in thy justice.

<span id="an_118:41">118:41</span> \[VAU\] Let thy mercy also come upon
me, O Lord: thy salvation according to thy word.

<span id="an_118:42">118:42</span> So shall I answer them that reproach
me in any thing; that I have trusted in thy words.

<span id="an_118:43">118:43</span> And take not thou the word of truth
utterly out of my mouth: for in thy words have I hoped exceedingly.

<span id="an_118:44">118:44</span> So shall I always keep thy law, for
ever and ever.

<span id="an_118:45">118:45</span> And I walked at large: because I have
sought after thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:46">118:46</span> And I spoke of thy testimonies before
kings: and I was not ashamed.

<span id="an_118:47">118:47</span> I meditated also on thy commandments,
which I loved.

<span id="an_118:48">118:48</span> And I lifted up my hands to thy
commandments, which I loved: and I was exercised in thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:49">118:49</span> \[ZAIN\] Be thou mindful of thy word
to thy servant, in which thou hast given me hope.

<span id="an_118:50">118:50</span> This hath comforted me in my
humiliation: because thy word hath enlivened me.

<span id="an_118:51">118:51</span> The proud did iniquitously
altogether: but I declined not from thy law.

<span id="an_118:52">118:52</span> I remembered, O Lord, thy judgments
of old: and I was comforted.

<span id="an_118:53">118:53</span> A fainting hath taken hold of me,
because of the wicked that forsake thy law.

<span id="an_118:54">118:54</span> Thy justifications were the subject
of my song, in the place of my pilgrimage.

<span id="an_118:55">118:55</span> In the night I have remembered thy
name, O Lord: and have kept thy law.

<span id="an_118:56">118:56</span> This happened to me: because I sought
after thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:57">118:57</span> \[HETH\] O Lord, my portion, I have
said, I would keep the law.

<span id="an_118:58">118:58</span> I entreated thy face with all my
heart: have mercy on me according to thy word.

<span id="an_118:59">118:59</span> I have thought on my ways: and turned
my feet unto thy testimonies.

<span id="an_118:60">118:60</span> I am ready, and am not troubled: that
I may keep thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:61">118:61</span> The cords of the wicked have
encompassed me: but I have not forgotten thy law.

<span id="an_118:62">118:62</span> I rose at midnight to give praise to
thee; for the judgments of thy justification.

<span id="an_118:63">118:63</span> I am a partaker with all them that
fear thee, and that keep thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:64">118:64</span> The earth, O Lord, is full of thy
mercy: teach me thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:65">118:65</span> \[TETH\] Thou hast done well with thy
servant, O Lord, according to thy word.

<span id="an_118:66">118:66</span> Teach me goodness and discipline and
knowledge; for I have believed thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:67">118:67</span> Before I was humbled I offended;
therefore have I kept thy word.

<span id="an_118:68">118:68</span> Thou art good; and in thy goodness
teach me thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:69">118:69</span> The iniquity of the proud hath been
multiplied over me: but I will seek thy commandments with my whole
heart.

<span id="an_118:70">118:70</span> Their heart is curdled like milk: but
I have meditated on thy law.

<span id="an_118:71">118:71</span> It is good for me that thou hast
humbled me, that I may learn thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:72">118:72</span> The law of thy mouth is good to me,
above thousands of gold and silver.

<span id="an_118:73">118:73</span> \[JOD\] Thy hands have made me and
formed me: give me understanding, and I will learn thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:74">118:74</span> They that fear thee shall see me, and
shall be glad: because I have greatly hoped in thy words.

<span id="an_118:75">118:75</span> I know, O Lord, that thy judgments
are equity: and in thy truth thou hast humbled me.

<span id="an_118:76">118:76</span> O! let thy mercy be for my comfort,
according to thy word unto thy servant.

<span id="an_118:77">118:77</span> Let thy tender mercies come unto me,
and I shall live: for thy law is my meditation.

<span id="an_118:78">118:78</span> Let the proud be ashamed, because
they have done unjustly towards me: but I will be employed in thy
commandments.

<span id="an_118:79">118:79</span> Let them that fear thee turn to me"
and they that know thy testimonies.

<span id="an_118:80">118:80</span> Let my heart be undefiled in thy
justifications, that I may not be confounded.

<span id="an_118:81">118:81</span> \[CAPH\] My soul hath fainted after
thy salvation: and in thy word I have very much hoped.

<span id="an_118:82">118:82</span> My eyes have failed for thy word,
saying: When wilt thou comfort me?

<span id="an_118:83">118:83</span> For I am become like a bottle in the
frost: I have not forgotten thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:84">118:84</span> How many are the days of thy servant:
when wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me?

<span id="an_118:85">118:85</span> The wicked have told me fables: but
not as thy law.

<span id="an_118:86">118:86</span> All thy statutes are truth: they have
persecuted me unjustly, do thou help me.

<span id="an_118:87">118:87</span> They had almost made an end of me
upon earth: but I have not forsaken thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:88">118:88</span> Quicken thou me according to thy
mercy: and I shall keep the testimonies of thy mouth.

<span id="an_118:89">118:89</span> \[LAMED\] For ever, O Lord, thy word
standeth firm in heaven.

<span id="an_118:90">118:90</span> Thy truth unto all generations: thou
hast founded the earth, and it continueth.

<span id="an_118:91">118:91</span> By thy ordinance the day goeth on:
for all things serve thee.

<span id="an_118:92">118:92</span> Unless thy law had been my
meditation, I had then perhaps perished in my abjection.

<span id="an_118:93">118:93</span> Thy justifications I will never
forget: for by them thou hast given me life.

<span id="an_118:94">118:94</span> I am thine, save thou me: for I have
sought thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:95">118:95</span> The wicked have waited for me to
destroy me: but I have understood thy testimonies.

<span id="an_118:96">118:96</span> I have seen an end to all
persecution: thy commandment is exceeding broad.

<span id="an_118:97">118:97</span> \[MEM\] O how have I loved thy law, O
Lord! it is my meditation all the day.

<span id="an_118:98">118:98</span> Through thy commandment, thou hast
made me wiser than my enemies: for it is ever with me.

<span id="an_118:99">118:99</span> I have understood more than all my
teachers: because thy testimonies are my meditation.

<span id="an_118:100">118:100</span> I have had understanding above
ancients: because I have sought thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:101">118:101</span> I have restrained my feet from
every evil way: that I may keep thy words.

<span id="an_118:102">118:102</span> I have not declined from thy
judgments, because thou hast set me a law.

<span id="an_118:103">118:103</span> How sweet are thy words to my
palate! more than honey to my mouth.

<span id="an_118:104">118:104</span> By thy commandments I have had
understanding: therefore have I hated every way of iniquity.

<span id="an_118:105">118:105</span> \[NUN\] Thy word is a lamp to my
feet, and a light to my paths.

<span id="an_118:106">118:106</span> I have sworn and am determined to
keep the judgments of thy justice.

<span id="an_118:107">118:107</span> I have been humbled, O Lord,
exceedingly: quicken thou me according to thy word.

<span id="an_118:108">118:108</span> The free offerings of my mouth make
acceptable, O Lord: and teach me thy judgments.

<span id="an_118:109">118:109</span> My soul is continually in my hands:
and I have not forgotten thy law.

<span id="an_118:110">118:110</span> Sinners have laid a snare for me:
but I have not erred from thy precepts.

<span id="an_118:111">118:111</span> I have purchased thy testimonies
for an inheritance for ever: because they are a joy to my heart.

<span id="an_118:112">118:112</span> I have inclined my heart to do thy
justifications for ever, for the reward.

<span id="an_118:113">118:113</span> \[SAMECH\] I have hated the unjust:
and have loved thy law.

<span id="an_118:114">118:114</span> Thou art my helper and my
protector: and in thy word I have greatly hoped.

<span id="an_118:115">118:115</span> Depart from me, ye malignant: and I
will search the commandments of my God.

<span id="an_118:116">118:116</span> Uphold me according to thy word,
and I shall live: and let me not be confounded in my expectation.

<span id="an_118:117">118:117</span> Help me, and I shall be saved: and
I will meditate always on thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:118">118:118</span> Thou hast despised all them that
fall off from thy judgments; for their thought is unjust.

<span id="an_118:119">118:119</span> I have accounted all the sinners of
the earth prevaricators: therefore have I loved thy testimonies.

<span id="an_118:120">118:120</span> Pierce thou my flesh with thy fear:
for I am afraid of thy judgments.

<span id="an_118:121">118:121</span> \[AIN\] I have done judgment and
justice: give me not up to them that slander me.

<span id="an_118:122">118:122</span> Uphold thy servant unto good: let
not the proud calumniate me.

<span id="an_118:123">118:123</span> My eyes have fainted after thy
salvation: and for the word of thy justice.

<span id="an_118:124">118:124</span> Deal with thy servant according to
thy mercy: and teach me thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:125">118:125</span> I am thy servant: give me
understanding that I may know thy testimonies.

<span id="an_118:126">118:126</span> It is time, O Lord, to do: they
have dissipated thy law.

<span id="an_118:127">118:127</span> Therefore have I loved thy
commandments above gold and the topaz.

<span id="an_118:128">118:128</span> Therefore was I directed to all thy
commandments: I have hated all wicked ways.

<span id="an_118:129">118:129</span> \[PHE\] Thy testimonies are
wonderful: therefore my soul hath sought them.

<span id="an_118:130">118:130</span> The declaration of thy words giveth
light: and giveth understanding to little ones.

<span id="an_118:131">118:131</span> I opened my mouth and panted:
because I longed for thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:132">118:132</span> Look thou upon me, and have mercy
on me, according to the judgment of them that love thy name.

<span id="an_118:133">118:133</span> Direct my steps according to thy
word: and let no iniquity have dominion over me.

<span id="an_118:134">118:134</span> Redeem me from the calumnies of
men: that I may keep thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:135">118:135</span> Make thy face to shine upon thy
servant: and teach me thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:136">118:136</span> My eyes have sent forth springs of
water: because they have not kept thy law.

<span id="an_118:137">118:137</span> \[SADE\] Thou art just, O Lord: and
thy judgment is right.

<span id="an_118:138">118:138</span> Thou hast commanded justice thy
testimonies: and thy truth exceedingly.

<span id="an_118:139">118:139</span> My zeal hath made me pine away:
because my enemies forgot thy words.

<span id="an_118:140">118:140</span> Thy word is exceedingly refined:
and thy servant hath loved it.

<span id="an_118:141">118:141</span> I am very young and despised; but I
forgot not thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:142">118:142</span> Thy justice is justice for ever:
and thy law is the truth.

<span id="an_118:143">118:143</span> Trouble and anguish have found me:
thy commandments are my meditation.

<span id="an_118:144">118:144</span> Thy testimonies are justice for
ever: give me understanding, and I shall live.

<span id="an_118:145">118:145</span> \[COPH\] I cried with my whole
heart, hear me, O Lord: I will seek thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:146">118:146</span> I cried unto thee, save me: that I
may keep thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:147">118:147</span> I prevented the dawning of the day,
and cried: because in thy words I very much hoped.

<span id="an_118:148">118:148</span> My eyes to thee have prevented the
morning: that I might meditate on thy words.

<span id="an_118:149">118:149</span> Hear thou my voice, O Lord,
according to thy mercy: and quicken me according to thy mercy.

<span id="an_118:150">118:150</span> They that persecute me have drawn
nigh to iniquity; but they are gone far off from the law.

<span id="an_118:151">118:151</span> Thou art near, O Lord: and all thy
ways are truth.

<span id="an_118:152">118:152</span> I have known from the beginning
concerning thy testimonies: that thou hast founded them for ever.

<span id="an_118:153">118:153</span> \[RES\] See my humiliation and
deliver me: for I have not forgotten the law.

<span id="an_118:154">118:154</span> Judge my judgment and redeem me:
quicken thou me for thy word's sake.

<span id="an_118:155">118:155</span> Salvation is far from sinners;
because they have not sought thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:156">118:156</span> Many, O Lord, are thy mercies:
quicken me according to thy judgment.

<span id="an_118:157">118:157</span> Many are they that persecute me,
and afflict me; but I have not declined from thy testimonies.

<span id="an_118:158">118:158</span> I beheld the transgressors, and I
pined away; because they kept not thy word.

<span id="an_118:159">118:159</span> Behold I have loved thy
commandments, O Lord; quicken me thou in thy mercy.

<span id="an_118:160">118:160</span> The beginning of thy words is
truth: all the judgments of thy justice are for ever.

<span id="an_118:161">118:161</span> \[SIN\] Princes have persecuted me
without cause: and my heart hath been in awe of thy words.

<span id="an_118:162">118:162</span> I will rejoice at thy words, as one
that hath found great spoil.

<span id="an_118:163">118:163</span> I have hated and abhorred iniquity;
but I have loved thy law.

<span id="an_118:164">118:164</span> Seven times a day I have given
praise to thee, for the judgments of thy justice.

<span id="an_118:165">118:165</span> Much peace have they that love thy
law, and to them there is no stumbling block

<span id="an_118:166">118:166</span> I looked to thy salvation, O Lord:
and I loved thy commandments.

<span id="an_118:167">118:167</span> My soul hath kept thy testimonies:
and hath loved them exceedingly.

<span id="an_118:168">118:168</span> I have kept thy commandments and
thy testimonies: because all my ways are in thy sight.

<span id="an_118:169">118:169</span> \[TAU\] Let my supplication, O
Lord, come near in thy sight: give me understanding according to thy
word.

<span id="an_118:170">118:170</span> Let my request come in before thee;
deliver thou me according to thy word.

<span id="an_118:171">118:171</span> My lips shall utter a hymn, when
thou shalt teach me thy justifications.

<span id="an_118:172">118:172</span> My tongue shall pronounce thy word:
because all thy commandments are justice.

<span id="an_118:173">118:173</span> Let thy hand be with me to save me;
for I have chosen thy precepts.

<span id="an_118:174">118:174</span> I have longed for thy salvation, O
Lord; and thy law is my meditation.

<span id="an_118:175">118:175</span> My soul shall live and shall praise
thee: and thy judgments shall help me.

<span id="an_118:176">118:176</span> I have gone astray like a sheep
that is lost: seek thy servant, because I have not forgotten thy
commandments.

<span id="an_119:1">119:1</span> In my trouble I cried to the Lord: and
he heard me.

<span id="an_119:2">119:2</span> O Lord, deliver my soul from wicked
lips, and a deceitful tongue.

<span id="an_119:3">119:3</span> What shall be given to thee, or what
shall be added to thee, to a deceitful tongue.

<span id="an_119:4">119:4</span> The sharp arrows of the mighty, with
coals that lay waste.

<span id="an_119:5">119:5</span> Woe is me, that my sojourning is
prolonged! I have dwelt with the inhabitants of cedar:

<span id="an_119:6">119:6</span> my soul hath been long a sojourner.

<span id="an_119:7">119:7</span> With them that hate peace I was
peaceable: when I spoke to them they fought against me without cause.

<span id="an_120:1">120:1</span> I have lifted up my eyes to the
mountains, from whence help shall come to me.

<span id="an_120:2">120:2</span> My help is from the Lord, who made
heaven and earth.

<span id="an_120:3">120:3</span> May he not suffer thy foot to be moved:
neither let him slumber that keepeth thee.

<span id="an_120:4">120:4</span> Behold he shall neither slumber nor
sleep, that keepeth Israel.

<span id="an_120:5">120:5</span> The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy
protection upon thy right hand.

<span id="an_120:6">120:6</span> The sun shall not burn thee by day: nor
the moon by night.

<span id="an_120:7">120:7</span> The Lord keepeth thee from all evil:
may the Lord keep thy soul.

<span id="an_120:8">120:8</span> May the Lord keep thy going in and thy
going out; from henceforth now and for ever.

<span id="an_121:1">121:1</span> I rejoiced at the things that were said
to me: We shall go into the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_121:2">121:2</span> Our feet were standing in thy courts, O
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_121:3">121:3</span> Jerusalem, which is built as a city,
which is compact together.

<span id="an_121:4">121:4</span> For thither did the tribes go up, the
tribes of the Lord: the testimony of Israel, to praise the name of the
Lord.

<span id="an_121:5">121:5</span> Because their seats have sat in
judgment, seats upon the house of David.

<span id="an_121:6">121:6</span> Pray ye for the things that are for the
peace of Jerusalem: and abundance for them that love thee.

<span id="an_121:7">121:7</span> Let peace be in thy strength: and
abundance in thy towers.

<span id="an_121:8">121:8</span> For the sake of my brethren, and of my
neighbours, I spoke peace of thee.

<span id="an_121:9">121:9</span> Because of the house of the Lord our
God, I have sought good things for thee.

<span id="an_122:1">122:1</span> To thee have I lifted up my eyes, who
dwellest in heaven.

<span id="an_122:2">122:2</span> Behold as the eyes of the servants are
on the hands of their masters, As the eyes of the handmaid are on the
hands of her mistress: so are our eyes unto the Lord our God, until he
have mercy on us.

<span id="an_122:3">122:3</span> Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on
us: for we are greatly filled with contempt.

<span id="an_122:4">122:4</span> For our soul is greatly filled: we are
a reproach to the rich, and contempt to the proud.

<span id="an_123:1">123:1</span> If it had not been that the Lord was
with us, let Israel now say:

<span id="an_123:2">123:2</span> If it had not been that the Lord was
with us, When men rose up against us

<span id="an_123:3">123:3</span> perhaps they had swallowed us up alive.
When their fury was enkindled against us,

<span id="an_123:4">123:4</span> perhaps the waters had swallowed us up.

<span id="an_123:5">123:5</span> Our soul hath passed through a torrent:
perhaps our soul had passed through a water insupportable.

<span id="an_123:6">123:6</span> Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given
us to be a prey to their teeth.

<span id="an_123:7">123:7</span> Our soul hath been delivered as a
sparrow out of the snare of the followers. The snare is broken, and we
are delivered.

<span id="an_123:8">123:8</span> Our help is in the name of the Lord,
who made heaven and earth.

<span id="an_124:1">124:1</span> They that trust in the Lord shall be as
mount Sion: he shall not be moved for ever that dwelleth

<span id="an_124:2">124:2</span> in Jerusalem. Mountains are round about
it: so the Lord is round about his people from henceforth now and for
ever.

<span id="an_124:3">124:3</span> For the Lord will not leave the rod of
sinners upon the lot of the just: that the just may not stretch forth
their hands to iniquity.

<span id="an_124:4">124:4</span> Do good, O Lord, to those that are
good, and to the upright of heart.

<span id="an_124:5">124:5</span> But such as turn aside into bonds, the
Lord shall lead out with the workers of iniquity: peace upon Israel.

<span id="an_125:1">125:1</span> When the lord brought back the
captivity of Sion, we became like men comforted.

<span id="an_125:2">125:2</span> Then was our mouth filled with
gladness; and our tongue with joy. Then shall they say among the
Gentiles: The Lord hath done great things for them.

<span id="an_125:3">125:3</span> The Lord hath done great things for us:
we are become joyful.

<span id="an_125:4">125:4</span> Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as a
stream in the south.

<span id="an_125:5">125:5</span> They that sow in tears shall reap in
joy.

<span id="an_125:6">125:6</span> Going they went and wept, casting their
seeds.

<span id="an_125:7">125:7</span> But coming they shall come with
joyfulness, carrying their sheaves.

<span id="an_126:1">126:1</span> Unless the Lord build the house, they
labour in vain that build it. Unless the Lord keep the city, he watcheth
in vain that keepeth it.

<span id="an_126:2">126:2</span> It is vain for you to rise before
light, rise ye after you have sitten, you that eat the bread of sorrow.
When he shall give sleep to his beloved,

<span id="an_126:3">126:3</span> behold the inheritance of the Lord are
children: the reward, the fruit of the womb.

<span id="an_126:4">126:4</span> As arrows in the hand of the mighty, so
the children of them that have been shaken.

<span id="an_126:5">126:5</span> Blessed is the man that hath filled the
desire with them; he shall not be confounded when he shall speak to his
enemies in the gate.

<span id="an_127:1">127:1</span> Blessed are all they that fear the
Lord: that walk in his ways.

<span id="an_127:2">127:2</span> For thou shalt eat the labours of thy
hands: blessed art thou, and it shall be well with thee.

<span id="an_127:3">127:3</span> Thy wife as a fruitful vine, on the
sides of thy house. Thy children as olive plants, round about thy table.

<span id="an_127:4">127:4</span> Behold, thus shall the man be blessed
that feareth the Lord.

<span id="an_127:5">127:5</span> May the Lord bless thee out of Sion:
and mayest thou see the good things of Jerusalem all the days of thy
life.

<span id="an_127:6">127:6</span> And mayest thou see thy children's
children, peace upon Israel.

<span id="an_128:1">128:1</span> Often have they fought against me from
my youth, let Israel now say.

<span id="an_128:2">128:2</span> Often have they fought against me from
my youth: but they could not prevail over me.

<span id="an_128:3">128:3</span> The wicked have wrought upon my back:
they have lengthened their iniquity.

<span id="an_128:4">128:4</span> The Lord who is just will cut the necks
of sinners:

<span id="an_128:5">128:5</span> let them all be confounded and turned
back that hate Sion.

<span id="an_128:6">128:6</span> Let them be as grass on the tops of
houses: which withered before it be plucked up:

<span id="an_128:7">128:7</span> Wherewith the mower filleth not his
hand: nor he that gathereth sheaves his bosom.

<span id="an_128:8">128:8</span> And they that have passed by have not
said: The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we have blessed you in the
name of the Lord.

<span id="an_129:1">129:1</span> Out of the depths I have cried to thee,
O Lord:

<span id="an_129:2">129:2</span> Lord, hear my voice. Let thy ears be
attentive to the voice of my supplication.

<span id="an_129:3">129:3</span> If thou, O Lord, wilt mark iniquities:
Lord, who shall stand it.

<span id="an_129:4">129:4</span> For with thee there is merciful
forgiveness: and by reason of thy law, I have waited for thee, O Lord.
My soul hath relied on his word:

<span id="an_129:5">129:5</span> my soul hath hoped in the Lord.

<span id="an_129:6">129:6</span> From the morning watch even until
night, let Israel hope in the Lord.

<span id="an_129:7">129:7</span> Because with the Lord there is mercy:
and with him plentiful redemption.

<span id="an_129:8">129:8</span> And he shall redeem Israel from all his
iniquities.

<span id="an_130:1">130:1</span> Lord, my heart is not exalted: nor are
my eyes lofty. Neither have I walked in great matters, nor in wonderful
things above me.

<span id="an_130:2">130:2</span> If I was not humbly minded, but exalted
my soul: As a child that is weaned is towards his mother, so reward in
my soul.

<span id="an_130:3">130:3</span> Let Israel hope in the Lord, from
henceforth now and for ever.

<span id="an_131:1">131:1</span> O Lord, remember David, and all his
meekness.

<span id="an_131:2">131:2</span> How he swore to the Lord, he vowed a
vow to the God of Jacob:

<span id="an_131:3">131:3</span> If I shall enter into the tabernacle of
my house: if I shall go up into the bed wherein I lie:

<span id="an_131:4">131:4</span> If I shall give sleep to my eyes, or
slumber to my eyelids,

<span id="an_131:5">131:5</span> Or rest to my temples: until I find out
a place for the Lord, a tabernacle for the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_131:6">131:6</span> Behold we have heard of it in Ephrata:
we have found it in the fields of the wood.

<span id="an_131:7">131:7</span> We will go into his tabernacle: We will
adore in the place where his feet stood.

<span id="an_131:8">131:8</span> Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place:
thou and the ark, which thou hast sanctified.

<span id="an_131:9">131:9</span> Let thy priests be clothed with
justice: and let thy saints rejoice.

<span id="an_131:10">131:10</span> For thy servant David's sake, turn
not away the face of thy anointed.

<span id="an_131:11">131:11</span> The Lord hath sworn truth to David,
and he will not make it void: of the fruit of thy womb I will set upon
thy throne.

<span id="an_131:12">131:12</span> If thy children will keep thy
covenant, and these my testimonies which I shall teach them: Their
children also for evermore shall sit upon thy throne.

<span id="an_131:13">131:13</span> For the Lord hath chosen Sion: he
hath chosen it for his dwelling.

<span id="an_131:14">131:14</span> This is my rest for ever and ever:
here will I dwell, for I have chosen it.

<span id="an_131:15">131:15</span> Blessing, I will bless her widow: I
will satisfy her poor with bread.

<span id="an_131:16">131:16</span> I will clothe her priests with
salvation: and her saints shall rejoice with exceeding great joy.

<span id="an_131:17">131:17</span> There will I bring forth a horn to
David: I have prepared a lamp for my anointed.

<span id="an_131:18">131:18</span> His enemies I will clothe with
confusion: but upon him will my sanctification flourish.

<span id="an_132:1">132:1</span> Behold how good and how pleasant it is
for brethren to dwell in unity.

<span id="an_132:2">132:2</span> Like the precious ointment on the head,
that ran down upon the beard, the beard of Aaron, Which ran down to the
skirt of his garment:

<span id="an_132:3">132:3</span> as the dew of Hermon, which descendeth
upon mount Sion. For there the Lord hath commandeth blessing, and life
for evermore.

<span id="an_133:1">133:1</span> Behold now bless ye the Lord, all ye
servants of the Lord: Who stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts
of the house of our God.

<span id="an_133:2">133:2</span> In the nights lift up your hands to the
holy places, and bless ye the Lord.

<span id="an_133:3">133:3</span> May the Lord out of Sion bless thee, he
that made heaven and earth.

<span id="an_134:1">134:1</span> Praise ye the name of the Lord: O you
his servants, praise the Lord:

<span id="an_134:2">134:2</span> You that stand in the house of the
Lord, in the courts of the house of our God.

<span id="an_134:3">134:3</span> Praise ye the Lord, for the Lord is
good: sing ye to his name, for it is sweet.

<span id="an_134:4">134:4</span> For the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto
himself: Israel for his own possession.

<span id="an_134:5">134:5</span> For I have known that the Lord is
great, and our God is above all gods.

<span id="an_134:6">134:6</span> Whatsoever the Lord hath pleased he
hath done, in heaven, in earth, in the sea, and in all the deeps.

<span id="an_134:7">134:7</span> He bringeth up clouds from the end of
the earth: he hath made lightnings for the rain. He bringeth forth winds
out of his stores:

<span id="an_134:8">134:8</span> He slew the firstborn of Egypt from man
even unto beast.

<span id="an_134:9">134:9</span> He sent forth signs and wonders in the
midst of thee, O Egypt: upon Pharao, and upon all his servants.

<span id="an_134:10">134:10</span> He smote many nations, and slew
mighty kings:

<span id="an_134:11">134:11</span> Sehon king of the Amorrhites, and Og
king of Basan, and all the kingdoms of Chanaan.

<span id="an_134:12">134:12</span> And gave their land for an
inheritance, for an inheritance to his people Israel.

<span id="an_134:13">134:13</span> Thy name, O Lord, is for ever: thy
memorial, O Lord, unto all generations.

<span id="an_134:14">134:14</span> For the Lord will judge his people,
and will be entreated in favour of his servants.

<span id="an_134:15">134:15</span> The idols of the Gentiles are silver
and gold, the works of men's hands.

<span id="an_134:16">134:16</span> They have a mouth, but they speak
not: they have eyes, but they see not.

<span id="an_134:17">134:17</span> They have ears, but they hear not:
neither is there any breath in their mouths.

<span id="an_134:18">134:18</span> Let them that make them be like to
them: and every one that trusteth in them.

<span id="an_134:19">134:19</span> Bless the Lord, O house of Israel:
bless the Lord, O house of Aaron.

<span id="an_134:20">134:20</span> Bless the Lord, O house of Levi: you
that fear the Lord, bless the Lord.

<span id="an_134:21">134:21</span> Blessed be the Lord out of Sion, who
dwelleth in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_135:1">135:1</span> Praise the Lord, for he is good: for
his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:2">135:2</span> Praise ye the God of gods: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:3">135:3</span> Praise ye the Lord of lords: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:4">135:4</span> Who alone doth great wonders: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:5">135:5</span> Who made the heavens in understanding:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:6">135:6</span> Who established the earth above the
waters: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:7">135:7</span> Who made the great lights: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:8">135:8</span> The sun to rule over the day: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:9">135:9</span> The moon and the stars to rule the
night: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:10">135:10</span> Who smote Egypt with their firstborn:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:11">135:11</span> Who brought Israel from among them:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:12">135:12</span> With a mighty hand and a stretched
out arm: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:13">135:13</span> Who divided the Red Sea into parts:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:14">135:14</span> And brought out Israel through the
midst thereof: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:15">135:15</span> And overthrew Pharao and his host in
the Red Sea: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:16">135:16</span> Who led his people through the
desert: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:17">135:17</span> Who smote great kings: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:18">135:18</span> And slew strong kings: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:19">135:19</span> Sehon king of the Amorrhites: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:20">135:20</span> And Og king of Basan: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:21">135:21</span> And he gave their land for an
inheritance: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:22">135:22</span> For an inheritance to his servant
Israel: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:23">135:23</span> For he was mindful of us in our
affliction: for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:24">135:24</span> And he redeemed us from our enemies:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:25">135:25</span> Who giveth food to all flesh: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:26">135:26</span> Give glory to the God of heaven: for
his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_135:27">135:27</span> Give glory to the Lord of lords: for
his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_136:1">136:1</span> Upon the rivers of Babylon, there we
sat and wept: when we remembered Sion:

<span id="an_136:2">136:2</span> On the willows in the midst thereof we
hung up our instruments.

<span id="an_136:3">136:3</span> For there they that led us into
captivity required of us the words of songs. And they that carried us
away, said: Sing ye to us a hymn of the songs of Sion.

<span id="an_136:4">136:4</span> How shall we sing the song of the Lord
in a strange land?

<span id="an_136:5">136:5</span> If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my
right hand be forgotten.

<span id="an_136:6">136:6</span> Let my tongue cleave to my jaws, if I
do not remember thee: If I make not Jerusalem the beginning of my joy.

<span id="an_136:7">136:7</span> Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom,
in the day of Jerusalem: Who say: Rase it, rase it, even to the
foundation thereof.

<span id="an_136:8">136:8</span> O daughter of Babylon, miserable:
blessed shall he be who shall repay thee thy payment which thou hast
paid us.

<span id="an_136:9">136:9</span> Blessed be he that shall take and dash
thy little ones against the rock.

<span id="an_137:1">137:1</span> I will praise thee, O lord, with my
whole heart: for thou hast heard the words of my mouth. I will sing
praise to thee in the sight of his angels:

<span id="an_137:2">137:2</span> I will worship towards thy holy temple,
and I will give glory to thy name. For thy mercy, and for thy truth: for
thou hast magnified thy holy name above all.

<span id="an_137:3">137:3</span> In what day soever I shall call upon
thee, hear me: thou shall multiply strength in my soul.

<span id="an_137:4">137:4</span> May all the kings of the earth give
glory to thee: for they have heard all the words of thy mouth.

<span id="an_137:5">137:5</span> And let them sing in the ways of the
Lord: for great is the glory of the Lord.

<span id="an_137:6">137:6</span> For the Lord is high, and looketh on
the low: and the high he knoweth afar off.

<span id="an_137:7">137:7</span> If I shall walk in the midst of
tribulation, thou wilt quicken me: and thou hast stretched forth thy
hand against the wrath of my enemies: and thy right hand hath saved me.

<span id="an_137:8">137:8</span> The Lord will repay for me: thy mercy,
O Lord, endureth for ever: O despise not the work of thy hands.

<span id="an_138:1">138:1</span> Lord, thou hast proved me, and known
me:

<span id="an_138:2">138:2</span> thou hast know my sitting down, and my
rising up.

<span id="an_138:3">138:3</span> Thou hast understood my thoughts afar
off: my path and my line thou hast searched out.

<span id="an_138:4">138:4</span> And thou hast foreseen all my ways: for
there is no speech in my tongue.

<span id="an_138:5">138:5</span> Behold, O Lord, thou hast known all
things, the last and those of old: thou hast formed me, and hast laid
thy hand upon me.

<span id="an_138:6">138:6</span> Thy knowledge is become wonderful to
me: it is high, and I cannot reach to it.

<span id="an_138:7">138:7</span> Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or
whither shall I flee from thy face?

<span id="an_138:8">138:8</span> If I ascend into heaven, thou art
there: if I descend into hell, thou art present.

<span id="an_138:9">138:9</span> If I take my wings early in the
morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea:

<span id="an_138:10">138:10</span> Even there also shall thy hand lead
me: and thy right hand shall hold me.

<span id="an_138:11">138:11</span> And I said: Perhaps darkness shall
cover me: and night shall be my light in my pleasures.

<span id="an_138:12">138:12</span> But darkness shall not be dark to
thee, and night shall be light as day: the darkness thereof, and the
light thereof are alike to thee.

<span id="an_138:13">138:13</span> For thou hast possessed my reins:
thou hast protected me from my mother's womb.

<span id="an_138:14">138:14</span> I will praise thee, for thou art
fearfully magnified: wonderful are thy works, and my soul knoweth right
well.

<span id="an_138:15">138:15</span> My bone is not hidden from thee,
which thou hast made in secret: and my substance in the lower parts of
the earth.

<span id="an_138:16">138:16</span> Thy eyes did see my imperfect being,
and in thy book all shall be written: days shall be formed, and no one
in them.

<span id="an_138:17">138:17</span> But to me thy friends, O God, are
made exceedingly honourable: their principality is exceedingly
strengthened.

<span id="an_138:18">138:18</span> I will number them, and they shall be
multiplied above the sand: I rose up and am still with thee.

<span id="an_138:19">138:19</span> If thou wilt kill the wicked, O God:
ye men of blood, depart from me:

<span id="an_138:20">138:20</span> Because you say in thought: They
shall receive thy cities in vain.

<span id="an_138:21">138:21</span> Have I not hated them, O Lord, that
hated thee: and pine away because of thy enemies?

<span id="an_138:22">138:22</span> I have hated them with a perfect
hatred: and they are become enemies to me.

<span id="an_138:23">138:23</span> Prove me, O God, and know my heart:
examine me, and know my paths.

<span id="an_138:24">138:24</span> And see if there be in me the way of
iniquity: and lead me in the eternal way.

<span id="an_139:1">139:1</span> Unto the end, a psalm for David.

<span id="an_139:2">139:2</span> Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man:
rescue me from the unjust man.

<span id="an_139:3">139:3</span> Who have devised iniquities in their
hearts: all the day long they designed battles.

<span id="an_139:4">139:4</span> They have sharpened their tongues like
a serpent: the venom of saps is under their lips.

<span id="an_139:5">139:5</span> Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of the
wicked: and from unjust men deliver me. Who have proposed to supplant my
steps.

<span id="an_139:6">139:6</span> the proud have hidden a net for me. And
they have stretched out cords for a snare: they have laid for me a
stumblingblock by the wayside.

<span id="an_139:7">139:7</span> I said to the Lord: Thou art my God:
hear, O Lord, the voice of my supplication.

<span id="an_139:8">139:8</span> O Lord, Lord, the strength of my
salvation: thou hast overshadowed my head in the day of battle.

<span id="an_139:9">139:9</span> Give me not up, O Lord, from my desire
to the wicked: they have plotted against me; do not thou forsake me,
lest they should triumph.

<span id="an_139:10">139:10</span> The head of them compassing me about:
the labour of their lips shall overwhelm them.

<span id="an_139:11">139:11</span> Burning coals shall fall upon them;
thou wilt cast them down into the fire: in miseries they shall not be
able to stand.

<span id="an_139:12">139:12</span> A man full of tongue shall not be
established in the earth: evil shall catch the unjust man unto
destruction.

<span id="an_139:13">139:13</span> I know that the Lord will do justice
to the needy, and will revenge the poor.

<span id="an_139:14">139:14</span> But as for the just, they shall give
glory to thy name: and the upright shall dwell with thy countenance.

<span id="an_140:1">140:1</span> I have cried to the, O Lord, hear me:
hearken to my voice, when I cry to thee.

<span id="an_140:2">140:2</span> Let my prayer be directed as incense in
thy sight; the lifting up of my hands, as evening sacrifice.

<span id="an_140:3">140:3</span> Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth:
and a door round about my lips.

<span id="an_140:4">140:4</span> Incline not my heart to evil words; to
make excuses in sins. With men that work iniquity: and I will not
communicate with the choicest of them.

<span id="an_140:5">140:5</span> The just shall correct me in mercy, and
shall reprove me: but let not the oil of the sinner fatten my head. For
my prayer also shall still be against the things with which they are
well pleased:

<span id="an_140:6">140:6</span> their judges falling upon the rock have
been swallowed up. They shall hear my words, for they have prevailed:

<span id="an_140:7">140:7</span> as when the thickness of the earth is
broken up upon the ground: Our bones are scattered by the side of hell.

<span id="an_140:8">140:8</span> But o to thee, O Lord, Lord, are my
eyes: in thee have I put my trust, take not away my soul.

<span id="an_140:9">140:9</span> Keep me from the snare, which they have
laid for me, and from the stumblingblocks of them that work iniquity.

<span id="an_140:10">140:10</span> The wicked shall fall in his net: I
am alone until I pass.

<span id="an_141:1">141:1</span> Of understanding for David. A prayer
when he was in the cave. \[1 Kings 24\].

<span id="an_141:2">141:2</span> I cried to the Lord with my voice: with
my voice I made supplication to the Lord.

<span id="an_141:3">141:3</span> In his sight I pour out my prayer, and
before him I declare my trouble:

<span id="an_141:4">141:4</span> When my spirit failed me, then thou
newest my paths.

<span id="an_141:5">141:5</span> I looked on my right hand, and beheld,
and there was no one that would know me. Flight hath failed me: and
there is no one that hath regard to my soul.

<span id="an_141:6">141:6</span> I cried to thee, O Lord: I said: Thou
art my hope, my portion in the land of the living.

<span id="an_141:7">141:7</span> Attend to my supplication: for I am
brought very low. Deliver me from my persecutors; for they are stronger
than I.

<span id="an_141:8">141:8</span> Bring my soul out of prison, that I may
praise thy name: the just wait for me, until thou reward me.

<span id="an_142:1">142:1</span> Hear, O Lord, my prayer: give ear to my
supplication in thy truth: hear me in thy justice.

<span id="an_142:2">142:2</span> And enter not into judgment with thy
servant: for in thy sight no man living shall be justified.

<span id="an_142:3">142:3</span> For the enemy hath persecuted my soul:
he hath brought down my life to the earth. He hath made me to dwell in
darkness as those that have been dead of old:

<span id="an_142:4">142:4</span> and my spirit is in anguish within me:
my heart within me is troubled.

<span id="an_142:5">142:5</span> I remembered the days of old, I
meditated on all thy works: I meditated upon the works of thy hands.

<span id="an_142:6">142:6</span> I stretched forth my hands to thee: my
soul is as earth without water unto thee.

<span id="an_142:7">142:7</span> Hear me speedily, O Lord: my spirit
hath fainted away. Turn not away thy face from me, lest I be like unto
them that go down into the pit.

<span id="an_142:8">142:8</span> Cause me to hear thy mercy in the
morning; for in thee have I hoped. Make the way known to me, wherein I
should walk: for I have lifted up my soul to thee.

<span id="an_142:9">142:9</span> Deliver me from my enemies, O Lord, to
thee have I fled:

<span id="an_142:10">142:10</span> teach me to do thy will, for thou art
my God. Thy good spirit shall lead me into the right land:

<span id="an_142:11">142:11</span> for thy name's sake, O Lord, thou
wilt quicken me in thy justice. Thou wilt bring my soul out of trouble:

<span id="an_142:12">142:12</span> and in thy mercy thou wilt destroy my
enemies. And thou wilt cut off all them that afflict my soul: for I am
thy servant.

<span id="an_143:1">143:1</span> Blessed be the Lord my God, who
teacheth my hands to fight, and my fingers to war.

<span id="an_143:2">143:2</span> My mercy, and my refuge: my support,
and my deliverer: My protector, and I have hoped in him: who subdueth my
people under me.

<span id="an_143:3">143:3</span> Lord, what is man, that thou art made
known to him? or the son of man, that thou makest account of him?

<span id="an_143:4">143:4</span> Man is like to vanity: his days pass
away like a shadow.

<span id="an_143:5">143:5</span> Lord, bow down thy heavens and descend:
touch the mountains and they shall smoke.

<span id="an_143:6">143:6</span> Send forth lightning, and thou shalt
scatter them: shoot out thy arrows, and thou shalt trouble them.

<span id="an_143:7">143:7</span> Put forth thy hand from on high, take
me out, and deliver me from many waters: from the hand of strange
children:

<span id="an_143:8">143:8</span> Whose mouth hath spoken vanity: and
their right hand is the right hand of iniquity.

<span id="an_143:9">143:9</span> To thee, O God, I will sing a new
canticle: on the psaltery and an instrument of ten strings I will sing
praises to thee.

<span id="an_143:10">143:10</span> Who givest salvation to kings: who
hast redeemed thy servant David from the malicious sword:

<span id="an_143:11">143:11</span> Deliver me, And rescue me out of the
hand of strange children; whose mouth hath spoken vanity: and their
right hand is the right hand of iniquity:

<span id="an_143:12">143:12</span> Whose sons are as new plants in their
youth: Their daughters decked out, adorned round about after the
similitude of a temple:

<span id="an_143:13">143:13</span> Their storehouses full, flowing out
of this into that. Their sheep fruitful in young, abounding in their
goings forth:

<span id="an_143:14">143:14</span> their oxen fat. There is no breach of
wall, nor passage, nor crying out in their streets.

<span id="an_143:15">143:15</span> They have called the people happy,
that hath these things: but happy is that people whose God is the Lord.

<span id="an_144:1">144:1</span> I will extol thee, O God my king: and I
will bless thy name for ever; yea, for ever and ever.

<span id="an_144:2">144:2</span> Every day I will bless thee: and I will
praise thy name for ever; yea, for ever and ever.

<span id="an_144:3">144:3</span> Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised: and of his greatness there is no end.

<span id="an_144:4">144:4</span> Generation and generation shall praise
thy works: and they shall declare thy power.

<span id="an_144:5">144:5</span> They shall speak of the magnificence of
the glory of thy holiness: and shall tell thy wondrous works.

<span id="an_144:6">144:6</span> And they shall speak of the might of
thy terrible acts: and shall declare thy greatness.

<span id="an_144:7">144:7</span> They shall publish the memory of the
abundance of thy sweetness: and shall rejoice in thy justice.

<span id="an_144:8">144:8</span> The Lord is gracious and merciful:
patient and plenteous in mercy.

<span id="an_144:9">144:9</span> The Lord is sweet to all: and his
tender mercies are over all his works.

<span id="an_144:10">144:10</span> Let all thy works, O lord, praise
thee: and let thy saints bless thee.

<span id="an_144:11">144:11</span> They shall speak of the glory of thy
kingdom: and shall tell of thy power:

<span id="an_144:12">144:12</span> To make thy might known to the sons
of men: and the glory of the magnificence of thy kingdom.

<span id="an_144:13">144:13</span> Thy kingdom is a kingdom of all ages:
and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.

<span id="an_144:14">144:14</span> The Lord lifteth up all that fall:
and setteth up all that are cast down.

<span id="an_144:15">144:15</span> The eyes of all hope in thee, O Lord:
and thou givest them meat in due season.

<span id="an_144:16">144:16</span> Thou openest thy hand, and fillest
with blessing every living creature.

<span id="an_144:17">144:17</span> The Lord is just in all his ways: and
holy in all his works.

<span id="an_144:18">144:18</span> The Lord is nigh unto all them that
call upon him: to all that call upon him in truth.

<span id="an_144:19">144:19</span> He will do the will of them that fear
him: and he will hear their prayer, and save them.

<span id="an_144:20">144:20</span> The Lord keepeth all them that love
him; but all the wicked he will destroy.

<span id="an_144:21">144:21</span> My mouth shall speak the praise of
the Lord: and let all flesh bless thy holy name for ever; yea, for ever
and ever.

<span id="an_145:1">145:1</span> Alleluia, of Aggeus and Zacharias.

<span id="an_145:2">145:2</span> Praise the Lord, O my soul, in my life
I will praise the Lord: I will sing to my God as long as I shall be. Put
not your trust in princes:

<span id="an_145:3">145:3</span> in the children of men, in whom there
is no salvation.

<span id="an_145:4">145:4</span> His spirit shall go forth, and he shall
return into his earth: in that day all their thoughts shall perish.

<span id="an_145:5">145:5</span> Blessed is he who hath the God of Jacob
for his helper, whose hope is in the Lord his God:

<span id="an_145:6">145:6</span> who made heaven and earth, the sea, and
all things that are in them.

<span id="an_145:7">145:7</span> Who keepeth truth for ever: who
executeth judgment for them that suffer wrong: who giveth food to the
hungry. The Lord looseth them that are fettered:

<span id="an_145:8">145:8</span> the Lord enlighteneth the blind. The
Lord lifteth up them that are cast down: the Lord loveth the just.

<span id="an_145:9">145:9</span> The Lord keepeth the strangers, he will
support the fatherless and the widow: and the ways of sinners he will
destroy.

<span id="an_145:10">145:10</span> The Lord shall reign for ever: thy
God, O Sion, unto generation and generation.

<span id="an_146:1">146:1</span> Praise ye the Lord, because psalm is
good: to our God be joyful and comely praise.

<span id="an_146:2">146:2</span> The Lord buildeth up Jerusalem: he will
gather together the dispersed of Israel.

<span id="an_146:3">146:3</span> Who healeth the broken of heart, and
bindeth up their bruises.

<span id="an_146:4">146:4</span> Who telleth the number of the stars:
and calleth them all by their names.

<span id="an_146:5">146:5</span> Great is our Lord, and great is his
power: and of his wisdom there is no number.

<span id="an_146:6">146:6</span> The Lord lifteth up the meek, and
bringeth the wicked down even to the ground.

<span id="an_146:7">146:7</span> Sing ye to the Lord with praise: sing
to our God upon the harp.

<span id="an_146:8">146:8</span> Who covereth the heaven with clouds,
and prepareth rain for the earth. Who maketh grass to grow on the
mountains, and herbs for the service of men.

<span id="an_146:9">146:9</span> Who giveth to beasts their food: and to
the young ravens that call upon him.

<span id="an_146:10">146:10</span> He shall not delight in the strength
of the horse: nor take pleasure in the legs of a man.

<span id="an_146:11">146:11</span> The Lord taketh pleasure in them that
fear him: and in them that hope in his mercy.

<span id="an_147:12">147:12</span> Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise
thy God, O Sion.

<span id="an_147:13">147:13</span> Because he hath strengthened the
bolts of thy gates, he hath blessed thy children within thee.

<span id="an_147:14">147:14</span> Who hath placed peace in thy borders:
and filleth thee with the fat of corn.

<span id="an_147:15">147:15</span> Who sendeth forth his speech to the
earth: his word runneth swiftly.

<span id="an_147:16">147:16</span> Who giveth snow like wool: scattereth
mists like ashes.

<span id="an_147:17">147:17</span> He sendeth his crystal like morsels:
who shall stand before the face of his cold?

<span id="an_147:18">147:18</span> He shall send out his word, and shall
melt them: his wind shall blow, and the waters shall run.

<span id="an_147:19">147:19</span> Who declareth his word to Jacob: his
justices and his judgments to Israel.

<span id="an_147:20">147:20</span> He hath not done in like manner to
every nation: and his judgments he hath not made manifest to them.
Alleluia.

<span id="an_148:1">148:1</span> Praise ye the Lord from the heavens:
praise ye him in the high places.

<span id="an_148:2">148:2</span> Praise ye him , all his angels: praise
ye him, all his hosts.

<span id="an_148:3">148:3</span> Praise ye him, O sun and moon: praise
him, all ye stars and light.

<span id="an_148:4">148:4</span> Praise him, ye heavens of heavens: and
let all the waters that are above the heavens

<span id="an_148:5">148:5</span> praise the name of the Lord. For he
spoke, and they were made: he commanded, and they were created.

<span id="an_148:6">148:6</span> He hath established them for ever, and
for ages of ages: he hath made a decree, and it shall not pass away.

<span id="an_148:7">148:7</span> Praise the Lord from the earth, ye
dragons, and all ye deeps:

<span id="an_148:8">148:8</span> Fire, hail, snow, ice, stormy winds
which fulfil his word:

<span id="an_148:9">148:9</span> Mountains and all hills, fruitful trees
and all cedars:

<span id="an_148:10">148:10</span> Beasts and all cattle: serpents and
feathered fowls:

<span id="an_148:11">148:11</span> Kings of the earth and all people:
princes and all judges of the earth:

<span id="an_148:12">148:12</span> Young men and maidens: let the old
with the younger, praise the name of the Lord:

<span id="an_148:13">148:13</span> for his name alone is exalted.

<span id="an_148:14">148:14</span> The praise of him is above heaven and
earth: and he hath exalted the horn of his people. A hymn to all his
saints: to the children of Israel, a people approaching to him.
Alleluia.

<span id="an_149:1">149:1</span> Sing ye to the Lord a new canticle: let
his praise be in the church of the saints.

<span id="an_149:2">149:2</span> Let Israel rejoice in him that made
him: and let the children of Sion be joyful in their king.

<span id="an_149:3">149:3</span> Let them praise his name in choir: let
them sing to him with the timbrel and the psaltery.

<span id="an_149:4">149:4</span> For the Lord is well pleased with his
people: and he will exalt the meek unto salvation.

<span id="an_149:5">149:5</span> The saints shall rejoice in glory: they
shall be joyful in their beds.

<span id="an_149:6">149:6</span> The high praise of God shall be in
their mouth: and two-edged swords in their hands:

<span id="an_149:7">149:7</span> To execute vengeance upon the nations,
chastisements among the people:

<span id="an_149:8">149:8</span> To bind their kings with fetters, and
their nobles with manacles of iron.

<span id="an_149:9">149:9</span> To execute upon them the judgment that
is written: this glory is to all his saints. Alleluia.

<span id="an_150:1">150:1</span> Praise ye the Lord in his holy places:
praise ye him in the firmament of his power.

<span id="an_150:2">150:2</span> Praise ye him for his mighty acts:
praise ye him according to the multitude of his greatness.

<span id="an_150:3">150:3</span> Praise him with sound of trumpet:
praise him with psaltery and harp.

<span id="an_150:4">150:4</span> Praise him with timbrel and choir:
praise him with strings and organs.

<span id="an_150:5">150:5</span> Praise him on high sounding cymbals:
praise him on cymbals of joy: let every spirit praise the Lord.
Alleluia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs](pro)
