[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wis)  [Next](bar) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Sirach

<span id="an_0:1">0:1</span> THE knowledge of many and great things hath
been shewn us by the law, and the prophets, and others that have
followed them: for which things Israel is to be commended for doctrine
and wisdom, because not only they that speak must needs be skilful, but
strangers also, both speaking and writing, may by their means become
most learned.

<span id="an_0:2">0:2</span> My grandfather Jesus, after he had much
given himself to a diligent reading of the law, and the prophets, and
other books, that were delivered to us from our fathers, had a mind also
to write something himself, pertaining to doctrine and wisdom: that such
as are desirous to learn, and are made knowing in these things, may be
more and more attentive in mind, and be strengthened to live according
to the law.

<span id="an_0:3">0:3</span> I entreat you therefore to come with
benevolence, and to read with attention, and to pardon us for those
things wherein we may seem, while we follow the image of wisdom, to come
short in the composition of words; for the Hebrew words have not the
same force in them when translated into another tongue. And not only
these, but the law also itself, and the prophets, and the rest of the
books, have no small difference, when they are spoken in their own
language.

<span id="an_0:4">0:4</span> For in the eight and thirtieth year coming
into Egypt, when Ptolemy Evergetes was king, and continuing there a long
time, I found there books left, of no small nor contemptible learning.

<span id="an_0:5">0:5</span> Therefore I thought it good, and necessary
for me to bestow some diligence and labour to interpret this book; and
with much watching and study in some space of time, I brought the book
to an end, and set it forth for the service of them that are willing to
apply their mind, and to learn how they ought to conduct themselves, who
purpose to lead their life according to the law of the Lord.

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> ALL wisdom is from the Lord God, and hath
been always with him, and is before all time.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Who hath numbered the sand of the sea, and
the drops of rain, and the days of the world? Who hath measured the
height of heaven, and the breadth of the earth, and the depth of the
abyss?

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Who hath searched out the wisdom of God
that goeth before all things?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Wisdom hath been created before all things,
and the understanding of prudence from everlasting.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The word of God on high is the fountain of
wisdom, and her ways are everlasting commandments.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> To whom hath the root of wisdom been
revealed, and who hath known her wise counsels?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> To whom hath the discipline of wisdom been
revealed and made manifest? and who hath understood the multiplicity of
her steps?

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> There is one most high Creator Almighty,
and a powerful king, and greatly to be feared, who sitteth upon his
throne, and is the God of dominion.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> He created her in the Holy Ghost, and saw
her, and numbered her, and measured her.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And he poured her out upon all his works,
and upon all flesh according to his gift, and hath given her to them
that love him.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> The fear of the Lord is honour, and
glory, and gladness, and a crown of joy.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> The fear of the Lord shall delight the
heart, and shall give joy, and gladness, and length of days.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> With him that feareth the Lord, it shall
go well in the latter end, and in the day of his death he shall be
blessed.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The love of God is honourable wisdom.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And they to whom she shall shew herself
love her by the sight, and by the knowledge of her great works.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The fear of the Lord Is the beginning of
wisdom, and was created with the faithful in the womb, it walketh with
chosen women, and is known with the just and faithful.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> The fear of the Lord is the religiousness
of knowledge.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Religiousness shall keep and justify the
heart, it shall give joy and gladness.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> It shall go well with him that feareth
the Lord, and in the days of his end he shall be blessed.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> To fear God is the fulness of wisdom, and
fulness is from the fruits thereof.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> She shall fill all her house with her
increase, and the storehouses with her treasures.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> The fear of the Lord is a crown of
wisdom, filling up peace and the fruit of salvation:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And it hath seen, and numbered her: but
both are the gifts of God.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Wisdom shall distribute knowledge, and
understanding of prudence: and exalteth the glory of them that hold her.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord:
and the branches thereof are longlived.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> In the treasures of wisdom is
understanding, and religiousness of knowledge: but to sinners wisdom is
an abomination.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> The fear of the Lord driveth out sin:

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> For he that is without fear, cannot be
justified: for the wrath of his high spirits is his ruin.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> A patient man shall bear for a time, and
afterwards joy shall be restored to him.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> A good understanding will hide his words
for a time, and the lips of many shall declare his wisdom.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> In the treasures of wisdom is the
signification of discipline:

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> But the worship of God is an abomination
to a sinner.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> Son, if thou desire wisdom, keep justice,
and God will give her to thee.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and
discipline: and that which is agreeable to him,

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Is faith, and meekness: and he will fill
up his treasures.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> Be not incredulous to the fear of the
Lord: and come not to him with a double heart.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> Be not a hypocrite in the sight of men,
and let not thy lips be a stumblingblock to thee.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Watch over them, lest thou fall, and
bring dishonour upon thy soul,

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And God discover thy secrets, and cast
thee down in the midst of the congregation.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> Because thou camest to the Lord wickedly,
and thy heart is full of guile and deceit.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> SON, when thou comest to the service of
God, stand in justice and in fear, and prepare thy soul for temptation.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Humble thy heart, and endure: incline thy
ear, and receive the words of understanding: and make not haste in the
time of clouds.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Wait on God with patience: join thyself to
God, and endure, that thy life may be increased in the latter end.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Take all that shall be brought upon thee:
and in thy sorrow endure, and in thy humiliation keep patience.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For gold and silver are tried in the fire,
but acceptable men in the furnace of humiliation.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Believe God, and he will recover thee: and
direct thy way, and trust in him. Keep his fear, and grow old therein.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Ye that fear the Lord, wait for his mercy:
and go not aside from him, lest ye fall.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Ye that fear the Lord, believe him: and
your reward shall not be made void.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Ye that fear the Lord, hope in him: and
mercy shall come to you for your delight.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Ye that fear the Lord, love him, and your
hearts shall be enlightened.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> My children behold the generations of
men: and know ye that no one hath hoped in the Lord, and hath been
confounded.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For who hath continued in his
commandment, and hath been forsaken? or who hath called upon him, and he
despised him?

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For God is compassionate and merciful,
and will forgive sins in the day of tribulation: and he is a protector
to all that seek him in truth.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Woe to them that are of a double heart
and to wicked lips, and to the hands that do evil, and to the sinner
that goeth on the earth two ways.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Woe to them that are fainthearted, who
believe not God: and therefore they shall not be protected by him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Woe to them that have lost patience, and
that have forsaken the right ways, and have gone aside into crooked
ways.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And what will they do, when the Lord
shall begin to examine?

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> They that fear the Lord, will not be
incredulous to his word: and they that love him, will keep his way.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> They that fear the Lord, will seek after
the things that are well pleasing to him: and they that love him, shall
be filled with his law.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> They that fear the Lord, will prepare
their hearts, and in his sight will sanctify their souls.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> They that fear the Lord, keep his
Commandments, and will have patience even until his visitation,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Saying: If we do not penance, we shall
fall into the hands of the Lord, and not into the hands of men.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> For according to his greatness, so also
is his mercy with him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> THE sons of wisdom are the church of the
just: and their generation, obedience and love.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Children, hear the judgment of your father,
and so do that you may be saved.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For God hath made the father honourable to
the children: and seeking the judgment of the mothers, hath confirmed it
upon the children.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> He that loveth God, shall obtain pardon for
his sine by prayer, and shall refrain himself from them, and shall be
heard in the prayer of days.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he that honoureth his mother is as one
that layeth up a treasure.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He that honoureth his father shall have joy
in his own children, and in the day of his prayer he shall be heard.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> He that honoureth his father shall enjoy a
long life: and he that obeyeth the father, shall be a comfort to his
mother.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> He that feareth the Lord, honoureth his
parents, and will serve them as his masters that brought him into the
world.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Honour thy father, in work and word, and
all patience,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> That a blessing may come upon thee from
him, and his blessing may remain in the latter end.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> The father's blessing establisheth the
houses of the children: but the mother's curse rooteth up the
foundation.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Glory not in the dishonour of thy father:
for his shame is no glory to thee.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For the glory of a man is from the honour
of his father, and a father without honour is the disgrace of the son.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Son, support the old age of thy father,
and grieve him not in his life;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And if his understanding fail, have
patience with him, and despise him not when thou art in thy strength:
for the relieving of the father shall not be for- gotten.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For good shall be repaid to thee for the
sin of thy mother.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And in justice thou shalt be built up,
and in the day of affliction thou shalt be remembered: and thy sine
shall melt away as the ice in the fair warm weather.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Of what an evil fame is he that forsaketh
his father: and he is cursed of God that angereth his mother.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> My son, do thy works in meekness, and
thou shalt be beloved above the glory of men.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> The greater thou art, the more humble
thyself in all things, and thou shalt find grace before God:

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> For great is the power of God alone, and
he is honoured by the humble.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Seek not the things that are too high for
thee, and search not into things above thy ability: but the things that
God hath commanded thee, think on them always, and in many of his works
be not curious.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> For it is not necessary for thee to see
with thy eyes those things that are hid.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> In unnecessary matters be not over
curious, and in many of his works thou shalt not be inquisitive.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For many things are shewn to thee above
the understanding of men.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And the suspicion of them hath deceived
many, and hath detained their minds in vanity.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> A hard heart shall fear evil at the last:
and he that loveth danger shall perish in it.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> A heart that goeth two ways shall not
have success, and the perverse of heart shall be scandalized therein.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> A wicked heart shall be laden with
sorrows, and the sinner will add sin to sin.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> The congregation of the proud shall not
be healed: for the plant of wickedness shall take root in them, and it
shall not be perceived.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> The heart of the wise is understood in
wisdom, and a good ear will hear wisdom with all desire.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> A wise heart, and which hath under-
standing, will abstain from sine, and in the works of justice shall have
success.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> Water quencheth a flaming fire, and alms
resisteth sins:

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And God provideth for him that sheweth
favour: he remembereth him afterwards, and in the time of his fall he
shall find a sure stay.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> SON, defraud not the poor of alms, and turn
not away thy eyes from the poor.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Despise not the hungry soul: and provoke
not the Boor in his want.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Afflict not the heart of the needy, and
defer not to give to him that is in distress.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Reject not the petition of the afflicted:
and turn not away thy face from the needy.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Turn not away thy eyes from the poor for
fear of anger: and leave not to them that ask of thee to curse thee
behind thy back.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For the prayer of him that curseth thee in
the bitterness of his soul, shall be heard, for he that made him will
hear him.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Make thyself affable to the congregation of
the poor, and humble thy soul to the ancient, and bow thy head to a
great man.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Bow down thy ear cheerfully to the poor,
and pay what thou owest, and answer him peaceable words with mildness.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Deliver him that suffereth wrong out of the
hand of the proud: and be not fainthearted in thy soul.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> In judging be merciful to the fatherless
as a father, and as a husband to their mother.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And thou shalt be as the obedient son of
the most High, and he will have mercy on thee more than a mother.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Wisdom inspireth life into her children,
and protecteth them that seek after her, and will go before them in the
way of justice.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he that loveth her, loveth life: and
they that watch for her, shall embrace her sweetness.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> They that hold her fast, shall inherit
life: and whithersoever she entereth, God will give a blessing.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> They that serve her, shall be servants to
the holy one: and God loveth them that love her.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> He that hearkeneth to her, shall judge
nations: and he that looketh upon her, shall remain secure.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> If he trust to her, he shall inherit her,
and his generation shall be in assurance.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> For she walketh with him in temptation,
and at the first she chooseth him.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> She will bring upon him fear and dread
and trial: and she will scourge him with the affliction of her
discipline, till she try him by her laws, and trust his soul.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Then she will strengthen him, and make a
straight way to him, and give him joy,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And will disclose her secrets to him, and
will heap upon him treasures of knowledge and understanding of justice.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> But if he go astray, she will forsake
him, and deliver him into the hands of his enemy.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Son, observe the time, and fly from evil.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For thy soul be not ashamed to say the
truth.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> For there is a shame that bringeth sin,
and there is a shame that bringeth glory and grace.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Accept no person against thy own person,
nor against thy soul a lie.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Reverence not thy neighbour in his fall:

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And refrain not to speak in the time of
salvation. Hide not thy wisdom in her beauty.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> For by the tongue wisdom is discerned:
and understanding, and knowledge, and learning by the word of the wise,
and steadfastness in the works of justice.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> In nowise speak against the truth, but be
ashamed of the lie of thy ignorance.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Be not ashamed to confess thy sins, but
submit not thyself to every man for sin.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> Resist not against the face of the
mighty, and do not strive against the stream of the river.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> Strive for justice for thy soul, and even
unto death fight for justice, and God will overthrow thy enemies for
thee.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Be not hasty in thy tongue: and slack and
remiss in thy works.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> Be not as a lion in thy house, terrifying
them of thy household, and oppressing them that are under thee.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> Let not thy hand be stretched out to
receive, and shut when thou shouldst give.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> SET not thy heart upon unjust possessions,
and say not: I have enough to live on: for it shall be of no service in
the time of vengeance and darkness.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Follow not in thy strength the desires of
thy heart:

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And say not: How mighty am I? and who shall
bring me under for my deeds? for God will surely take revenge.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Say not: I have sinned, and whet harm hath
befallen me? for the most High is a patient rewarder.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Be not without fear about sin forgiven, and
add not sin upon sin:

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And say not: The mercy of the Lord is
great, he will have mercy on the multitude of my sins.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For mercy and wrath quickly come from him,
and his wrath looketh upon sinners.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Delay not to be converted to the Lord, and
defer it not from day to day.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For his wrath shall come on a sudden, and
in the time of vengeance he will destroy thee.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Be not anxious for goods unjustly gotten:
for they shall not profit thee in the day of calamity and revenge.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Winnow not with every wind, and go not
into every way: for so is every sinner proved by a double tongue.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Be steadfast in the way of the Lord, and
in the truth of thy judgment, and in knowledge, and let the word of
peace and justice keep with thee.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Be meek to hear the word, that thou mayst
understand: and return a true answer with wisdom.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> If thou have understanding, answer thy
neighbour: but if not, let thy hand be upon thy mouth, lest thou be
surprised in an unskilful word, and be confounded.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Honour and glory is in the word of the
wise, but the tongue of the fool is his ruin.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Be not called a whisperer, and be not
taken in thy tongue, and confounded.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For confusion and repentance is upon a
thief, and an evil mark of disgrace upon the double tongued, but to the
whisperer hatred, and enmity, and reproach.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Justify alike the small and the great.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> INSTEAD of a friend become not an enemy to
thy neighbour: for an evil man shall inherit reproach and shame, so
shall every sinner that is envious and double tongued.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Extol not thyself in the thoughts of thy
soul like a bull: lest thy strength be quashed by folly,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And it eat up thy leaves, and destroy thy
fruit: and thou be left as a dry tree in the wilderness.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For a wicked soul shall destroy him that
hath it, and maketh him to be a joy to his enemies, and shall lead him
into the lot of the wicked.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> A sweet word multiplieth friends, and
appeaseth enemies, and a gracious tongue in a good man aboundeth.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Be in peace with many, but let one of a
thousand be thy counsellor.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> If thou wouldst get a friend, try him
before thou takest him, and do not credit him easily.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> For there is a friend for his own occasion,
and he will not abide in the day of thy trouble.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And there is a friend that turneth to
enmity; and there is a friend that will disclose hatred and strife and
reproaches.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And there is a friend a companion at the
table, and he will not abide in the day of distress.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> A friend ii he continue steadfast, shall
be to thee as thyself, and shall act with confidence among them of thy
household.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> If he humble himself before thee, and
hide himself from thy face, thou shalt have unanimous friendship for
good.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Separate thyself from thy enemies, and
take heed of thy friends.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> A faithful friend is a strong defence:
and he that hath found him, hath found a treasure.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Nothing can be compared to a faithful
friend, and no weight of gold and silver is able to countervail the
goodness of his fidelity.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> A faithful friend is the medicine of life
and immortality: and they that fear the Lord, shall find him.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> He that feareth God, shall likewise have
good friendship: because according to him shall his friend be.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> My son, from thy youth up receive
instruction, and even to thy grey hairs thou shalt find wisdom.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Come to her as one that plougheth, and
soweth, and wait for her good fruits:

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For in working about her thou shalt
labour a little, and shalt quickly eat of her fruits.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> How very unpleasant is wisdom to the
unlearned, and the unwise will not continue with her.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> She shall be to them as a mighty stone of
trial, and they will cast her from them before it be long.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the wisdom of doctrine is according
to her name, and she is not manifest unto many, but with them to whom
she is known, she continueth even to the sight of God.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Give ear, my son, and take wise counsel,
and cast not away my advice.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Put thy feet into her fetters, and thy
neck into her chains:

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Bow down thy shoulder, and bear her, and
be not grieved with her bands.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Come to her with all thy mind, and keep
her ways with all thy power.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Search for her, and she shall be made
known to thee, and when thou hast gotten her, let her not go:

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> For in the latter end thou shalt find
rest in her, and she shall be turned to thy joy.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Then shall her fetters be a strong
defence for thee, and a firm foundation, and her chain a robe of glory:

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> For in her is the beauty of life, and her
bands are a healthful binding.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> Thou shalt put her on as a robe of glory,
and thee shalt set her upon thee as a crown of joy.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> My son, if thou wilt attend to me, thou
shalt learn: and if thou wilt apply thy mind, thou shalt be wise.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> If thou wilt incline thy ear, thou shalt
receive instruction: and if thou love to hear, thou shalt be wise.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> Stand in the multitude of ancients that
are wise, and join thyself from thy heart to their wisdom, that thou
mayst hear every discourse of God, and the sayings of praise may not
escape thee.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> And if thou see a man of understanding,
go to him early in the morning, and let thy foot wear the steps of his
doors.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> Let thy thoughts be upon the precepts of
God, and meditate continually on his commandments: and he will give thee
a heart, and the desire of wisdom shall be given thee.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> DO no evils, and no evils shall lay hold of
thee.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Depart from the unjust, and evils shall
depart from thee.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> My son, sow not evils in the furrows of
injustice, and thou shalt not reap them sevenfold.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Seek not of the Lord a pre-eminence, nor of
the king the seat of honour.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Justify not thyself before God, for he
knoweth the heart: and desire not to appear wise before the king.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Seek not to be made a judge, unless thou
have strength enough to extirpate iniquities: lest thou fear the person
of the powerful, and lay a stumblingblock for thy integrity.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Offend not against the multitude of a city,
neither cast thyself in upon the people,

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Nor bind sin to sin: for even in one thou
shalt not be unpunished.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Be not fainthearted in thy mind:

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Neglect not to pray, and to give alms.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Say not: God will have respect to the
multitude of my gifts, and when I offer to the most high God, he will
accept my offerings.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Laugh no man to scorn in the bitterness
of his soul: for there is one that humbleth and exalteth, God who seeth

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Devise not a lie against thy brother:
neither do the like against thy friend.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Be not willing to make any manner of lie:
for the custom thereof is not good.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Be not full of words in a multitude of
ancients, and repeat not the word in thy prayer.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Hate not laborious works, nor husbandry
ordained by the most High.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Number not thyself among the multitude of
the disorderly.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Remember wrath, for it will not tarry
long.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Humble thy spirit very much: for the
vengeance on the flesh of the ungodly is fire and worms.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Do not transgress against thy friend
deferring money, nor despise thy dear brother for the sake of gold.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Depart not from a wise and good wife,
whom thou best gotten in the fear of the Lord: for the grace of her
modesty is above gold.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Hurt not the servant that worketh
faithfully, nor the hired man that giveth thee his life.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Let a wise servant be dear to thee as thy
own soul, defraud him not of liberty, nor leave him needy.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Hast thou cattle? have an eye to them:
and if they be for thy profit, keep them with thee.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Hast thou children? instruct them, and
bow down their neck from their childhood.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Hast thou daughters? have a care of their
body, and shew not thy countenance gay towards them.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Marry thy daughter well, and then shalt
do a great work, and give her to a wise man.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> If thou hast a wife according to thy
soul, cast her not off: and to her that is hateful, trust not thyself.
With thy whole heart,

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Honour thy father, and forget not the
groanings of thy mother:

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> Remember that thou hadst not been born
but through them: and make a return to them as they have done for thee.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> With all thy soul fear the Lord, and
reverence his priests.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> With all thy strength love him that made
thee: and forsake not his ministers.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> Honour God with all thy soul, and give
honour to the priests, and purify thyself with thy arms.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> Give them their portion, as it is
commanded thee, of the firstfruits and of purifications: and for thy
negligences purify thyself with a few.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> Offer to the Lord the gift of thy
shoulders, and the sacrifice of sanctification, and the firstfruits of
the holy things:

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And stretch out thy hand to the poor,
that thy expiation and thy blessing may be perfected.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> A gift hath grace in the sight of all the
living, and restrain not grace from the dead.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> Be not wanting in comforting them that
weep, and walk with them that mourn.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> Be not slow to visit the sick: for by
these things thou shalt be confirmed in love.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> In all thy works remember thy last end,
and thou shalt never sin.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> STRIVE not with a powerful man, lest thou
fall into his hands.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Contend not with a rich man, lest he bring
an action against thee.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For gold and silver hath destroyed many,
and hath reached even to the heart of kings, and perverted them.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Strive not with a man that is full of
tongue, and heap not wood upon his fire.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Communicate not with an ignorant man, lest
he speak ill of thy family.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Despise not a man that turneth away from
sin, nor reproach him therewith: remember that we are all worthy of
reproof.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Despise not a man in his old age; for we
also shall become old.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Rejoice not at the death of thy enemy;
knowing that we all die, and are not willing that others should rejoice
at our death.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Despise not the discourse of them that are
ancient and wise, but acquaint thyself with their proverbs.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> For of them thou shalt learn wisdom, and
instruction of understanding, and to serve great men without blame.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Let not the discourse of the ancients
escape thee, for they have learned of their fathers:

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For of them thou shalt learn
understanding, and to give an answer in time of need.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Kindle not the coals of sinners by
rebuking them, lest thou be burnt with the flame of the fire of their
sins.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Stand not against the face of an
injurious person, lest he sit as a spy to entrap thee in thy words.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Lend not to a man that is mightier than
thyself: and if thou lendest, count it as lost.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Be not surety above thy power: and if
thou be surety, think as if thou wert to pay it.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Judge not against a judge: for he judgeth
according to that which is just.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Go not on the way with a bold man, lest
he burden thee with his evils: for he goeth according to his own will,
and thou shalt perish together with his folly.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Quarrel not with a passionate man, and go
not into the desert with a bold man: for blood is as nothing in his
sight, and where there is no help he will overthrow thee.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Advise not with fools, for they cannot
love but such things as please them.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Before a stranger do no matter of
counsel: for thou knowest not what he will bring forth.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Open not thy heart to every man: lest he
repay thee with an evil turn, and speak reproachfully to thee.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> BE not jealous over the wife of thy bosom,
lest she shew in thy regard the malice of a wicked lesson.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Give not the power of thy soul to a woman,
lest she enter upon thy strength, and thou be confounded.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Look not upon a woman that hath a mind for
many: lest thou fall into her snares.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Use not much the company of her that is a
dancer, and hearken not to her, lest thou perish by the force of her
charms.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Gaze not upon a maiden, lest her beauty be
a stumblingblock to thee.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Give not thy soul to harlots in any point:
lest thou destroy thyself and thy inheritance.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Look not round about thee in the of the
city, nor wander up and down in the streets thereof.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Turn away thy face from a woman dressed up,
and gaze not about upon another's beauty.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For many have perished by the beauty of a
woman, and hereby lust is enkindled as a fire.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Every woman that is a harlot, shall be
trodden upon as dung in the way.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Many by admiring the beauty of another
man's wife, have become reprobate, for her conversation burneth as fire.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Sit not at all with another man's wife,
nor repose upon the bed with her:

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And strive not with her over wine, lest
thy heart decline towards her, and by thy blood thou fall into
destruction.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Forsake not an old friend, for the new
will not be like to him.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> A new friend is as new wine: it shall
grow old, and thou shalt drink it with pleasure.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Envy not the glory and riches of a
sinner: for thou knowest not what his ruin shall be.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Be not pleased with the wrong done by the
unjust, knowing that even to hell the wicked shall not please.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Keep thee far from the man that hath
power to kill, so thou shalt not suspect the fear of death.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And if thou come to him, commit no fault,
lest he take away thy life.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Know it to be a communication with death:
for thou art going in the midst of snares, and walking upon the arms of
them that are grieved:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> According to thy power beware of thy
neighbor, and treat with the wise and prudent.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Let just men be thy guests, and let thy
glory be in the fear of God.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And let the thought of God be in thy
mind, and all thy discourse on the commandments of the Highest.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Works shall be praised for the hand of
the artificers, and the prince of the people for the wisdom of his
speech, but word of the ancients for the sense.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> A man full of tongue is terrible in his
city, and he that is rash in his word shall be hateful.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> A WISE judge shall judge his people, and
the government of a prudent man shall be steady.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> As the judge of the people is himself, so
also are his ministers: and what manner of man the ruler of a city is,
such also are they that dwell therein.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> An unwise king shall be the ruin of his
people: and cities shall be inhabited through the prudence of the
rulers.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> The power of the earth is in the hand of
God, and in his time he will raise up a profitable ruler over it.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> The prosperity of man is in the hand of
God, and upon the person of the scribe he shall lay his honour.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Remember not any injury done thee by thy
neighbour, and do thou nothing by deeds of injury.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Pride is hateful before God and men: and
ah iniquity of nations is execrable.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> A kingdom is translated from one people
to another, because of injustices, and wrongs, and injuries, and divers
deceits.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> But nothing is more wicked than the
covetous man. Why is earth and ashes proud?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> There is not a more wicked thing than
to love money: for such a one setteth even his own soul to sale: because
while he liveth he hath cast away his bowels.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> All power is of short life. A long
sickness is troublesome to the physician.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The physician cutteth off it short
sickness: so also a king is to day, and to morrow he shall die.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For when a man shall die, he shall
inherit serpents, end beasts, and worms.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> The beginning of the pride of man, is
to fall off from God:

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Because his heart is departed from him
that made him: for pride is the beginning of all sin: be that holdeth
it, shall be filled with maledictions, and it shall ruin him in the end.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Therefore hath the Lord disgraced the
assemblies of the wicked, and hath utterly destroyed them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> God hath overturned the thrones of
proud princes, and hath set up the meek in their stead.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> God hath made the roots of proud
nations to wither, and hath planted the humble of these nations.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> The Lord hath overthrown the lands of
the Gentiles, and hath destroyed them even to the foundation.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> He hath made some of them to wither
away, and hath destroyed them, and hath made the memory of them to cease
from the earth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> God hath abolished the memory of the
proud, and hath preserved the memory of them that are humble in mind.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Pride was not made for men: nor wrath
for the race of women.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> That seed of men shall be honoured,
which feareth God: but that seed shall be dishonoured, which
transgresseth the commandments of the Lord.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> In the midst of brethren their chief is
honourable: so shall they that fear the Lord, be in his eyes.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> The fear of God is the glory of the
rich, and of the honourable, and of the poor:

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Despise not a just man that is poor,
and do not magnify a sinful man that is rich.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> The great man, and the judge, and the
mighty is in honour: and there is none greater than he that feareth God.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> They that are free shall serve a
servant that is wise: and a man that is prudent and well instructed will
not murmur when he is reproved; and he that is ignorant, shall not be
honoured.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Extol not thyself in doing thy work,
and linger not in the time of distress:

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Better is he that laboureth, and
aboundeth in all things, than he that boasteth himself and wanteth
bread.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> My son, keep thy soul in meekness, and
give it honour according to its desert.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Who will justify him that sinneth
against his own soul? and who will honour him that dishonoureth his own
soul?

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> The poor man is glorified by his
discipline and fear: and there is a man that is honoured for his wealth.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> But he that is glorified in poverty,
how much more in wealth? and he that is glorified in wealth, let him
fear poverty.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> THE wisdom of the humble shall exalt his
head, and shall make him sit in the midst of great men.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Praise not a man for his beauty, neither
despise a man for his look.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The bee is small among flying things, but
her fruit hath the chiefest sweetness.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Glory not in apparel at any time, and be
not exalted in the day of thy honour: for the works of the Highest only
are wonderful, and his works are glorious, and secret, end hidden.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Many tyrants have sat on the throne, and
he whom no man would think on, hath worn the crown.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Many mighty men have been greatly brought
down, and the glorious have been delivered into the hand of others.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Before thou inquire, blame no man: and
when thou hast inquired, reprove justly.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Before thou hear, answer not a word: and
interrupt not others in the midst of their discourse.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Strive not in a matter which doth not
concern thee, and sit not in judgment with sinners.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> My son, meddle not with many matters:
and if thou be rich, thou shalt not be free from sin: for if thou pursue
after thou shalt not overtake: and if thou run before thou shalt not
escape.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> There is an ungodly man that laboureth,
and maketh haste, and is in sorrow, and is so much the more in want.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Again, there is an inactive man that
wanteth help, is very weak in ability, and full of poverty:

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Yet the eye of God hath looked upon him
for good, and hath lifted him up from his low estate, and hath exalted
his head: and many have wondered at him, and have glorified God.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Good things and evil, life and death,
poverty and riches, are from God.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Wisdom and discipline, and the
knowledge of the law are with God. Love and the ways of good things are
with him

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Error and darkness are created with
sinners: and they that glory in evil things, grow old in evil.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> The gift of God abideth with the just,
and his advancement shall have success for ever.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> There is one that is enriched by living
sparingly, and this is the portion of his reward.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> In that he saith: I have found me rest,
and now I will eat of my goods alone:

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And he knoweth not what time shall
pass, and that death approacheth, and that he must leave all to others,
and shall die.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Be steadfast in thy covenant, and be
conversant therein, and grow old in the work of thy commandments.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Abide not in the works of sinners. But
trust in God, and stay in thy place.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> For it is easy in the eyes of God on a
sudden to make the poor man rich.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> The blessing of God maketh haste to
reward the just, and in a swift hour his blessing beareth fruit.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Say not: What need I, and what good
shall I have by this?

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Say not: I am sufficient for myself:
and what shall I be made worse by this?

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> In the day of good things be not
unmindful of evils: and in the day of evils be not unmindful of good
things:

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> For it is easy before God in the day of
death to reward every one according to his ways.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> The affliction of an hour maketh one
forget great delights, and in the end of a man is the disclosing of his
works.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Praise not any man before death, for a
man is known by his children.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Bring not every man into thy house: for
many are the snares of the deceitful.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> For as corrupted bowels send forth
stinking breath, and as the partridge is brought into the cage, and as
the roe into the snare: so also is the heart of the proud, and as a spy
that looketh on the fall of his neighbour.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> For he lieth in wait and turneth good
into evil, and on the elect he will lay a blot.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Of one spark cometh a great fire, and
of one deceitful man much blood: and a sinful man lieth in wait for
blood.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Take heed to thyself of a mischievous
man, for he worketh evils: lest he bring upon thee reproach for ever.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> Receive a stranger in, and he shall
overthrow thee with a whirlwind, and shall turn thee out of thy own.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> IF thou do good, know to whom thou dost
it, and there shall be much thanks for thy good deeds.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Do good to the just, and thou shalt find
great recompense: and if not of him, assuredly of the Lord.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For there is no good for him that is
always occupied in evil, and that giveth no alms: for the Highest hateth
sinners, and hath mercy on the penitent.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Give to the merciful and uphold not the
sinner: God will repay vengeance to the ungodly and to sinners, and keep
them against the day of vengeance.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Give to the good, and receive not a
sinner.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Do good to the humble, and give not to
the ungodly: hold back thy bread, and give it not to him, lest thereby
he overmaster thee.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> For thou shalt receive twice as much evil
for all the good thou shalt have done to him: for the Highest also
hateth sinners, and will repay vengeance to the ungodly.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> A friend shall not be known in
prosperity, and an enemy shall not be hidden in adversity.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> In the prosperity of a man, his enemies
are grieved: and a friend is known in his adversity.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Never trust thy enemy: for as a brass
pot his wickedness rusteth:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> 11Though he humble himself and go
crouching, yet take good heed and beware of him.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Set him not by thee, neither let him
sit on thy right hand, lest he turn into thy place, and seek to take thy
seat: and at the last thou acknowledge my words, and be pricked with my
sayings.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Who will pity an enchanter struck by a
serpent, or any that come near wild beasts? so is it with him that
keepeth company with a wicked man, and is involved in his sins.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> For an hour he will abide with thee:
but if thou begin to decline, he will not endure it.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> An enemy speaketh sweetly with his
lips, but in his heart he lieth in wait, to throw thee into a pit.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> An enemy weepeth with his eyes: but if
he find an opportunity he will not be satisfied with blood:

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And if evils come upon thee, thou shalt
find him there first.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> An enemy hath tears in his eyes, and
while he pretendeth to help thee, will undermine thy feet.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> He will shake his head, and clap his
hands, and whisper much, and change his countenance.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> HE that toucheth pitch, shall be defiled
with it: and he that hath fellowship with the proud, shall put on pride.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> He shall take a burden upon him that hath
fellowship with one more honour- able than himself. And have no fellow-
ship with one that is richer than thyself.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> What agreement shall the earthen pot have
with the kettle? for if they knock one against the other, it shall be
broken.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The rich man hath done wrong, and yet he
will fume: but the poor is wronged and must hold his peace.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> If thou give, he will make use of thee:
and if thou have nothing, he will forsake thee.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> If thou have any thing, he will live with
thee, and will make thee bare, and he will not be sorry for thee.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> If he have need of thee he will deceive
thee, and smiling upon thee will put thee in hope; he will speak thee
fair, and will say: What wantest thou?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And he will shame thee by his meats, till
he have drawn thee dry twice or thrice, and at last he will laugh at
thee: and afterward when he seeth thee, he will forsake thee, and shake
his head at thee.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Humble thyself to God, and wait for his
hands.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Beware that thou be not deceived Into
folly, and be humbled.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Be not lowly in thy wisdom, lest being
humbled thou be deceived into folly.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> If thou be invited by one that is
mightier, withdraw thyself: for so he will invite thee the more.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Be not troublesome to him, lest thou be
put back: and keep not far from him, lest thou be forgotten.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Affect not to speak with him as an
equal: and believe not his many words: for by much talk he will sift
thee, and smiling will examine thee concerning thy secrets.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> His cruel mind will lay up thy words:
and he will not spare to do thee hurt, and to cast thee into prison.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Take heed to thyself, and attend
diligently to what thou hearest: for thou walkest in danger of thy ruin.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> When thou hearest those things, see as
it were in sleep, and thou shalt awake.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Love God all thy life, and call upon
him for thy salvation.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Every beast loveth its like: so also
every man him that is nearest to himself.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> All flesh shall consort with the like
to itself, and every man shall associate himself to his like.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> If the wolf shall at any time have
fellowship with the lamb, so the sinner with the just.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> What fellowship hath a holy man with a
dog, or what part hath the rich with the poor?

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> The wild ass is the lion's prey in the
desert: so also the poor are devoured by the rich.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And as humility is an abomination to
the proud: so also the rich man abhorreth the poor.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> When a rich man is shaken, he is kept
up by his friends: but when a poor man is fallen down, he is thrust away
even by his acquaintance.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> When a rich man hath been deceived, he
hath many helpers: he hath spoken proud things, and they have justified
him.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> The poor man was deceived, and he is
rebuked also: he hath spoken wisely, and could have no place.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> The rich man spoke, and all held their
peace, and what he said they extol even to the clouds.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> The poor man spoke, and they say: Who
is this? and if he stumble, they will overthrow him.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Riches are good to him that hath no sin
in his conscience: and poverty is very wicked in the mouth of the
ungodly.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> The heart of a man changeth his
countenance, either for good, or for evil.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> The token of a good heart, and a good
countenance thou shalt hardly find, and with labour.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> BLESSED is the man that hath not slipped
by a word out of his mouth, and is not pricked with the remorse of sin.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Happy is he that hath had no sadness of
his mind, and who is not fallen from his hope.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Riches are not comely for a covetous man
and a niggard, and what should an envious man do with gold?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> He that gathereth together by wronging
his own soul, gathereth for others, and another will squander away his
goods in rioting.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> He that is evil to himself, to whom will
he be good? and he shall not take pleasure in his goods.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> There is none worse than he that envieth
himself, and this is the reward of his wickedness:

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And if he do good, he doth it ignorantly,
and unwillingly: and at the last he discovereth his wickedness.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The eye of the envious is wicked: and he
turneth away his face, and despiseth his own soul.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> The eye of the covetous man is insatiable
in his portion of iniquity: he will not be satisfied till he consume his
own soul, drying it up.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> An evil eye is towards evil things: and
he shall not have his fill of bread, but shall be needy and pensive at
his own table.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> My son, if thou have any thing, do good
to thyself, and offer to God worthy offerings.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Remember that death is not slow, and
that the covenant of hell hath been shewn to thee: for the covenant of
this world shall surely die.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Do good to thy friend before thou die,
and according to thy ability, stretching out thy hand give to the poor.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Defraud not thyself of the good day,
and let not the part of a good gift over- pass thee.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Shalt thou not leave to others to
divide by lot thy sorrows and labours?

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Give and take, and justify thy soul.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Before thy death work justice: for in
hell there is no finding food.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> All flesh shall fade as grass, and as
the leaf that springeth out on a green tree.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Some grow, and some fall off: so is the
generation of flesh and blood, one cometh to an end, and another is
born.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Every work that is corruptible shall
fail in the end: and the worker thereof shall go with it.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And every excellent work shall be
justified: and the worker thereof shall be honoured therein.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Blessed is the man that shall continue
in wisdom, and that shall meditate in his justice, and in his mind shall
think of the all seeing eye of God.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> He that considereth her ways in his
heart, and hath understanding in her secrets, who goeth after her as one
that traceth, and stayeth in her ways:

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> He who looketh in at her windows, and
hearkeneth at her door:

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> He that lodgeth near her house, and
fastening a pin in her walls shall set up his tent nigh unto her, where
good things shall rest in his lodging for ever.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> He shall set his children under her
shelter, and shall lodge under her branches:

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> He shall be protected under her
covering from the heat, and shall rest in her glory.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> HE that feareth God, will do good: and he
that possesseth justice, shall lay hold on her,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And she will meet him as an honourable
mother, and will receive him as a wife married of a virgin.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> With the bread of life and understanding,
she shall feed him, and give him the water of wholesome wisdom to drink:
and she shall be made strong in him, and he shall not be moved:

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And she shall hold him fast, and he shall
not be confounded: and she shall exalt him among his neighbours.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And in the midst of the church she shall
open his mouth, and shall fill him with the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, and shall clothe him with a robe of glory.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> She shall heap upon him a treasure of joy
and gladness, and shall cause him to inherit an everlasting name.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> But foolish men shall not obtain her, and
wise men shall meet her, foolish men shall not see her: for she is far
from pride and deceit.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Lying men shall not be mindful of her:
but men that speak truth shall be found with her, and shall advance,
even till they come to the sight of God.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a
sinner:

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> For wisdom came forth from God: for
praise shall be with the wisdom of God, and shall abound in a faithful
mouth, and the sovereign Lord will give praise unto it.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Say not: It is through God, that she is
not with me: for do not thou the things that he hateth.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Say not: He hath caused me to err: for
he hath no need of wicked men.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> The Lord hateth all abomination of
error, and they that fear him shall not love it.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> God made man from the beginning, and
left him in the hand of his own counsel.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> He added his commandments and precepts.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> If thou wilt keep the commandments and
perform acceptable fidelity for ever, they shall preserve thee.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> He hath set water and fire before thee:
stretch forth thy hand to which thou wilt.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Before man is life and death, good and
evil, that which he shall choose shall be given him:

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For the wisdom of God is great, and he
is strong in power, seeing all men without ceasing.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> The eyes of the Lord are towards them
that fear him, and he knoweth all the work of man.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> He hath commanded no man to do
wickedly, and he hath given no man license to sin:

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> For he desireth not a multitude of
faithless and unprofitable children.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> REJOICE not in ungodly children, if they
be multiplied: neither be delighted in them, if the fear of God be not
with them.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Trust not to their life, and respect not
their labours.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> For better is one that feareth God, than
a thousand ungodly children.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And it is better to die without children,
than to leave ungodly children.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> By one that is wise a country shall be
inhabited, the tribe of the ungodly shall become desolate.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Many such things hath my eyes seen, and
greater things than these my ear hath heard.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> In the congregation of sinners a fire
shall be kindled, and in an unbelieving nation wrath shall dame out.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> The ancient giants did not obtain pardon
for their sine, who were destroyed trusting to their own strength:

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And he spared not the place where Lot
sojourned, but abhorred them for the pride of their word.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> He had not pity on them, destroying the
whole nation that extolled them- selves in their sine.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> So did he with the six hundred thousand
footmen, who were gathered together in the hardness of their heart: and
if one had been stiffnecked, it is a wonder if he had escaped
unpunished:

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> For mercy and wrath are with him. He is
mighty to forgive, and to pour out indignation:

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> According as his mercy is, so his
correction judgeth a man according to his works.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> The sinner shall not escape in his
rapines, and the patience of him that sheweth mercy shall not be put
off.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> All mercy shall make a place for every
man according to the merit of his works, and according to the wisdom of
his sojournment.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Say not: I shall be hidden from God.
and who shall remember me from on high?

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> In such a multitude I shall not be
known: for what is my soul in such an immense creation?

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Behold the heaven, and the heavens of
heavens, the deep, and all the earth, and the things that are in them,
shall be moved in his sight,

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> The mountains also, and the hills, end
the foundations of the earth: when God shall look upon them, they shall
be shaken with trembling.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And in all these things the heart is
senseless: and every heart is understood by him:

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And his ways who shall understand, and
the storm, which no eye of man see?

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> For many of his works are hidden: hut
the works of his justice who shall declare? or who shall endure? for the
testament is far from some, and the examination of all is in the end.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> He that wanteth understanding thinketh
vain things: and the foolish, and erring man, thinketh foolish things.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Hearken to me, my son, and learn the
discipline of understanding, and attend to my words in thy heart.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And I will shew forth good doctrine in
equity, and will seek to declare wisdom: and attend to my words in thy
heart, whilst with equity of spirit I tell thee the virtues that God
hath put upon his works from the beginning, and I shew forth in truth
his knowledge.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> The works of God are done in judgment
from the beginning, and from the making of them he distinguished their
parts, and their beginnings in their generations.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> He beautified their works for ever,
they have neither hungered, nor laboured, and they have not ceased from
their works.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> Nor shall any of them straiten his
neighbour at any time.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> Be not thou incredulous to his word.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> After this God looked upon the earth,
and filled it with his goods.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> The soul of every living thing hath
shewn forth before the face thereof, and into it they return again.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> GOD created man of the earth, and made
him after his own image.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And he turned him into it again, and
clothed him with strength according to himself.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> He gave him the number of his days and
time, and gave him power over all things that are upon the earth.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> He put the fear of him upon all flesh,
and he had dominion over beasts and fowls.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He created of him a helpmate like to
himself: he gave them counsel, and a tongue, and eyes, and ears, and a
heart to devise: and he filled them with the knowledge of understanding.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> He created in them the science of the
spirit, he filled their heart with wisdom, and shewed them both good and
evil.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> He set his eye upon their hearts to shew
them the greatness of his works:

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> That they might praise the name which he
hath sanctified: and glory in his wondrous acts, that they might declare
the glorious things of his works.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Moreover he gave them instructions, and
the law of life for an inheritance.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> He made an everlasting covenant with
them, and he shewed them his justice and judgments.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And their eye saw the majesty of his
glory. and their ears heard his glorious voice, and he said to them:
Beware of all iniquity.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And he gave to every one of them
commandment concerning his neighbour.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Their ways are always before him, they
are not hidden from his eyes.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> Over every nation he set a ruler.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And Israel was made the manifest
portion of God.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And all their works are as the sun in
the sight of God: and his eyes are continually upon their ways.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Their covenants were not hid by their
iniquity, and all their iniquities are in the sight of God.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> The alms of a man is as a signet with
him, and shall preserve the grace of a man as the apple of the eye:

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And afterward he shall rise up, and
shall render them their reward, to every one upon their own head, and
shall turn them down into the bowels of the earth.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> But to the penitent he hath given the
way of justice, and he hath strengthened them that were fainting in
patience, and hath appointed to them the lot of truth.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> Turn to the Lord, and forsake thy sins:

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Make thy prayer before the face of the
Lord, and offend less.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> Return to the Lord, and turn away from
thy injustice, and greatly hate abomination.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And know the justices and judgments of
God, and stand firm in the lot set before thee, and in prayer to the
most high God.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> Go to the side of the holy age, with
them that live and give praise to God.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> Tarry not in the error of the ungodly,
give glory before death. Praise perisheth from the dead as nothing.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> Give thanks whilst thou art living,
whilst thou art alive and in health thou shalt give thanks, and shalt
praise God, and shalt glory in his mercies.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> How great is the mercy of the Lord, and
his forgiveness to them that turn to him I

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> For all things cannot be in men,
because the son of man is not immortal, and they are delighted with the
vanity of evil.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> What is brighter than the sun; yet it
shall be eclipsed. Or what is more wicked than that which flesh and
blood hath invented? and this shall be reproved.

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> He beholdeth the power of the height of
heaven: and all men are earth and ashes.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> HE that liveth for ever created all
things together. God only shall be justified, and he remaineth an
invincible king for ever.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Who is able to declare his works?

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> For who shall search out his glorious
acts?

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And who shall shew forth the power of his
majesty? or who shall be able to declare his mercy?

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Nothing may be taken away, nor added,
neither is it possible to find out the glorious works of God:

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> When a man hath done, then shall he
begin: and when he leaveth off, he shall be at a loss.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> What is man, and what is his grace? and
what is his good, or what is his evil?

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> The number of the days of men at the most
are a hundred years: as a drop of water of the sea are they esteemed:
and as a pebble of the sand, so are a few years compared to eternity.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> Therefore God is patient in them, and
poureth forth his mercy upon them.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> He hath seen the presumption of their
heart that it is wicked, and hath known their end that it is evil.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Therefore bath he filled up his mercy
in their favour, and hath shewn them the way of justice.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> The compassion of man is toward his
neighbour: but the mercy of God is upon all flesh.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> He hath mercy, and teacheth, and
correcteth, as a shepherd doth his hock.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> He hath mercy on him that receiveth the
discipline of mercy, and that maketh haste in his judgments.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> My son, in thy good deeds, make no
complaint, and when thou givest any thing, add not grief by an evil
word.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Shall not the dew assuage the heat? so
also the good word is better than the gift.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Lo, is not a word better than a gift?
but both are with a justified man.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> A fool will upbraid bitterly: and a
gift of one ill taught consumeth the eyes.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Before judgment prepare thee justice,
and learn before thou speak.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Before sickness take a medicine, and
before judgment examine thyself, and thou shalt find mercy in the sight
of God.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Humble thyself before thou art sick,
and in the time of sickness shew thy conversation.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Let nothing hinder thee from praying
always, and be not afraid to be justified even to death: for the reward
of God continueth for ever.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Before prayer prepare thy soul: and be
not as a man that tempteth God.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Remember the wrath that shall be at the
last day, and the time of repaying when he shall turn away his face.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Remember poverty is the time of
abundance, and the necessities of poverty in the day of riches.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> From the morning until the evening the
time shall be changed, and all these are swift in the eyes of God.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> A wise man will fear in every thing,
and in the days of sine will beware of sloth.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Every man of understanding knoweth
wisdom, and will give praise to him that findeth her.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> They that were of good understanding in
words, have also done wisely themselves: and have understood truth and
justice, and have poured forth pro- verbs and judgments.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Go not after thy lusts, but turn away
from thy own will.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> If thou give to thy soul her desires,
she will make thee a joy to thy enemies.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> Take no pleasure in riotous assemblies,
be they ever so small: for their concertation is continual.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Make not thyself poor by borrowing to
contribute to feasts when thou hast nothing in thy purse : for thou
shalt be an enemy to thy own life.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> A WORKMAN that is a drunkard shall not be
rich: and he that contemneth small things, shall fall by little and
little.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Wine and women make wise men fall off,
and shall rebuke the prudent:

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And he that joineth himself to harlots,
will be wicked. Rottenness and worms shall inherit him, and he shall be
lifted up for a greater example, and his soul shall be taken away out of
the number.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> He that is hasty to give credit, is light
of heart, and shall be lessened: and he that sinneth against his own
soul, shall be despised.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> He that rejoiceth in iniquity, shall be
censured, and he that hateth chastisement, shall have less life: and he
that hateth babbling, extinguisheth evil.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> He that sinneth against his own soul,
shall repent: and he that is delighted with wickedness, shall be
condemned.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Rehearse not again a wicked and harsh
word, and thou shalt not fare the worse.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Tell not thy mind to friend or foe: and
if there be a sin with thee, disclose it not.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> For he will hearken to thee, and will
witch thee, and as it were defending thy sin he will hate thee, and so
will he be with thee always.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Hast thou heard a word against thy
neighbour? let it die within thee, trusting that it will not burst thee.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> At the hearing of a word the fool is in
travail, as a woman groaning. in the bringing forth a child.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> As an arrow that sticketh in a man's
thigh: so is a word in the heart of a fool.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Reprove a friend, lest he may not have
understood, and say : f did it not: or if he did it, that he may do it
no more.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Reprove thy neighbour, for it may be he
hath not said it: and if he hath said it, that he may not say it again.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Admonish thy friend: for there is often
a fault committed.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And believe not every word. There is
one, that slippeth with the tongue, but not from his heart.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> For who is there that hath not offended
with his tongue? Admonish thy neighbour before thou threaten him.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And give place to the fear of the most
High: for the fear of God is all wisdom, and therein is to fear God, and
the disposition of the law is in all wisdom.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> But the learning of wickedness is not
wisdom: and the device of sinners is not prudence.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> There is a subtle wickedness, and the
same is detestable: and there is a man that is foolish, wanting in
wisdom.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Better is a man that hath less wisdom,
and wanteth understanding, with the fear of God, than he that aboundeth
in understanding, and transgresseth the law of the most High.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> There is an exquisite subtilty, and the
same is unjust.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And there is one that uttereth an exact
word telling the truth. There is one that humbleth himself wickedly, and
his interior is full of deceit:

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And there is one that submitteth
himself exceedingly with a great lowliness: and there is one that
casteth down his countenance, and maketh as if he did not see that which
is unknown:

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And if he be hindered from sinning for
want of power, if he shall find opportunity to do evil, he will do it.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> A man is known by his look, and a wise
man, when thou meetest him, is known by his countenance.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> The attire of the body, and the
laughter of the teeth, and the gait of the man, shew what he is.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> There is a lying rebuke in the anger of
an injurious man: and there is a judgment that is not allowed to be
good: and there is one that holdeth his peace, he is wise.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> HOW much better is it to reprove, than to
be angry, and not to hinder him that confesseth in prayer.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> The lust of an eunuch shall devour a
young maiden:

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> So is he that by violence executeth
unjust judgment.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> How good is it, when thou art reproved,
to shew repentance! for so thou shalt escape wilful sin.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> There is one that holdeth his peace, that
is found wise: and there is another that is hateful, that is bold in
speech.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> There is one that holdeth his peace,
because he knoweth not what to say: and there is another that holdeth
his peace, knowing the proper time.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> A wise man will hold his peace till he
see opportunity: but a babbler, and a fool, will regard no time.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> He that useth many words shall hurt his
own soul: and he that taketh authority to himself unjustly shall be
hated.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> There is success in evil things to a man
without discipline, and there is a finding that turneth to loss.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> There is a gift that is not profitable:
and there is a gift, the recompense of which is double.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> There is an abasement because of glory:
and there is one that shall lift up his head from a low estate.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> There is that buyeth much for a small
price, and restoreth the same sevenfold.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> A man wise in words shall make himself
beloved: but the graces of fools shall be poured out.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> The gift of the fool shall do thee no
good: for his eyes are sevenfold.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> He will give a few things, and upbraid
much: and the opening of his mouth is the kindling of a fire.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> To day a man lendeth, and to morrow he
asketh it again: such a man as this is hateful.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> A fool shall have no friend, and there
shall be no thanks for his good deeds.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> For they that eat his bread, are of a
false tongue. How often, and how many will laugh him to scorn!

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> For he doth not distribute with right
understanding that which was to be had: in like manner also that which
was not to be had.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> The slipping of a false tongue is as
one that falleth on the pavement: so the fall of the wicked shall come
speedily.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> A man without grace is as a vain fable,
it shall be continually in the mouth of the unwise.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> A parable coming out, of a fool's mouth
shall be rejected: for he doth not speak it in due season.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> There is that is hindered from sinning
through want, and in his rest he shall be pricked.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> There is that will destroy his own soul
through shamefacedness, and by occasion of an unwise person he will
destroy it: and by respect of person he will destroy himself.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> There is that for bashfulness promiseth
to his friend, and maketh him his enemy for nothing.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> A lie is a foul blot in a man, and yet
it will be continually in the mouth of men without discipline.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> A thief is better than a man that is
always lying: but both of them shall inherit destruction.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> The manners of lying men are without
honour: and their confusion is with them without ceasing.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> A wise man shall advance himself with
his words, and a prudent man shall please the great ones.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> He that tilleth his land shall make a
high heap of corn: and he that worketh justice shall be exalted: and he
that pleaseth great men shall escape iniquity.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> Presents and gifts blind the eyes of
judges, and make them dumb in the mouth, so that they cannot correct.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> Wisdom that is hid, and treasure that
is not seen: what profit is there in them both?

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> Better is he that hideth his folly,
than the man that hideth his wisdom.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> MY son, hast thou sinned? do so no more:
but for thy former sins also pray that they may be forgiven thee.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Flee from sins as from the face of a
serpent: for if thou comest near them, they will take hold of thee.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> The teeth thereof are the teeth of a
lion, killing the souls of men.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> All iniquity is like a two-edged sword,
there is no remedy for the wound thereof.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Injuries and wrongs will waste riches:
and the house that is very rich shall be brought to nothing by pride :
so the substance of the proud shall be rooted out.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> The prayer out of the mouth of the poor
shall reach the ears of God, and judgment shall come for him speedily.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> He that hateth to be reproved walketh in
the trace of a sinner: and he that feareth God will turn to his own
heart.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> He that is mighty by a bold tongue is
known afar off, but a wise man knoweth to slip by him.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> He that buildeth his house at other men's
charges, is as he that gathereth himself stones to build in the winter.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> The congregation of sinners is like tow
heaped together, and the end of them is a flame of fire.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> The way of sinners is made plain with
stones, and in their end is hell, and darkness, and pains.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> He that keepeth justice shall get the
understanding thereof.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> The perfection of the fear of God is
wisdom and understanding.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> He that is not wise in good, will not
be taught.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> But there is a wisdom that aboundeth in
evil : and there is no understanding where there is bitterness.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> The knowledge of a wise man shall
abound like a flood, and his counsel continueth like a fountain of life.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> The heart of a fool is like a broken
vessel, and no wisdom at all shall it hold.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> A man of sense will praise every wise
word he shall hear, and will apply it to himself: the luxurious man hath
heard it, and it shall displease him, and he will cast it behind his
back.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> The talking of a fool is like a burden
in the way: but in the lips of the wise, grace shall be found.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> The mouth of the prudent is sought
after in the church, and they will think upon his words in their hearts.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> As a house that is destroyed, so is
wisdom to a fool : and the knowledge of the unwise is as words without
sense.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Doctrine to a fool is as fetters on the
feet, and like manacles on the right hand.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> A fool lifteth up his voice in
laughter: but a wise man will scarce laugh low to himself.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Learning to the prudent is as an
ornament of gold, and like a bracelet upon his right arm.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The foot of a fool is soon in his
neighbour's house: but a man of experience will be abashed at the person
of the mighty.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> A fool will peep through the window
into the house: but he that is well taught will stand without.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> It is the folly of a man to hearken at
the door: and a wise man will be grieved with the disgrace.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> The lips of the unwise will be telling
foolish things but the words of the wise shall be weighed in a balance.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> The heart of fools is in their mouth:
and the mouth of wise men is in their heart.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> While the ungodly curseth the devil, he
curseth his own soul.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> The talebearer shall defile his own
soul, and shall be hated by all: and he that shall abide with him shall
be hateful: the silent and wise man shall be honoured.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> THE sluggard is pelted with a dirty
stone, and all men will speak of his disgrace.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The sluggard is pelted with the dung of
oxen: and every one that toucheth him will shake his hands.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> A son ill taught is the confusion of the
father: and a foolish daughter shall be to his loss.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> A wise daughter shall bring an
inheritance to her husband: but she that confoundeth, becometh a
disgrace to her father.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> She that is bold shameth both her father
and husband, and will not be inferior to the ungodly: and shall be
disgraced by them both.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> A tale out of time is like music in
mourning: but the stripes and instruction of wisdom are never out of
time.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> He that teacheth a fool, is like one that
glueth a potsherd together.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> He that telleth a word to him that
heareth not, is like one that waketh a man out of a deep sleep.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> He speaketh with one that is asleep, who
uttereth wisdom to a fool: and in the end of the discourse he saith: Who
is this?

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Weep for the dead, for his light hath
failed: and weep for the fool, for his understanding faileth.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Weep but a little for the dead, for he
is at rest.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> For the wicked life of a wicked fool is
worse than death.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> The mourning for the dead is seven
days: but for a fool and an ungodly man all the days of their life.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Talk not much with a fool, and go not
with him that hath no sense.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Keep thyself from him, that thou mayst
not have trouble, and thou shalt not be defiled with his sin.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Turn away from him, and thou shalt find
rest, and shalt not be wearied out with his folly.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> What is heavier than lead? and what
other name hath he but fool?

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Sand and salt, and a mass of iron is
easier to bear, than a man without sense, that is both foolish and
wicked.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> A frame of wood bound together in the
foundation of a building, shall not be loosed: so neither shall the
heart that is established by advised counsel.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> The thought of him that is wise at all
times, shall not be depraved by fear.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> As pales set in high places, and
plasterings made without cost, will not stand against the face of the
wind:

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> So also a fearful heart in the
imagination of a fool shall not resist against the violence of fear.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> As a fearful heart in the thought of a
fool at all times will not fear, so neither shall he that continueth
always in the commandments of God.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> He that pricketh the eye, bringeth out
tears: and he that pricketh the heart, bringeth forth resentment.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> He that flingeth a stone at birds,
shall drive them away: so he that upbraideth his friend, breaketh
friendship.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Although thou hast drawn a sword at a
friend, despair not: for there may be a returning. To a friend,

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> If thou hast opened a sad mouth, fear
not, for there may be a reconciliation: except upbraiding, and reproach,
and pride, and disclosing of secrets, or a treacherous wound: for in all
these cases a friend will flee away.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Keep fidelity with a friend in his
poverty, that in his prosperity also thou mayst rejoice.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> In the time of his trouble continue
faithful to him, that thou mayst also be heir with him in his
inheritance.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> As the vapour of a chimney, and the
smoke of the fire goeth up before the fire: so also injurious words, and
reproaches, and threats, before blood.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> I will not be ashamed to salute a
friend, neither will I hide myself from his face: and if any evil happen
to me by him, I will bear it.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> But every one that shall hear it, will
beware of him.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> Who will set a guard before my mouth,
and a sure seal upon my lips, that I fall not by them, and that my
tongue destroy me not?

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> O LORD, father, and sovereign ruler of my
life, leave me not to their counsel: nor suffer me to fall by them.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Who will set scourges over my thoughts,
and the discipline of wisdom over my heart, that they spare me not in
their ignorances, and that their sine may not appear:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Lest my ignorances increase, and my
offences be multiplied, and my sine abound, and I fall before my
adversaries, and my enemy rejoice over me?

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> O Lord, father, and God of my life, leave
me not to their devices.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Give me not haughtiness of my eyes, and
turn away from me all coveting.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Take from me the greediness of the belly,
and let not the lusts of the flesh take hold of me, and give me not over
to a shameless and foolish mind.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Hear, O ye children, the discipline of
the mouth: and he that will keep it shall not perish by his lips, nor be
brought to fall into most wicked works.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> A sinner is caught in his own vanity, and
the proud and the evil speakers shall fall thereby.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Let not thy mouth be accustomed to
swearing: for in it there are many falls.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And let not the naming of God be usual
in thy mouth, and meddle not with the names of saints, for thou shalt
not escape free from them.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> For as a slave daily put to the
question, is never without a blue mark: so every one that sweareth, and
nameth, shall not be wholly pure from sin.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> A man that sweareth much, shall be
filled with iniquity, and a scourge shall not depart from his house.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And if he make it void, his sin shall
be upon him: and if he dissemble it, he offendeth double:

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And if he swear in vain, he shall not
be justified: for his house shall be filled with his punishment.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> There is also another speech opposite
to death, let it not be found in the inheritance of Jacob.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> For from the merciful all these things
shall be taken away, and they shall not wallow in sins.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Let not thy mouth be accustomed to
indiscreet speech: for therein is the word of sin.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Remember thy father and thy mother, for
thou sittest is the midst of great men:

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Lest God forget thee in their sight,
and thou, by thy daily custom, be infatuated and suffer reproach: and
wish that thou hadst not been born, and curse the day of thy nativity.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> The man that is accustomed to
opprobrious words, will never be corrected all the days of his life.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Two sorts of men multiply sins, and the
third bringeth wrath and destruction.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> A hot soul is a burning fire, it will
never be quenched, till it devour some thing.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> And a man that is wicked in the mouth
of his flesh, will not leave off till he hath kindled a fire.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> To a man that is a fornicator all bread
is sweet, he will not be weary of sinning unto the end.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Every man that passeth beyond his own
bed, despising his own soul, and saying: Who seeth me?

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Darkness compasseth me about, and the
walls cover me, and no man seeth me: whom do I fear? the most High will
not remember my sins.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> And he understandeth not that his eye
seeth all things, for such a man's fear driveth from him the fear of
God, and the eyes of men fearing him:

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And he knoweth not that the eyes of the
Lord are far brighter than the sun, beholding round about all the ways
of men, and the bottom of the deep, and looking into the hearts of men,
into the most hidden parts.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> For all things were known to the Lord
God, before they were created: so also after they were perfected he
beholdeth all things.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> This man shall be punished in the
streets of the city, and he shall be chased as a colt: and where he
suspected not, he shall be taken.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> And he shall be in disgrace with all
men, because he understood not the fear of the Lord.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> So every woman also that leaveth her
husband, and bringeth in an heir by another :

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> For first she hath been unfaithful to
the law of the most High: and secondly, she hath offended against her
husband: thirdly, she hath fornicated in adultery, end hath gotten her
children of another man.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> This woman shall be brought into the
assembly, and inquisition shall be made of her children.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Her children shall not take root, and
her branches shall bring forth no fruit.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> She shall leave her memory to be
cursed, and her infamy shall not be blotted out.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> And they that remain shall know. that
there is nothing better than the fear of God: and that there is nothing
sweeter than to have regard to the commandments of the Lord.

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> It is great glory to follow the Lord
for length of days shall be received from him.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> WISDOM shall praise her own self, and
shall be honoured in God, and shall glory in the midst of her people,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And shall open her mouth in the churches
of the most High, and shall glorify herself in the sight of his power,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And in the midst of her own people she
shall be exalted, and shall be ad- mired in the holy assembly.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And in the multitude of the elect she
shall have praise, and among the blessed she shall be blessed, saying:

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> I came out of the mouth of the most High,
the firstborn before all creatures:

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> I made that in the heavens there should
rise light that never faileth, and as a cloud I covered all the earth:

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> I dwelt in the highest places, and my
throne is in a pillar of a cloud.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> I alone have compassed the circuit of
heaven, and have penetrated into the bottom of the deep, and have walked
in the waves of the sea,

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And have stood in all the earth: and in
every people,

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And in every nation I have had the
chief rule:

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And by my power I have trodden under my
feet the hearts of all the high and low: and in all these I sought rest,
and I shall abide in the inheritance of the Lord.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Then the creator of all things
commanded, and said to me: and he that made me, rested in my tabernacle,

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And he said to me: Let thy dwelling be
in Jacob, and thy inheritance in Israel, and take root in my elect.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> From the beginning, and before the
world, was I created, and unto the world to come I shall not cease to
be, and in the holy dwelling place I have ministered before him.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And so was I established in Sion, and
in the holy city likewise I rested, and my power was in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And I took root in an honourable
people, and in the portion of mg God his inheritance, and my abode is in
the full assembly of saints.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus,
and as a cypress tree on mount Sion.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> I was exalted like a palm tree in
Cades, and as a rose plant in Jericho:

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> As a fair olive tree in the plains, and
as a plane tree by the water in the streets, was I exalted.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon. and
aromatical balm: I yielded a sweet odour like the best myrrh:

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And I perfumed my dwelling as storax,
and galbanum, and onyx, and aloes, and as the frankincense not cut, and
my odour is as the purest balm.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> I have stretched out my branches as the
turpentine tree, and my branches are of honour and grace.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> As the vine I have brought forth a
pleasant odour: and my flowers are the fruit of honour and riches.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> I am the mother of fair love, and of
fear, and of knowledge, and of holy hope.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> In me is all grace of the way and of
the truth, in me is all hope of life and of virtue.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> Come over to me, all ye that desire me,
and be filled with my fruits.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> For my spirit is sweet above honey, and
my inheritance above honey and the honeycomb.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> My memory is unto everlasting
generations.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> They that eat me, shall yet hunger: and
they that drink me, shall yet thirst.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> He that hearkeneth to me, shall not be
confounded: and they that work by me, shall not sin.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> They that explain me shall have life
everlasting.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> All these things are the book of life,
and the covenant of the most High, and the knowledge of truth.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> Moses commanded a law in the precepts
of justices, and an inheritance to the house of Jacob, and the promises
to Israel.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> He appointed to David his servant to
raise up of him a most mighty king, and sitting on the throne of glory
for ever.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> Who filleth up wisdom as the Phison,
and as the Tigris in the days of the new fruits.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> Who maketh understanding to abound as
the Euphrates, who multiplieth it as the Jordan in the time of harvest.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> Who sendeth knowledge as the light, and
riseth up as Gehon in the time of the vintage.

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> Who first hath perfect knowledge of
her, and a weaker shall not search her out.

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> For her thoughts are more vast than the
sea, and her counsels more deep than the great ocean.

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> I, wisdom, have poured out rivers.

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> I, like a brook out of a river of a
mighty water; I, like a channel of a river. and like an aqueduct, came
out of paradise.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> I said: I will water my garden of
plants, and I will water abundantly the fruits of my meadow.

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> And behold my brook became a great
river, and my river came near to a sea:

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> For I make doctrine to shine forth to
all as the morning light, and I will declare it afar off.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> I will penetrate to all the lower parts
of the earth, and will behold all that sleep, and will enlighten all
that hope in the Lord.

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> I will yet pour out doctrine as
prophecy, and will leave it to them that seek wisdom, and will not cease
to instruct their offspring even to the holy age.

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> See ye that I have not laboured for
myself only, but for all that seek out the truth.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> WITH three things my spirit is pleased,
which are approved before God and men:

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> The concord of brethren, and the love of
neighbours, and mall and wife that agree well together.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Three sorts my soul hateth, and I am
greatly grieved at their life:

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> A poor man that is proud: a rich man that
is a liar: an old man that is a fool, and doting.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> The things that thou hast not gathered in
thy youth, how shalt thou find them in thy old age?

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> O how comely is judgment for a grey head,
and for ancients to know counsel!

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> O how comely is wisdom for the aged, and
understanding and counsel to men of honour!

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Much experience is the crown of old men,
and the fear of God is their glory.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Nine things that are not to be imagined
by the heart have I magnified, and the tenth I will utter to men with my
tongue.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> A man that hath joy of his children:
and he that liveth and seeth the fall of his enemies.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> Blessed is he. that dwelleth with a
wise woman, and that hath not slipped with his tongue, and that hath not
served such as are unworthy of him.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Blessed is he that findeth a true
friend, and that declareth justice to an ear that heareth.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> How great is he that findeth wisdom and
knowledge! but there is none above him that feareth the Lord.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> The fear of God hath set itself above
all things:

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Blessed is the man, to whom it is given
to have the fear of God: he that holdeth it, to whom shall he be
likened?

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> The fear of God is the beginning of his
love: and the beginning of faith is to be fast joined unto it.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> The sadness of the heart is every
plague: and the wickedness of a woman is all evil.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And a man will choose any plague, but
the plague of the heart:

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> And ally wickedness, but the wickedness
of a woman:

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And any affliction, but the affliction
from them that hate him:

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> And ally revenge, but the revenge of
enemies.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> There is no head worse than the head of
a serpent:

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And there is no anger above the anger
of a woman. It will be more agreeable to abide with a lion and a dragon,
than to dwell with a wicked woman.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> The wickedness of a woman changeth her
face: and she darkeneth her countenance as a bear: and sheweth it like
sackcloth. In the midst of her neighbours,

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> Her husband groaned, and hearing he
sighed a little.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> All malice is shore to the malice of a
woman, let the lot of sinners fall upon her.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> As the climbing of a sandy way is to
the feet of the aged, so is a wife full of tongue to a quiet man.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Look not upon a woman's beauty, and
desire not a woman for beauty.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> A woman's anger, and impudence, and
confusion is great.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> A woman, if she have superiority, is
contrary to her husband.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> A wicked woman abateth the courage, and
maketh a heavy countenance, and a wounded heart.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> Feeble hands, and disjointed knees, a
woman that doth not make her husband happy.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> From the woman came the beginning of
sin, and by her we all die.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Give no issue to thy water, no, not a
little: nor to a wicked woman liberty to gad abroad.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> If she walk not at thy hand, she will
confound thee in the sight of thy enemies.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> Cut her off from thy flesh, lest she
always abuse thee.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> HAPPY is the husband of a good wife: for
the number of his years is double.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> A virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband:
and shall fulfil the years of his life in peace.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> A good wife is a good portion, she shall
be given in the portion of them that fear God, to a man for his good
deeds.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Rich or poor, if his heart is good, his
countenance shall be cheerful at all times.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Of three things my heart hath been
afraid, and at the fourth my face hath trembled:

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> The accusation of a city, and the
gathering together of the people:

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And a false calumny, all are more
grievous than death.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> A jealous woman is the grief and mourning
of the heart.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> With a jealous woman is a scourge of the
tongue which communicateth with all.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> As a yoke of oxen that is moved to and
fro, so also is a wicked woman: he that hath hold of her, is as he that
taketh hold of a scorpion.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> A drunken woman is a great wrath: and
her reproach and shame shall not be hid.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> The fornication of a woman shall be
known by the haughtiness of her eyes, and by her eyelids.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> On a daughter that turneth not away
herself, set a strict watch: lest finding an opportunity she abuse
herself.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Take heed of the impudence of her eyes,
and wonder not if she slight thee.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> She will open her mouth as a thirsty
traveller to the fountain, and will drink of every water near her, and
will sit down by every hedge, and open her quiver against every arrow,
until she fail.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> The grace of a diligent woman shall
delight her husband, and shall fat his bones.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Her discipline is the gift of God.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Such is a wise and silent woman, and
there is nothing so much worth as a well instructed soul.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> A holy and shamefaced woman is grace
upon grace.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And no price is worthy of a continent
soul.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> As the sun when it riseth to the world
in the high places of God, so is the beauty of a good wife for the
ornament of her house.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> As the lamp shining upon the holy
candlestick, so is the beauty of the face in a ripe age.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> As golden pillars upon bases of silver,
so are the firm feet upon the soles of a steady woman.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> As everlasting foundations upon a solid
rock, so the commandments of God In the heart of a holy woman.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> At two things my heart is grieved, and
the third bringeth anger upon me:

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> A man of was fainting through poverty:
and a man of sense despised:

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And he that passeth over from justice
to sin, God hath prepared such an one for the sword.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> Two sorts of callings have appeared to
me hard and dangerous: a merchant is hardly free from negligence: and a
huckster shall not be justified from the sins of the lips.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> THROUGH poverty many have sinned: and he
that seeketh to be enriched, turneth away his eye.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> As a stake sticketh fast in the midst of
the joining of stones, so also in the midst of selling and buying, sin
shall stick fast.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Sin shall be destroyed with the sinner.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Unless thou hold thyself diligently in
the fear of the Lord, thy house shall quickly be overthrown.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> As when one sifteth with a sieve, the
dust will remain: so will the perplexity of a man in his thoughts.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> The furnace trieth the potter's vessels,
and the trial of affliction just men.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Be the dressing of a tree sheweth the
fruit thereof, so a word out of the thought of the heart of man.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Praise not a man before he speaketh, for
this is the trial of men.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> If thou followest justice, thou shalt
obtain her: and shalt put her on as a long robe of honour, and thou
shalt dwell with her: and she shall protect thee for ever, and in the
day of acknowledgment thou shalt find a strong foundation.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Birds resort unto their like: so truth
will return to them that practise her.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> The lion always lieth in wait for prey:
so do sine for them that work iniquities.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> A holy man continueth in wisdom as the
sun: but a fool is changed as the moon.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> In the midst of the unwise keep in the
word till its time: but be continually among men that think.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> The discourse of sinners is hateful,
and their laughter is at the pleasures of sin.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> The speech that sweareth much shall
make the hair of the head stand upright: and its irreverence shall make
one stop his ears.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Is the quarrels of the proud is the
shedding of blood: and their cursing is a grievous hearing.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> He that discloseth the secret of a
friend loseth his credit, and shall never find a friend to his mind.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Love thy neighbour, and be joined to
him with fidelity.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> But if thou discover his secrets,
follow no more after him.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> For as a man that destroyeth his
friend, so also is he that destroyeth the friendship of his neighbour.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And as one that letteth a bird go out
of his hand, so hast thou let thy neighbour go, and thou shalt not get
him again.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Follow after him no more, for he is
gone afar off, he is fled, as a roe escaped out of the snare: because
his soul is wounded.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Thou canst no more bind him up. And of
a curse there is reconciliation:

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> But to disclose the secrets of a
friend, leaveth no hope to an unhappy soul.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> He that winketh with the eye forgeth
wicked things, and no man will cast him off:

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> In the sight of thy eyes he will
sweeten his mouth, and will admire thy words: but at the last he will
writhe his mouth, and on thy words he will lay a stumblingblock.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> I have hated many things, but not like
him, and the Lord will hate him.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> If one cast a stone on high, it will
fall upon his own head: and the deceitful stroke will wound the
deceitful.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into
it: and he that setteth a stone for his neighbour, shall stumble upon
it: and he that layeth a snare for another, shall perish in it.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> A mischievous counsel shall be rolled
back upon the author, and he shall not know from whence it cometh to
him.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> Mockery and reproach are of the proud,
and vengeance as a lion shall lie in wait for him.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> They shall perish in a snare that are
delighted with the fall of the just: and sorrow shall consume them
before they die.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> Anger and fury are both of them
abominable, and the sinful man shall be subject to them.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> HE that seeketh to revenge himself, shall
find vengeance from the Lord, and he will surely keep his sins in
remembrance.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Forgive thy neighbour if he hath hurl
thee: and then shall thy sins be forgiven to thee when thou prayest.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Man to man reserveth anger, and doth he
seek remedy of God?

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> He hath no mercy on a man like himself,
and doth he entreat for his own sins?

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> He that is but flesh, nourisheth anger,
and doth he ask forgiveness of God? who shall obtain pardon for his
sins?

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Remember thy last things, and let enmity
cease:

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> For corruption and death hang over in his
commandments.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> Remember the fear of God, and be not
angry with thy neighbour.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Remember the covenant of the most High,
and overlook the ignorance of thy neighbour.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Refrain from strife, and thou shalt
diminish thy sine:

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> For a passionate man kindleth strife,
and a sinful man will trouble his friends, and bring in debate in the
midst of them that are at peace.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> For as the wood of the forest is, so
the fire burneth: and as a man's strength is, so shall his anger be, and
according to his riches he shall increase his anger.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> A hasty contention kindleth a fire: and
a hasty quarrel sheddeth blood: and a tongue that beareth witness
bringeth death.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> If thou blow the spark, it shall burn
as a fire: and if thou spit upon it, it shall be quenched: both come out
of the mouth.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> The whisperer and the double tongued is
accursed: for he hath troubled many that were at peace.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> The tongue of a third person hath
disquieted many, and scattered them from nation to nation.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> It hath destroyed the strong cities of
the rich, and hath overthrown the houses of great men.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> It hath cut in pieces the forces of
people, and undone strong nations.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> The tongue of a third person hath cast
out valiant women, and deprived them of their labours.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> He that hearkeneth to it, shall never
have rest, neither shall he have a friend in whom he may repose.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> The stroke of a whip maketh a blue
mark: but the stroke of the tongue will break the bones.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Many have fallen by the edge of the
sword, but not so many as have perished by their own tongue.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> Blessed is he that is defended from a
wicked tongue, that hath not passed into the wrath thereof, and that
hath not drawn the yoke thereof, and hath not been bound in its bands.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> For its yoke is a yoke of iron: and its
bands are bands of brass.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> The death thereof is a most evil death:
and hell is preferable to it.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Its continuance shall not be for a long
time, but it shall possess the ways of the unjust: and the just shall
not be burnt with its flame.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> They that forsake God shall fall into
it, and it shall burn in them, and shall not be quenched, and it shall
be sent upon them as a lion, and as a leopard it shall tear them.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Hedge in thy ears with thorns, hear not
a wicked tongue, and make doors and bars to thy mouth.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> Melt down thy gold and silver, and make
a balance for thy words, and a just bridle for thy mouth:

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And take heed lest thou slip with thy
tongue, and fall in the sight of thy enemies who lie in wait for thee,
and thy fall be incurable unto death.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> HE that sheweth mercy, lendeth to his
neighbour: and he that is stronger in hand, keepeth the commandments.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Lend to thy neighbour in the time of his
need, and pay thou thy neighbour again in due time.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> Reap thy word, and deal faithfully with
him: and thou shalt always find that which is necessary for thee.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> Many have looked upon a thing lent as a
thing found, and have given trouble to them that helped them.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Till they receive, they kiss the hands of
the lender, and in promises they humble their voice:

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> But when they should repay, they will ask
time, and will return tedious and murmuring words, and will complain of
the time:

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And if he be able to pay, he will stand
off, he will scarce pay one half, and will count it as if he had found
it:

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> But if not, he will defraud him of his
money, and he shall get him for an enemy without cause:

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And he will pay him with reproaches and
curses, and instead of honour and good turn will repay him injuries.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Many have refused to lend, not out of
wickedness, but they were afraid to be defrauded without cause.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> But yet towards the poor be thou more
hearty, and delay not to shew him mercy.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> Help the poor because of the
commandment: and send him not away empty handed because of his poverty.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> Lose thy money for thy brother and thy
friend: and hide it not under a stone to be lost.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> Place thy treasure in the commandments
of the most High, and it shall bring thee more profit than gold.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Shut up alms in the heart of the poor,
and it shall obtain help for thee against all evil.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> Better than the shield of the mighty,
and better than the spear:

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> It shall fight for thee against thy
enemy.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> A good man is surety for his neighbour:
and he that hath lost shame, will leave him to himself.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Forget not the kindness of thy surety:
for he hath given his life for thee.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> The sinner and the unclean fleeth from
his surety.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> A sinner attributeth to himself the
goods of his surety: and he that is of an unthankful mind will leave him
that delivered him.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> A man is surety for his neighbour: and
when he hath lost all shame, he shall forsake him.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> Evil suretyship hath undone many of
good estate, and hath tossed them as a wave of the sea.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> It hath made powerful men to go from
place to place round about, and they have wandered in strange countries.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> A sinner that transgresseth the
commandment of the Lord, shall fall into an evil suretyship: and he that
undertaketh many things, shall fall into judgment.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Recover thy neighbour according to thy
power, and take heed to thyself that thou fall not.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> The chief thing for man's life is water
and bread, and clothing, and a house to cover shame.

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> Better is the poor man's fare under a
roof of boards, than sumptuous cheer abroad in another man's house.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> Be contented with little instead of
much, and thou shalt not hear the reproach of going abroad.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> It is a miserable life to go as a guest
from house to house: for where a man is a stranger, he shall not deal
confidently, nor open his mouth.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> He shall entertain and feed, and give
drink to the unthankful, and moreover he shall hear bitter words.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> Go, stranger, and furnish the table,
and give others to eat what thou hast in thy hand.

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> Give place to the honourable presence
of my friends: for I want my house, my brother being to be lodged with
me.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> These things are grievous to a man of
understanding: the upbraiding of houseroom, and the reproaching of the
lender.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> HE that loveth his son, frequently
chastiseth him, that he may rejoice in his latter end, and not grope
after the doors of his neighbours.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> He that instructeth his son shall be
praised in him, and shall glory in him in the midst of them of his
household.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> He that teacheth his son, maketh his
enemy jealous, and in the midst of his friends he shall glory in him.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> His father is dead, and he is as if he
were not dead: for he hath left one behind him that is like himself.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> While he lived he saw and rejoiced in
him: and when he died he was not sorrowful, neither was he confounded
before his enemies.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> For he left behind him a defender of his
house against his enemies, and one that will requite kindness to his
friends.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> For the souls of his sons he shall bind
up his wounds, and at every cry his bowels shall be troubled.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> 8A horse not broken becometh stubborn,
and a child left to himself will become headstrong.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> Give thy son his way, and he shall make
thee afraid: play with him, and he shall make thee sorrowful.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Laugh not with him, lest thou have
sorrow, and at the last thy teeth be set on edge.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> Give him not liberty in his youth, and
wink not at his devices.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> Bow down his neck while he is young,
and beat his sides while he is a child, lest he grow stubborn, and
regard thee not, and so be a sorrow of heart to thee.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Instruct thy son, and labour about him,
lest his lewd behaviour be an offence to thee.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> Better is a poor man who is sound, and
strong of constitution, than a rich man who is weak and afflicted with
evils.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Health of the soul in holiness of
justice, is better then all gold and silver: and a sound body, than
immense revenues.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> There is no riches above the riches of
the health of the body: and there is no pleasure above the joy of the
heart.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> Better is death than a bitter life: and
everlasting rest, than continual sickness.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Good things that are hidden in a mouth
that is shut, are as masses of meat set about a grave.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> What good shall an offering do to an
idol? for it can neither eat, nor smell:

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> So is he that is persecuted by the
Lord, bearing the reward of his iniquity:

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> He seeth with his eyes, and groaneth,
as an eunuch embracing a virgin, and sighing.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Give not up thy soul to sadness, and
afflict not thyself in thy own counsel.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> The joyfulness of the heart, is the
life of a man, and a never failing treasure of holiness: and the joy of
a man is length of life.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> Have pity on thy own soul, pleasing
God, and contain thyself: gather up thy heart in his holiness: and drive
away sadness far from thee.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> For sadness hath killed many, and there
is no profit in it.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> Envy and anger shorten a man's days,
and pensiveness will bring old age before the time.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> A Cheerful and good heart is always
feasting: for his banquets are prepared with diligence.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> WATCHING for riches consumeth the flesh,
and the thought thereof driveth away sleep.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> The thinking beforehand turneth away the
understanding, and a grievous sickness maketh the soul sober.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> The rich man hath laboured in gathering
riches together, and when he resteth he shall be filled with his goods.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> The poor man hath laboured in his low way
of life, and in the end he is still poor.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> He that loveth gold, shall not be
justified: and he that followeth after corruption, shall be filled with
it.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Many have been brought to fall for gold,
and the beauty thereof hath been their ruin.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Gold is a stumblingblock to them that
sacrifice to it: woe to them that eagerly follow after it, and every
fool shall perish by it.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Blessed is the rich man that is found
without blemish: and that hath not gone after gold, nor put his trust in
money nor in treasures.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Who is he, and we will praise him? for he
hath done wonderful things in his life.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Who hath been tried thereby, and made
perfect, he shall have glory everlasting. He that could have
transgressed, and hath not transgressed: and could do evil things, and
hath not done them:

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> Therefore are his goods established in
the Lord, and all the church of the saints shall declare his alms.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> Art thou set at a great table? be not
the first to open thy mouth upon it.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Say not: There are many things which
are upon it.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> Remember that a wicked eye is evil.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> What is created more wicked than an
eye? therefore shall it weep over all the face when it shall see.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Stretch not out thy hand first, lest
being disgraced with envy thou be put to confusion.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Be not hasty in a feast.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> Judge of the disposition of thy
neighbour by thyself.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Use as a frugal man the things that are
set before thee: lest if thou eatest much, thou be hated.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> Leave off first, for manners' sake: and
exceed not, lest thou offend.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> 21And if thou sittest among many, reach
not thy hand out first of all: and be not the first to ask for drink.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> How sufficient is a little wine for a
man well taught, and in sleeping thou shalt not be uneasy with it, and
thou shalt feel no pain.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Watching, and choler, and gripes, are
with an intemperate man:

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> Sound and wholesome sleep with a
moderate man: he shall sleep till morning, and his soul shall be
delighted with him.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> And if thou hast been forced to eat
much, arise, go out, and vomit: and it shall refresh thee, and thou
shalt not bring sickness upon thy body.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> Hear me, my son, and despise me not:
and in the end thou shalt find my words.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> In all thy works be quick, and no
infirmity shall come to thee.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> The lips of many shall bless him that
is liberal of his bread, and the testimony of his truth is faithful.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> Against him that is niggardly of his
bread, the city will murmur, and the testimony of his niggardliness is
true.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Challenge not them that love wine: for
wine hath destroyed very many.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Fire trieth hard iron: so wine drunk to
excess shall rebuke the hearts of the proud.

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> Wine taken with sobriety is equal lire
to men: if thou drink it moderately, thou shalt be sober.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> What is his life, who is diminished
with wine?

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> What taketh away life? death.

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> Wine was created from the beginning to
make men joyful, and not to make them drunk.

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> Wine drunken with moderation is the joy
of the soul and the heart.

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> Sober drinking is health to soul and
body.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> Wine drunken with excess raiseth
quarrels; and wrath, and many ruins.

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> Wine drunken with excess is bitterness
of the soul.

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> The heat of drunkenness is the
stumblingblock of the fool, lessening strength and causing wounds.

<span id="an_31:41">31:41</span> Rebuke not thy neighbour in a banquet
of wine: and despise him not in his mirth.

<span id="an_31:42">31:42</span> Speak not to him words of reproach: and
press him not in demanding again.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> HAVE they made thee ruler? be not lifted
up: be among them as one of them.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Have care of them, and so sit down, and
when thou hast acquitted thyself of all thy charge, take thy place :

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> That thou mayst rejoice for them, and
receive a crown as an ornament of grace, and get the honour of the
contribution.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> Speak, thou that art elder: for it
becometh thee,

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> To speak the first word with care
knowledge, and hinder not music.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> Where there is no hearing, pour out
words, and be not lifted up out season with thy wisdom.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> 7A concert of music in a banquet wine is
as a carbuncle set in gold.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> As a signet of an emerald in a work of
gold: so is the melody of music with pleasant and moderate wine.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> Hear in silence, and for thy reverence
good grace shall come to thee.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Young man, scarcely speak in thy own
cause.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> If thou be asked twice, let thy answer
be short.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> In many things be as if thou wert
ignorant, and hear in silence and withal seeking.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> In the company of great men bake not
upon thee: and when the ancients are present, speak not much.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Before a storm goeth lightning: and
before shamefacedness goeth favour: and for thy reverence good grace
shall come to thee.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> And at the time of rising be not slack:
but be first to run home to thy house, and there withdraw thyself, and
there take thy pastime.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And do what thou hast a mind, but not
in sin or proud speech.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And for all these things bless the
Lord, that made thee, and that replenisheth thee with all his good
things.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> He that feareth the Lord, will receive
his discipline: and they that will seek him early, shall find a
blessing.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> He that seeketh the law, shall be
filled with it: and he that dealeth deceitfully, shall meet with a
stumblingblock therein.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> They that fear the Lord, shall find
just judgment, and shall kindle justice as a light.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> A sinful man will flee reproof, and
will find an excuse according to his will.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> A man of counsel will not neglect
understanding, a strange and proud man will not dread fear:

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> Even after he hath done with fear
without counsel, he shall be controlled by the things of his own
seeking.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> My son, do thou nothing without
counsel, and thou shalt not repent when thou hast done.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> Go not in the way of ruin, and thou
shalt not stumble against the stones; trust not thyself to a rugged may,
lest thou set a stumblingblock to thy soul.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> And beware of thy own children, and
take heed of them of thy household.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> In every work of thine regard thy soul
in faith: for this is the keeping of the commandments.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> He that believeth God, taketh heed to
the commandments: and he that trusteth in him, shall fare never the
worse.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> NO evils shall happen to him that feareth
the Lord, but in temptation God will keep him, and deliver him from
evils.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> A wise man hateth not the commandments
and justices, and he shall not be dashed in pieces as a ship in a storm.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> A man of understanding is faithful to the
law of God, and the law is faithful to him.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> He that cleareth up a question, shall
prepare what to say, and so having prayed he shall be heard, and shall
keep discipline, and then he shall answer.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> The heart of a fool is as a wheel of a
cart: and his thoughts are like a rolling axletree.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> A friend that is a mocker, is like a
stallion horse: he neigheth under every one that sitteth upon him.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Why doth one day excel another, and one
light another, and one year another year, when all come of the sun?

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> By the knowledge of the Lord they were
distinguished, the sun being made, and keeping his commandment.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And he ordered the seasons, and holidays
of them, and in them they celebrated festivals at an hour.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Some of them God made high and great
days, and some of them he put in the number of ordinary days. And all
men are from the ground, and out of the earth, from whence Adam was
created.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> With much knowledge the Lord hath
divided them and diversified their ways.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Some of them hath he blessed, and
exalted: and some of them hath he sanctified, and set near himself: and
some of them hath he cursed and brought low, end turned them from their
station.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> As the potter's clay is in his hand, to
fashion and order it:

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> All his ways are according to his
ordering: so man is in the hand of him that made him, and he will render
to him according to his judgment.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> Good is set against evil, and life
against death: so also is the sinner against a just man. And so look
upon all the works of the most High. Two and two, and one against
another.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> And I awaked last of all, and as one
that gathereth after the grapegatherers.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> In the blessing of God I also have
hoped: and as one that gathereth grapes, have I filled the winepress.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> See that I have not laboured for myself
only, but for all that seek discipline.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> Hear me, ye great men, and all ye
people, and hearken with your ears, ye rulers of the church.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Give not to son or wife, brother or
friend, power over thee while thou livest; and give not thy estate to
another, lest then repent, and thou entreat for the same.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> As long as thou livest, and hast breath
in thee, let no man change thee.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> For it is better that thy children
should ask of thee, than that thou look toward the hands of thy
children.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> In all thy works keep the pre-eminence.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Let no stain sully thy glory. In the
time when thou shalt end the days of thy life, and in the time of thy
decease, distribute thy inheritance.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Fodder, and a wand, and a burden are
for an ass: bread, and correction, and work for a slave.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> He worketh under correction, and
seeketh to rest: let his hands be idle, and he seeketh liberty.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> The yoke and the thong bend a stiff
neck, and continual labours bow a slave.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> Torture and fetters are for a malicious
slave: send him to work, that he be not idle:

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> For idleness hath taught much evil.

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> Set him to work: for so it is fit for
him. And if he be not obedient, bring him down with fetters, but be not
excessive towards any one: and do no grievous thing without judgment.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> If thou have a faithful servant, let
him be to thee as thy own soul: treat him as a brother: because in the
blood of thy soul thou hast gotten him.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> If thou hurt him unjustly, he will run
away:

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> And if he rise up and depart, thou
knowest not whom to ask, and in what way to seek him.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> THE hopes of a man that is void of
understanding are vain and deceitful: and dreams lift up fools.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> The man that giveth heed to lying
visions, is like to him that catcheth at a shadow, and followeth after
the wind.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> The vision of dreams is the resemblance
of one thing to another: as when a man's likeness is before the face of
a man.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> What can be made clean by the unclean?
and what truth can come from that which is false?

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> Deceitful divinations and lying omens and
the dreams of evildoers, are vanity:

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And the heart fancieth as that of a woman
in travail: except it be a vision sent forth from the most High, set no
thy heart upon them.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> For dreams have deceived many, and they
have failed that put their trust in them.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> The word of the law shall be fulfilled
without a lie, and wisdom shall be made plain in the mouth of the
faithful.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> What doth he know, that hath not been
tried? A man that hath much experience, shall think of many things: and
he that hath learned many things, shall shew forth understanding.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> He that hath no experience, knoweth
little: and he that hath been experienced in many things, multiplieth
prudence.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> He that hath not been tried, what
manner of things doth he know? he that hath been surprised, shall abound
with subtlety.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> I have seen many things by travelling,
and many customs of things.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Sometimes I have been in danger of
death for these things, and I have been delivered by the grace of God.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> The spirit of those that fear God; is
sought after, and by his regard shall be blessed.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> For their hope is on him that saveth
them, and the eyes of God are upon them that love him.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> He that feareth the Lord shall tremble
at nothing, and shall not be afraid for he is his hope.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> The soul of him that feareth the Lord
is blessed.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> To whom doth he look, and who in his
strength?

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> The eyes of the Lord are upon them that
fear him, he is their powerful protector, and strong stay, a defence
from the heat, and a cover from the sun at noon,

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> A preservation from stumbling, and a
help from falling; he raiseth up the soul, and enlighteneth the eyes,
and giveth health, and life, and blessing.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> The offering of him that sacrificeth of
a thing wrongfully gotten, is stained, and the mockeries of the unjust
are not acceptable.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> The Lord is only for them that wait
upon him in the way of truth and justice.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> The most High approveth not the gifts
of the wicked: neither hath he respect to the oblations of the unjust,
nor will he be pacified for sine by the multitude of their sacrifices.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> He that offereth sacrifice of the goods
of the poor, is as one that sacrificeth the son in the presence of his
father.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> The bread of the needy, is the life of
the poor: he that defraudeth them thereof, is a man of blood.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> He that taketh away the bread gotten by
sweat, is like him that killeth his neighbour.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> He that sheddeth blood, and he that
defraudeth the labourer of his hire, are brothers.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> When one buildeth up, and another
pulleth down: what profit have they but the labour?

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> When one prayeth, and another curseth:
whose voice will God hear?

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> He that washeth himself after touching
the dead, if he toucheth him again, what doth his washing avail?

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> So a man that fasteth for his sins, and
doth the same again, what doth his humbling himself profit him? who will
hear his prayer?

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> HE that keepeth the law, multiplieth
offerings.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> It is a wholesome sacrifice to take heed
to the commandments, and to depart from all iniquity. \_J

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> And to depart from injustice, is to offer
a propitiatory sacrifice for injustices, and a begging of pardon for
sins.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> He shall return thanks, that offereth
fine flour: and he that doth mercy, offereth sacrifice.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> To depart from iniquity is that which
pleaseth the Lord, and to depart from injustice, is an entreaty for
sins.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> Thou shalt not appear empty in the sight
of the Lord.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> For all these things are to be done
because of the commandment of God.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> The oblation of the just maketh the altar
fat, and is an odour of sweetness in the sight of the most High.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> The sacrifice of the just is acceptable,
and the Lord will not forget the memorial thereof.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Give glory to God with a good heart:
and diminish not the firstfruits of thy hands.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> In every gift shew a cheerful
countenance, and sanctify thy tithes with joy.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> Give to the most High according to what
he hath given to thee, and with a good eye do according to the ability
of thy hands:

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> For the Lord maketh recompense, and
will give thee seven times as much.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Do not offer wicked gifts, for such he
will not receive.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And look not upon an unjust sacrifice,
for the Lord is judge, and there is not with him respect of person.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> The Lord will not accept any person
against a poor man, and he will hear the prayer of him that is wronged.

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> He will not despise the prayers of the
fatherless; nor the widow, when she poureth out her complaint.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> Do not the widow's tears run down the
cheek, and her cry against him that causeth them to fall?

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> For from the cheek they go up even to
heaven, and the Lord that heareth will not be delighted with them.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> He that adoreth God with joy, shall be
accepted, and his prayer shall approach even to the clouds.

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> The prayer of him that humbleth
himself, shall pierce the clouds: and till it come nigh he will not be
comforted: and he will not depart till the most High behold.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> And the Lord will not be slack, but
will judge for the just, and will do judgment: and the Almighty will not
have patience with them, that he may crush their back:

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> And he will repay vengeance to the
Gentiles, till he have taken away the multitude of the proud, and broken
the sceptres of the unjust,

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> Till he have rendered to men according
to their deeds: and according to the works of Adam, and according to his
presumption,

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> Till he have judged the cause of his
people, and he shall delight the just with his mercy.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> The mercy of God is beautiful in the
time of affliction, as a cloud of rain in the time of drought.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> HAVE mercy upon us, O God of all, and
behold us, and shew us the light of thy mercies:

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And send thy fear upon the nations, that
have not sought after thee: that they may know that there is no God
beside thee, and that they may shew forth thy wonders.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> Lift up thy hand over the strange
nations, that they may see thy power.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> For as thou hast been sanctified in us in
their sight, so thou shalt be magnified among them in our presence,

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> That they may know thee, as we also have
known thee, that there is no God beside thee, O Lord.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Renew thy signs, and work new miracles.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> Glorify thy hand, and thy right arm.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> Raise up indignation, and pour out wrath.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> Take away the adversary, and crush the
enemy.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> Hasten the time, and remember the end,
that they may declare thy wonderful works.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> 11Let him that escapeth be consumed by
the rage of the fire: and let them perish that oppress thy people.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> Crush the head of the princes of the
enemies that say: There is no other beside us.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Gather together all the tribes of
Jacob: that they may know that there is no God besides thee, and may
declare thy great works: and thou shalt inherit them as from the
beginning.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Have mercy on thy people, upon whom thy
name is invoked: and upon Israel, m whom thou hast raised up to be thy
firstborn.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> Have mercy on Jerusalem, the city which
thou hast sanctified, the city of thy rest.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Fill Sion with thy unspeakable words,
and thy people with thy glory.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Give testimony to them that are thy
creatures from the beginning, and raise up the prophecies which the
former prophets spoke in thy name.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Reward them that patiently wait for
thee, that thy prophets may be found faithful: and hear the prayers of
thy servants,

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> According to the blessing of Aaron over
thy people, and direct us into the way of justice, and let all know that
dwell upon the earth, that thou art God the beholder of all ages.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> The belly will devour all meat, yet one
is better than another.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> 21The palate tasteth venison and the
wise heart false speeches.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> A perverse heart will cause grief, and
a man of experience will resist it.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> A woman will receive every man: yet one
daughter is better than an- other.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> The beauty of a woman cheereth the
countenance of her husband, and a man desireth nothing more.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> If she have a tongue that can cure, and
likewise mitigate and shew mercy: her husband is not like other men.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> He that possesseth a good wife,
beginneth a possession: she is a help like to himself, and a pillar of
rest.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> Where there is no hedge, the possession
shall be spoiled: and where there is no wife, he mourneth that is in
want.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> Who will trust him that hath no rest,
and that lodgeth wheresoever the night taketh him, as a robber well
appointed, that skippeth from city to city.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> EVERY friend will say: I also am his
friend: but there is a friend, that is only a friend in name. Is not
this a grief even to death?

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> But a companion and a friend shall be
turned to an enemy.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> O wicked presumption, whence camest thou
to cover the earth with thy malice, and deceitfulness?

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> There is a companion who rejoiceth with
his friend in his joys, but in the time of trouble, he will be against
him.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> There is a companion who condoleth with
his friend for his belly's sake, and he will take up a shield against
enemy.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and be
not unmindful of him in thy riches.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> Consult not with him that layeth a snare
for thee, and hide thy counsel from them that envy thee.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> Every counsellor giveth out counsel, but
there is one that is a counsellor for himself.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Beware of a counsellor. And know before
what need he hath: for he will devise to his own mind:

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> Lest he thrust a stake into the ground,
and say to thee:

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Thy way is good; and then stand on the
other side to see what shall befall thee.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Treat not with a man without religion
concerning holiness, nor with an unjust man concerning justice, nor with
a woman touching her of whom she is jealous, nor with a coward
concerning war, nor with a merchant about traffic, nor with a buyer of
selling, nor with an envious man of giving thanks,

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> Nor with the ungodly of piety, nor with
the dishonest of honesty, nor with the held labourer of every work

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Nor with him that worketh by the year
of the finishing of the year, nor with an idle servant of much business:
give no heed to these in any matter of counsel.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> But be continually with a holy man,
whomsoever thou shalt know to observe the fear of God,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> Whose soul is according to thy own
soul: and who, when thou shalt stumble in the dark, will be sorry for
thee.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> And establish within thyself a heart of
good counsel: for there is no other thing of more worth to thee than it.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> The soul of a holy man discovereth
sometimes true things, more than seven watchmen that sit in a high piece
to watch.

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> But above all these things pray to the
most High, that he may direct thy way in truth.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> In all thy works let the true word go
before thee, and steady counsel before every action.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> A wicked word shall change the beast:
out of which four manner of things arise, good and evil, life and death:
and the tongue is continually the ruler of them. There is a man that is
subtle and a teacher of many, and yet is unprofitable to his own soul.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> A skilful man hath taught many, and is
sweet to his own soul.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> He that speaketh sophistically, is
hateful: he shall be destitute of every thing.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> Grace is not given him from the Lord:
for he is deprived of all wisdom.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> There is a wise man that is wise to his
own soul: and the fruit of his understanding is commendable.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> A wise man instructeth his own people,
and the fruits of his understanding are faithful.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> A wise man shall be filled with
blessings, and they that see shall praise him.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> The life of a man is in the number of
his days: but the days of Israel are innumerable.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> A wise man shall inherit honour among
his people, and his name shall live for ever.

<span id="an_37:30">37:30</span> My son, prove thy soul in thy life: and
if it be wicked, give it no power:

<span id="an_37:31">37:31</span> For all things are not expedient for
all, and every kind pleaseth not every soul.

<span id="an_37:32">37:32</span> Be not greedy in any feasting, and pour
not out thyself upon any meat:

<span id="an_37:33">37:33</span> For in many meats there will be
sickness, and greediness will turn to choler.

<span id="an_37:34">37:34</span> By surfeiting many have perished: but
he that is temperate, shall prolong life.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> HONOUR the physician for the need thou
hast of him: for the most High hath created him.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> For all healing is from God, and he shall
receive gifts of the king.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> The skill of the physician shall lift up
his head, and in the sight of great men he shall be praised.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> The most High hath created medicines out
of the earth, and a wise man will not abhor them.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Was not bitter water made sweet with
wood?

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> The virtue of these things is come to the
knowledge of men, and the meet High hath given knowledge to men, that he
may be honoured in his wonders.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> By these he shall cure and shall allay
their pains, and of these the apothecary shall make sweet confections,
and shall make up ointments of health, and of his works there shall be
no end.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> For the peace of God is over all the face
of the earth.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> My son, in thy sickness neglect not
thyself, but pray to the Lord, and he shall heal thee.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Turn away from sin and order thy hands
aright, and cleanse thy heart from all offence.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> Give a sweet savour, and a memorial of
fine flour, and make a fat offering, and then give place to the
physician.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> For the Lord created him: and let him
not depart from thee, for his works are necessary.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> For there is a time when thou must fall
into their hands:

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> And they shall beseech the Lord, that
he would prosper what they give for ease and remedy, for their
conversation.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> He that sinneth in the sight of his
Maker, shall fall into the hands of the physician.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> My son, shed tears over the dead, and
begin to lament as if thou hadst suffered some great harm, and according
to judgment cover his body, and neglect not his burial.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> And for fear of being ill spoken of
weep bitterly for a, day, and then comfort thyself in thy sadness.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And make mourning for him according to
his merit for a day, or two, for fear of detraction.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> For of sadness cometh death, and it
overwhelmeth the strength, and the sorrow of the heart boweth down the
neck.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> In withdrawing aside sorrow remaineth:
and the substance of the poor is according to his heart.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> Give not up thy heart to sadness, but
drive it from thee: and remember the latter end.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Forget it not: for there is no
returning, and thou shalt do him no good, and shalt hurt thyself.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> Remember my judgment: for also shall be
so: yesterday for me, and to day for thee.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> When the dead is at rest, let his
remembrance rest, and comfort him in the departing of his spirit.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> The wisdom of a scribe cometh by his
time of leisure: and he that is less in action, shall receive wisdom.

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> With what wisdom shall he be furnished
that holdeth the plough, and that glorieth in the goad, that driveth the
oxen therewith, and is occupied in their labours, and his whole talk is
about the offspring of bulls?

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> He shall give his mind to turn up
furrows, and his care is to give the kine fodder.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> So every craftsman and workmaster that
laboureth night and day, he who maketh graven seals, and by his
continual diligence varieth the figure: he shall give his mind to the
resemblance of the picture, and by his watching shall finish the work.

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> So doth the smith sitting by the anvil
and considering the iron work. The vapour of the fire wasteth his flesh,
and he fighteth with the heat of the furnace.

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> The noise of the hammer is always in
his ears, and his eye is upon the pat tern of the vessel he maketh.

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> He setteth his mind to finish his work,
and his watching to polish them, to perfection.

<span id="an_38:32">38:32</span> So doth the potter sitting at his work,
turning the wheel about with his feet, who is always carefully set to
his work, and maketh all his work by number:

<span id="an_38:33">38:33</span> He fashioneth the clay with his arm,
and boweth down his strength before his feet:

<span id="an_38:34">38:34</span> He shall give his mind to finish the
glazing, and his watching to make clean the furnace.

<span id="an_38:35">38:35</span> All these trust to their hands, and
every one is wise in his own art.

<span id="an_38:36">38:36</span> Without these a city is not built.

<span id="an_38:37">38:37</span> And they shall not dwell, nor walk
about therein, and they shall not go up into the assembly.

<span id="an_38:38">38:38</span> Upon the judges' seat they shall not
sit, and the ordinance of judgment they shall not understand, neither
shall they declare discipline and judgment, and they shall not be found
where parables are spoken:

<span id="an_38:39">38:39</span> But they shall strengthen the state of
the world, and their prayer shall be in the work of their craft,
applying their soul, and searching in the law of the most High.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> THE wise men will seek out the wisdom of
all the ancients, and will be occupied in the prophets.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> He will keep the sayings of renowned men,
and will enter withal into the subtilties of parables.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> He will search out the hidden meanings of
proverbs, and will be conversant in the secrets of parables.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> He shall serve among great men, and:
appear before the governor.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> He shall pass into strange countries: for
he shall try good and evil among men.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> He will give his heart to resort early to
the Lord that made him, and he will pray in the sight of the most High.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> He will open his mouth in prayer, and
will make supplication for his sins.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> For if it shall please the great Lord, he
will fill him with the spirit of understanding:

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> And he will pour forth the words of his
wisdom as showers, and in his prayer he will confess to the Lord.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And he shall direct his counsel, and
his knowledge, and in his secrets shall he meditate.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> He shall shew forth the discipline he
hath learned, and shall glory in the law of the covenant of the Lord.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Many shall praise his wisdom, and it
shall never be forgotten.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> The memory of him shall not depart
away, and his name shall be in request from generation to generation.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> Nations shall declare his wisdom, and
the church shall shew forth his praise.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> If he continue, he shall leave a name
above a thousand: and if he rest, it shall be to his advantage.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> I will yet meditate that I may declare:
for I am filled as with a holy transport.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> By a voice he saith: Hear me, ye divine
offspring, and bud forth as the rose planted by the brooks of waters.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> Give ye a sweet odour as frankincense.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> Send forth flowers, as the lily, and
yield a smell, and bring forth leaves in grace, and praise with
canticles, and bless the Lord in his works.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> Magnify his name, and give glory to him
with the voice of your lips, and with the canticles of your mouths, and
with harps, and in praising him, you shall say in this manner:

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> All the works of the Lord are exceeding
good.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> At his word the waters stood as a heap:
and at the words of his mouth the receptacles of waters:

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> For at his commandment favour is shewn,
and there is no diminishing of his salvation.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> The works of all flesh are before him,
and there is nothing hid from his eyes.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> He seeth from eternity to eternity, and
there is nothing wonderful before him.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> There is no saying: What is this, or
what is that? for all things shall be sought in their time.

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> His blessing hath overflowed like a
river.

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> And as a flood hath watered the earth;
so shall his wrath inherit the nations, that have not sought after him:

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> Even as he turned the waters into a dry
land, and the earth was made dry: and his ways were made plain for their
journey: so to sinners they are stumblingblocks in his wrath.

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> Good things were created for the good
from the beginning, so for the wicked, good and evil things.

<span id="an_39:31">39:31</span> The principal things necessary for the
life of men, are water, fire, and iron, salt, milk, and bread of flour,
and honey, and the cluster of the grape, and oil, and clothing.

<span id="an_39:32">39:32</span> All these things shall be for good to
the holy, so to the sinners and the ungodly they shall be turned into
evil.

<span id="an_39:33">39:33</span> There are spirits that are created for
vengeance, and in their fury they lay on grievous torments.

<span id="an_39:34">39:34</span> In the time of destruction they shall
pour out their force: and they shall appease the wrath of him that made
them.

<span id="an_39:35">39:35</span> Fire, hail, famine, and death, all
these were created for vengeance.

<span id="an_39:36">39:36</span> The teeth of beasts, and scorpions, and
serpents, and the sword taking vengeance upon the ungodly unto
destruction.

<span id="an_39:37">39:37</span> In his commandments they shall feast,
and they shall be ready upon earth when need is, and when their time is
come they shall not transgress his word.

<span id="an_39:38">39:38</span> Therefore from the beginning I was
resolved, and I have meditated, and thought on these things and left
them in writing.

<span id="an_39:39">39:39</span> All the works of the Lord are good, and
he will furnish every work in due time.

<span id="an_39:40">39:40</span> It is not to be said: This is worse
than that: for all shall be well approved in their time.

<span id="an_39:41">39:41</span> Now therefore with the whole heart and
mouth praise ye him, and bless the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> GREAT labour is created for all men, and
a heavy yoke is upon the children of Adam, from the day of their coming
out of their mother's womb, until the day of their burial into the
mother of all.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Their thoughts, and fears of the heart,
their imagination of things to come, and the day of their end:

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> From him that sitteth on a glorious
throne, unto him that is humbled in earth and ashes:

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> From him that weareth purple, and beareth
the crown, even to him that is covered with rough linen: wrath, envy,
trouble, unquietness, and the fear of death, continual anger, and
strife,

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And in the time of rest upon his bed, the
sleep of the night changeth his knowledge.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> A little and as nothing is his rest, and
afterward in sleep, as in the day of keeping watch.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> He is troubled in the vision of his
heart, as if he had escaped in the day of battle. In the time of his
safety he rose up, and wondereth that there is no fear:

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> Such things happen to all flesh, from man
even to beast, and upon sinners are sevenfold mere.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Moreover, death, and bloodshed, strife,
and sword, oppressions, famine, and affliction, and scourges:

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> All these things are created for the
wicked, and for their sakes came the flood.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> All things that are of the earth, shall
return to the earth again, and all waters shall return to the sea.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> All bribery, and injustice shall
blotted out, and fidelity shall stand for ever.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> The riches of the unjust shall be dried
up like a river, and shall pass sway a noise like a great thunder in
rain.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> While he openeth his hands he shall
rejoice: but transgressors shall pine away in the end.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> The offspring of the ungodly shall not
bring forth many branches, and make a noise as unclean roots upon the
top of a rock.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> The weed growing over every water, and
at the bank of the river, shall be pulled up before all grass.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> Grace is like a paradise in blessings,
and mercy remaineth for ever.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> The life of a labourer that is content
with what he hath, shall be sweet, and in it thou shalt find a treasure.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> Children, and the building of a city
shall establish a name, but a blameless wife shall be counted above them
both.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> Wine and music rejoice the heart, but
the love of wisdom is above them both.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> The flute and the psaltery make a sweet
melody, but a pleasant tongue is above them both.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> Thy eye desireth favour and beauty, but
more than these green sown fields.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> A friend and companion meeting together
in season, but above them both is a wife with her husband.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> Brethren are a help in the time of
trouble, but mercy shall deliver more than they.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> Gold and silver make the feet stand
sure: but wise counsel is above them both.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> Riches and strength lift up the heart:
but above these is the fear of the Lord.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> There is no want in the fear of the
Lord, and it needeth not to seek for help.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> The fear of the Lord is like a paradise
of blessing, and they have covered it above all glory.

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> My son, in thy lifetime be not
indigent: for it is better to die than to want.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> The life of him that looketh toward
another man's table is not to be counted a life: for he feedeth his soul
with another man's meat.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> But a man, well instructed and taught,
will look to himself.

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> Begging will be sweet in the mouth of
the unwise, but in his belly there shall burn a fire.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> O DEATH, how bitter is the remembrance of
thee to a man that hath peace in his possessions!

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> To a man that is at rest, and whose ways
are prosperous in all things, and that is yet able to take meat!

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> O death, thy sentence is welcome to the
man that is in need, and to him whose strength faileth:

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Who is in a decrepit age, and that is in
care about all things, and to the distrustful that loseth patience!

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Fear not the sentence of death. Remember
what things have been before thee, and what shall come after thee: this
sentence is from the Lord upon all flesh.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And what shall come upon thee by the good
pleasure of the most High? whether ten, or a hundred, or a thousand
years.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> For among the dead there is no accusing
of life.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> The children of sinners become children
of abominations, and they that converse near the houses of the ungodly.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> The inheritance of the children of
sinners shall perish, and with their posterity shall be a perpetual
reproach.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> The children will complain of an
ungodly father, because for his sake they are in reproach.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Woe to you, ungodly men, who have
forsaken the law of the most high Lord.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> And if you be born, you shall be born
in malediction: and if you die, in malediction shall be your portion.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> All things that are of the earth, shall
return into the earth: so the ungodly shall from malediction to
destruction.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> The mourning of men is about their
body, but the name of the ungodly shall be blotted out.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> Take care of a good name: for this
shall continue with thee, more than a thousand treasures precious and
great.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> A good life hath its number of days:
but a good name shall continue for ever.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> My children, keep discipline in peace:
for wisdom that is hid, and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is
there in them both?

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> Better is the man that hideth his
folly, then the man that hideth his wisdom.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> Wherefore have a shame of these things
I am now going to speak of.

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> For it is not good to keep all
shamefacedness: and all things do not please all men in opinion.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> Be ashamed of fornication before father
and mother: and of a lie before a governor and a man in power:

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> Of an offence before a prince, and a
judge: of iniquity before a congregation and a people:

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> Of injustice before a companion and
friend: and in regard to the place where thou dwellest,

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> Of theft, and of the truth of God, and
the covenant: of leaning with thy elbow over meat, and of deceit in
giving and taking:

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> Of silence before them that salute
thee: of looking upon a harlot: and of turning away thy face from thy
kinsman.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> Turn not sway thy face from thy
neighbour, and of taking away a portion and not restoring.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> Gaze not upon another man's wife, and
be not inquisitive after his handmaid, and approach not her bed.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> Be ashamed of upbraiding speeches
before friends: and after thou hast given, upbraid not.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> REPEAT not the word which thou hast
heard, and disclose not the thing that is secret; so shalt thou be truly
without confusion, and shah find favour before all men: be not ashamed
of any of these things, and accept no person to sin thereby:

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> Of the law of the most High, and of his
covenant, and of judgment to justify the ungodly:

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Of the affair of companions and
travellers, and of the gift of the inheritance of friends:

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> Of exactness of balance and weights, of
getting much or little:

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Of the corruption of buying, and of
merchants, and of much correction of children, and to make the side of a
wicked slave to bleed.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Sure keeping is good over a wicked wife.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> Where there are many hands, shut up, and
deliver all things in number, and weight: and put all in writing that
thou givest out or receivest in.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> Be not ashamed to inform the unwise and
foolish, and the aged, that are judged I by young men: and thou shalt be
well instructed in all things, and well approved in the sight of all men
living.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> The father waketh for the daughter when
no man knoweth, and the care for her taketh away his sleep, when she is
young, lest she pass away the flower of her age, and when she is
married, lest she should be hateful:

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> In her virginity, lest she should be
corrupted, and be found with child in her father's house: and having a
husband, lest she should misbehave herself, or at the least become
barren.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Keep a sure watch over a shameless
daughter: lest at any time she make thee become a laughingstock to thy
enemies, and a byword in the city, and a reproach among the people, and
she make thee ashamed before all the multitude.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> Behold not everybody's beauty: and
tarry not among women.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> For from garments cometh a moth, end
from a woman the iniquity of a man.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> For better is the iniquity of a man,
than a woman doing a good turn, and a woman bringing shame and reproach.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> I will now remember the works of the
Lord, and I will declare the things I have seen. By the words of the
Lord are his works.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> The sun giving light hath looked upon
all things, and full of the glory of the Lord is his work.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> Hath not the Lord made the saints to
declare all his wonderful works, which the Lord Almighty hath firmly
settled to be established for his glory?

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> He hath searched out the deep, and the
heart of men: and considered their crafty devices.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> For the Lord knoweth all knowledge, and
hath beheld the signs of the world, he declareth the things that are
past, and the things that are to come, and revealeth the traces of
hidden things.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> No thought escapeth him, and no word
can hide itself from him.

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> He hath beautified the glorious works
of his wisdom: and he Is from eternity to eternity, and to him nothing
may be added,

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> Nor can he be diminished, and he hath
no need of any counsellor.

<span id="an_42:23">42:23</span> O how desirable are all his works, and
what we can know is but as a spark!

<span id="an_42:24">42:24</span> All these things live, and remain for
ever, and for every use all things obey him.

<span id="an_42:25">42:25</span> All things are double, one against
another, and he hath made nothing defective.

<span id="an_42:26">42:26</span> He hath established the good things of
every one. And who shall be filled with beholding his glory?

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> THE firmament on high is his beauty, the
beauty of heaven with its glorious shew.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> The sun when he appeareth shewing forth
at his rising, an admirable instrument, the work of the most High.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> At noon he burneth the earth, and who can
abide his burning heat? As one keeping a furnace in the works of heat:

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> The sun three times as much, burneth the
mountains, breathing out fiery vapours, and shining with his beams, he
blindeth the eyes.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> Great is the Lord that made him, and at
his words he hath hastened his course.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> And the moon in all in her season, is for
a declaration of times and a sign of the world.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> From the moon is the sign of the festival
day, a light that decreaseth in her perfection.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> The month is called after her name,
increasing wonderfully in her perfection

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Being an instrument of the armies on
high, shining gloriously in the Armament of heaven.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> The glory of the stars is the beauty of
heaven; the Lord enlighteneth the world on high.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> By the words of the holy one they shall
stand in judgment, and shall never fail in their watches.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> Look upon the rainbow, and bless him
that made it: it is very beautiful in its brightness.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> It encompasseth the heaven about with
the circle of its glory, the hands of the most High have displayed it.

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> By his commandment he maketh the snow
to fall apace, and sendeth forth swiftly the lightnings of his judgment.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> Through this are the treasures opened,
and the clouds fly out like birds.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> By his greatness he hath fixed the
clouds, and the hailstones are broken.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> At his sight shall the mountains be
shaken, and at his will the south wind shall blow.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> The noise of his thunder shall strike
the earth, so doth the northern storm, and the whirlwind:

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> And as the birds lighting upon the
earth, he scattereth snow, and the falling thereof, is as the coming
down of locusts.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> The eye admireth at the beauty of the
whiteness thereof, and the heart is astonished at the shower thereof.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> He shall pour frost as salt upon the
earth: and when it freezeth, it shall become like the tops of thistles.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> The cold north wind bloweth, and the
water is congealed into crystal; upon every gathering together of waters
it shall rest, and shall clothe the waters as a breastplate.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> And it shall devour the mountains, and
burn the wilderness, and consume all that is green as with fire.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> A present remedy of all is the speedy
coming of a cloud, and a dew that meeteth it, by the heat that cometh,
shall overpower it.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> At his word the wind is still, and with
his thought he appeaseth the deep, and the Lord hath planted islands
therein.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Let them that sail on the sea, tell the
dangers thereof: and when we hear with our ears, we shall admire.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> There are great and wonderful works: a
variety of beasts, and of all living things, and the monstrous creatures
of whales.

<span id="an_43:28">43:28</span> Through him is established the end of
their journey, and by his word all things are regulated.

<span id="an_43:29">43:29</span> We shall say much, and yet shall want
words: but the sum of our words is, He is all.

<span id="an_43:30">43:30</span> What shall we be able to do to glorify
him? for the Almighty himself is above all his works.

<span id="an_43:31">43:31</span> The Lord is terrible, and exceeding
great, and his power is admirable.

<span id="an_43:32">43:32</span> Glorify the Lord as much as ever you
can, for he will yet far exceed, and his magnificence is wonderful.

<span id="an_43:33">43:33</span> Blessing the Lord, exalt him as much as
you can: for he is above all praise.

<span id="an_43:34">43:34</span> When you exalt him put forth all your
strength, and be not weary: for you can never go far enough.

<span id="an_43:35">43:35</span> Who shall see him, and declare him? and
who shall magnify him as he is from the beginning?

<span id="an_43:36">43:36</span> There are many things hidden from us
that are greater than these: for we have seen but a few of his works.

<span id="an_43:37">43:37</span> But the Lord hath made all things, and
to the godly he hath given wisdom.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> LET us now praise men of renown, and our
fathers in their generation.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> The Lord hath wrought great glory through
his magnificence from the beginning.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> Such as have borne rule in their
dominions, men of great power, and endued with their wisdom, shewing
forth in the prophets the dignity of prophets,

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And ruling over the present people, and
by the strength of wisdom instructing the people in most holy words.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> Such as by their skill sought out musical
tunes, and published canticles of the scriptures.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> Rich men in virtue, studying
beautifulness: living at peace in their houses.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> All these have gained glory in their
generations, and were praised in their days.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> They that were born of them have left a
name behind them, that their praises might be related:

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> And there are some, of whom there is no
memorial: who are perished, as if they had never been: and are become as
if they had never been born, and their children with them.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> But these were men of mercy, whose
godly deeds have not failed:

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Good things continue with their seed,

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> Their posterity are a holy inheritance,
and their seed hath stood in the covenants.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> And their children for their sakes
remain for ever: their seed and their glory shall not be forsaken.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> Their bodies are buried in peace, and
their name liveth unto generation and generation.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> Let the people shew forth their wisdom,
and the church declare their praise.

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> Henoch pleased God, and was translated
into paradise, that he may give repentance to the nations.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> Noe was found perfect, just, and in the
time of wrath he was made a reconciliation.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> Therefore was there a remnant left to
the earth, when the flood came.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> The covenants of the world were made
with him, that all flesh should no more be destroyed with the hood.

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> Abraham was the great father of a
multitude of nations, and there was not found the like to him in glory,
who kept the law of the most High, and was in covenant with him.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> In his flesh he established the
covenant, and in temptation he was found faithful.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> Therefore by an oath he gave him glory
in his posterity, that he should increase as the dust of the earth,

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> And that he would exalt his seed as the
stars, and they should inherit from sea to sea, and from the river to
the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> And he did in like manner with Isaac
for the sake of Abraham his father.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> The Lord gave him the blessing of all
nations, and confirmed his covenant upon the head of Jacob.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> He acknowledged him in his blessings,
and gave him an inheritance, and divided him his portion in twelve
tribes.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> And he preserved for him men of mercy,
that found grace in the eyes of all flesh.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> MOSES was beloved of God, and men: whose
memory is in benediction.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> He made him like the saints in glory, and
magnified him in the fear of his enemies, and with his words he made
prodigies to cease.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> He glorified him in the sight of kings,
and gave him commandments in the sight of his people, and shewed him his
glory.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> He sanctified him in his faith, and
meekness, and chose him out of all flesh.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> For he heard him, and his voice, and
brought him into a cloud.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> And he gave him commandments before his
face, and a law of life and instruction, that he might teach Jacob his
covenant, and Israel his judgments.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> He exalted Aaron his brother, and like to
himself of the tribe of Levi:

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> He made an everlasting covenant with him,
and gave him the priesthood of the nation, and made him blessed in
glory,

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> And he girded him about with a glorious
girdle, and clothed him with a robe of glory, and crowned him with
majestic attire.

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> He put upon him a garment to the feet,
and breeches, and as ephod, and he compassed him with many little bells
of gold all round about,

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> That as he went there might be a sound,
and a noise made that might be heard in the temple, for a memorial to
the children of his people.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> He gave him a holy robe of gold, and
blue, and purple, a woven work of a wise man, endued with judgment and
truth:

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> Of twisted scarlet the work of an
artist, with precious stones cut and set in gold, and graven by the work
of a lapidary for a memorial, according to the number of the tribes of
Israel.

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> And a crown of gold upon his mitre
wherein was engraved Holiness, an ornament of honour: a work of power,
and delightful to the eyes for its beauty.

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> Before him there were none so
beautiful, even from the beginning.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> No stranger was ever clothed with them,
but only his children alone, and his grandchildren for ever.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> His sacrifices were consumed with fire
every day.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> Moses filled his hands and anointed him
with holy oil.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> This was made to him for an everlasting
testament, and to his seed as the days of heaven, to execute the office
of the priesthood, and to have praise, and to glorify his people in his
name.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> He chose him out of all men living, to
offer sacrifice to God, incense, and a good savour, for a memorial to
make reconciliation for his people:

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> And he gave him power in his
commandments, in the covenants of his judgments, that he should teach
Jacob his testimonies, and give light to Israel in his law.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> And strangers stood up against him, and
through envy the men that were with Dathan and Abiron, compassed him
about in the wilderness, and the congregation of Core in their wrath.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> The Lord God saw and it pleased him
not, and they were consumed in his wrathful indignation.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> He wrought wonders upon them, and
consumed them with a flame of fire.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> And he added glory to Aaron, and gave
him an inheritance, and divided unto him the firstfruits of the increase
of the earth.

<span id="an_45:26">45:26</span> He prepared them bread in the first
place unto fulness: for the sacrifices also of the Lord they shall eat,
which he gave to him, and to his seed.

<span id="an_45:27">45:27</span> But he shall not inherit among the
people in the land, and he hath no portion among the people: for he
himself is his portion and inheritance.

<span id="an_45:28">45:28</span> Phinees the son of Eleazar is the third
in glory, by imitating him in the fear of the Lord:

<span id="an_45:29">45:29</span> And he stood up in the shameful fall of
the people: in the goodness and readiness of his soul he appeased God
for Israel.

<span id="an_45:30">45:30</span> Therefore he made to him a covenant of
peace, to be the prince of the sanctuary, and of his people, that the
dignity of priesthood should be to him and to his seed for ever.

<span id="an_45:31">45:31</span> And a covenant to David the king, the
son of Jesse of the tribe of Juda, an inheritance to him and to his
seed, that he might give wisdom into our heart to judge his people in
justice, that their good things might not be abolished, and he made
their glory in their nation everlasting.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> VALIANT in war was Jesus the son of Nave,
who was successor of Moses among the prophets, who was great according
to his name,

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> Very great for the saving the elect of
God, to overthrow the enemies that rose up against them, that he might
get the inheritance for Israel.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> How great glory did he gain when he
lifted up his hands, and stretched out swords against the cities?

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> Who before him hath so resisted? for the
Lord himself brought the enemies.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> Was not the sun stopped in his anger, and
one day made as two?

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> He called upon the most high Sovereign
when the enemies assaulted him on every side, and the great and holy God
heard him by hailstones of exceeding great force.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> He made a violent assault against the
nation of his enemies, and in the descent he destroyed the adversaries.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> That the nations might know his power,
that it is not easy to fight against God. And he followed the mighty
one:

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> And in the days of Moses he did a work of
mercy, he and Caleb the son of Jephone, in standing against the enemy,
and withholding the people from sins, and appeasing the wicked
murmuring.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> And they two being appointed, were
delivered out of the danger from among the number of six hundred
thousand men on foot, to bring them into their inheritance, into the
land that floweth with milk and honey.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> And the Lord gave strength also to
Caleb, and his strength continued even to his old age, so that he went
up to the high places of the land, and his seed obtained it for an
inheritance:

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> That all the children of Israel might
see, that it is good to obey the holy God.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> Then all the judges, every one by name,
whose heart was not corrupted: who turned not away from the Lord,

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> That their memory might be blessed, and
their bones spring up out of their place,

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> And their name continue for ever, the
glory of the holy men remaining unto their children.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> Samuel the prophet of the Lord, the
beloved of the Lord his God, established a new government, and anointed
princes over his people.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> By the law of the Lord he judged the
congregation, and the God of Jacob beheld, and by his fidelity he was
proved a prophet.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> And he was known to be faithful in his
words, because he saw the God of light:

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> And called upon the name of the Lord
Almighty, in fighting against the enemies who beset him on every side,
when he offered a lamb without blemish.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> And the Lord thundered from heaven, and
with a great noise made his voice to be heard.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> And he crushed the princes of the
Tyrians, and all the lords of the Philistines:

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> And before the time of the end of his
life in the world, he protested before the Lord, and his anointed:
money, or any thing else, even to a shoe, he had not taken of any man,
and no mall did accuse him.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> And after this he slept, and he made
known to the king, and shewed him the end of his life, and he lifted up
his voice from the earth in prophecy to blot out the wickedness of the
nation.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> THEN Nathan the prophet arose in the days
of David.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> And as the fat taken away from the flesh,
so was David chosen from among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> He played with lions as with lambs: and
with bears he did in like manner as with the lambs of the flock, in his
youth.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> Did not he kill the giant, and take away
reproach from his people?

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> In lifting up his hand, with the stone in
the sling he beat down the boasting of Goliath:

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> For he called upoI

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> the Lord the Almighty, and he gave
strength in his right hand, to take away the mighty warrior, and to set
up the horn of his nation.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> So in ten thousand did he glorify him,
and praised him in the blessings of the Lord, in offering to him a crown
of glory:

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> For he destroyed the enemies on every
side, and extirpated the Philistines the adversaries unto this day: he
broke their horn for ever.

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> In all his works he gave thanks to the
holy one, and to the most High, with words of glory.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> With his whole heart he praised the
Lord, and loved God that made him: and he gave him power against his
enemies:

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> And he set singers before the altar,
and by their voices he made sweet melody.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> And to the festivals he added beauty,
and set in order the solemn times even to the end of his life, that they
should praise the holy name of the Lord, and magnify the holiness of God
in the morning.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> The Lord took away his sine, and
exalted his horn for ever: and he gave him a covenant of the kingdom,
and a throne of glory in Israel.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> After him arose up a wise son, and for
his sake he cast down all the power of the enemies.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> Solomon reigned in days of peace, and
God brought all his enemies under him, that he might build a house in
his name, and prepare a sanctuary for ever: O how wise wast thou in thy
youth!

<span id="an_47:16">47:16</span> And thou wast filled as a river with
wisdom, and thy soul covered the earth.

<span id="an_47:17">47:17</span> And thou didst multiply riddles in
parables: thy name went abroad to the islands far off, and thou wast
beloved in thy peace.

<span id="an_47:18">47:18</span> The countries wondered at thee for thy
canticles, and proverbs, and parables, and interpretations,

<span id="an_47:19">47:19</span> And at the name of the Lord God, whose
surname is, God of Israel.

<span id="an_47:20">47:20</span> Thou didst gather gold as copper, and
didst multiply silver as lead,

<span id="an_47:21">47:21</span> And thou didst bow thyself to women:
and by thy body thou wast brought under subjection.

<span id="an_47:22">47:22</span> Thou hast stained thy glory, and
defiled thy seed so as to bring wrath upon thy children, and to have thy
folly kindled,

<span id="an_47:23">47:23</span> That thou shouldst make the kingdom to
be divided, and out of Ephraim a rebellious kingdom to rule.

<span id="an_47:24">47:24</span> But God will not leave off his mercy,
and he will not destroy, nor abolish his own works, neither will he out
up by the roots the offspring of his elect: and he will not utterly take
away the seed of him that loveth the Lord.

<span id="an_47:25">47:25</span> Wherefore he gave a remnant to Jacob,
and to David of the same stock.

<span id="an_47:26">47:26</span> And Solomon had an end with his
fathers.

<span id="an_47:27">47:27</span> And he left behind him of his seed, the
folly of the nation,

<span id="an_47:28">47:28</span> Even Roboam that had little wisdom, who
turned away the people through his counsel:

<span id="an_47:29">47:29</span> And Jeroboam the son of Nabat, who
caused Israel to sin, and shewed Ephraim the way of sin, and their sins
were multiplied exceedingly.

<span id="an_47:30">47:30</span> They removed them far away from their
land.

<span id="an_47:31">47:31</span> And they sought out all iniquities,
till vengeance came upon them, and put an end to all their sine.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> AND Elias the prophet stood up, as a
fire, and his word burnt like a torch.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> He brought a famine upon them, and they
that provoked him in their envy, were reduced to a small number, for
they could not endure the commandments of the Lord.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> By the word of the Lord he shut up the
heaven, and he brought down fire from heaven thrice.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> Thus was Elias magnified in his wondrous
works. And who can glory like to thee?

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> Who raisedst up a dead man from below,
from the lot of death, by the word of the Lord God.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> Who broughtest down kings to destruction,
and brokest easily their power in pieces, and the glorious from their
bed.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> Who heardest judgment in Sina, and in
Horeb the judgments of vengeance.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> Who anointedst kings to penance, and
madest prophets successors after thee.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> Who wast taken up in a whirlwind of fire,
in a chariot of fiery horses.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Who art registered in the judgments of
times to appease the wrath of the Lord, to reconcile the heart of the
father to the son, and to restore the tribes of Jacob.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> Blessed are they that saw thee, and
were honoured with thy friendship.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> For we live only in our life, but after
death our name shall not be such.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> Elias was indeed covered with the
whirlwind, and his spirit was filled up in Eliseus: in his days he
feared not the prince, and no man was more powerful than he.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> No word could overcome him, and after
death his body prophesied.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> In his life he did great wonders, and
is death he wrought miracles.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> For all this the people repented not,
neither did they depart from their sins till they were cast out of their
land, and were scattered through all the earth.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> And there was left but a small people,
and a prince in the house of David.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> Some of these did that which pleased
God: but others committed many sine.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> Ezechias fortified his city, and
brought in water into the midst thereof, and he digged a rock with iron,
and made a well for water.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> In his days Sennacherib came up, and
sent Rabsaces, and lifted up his hand against them, and he stretched out
his hand against Sion, and became proud through his power.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> Then their hearts and hands trembled,
and they were in pain as women in travail.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> And they called upon the Lord who is
merciful, and spreading their hands, they lifted them up to heaven: and
the holy Lord God quickly heard their voice.

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> He was not mindful of their sins,
neither did he deliver them up to their enemies, but he purified them by
the hand of Isaias, the holy prophet.

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> He overthrew the army of the Assyrians,
and the angel of the Lord destroyed them.

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> For Ezechias did that which pleased
God, and walked valiantly in the way of David his father, which Isaias,
the great prophet, and faithful in the sight of God, had commanded him.

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> In his days the sun went backward, and
he lengthened the king's life.

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> With a great spirit he saw the things
that are to come to pass at last, and comforted the mourners in Sion.

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> He shewed what should come to pass for
ever, and secret things before they came.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> THE memory of Josias is like the
composition of a sweet smell made by the art of a perfumer:

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> His remembrance shall be sweet as honey
in every mouth, and as music at a banquet of wine.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> He was directed by God unto the
repentance of the nation, and he took away the abominations of
wickedness.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> And he directed his heart towards the
Lord, and in the days of sinners he strengthened godliness.

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> Except David, and Ezechias, and Josias,
all committed sin.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> For the kings of Juda forsook the law of
the most High, and despised the fear of God.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> So they gave their kingdom to others, and
their glory to a strange nation.

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> They burnt the chosen city of holiness,
and made the streets thereof desolate according to the prediction of
Jeremias.

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> For they treated him evil, who was
consecrated a prophet from his mother's womb, to overthrow, and pluck
up, and destroy, and to build again, and renew.

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> It was Ezechiel that saw the glorious
vision, which was shewn him upon the chariot of cherubims.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> For he made mention of the enemies
under the figure of rain, and of doing good to them that shewed right
ways.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> And may the bones of the twelve
prophets spring up out of their place: for they strengthened Jacob, and
re- deemed themselves by strong faith.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> How shall we magnify Zorobabel? for he
was as a signet on the right hand;

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> In like manner Jesus the son of
Josedec? who in their days built the house, and set up a holy temple to
the Lord, prepared for everlasting glory.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> And let Nehemias be a long time
remembered, who raised up for us our walls that were cast down, and set
up the gates and the bars, who rebuilt our houses.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> No man was born upon earth like Henoch:
for he also was taken up from the earth.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Nor as Joseph, who was a man born
prince of his brethren, the support of his family, the ruler of his
brethren, the stay of the people:

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> And his bones were visited, and after
death they prophesied.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> Seth and Sem obtained glory among men:
and above every soul Adam in the beginning.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> SIMON the high priest, the son of Onias,
who in his life propped up the house, and in his days fortified the
temple.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> By him also the height of the temple was
founded, the double building and the high walls of the temple.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> In his days the wells of water flowed
out, and they were filled as the sea above measure.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> He took care of his nation, and delivered
it from destruction.

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> He prevailed to enlarge the city, and
obtained glory in his conversation with the people: and enlarged the
entrance of the house and the court.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> He shone in his days as the morning star
in the midst of a cloud, and as the moon at the full.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> And as the sun when it shineth, so did he
shine in the temple of God.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> And as the rainbow giving light in the
bright clouds, and as the flower of roses in the days of the spring, and
as the lilies that are on the brink of the water, and as the sweet
smelling frankincense in the time of summer.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> As a bright Are, and frankincense burning
in the fire.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> As a massy vessel of gold, adorned with
every precious stone.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> As an olive tree budding forth, and a
cypress tree rearing itself on high, when he put on the robe of glory,
and was clothed with the perfection of power.

<span id="an_50:12">50:12</span> When he went up to the holy altar, he
honoured the vesture of holiness.

<span id="an_50:13">50:13</span> And when he took the portions out of
the hands of the priests, he himself stood by the altar. And about him
was the ring of his brethren: and as the cedar planted in mount Libanus,

<span id="an_50:14">50:14</span> And as branches of palm trees, they
stood round about him, and all the sons of Aaron in their glory.

<span id="an_50:15">50:15</span> And the oblation of the Lord was in
their hands, before all the congregation of Israel: and finishing his
service, on the altar, to honour the offering of the most high Ring,

<span id="an_50:16">50:16</span> He stretched forth his hand to make a
libation, and offered of the blood of the grape.

<span id="an_50:17">50:17</span> He poured out at the foot of the altar
a divine odour to the most high Prince.

<span id="an_50:18">50:18</span> Then the sons of Aaron shouted, they
sounded with beaten trumpets, and made a great noise to be heard for a
remembrance before God.

<span id="an_50:19">50:19</span> Then all the people together made
haste, and fell down to the earth upon their faces, to adore the Lord
their God, and to pray to the Almighty God the most High.

<span id="an_50:20">50:20</span> And the singers lifted up their voices.
and in the great house the sound of sweet melody was increased.

<span id="an_50:21">50:21</span> And the people in prayer besought the
Lord the most High, until the worship of the Lord was perfected, and
they had finished their office.

<span id="an_50:22">50:22</span> Then coming down, he lifted up his
hands over all the congregation of the children of Israel, to give glory
to God with his lips, and to glory in his name:

<span id="an_50:23">50:23</span> And he repeated his prayer, willing to
shew the power of God.

<span id="an_50:24">50:24</span> And now pray ye to the God of all, who
hath done great things in all the earth, who hath increased our days
from our mother's womb, and hath done with us according to his mercy.

<span id="an_50:25">50:25</span> May he grant us joyfulness of heart,
and that there be peace in our days in Israel for ever:

<span id="an_50:26">50:26</span> That Israel may believe that the mercy
of God is with us, to deliver us in his days.

<span id="an_50:27">50:27</span> There are two nations which my soul
abhorreth: and the third is no nation, which I hate:

<span id="an_50:28">50:28</span> They that sit on mount Seir, and the
Philistines, and the foolish people that dwell in Sichem.

<span id="an_50:29">50:29</span> Jesus the son of Sirach, of Jerusalem,
hath written in this book the doctrine of wisdom and instruction, who
renewed wisdom from his heart.

<span id="an_50:30">50:30</span> Blessed is he that is conversant in
these good things: and he that layeth them up in his heart, shall be
wise always.

<span id="an_50:31">50:31</span> For if he do them, he shall be strong
to do all things: because the light of God guideth his steps.

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> A PRAYER of Jesus the son of Sirach. I
will give glory to thee, O Lord, O King, and I will praise thee, O God
my Saviour.

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> I will give glory to thy name: for thou
best been a helper and protector to me.

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> And hast preserved my body from
destruction, from the snare of an unjust tongue, and from the lips of
them that forge lies, and in the sight of them that stood by, thou hast
been my helper.

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> And thou hast delivered me, according to
the multitude of the mercy of thy name, from them that did roar,
prepared to devour.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> Out of the hands of them that sought my
life, and from the gates of afflictions, which compassed me about:

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> From the oppression of the flame which
surrounded me, and in the midst of the fire I was not burnt.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> From the depth of the belly of hell, and
from an unclean tongue, and from lying words, from an unjust king, and
from a slanderous tongue:

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> My soul shall praise the Lord even to
death.

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> And my life was drawing near to hell
beneath.

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> They compassed me on every side, and
there was no one that would help me. I looked for the succour of men,
and there was none.

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> I remembered thy mercy, O Lord, and thy
works, which are from the beginning of the world.

<span id="an_51:12">51:12</span> How thou deliverest them that wait for
thee, O Lord, and savest them out of the hands of the nations.

<span id="an_51:13">51:13</span> Thou hast exalted my dwelling place
upon the earth and I have prayed for death to pass away.

<span id="an_51:14">51:14</span> I called upon the Lord, the father of
my Lord, that he would not leave me in the day of my trouble, and in the
time of the proud without help.

<span id="an_51:15">51:15</span> I will praise thy name continually, and
will praise it with thanksgiving, and my prayer was heard.

<span id="an_51:16">51:16</span> And thou hast saved me from
destruction, and hast delivered me from the evil time.

<span id="an_51:17">51:17</span> Therefore I will give thanks, and
praise thee, and bless the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_51:18">51:18</span> When I was yet young, before I wandered
about, I sought for wisdom openly in my prayer.

<span id="an_51:19">51:19</span> I prayed for her before the temple, and
unto the very end I will seek after her, and she flourished as a grape
soon ripe.

<span id="an_51:20">51:20</span> My heart delighted in her, my foot
walked in the right way, from my youth up I sought after her.

<span id="an_51:21">51:21</span> I bowed down my ear a little, and
received her.

<span id="an_51:22">51:22</span> I found much wisdom in myself, and I
profited much therein.

<span id="an_51:23">51:23</span> To him that giveth me wisdom, will I
give glory.

<span id="an_51:24">51:24</span> For I have determined to follow her: I
have had a zeal for good, and shall not be confounded.

<span id="an_51:25">51:25</span> My soul hath wrestled for her, and in
doing it I have been confirmed.

<span id="an_51:26">51:26</span> I stretched forth my hands on high, and
I bewailed my ignorance of her.

<span id="an_51:27">51:27</span> I directed my soul to her, and in
knowledge I found her.

<span id="an_51:28">51:28</span> I possessed my heart with her from the
beginning: therefore I shall not be forsaken.

<span id="an_51:29">51:29</span> My entrails were troubled in seeking
her: therefore shall I possess a good possession.

<span id="an_51:30">51:30</span> The Lord hath given me a tongue for my
reward: and with it I will praise him.

<span id="an_51:31">51:31</span> Draw near to me, ye unlearned, and
gather yourselves together into the house of discipline.

<span id="an_51:32">51:32</span> Why are ye slow? and what do you say of
these things? your souls are exceeding thirsty.

<span id="an_51:33">51:33</span> I have opened my mouth, and have
spoken: buy her for yourselves without silver,

<span id="an_51:34">51:34</span> And submit your neck to the yoke, and
let your soul receive discipline: for she is near at hand to be found.

<span id="an_51:35">51:35</span> Behold with your eyes how I have
laboured a little, and have found much rest to myself.

<span id="an_51:36">51:36</span> Receive ye discipline as a great sum of
money, and possess abundance of gold by her.

<span id="an_51:37">51:37</span> Let your soul rejoice in his mercy, and
you shall not be confounded in his praise.

<span id="an_51:38">51:38</span> Work your work before the time, and he
will give you your reward in his time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Baruch](bar)
