[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hab)  [Next](hag) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Zephaniah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of the Lord that came to Sophonias
the son of Chusi, the son of Godolias, the son of Amarias, the son of
Ezechias, in the days of Josias the son of Amon king of Juda.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Gathering, I will gather together all
things from off the face of the land, saith the Lord:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I will gather man, and beast, I will gather
the birds of the air, and the fishes of the sea: and the ungodly shall
meet with ruin: and I will destroy men from off the face of the land,
saith the Lord.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And I will stretch out my hand upon Juda,
and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and I will destroy out of
this place the remnant of Baal, and the names of the wardens of the
temples with the priests:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And them that worship the host of heaven
upon the tops of houses, and them that adore, and swear by the Lord, and
swear by Melchom.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And them that turn away from following
after the Lord, and that have not sought the Lord, nor searched after
him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Be silent before the face of the Lord God:
for the day of the Lord is near, for the Lord hath prepared a victim, he
hath sanctified his guests.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And it shall come to pass in the day of the
victim of the Lord, that I will visit upon the princes, and upon the
king's sons, and upon all such as are clothed with strange apparel.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And I will visit in that day upon every one
that entereth arrogantly over the threshold: them that fill the house of
the Lord their God with iniquity and deceit.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And there shall be in that day, saith the
Lord, the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and a howling from the
Second, and a great destruction from the hills.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Howl, ye inhabitants of the Morter. All
the people of Chanaan is hush, all are cut off that were wrapped up in
silver.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And it shall come to pass at that time,
that I will search Jerusalem with lamps, and will visit upon the men
that are settled on their lees: that say in their hearts: The Lord will
not do good, nor will he do evil.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And their strength shall become a booty,
and their houses as a desert: and they shall build houses, and shall not
dwell in them: and they shall plant vineyards, and shall not drink the
wine of them.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The great day of the Lord is near, it is
near and exceeding swift: the voice of the day of the Lord is bitter,
the mighty man shall there meet with tribulation.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> That day is a day of wrath, a day of
tribulation and distress, a day of calamity and misery, a day of
darkness and obscurity, a day of clouds and whirlwinds,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> A day of the trumpet and alarm against
the fenced cities, and against the high bulwarks.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And I will distress men, and they shall
walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord: and
their blood shall be poured out as earth, and their bodies as dung.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Neither shall their silver and their gold
be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord: all the
land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy, for he shall make
even a speedy destruction of all them that dwell in the land.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Assemble yourselves together, be gathered
together, O nation not worthy to be loved:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Before the decree bring forth the day as
dust passing away, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you,
before the day of the Lord's indignation come upon you.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Seek the Lord, all ye meek of the earth,
you that have wrought his judgment: seek the just, seek the meek: if by
any means you may be hid in the day of the Lord's indignation.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For Gaza shall be destroyed, and Ascalon
shall be a desert, they shall cast out Azotus at noonday, and Accaron
shall be rooted up.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Woe to you that inhabit the sea coast, O
nation of reprobates: the word of the Lord upon you, O Chanaan, the land
of the Philistines, and I will destroy thee, so that there shall not be
an inhabitant.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And the sea coast shall be the resting
place of shepherds, and folds for cattle:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And it shall be the portion of him that
shall remain of the house of Juda, there they shall feed: in the houses
of Ascalon they shall rest in the evening: because the Lord their God
will visit them, and bring back their captivity.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the
blasphemies of the children of Ammon, with which they reproached my
people, and have magnified themselves upon their borders.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore as I live, saith the Lord of
hosts the God of Israel, Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of
Ammon as Gomorrha, the dryness of thorns, and heaps of salt, and a
desert even for ever: the remnant of my people shall make a spoil of
them, and the residue of my nation shall possess them.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> This shall befall them for their pride:
because they have blasphemed, and have been magnified against the people
of the Lord of hosts.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The Lord shall be terrible upon them, and
shall consume all the gods of the earth: and they shall adore him every
man from his own place, all the islands of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> You Ethiopians, also shall be slain with
my sword.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he will stretch out his hand upon the
north, and will destroy Assyria: and he will make the beautiful city a
wilderness, and as a place not passable, and as a desert.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And flocks shall lie down in the midst
thereof, all the beasts of the nations: and the bittern and the urchin
shall lodge in the threshold thereof: the voice of the singing bird in
the window, the raven on the upper post, for I will consume her
strength.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> This is the glorious city that dwelt in
security: that said in her heart: I am, and there is none beside me: how
is she become a desert, a place for beasts to lie down in? every one
that passeth by her, shall hiss, and wag his hand.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Woe to the provoking, and redeemed city,
the dove.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> She hath not hearkened to the voice,
neither hath she received discipline: she hath not trusted in the Lord,
she drew not near to her God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Her princes are in the midst of her as
roaring lions: her judges are evening wolves, they left nothing for the
morning.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Her prophets are senseless men without
faith: her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have acted unjustly
against the law.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he
will not do iniquity: in the morning, in the morning he will bring his
judgment to light, and it shall not be hid: but the wicked man hath not
known shame.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I have destroyed the nations, and their
towers are beaten down: I have made their ways desert, so that there is
none that passeth by: their cities are desolate, there is not a man
remaining, nor any inhabitant.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> I said: Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt
receive correction: and her dwelling shall not perish, for all things
wherein I have visited her: but they rose early and corrupted all their
thoughts.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Wherefore expect me, saith the Lord, in the
day of my resurrection that is to come, for my judgment is to assemble
the Gentiles, and to gather the kingdoms: and to pour upon them my
indignation, all my fierce anger: for with the fire of my jealousy shall
all the earth be devoured.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Because then I will restore to the people a
chosen lip, that all may call upon the name of the Lord, and may serve
him with one shoulder.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, shall
my suppliants the children of my dispersed people bring me an offering.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> In that day thou shalt not be ashamed for
all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed against me: for then I
will take away out of the midst of thee thy proud boasters, and thou
shalt no more be lifted up because of my holy mountain.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And I will leave in the midst of thee a
poor and needy people: and they shall hope in the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The remnant of Israel shall not do
iniquity, nor speak lies, nor shall a deceitful tongue be found in their
mouth: for they shall feed, and shall lie down, and there shall be none
to make them afraid.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Give praise, O daughter of Sion: shout, O
Israel: be glad, and rejoice with all thy heart, O daughter of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> The Lord hath taken away thy judgment, he
hath turned away thy enemies: the king of Israel the Lord is in the
midst of thee, thou shalt fear evil no more.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> In that day it shall be said to
Jerusalem: Fear not: to Sion: Let not thy hands be weakened.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is
mighty, he will save: he will rejoice over thee with gladness, he will
be silent in his love, he will be joyful over thee in praise.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> The triflers that were departed from the
law, I will gather together, because they were of thee: that thou mayest
no more suffer reproach for them.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Behold I will cut off all that have
afflicted thee at that time: and I will save her that halteth, and will
gather her that was cast out: and I will get them praise, and a name, in
all the land where they had been put to confusion.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> At that time, when I will bring you: and
at the time that I will gather you: for I will give you a name, and
praise among all the people of the earth, when I shall have brought back
your captivity before your eyes, saith the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai](hag)
