[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14050) 
[Next](m14052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LI

"Brahmana said, 'Since the mind is the ruler of these five elements, in
the matter of controlling and bringing them forth, the mind, therefore,
is the soul of the elements. The mind always presides over the great
elements. The understanding proclaims power, and is called the
Kshetrajna. <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155) The mind yokes the
senses as a charioteer yokes good steeds. The senses, the mind, and the
understanding are always joined to the Kshetrajna. The individual soul,
mounting the chariot to which big steeds are yoked and which has the
understanding for the reins, drives about on all sides. With all the
senses attached to it (for steeds), with the mind for the charioteer,
and the understanding for the eternal reins, exists the great
Brahman-car. Verily, that man endued with learning and wisdom who always
understands the Brahman-car in this way, is never overwhelmed by
delusion in the midst of all entities. This forest of Brahman begins
with the Unmanifest and ends with gross objects. It includes mobile and
immobile entities, and receives light from the radiance of the sun and
the moon, and is adorned with planets and constellations. It is decked,
again, on all sides with nets of rivers and mountains. It is always
embellished likewise by diverse kinds of waters. It is the means of
subsistence for all creatures. It is, again, the goal of all living
creatures. In that forest the Kshetrajna always moves about. Whatever
entities exist in this world, mobile and immobile, are the very first to
be dissolved away. After this (are dissolved) those qualities which
compose all entities. After the qualities (are dissolved) the five
elements. Such is the gradation of entities. Gods, men, Gandharvas,
Pisachas, Asuras, and Rakshasas, have all sprung from Nature, and not
from actions, not from a cause. The Brahmanas, who are creators of the
universe, are born here again and again. All that springs from them
dissolves, when the time comes, in those very five great elements like
billows in the ocean. All the great elements are beyond those elements
that compose the universe. He that is released from those five elements
goes to the highest goal. The puissant Prajapati created all this by the
mind only. After the same manner Rishis attained to the status of
deities by the aid of penance. After the same manner, those who have
achieved perfection, who were capable of the concentration of Yoga, and
who subsist on fruits and roots, likewise perceive the triple world by
penance. Medicines and herbs and all the diverse sciences are acquired

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

by means of penance alone, for all acquisition has penance for its root.
Whatever is difficult of acquisition, difficult to learn, difficult to
vanquish, difficult to pass through, are all achievable by penance, for
penance is irresistible. One that drinks alcoholic liquors, one that
slays a Brahmana, one that steals, one that destroys a foetus, one that
violates one's preceptor's bed, becomes cleansed of such sin by penance
well performed. Human beings, Pitris, deities, (sacrificial) animals,
beasts and birds, and all other creatures mobile and immobile, by always
devoting themselves to penances, become crowned with success by penance
alone. In like manner, the deities, endued with great powers of
illusion, have attained to Heaven. Those who without idleness perform
acts with expectations, being full of egoism, approach the presence of
Prajapati. Those high-souled ones, however, who are devoid of mineness
and freed from egoism through the pure contemplation of Yoga, attain to
the great and highest regions. Those who best understand the self,
having attained to Yoga contemplation and having their minds always
cheerful, enter into the unmanifest accumulation of happiness. Those
persons who are freed from the idea of mineness as also from egoism and
who are reborn after having attained to the fullness of Yoga
contemplation, enter (when they depart from such life) into the highest
region reserved for the great, *viz.*, the Unmanifest. Born from that
same unmanifest (principle) and attaining to the same once more, freed
from the qualities of Darkness and Passion, and adhering to only the
quality of Goodness, one becomes released from every sin and creates all
things. <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156) Such a one should be known
to be Kshetrajna in perfection. He that knows him, knows the Veda. <span
id="fr_157"></span>[2](#fn_157) Attaining to pure knowledge from
(restraining) the mind, the ascetic should sit self-restrained. One
necessarily becomes that on which one's mind is set. This is an eternal
mystery. That which has the unmanifest for its beginning and gross
qualities for its end, has been said to have Ne-science for its
indication. But do you understand that whose nature is destitute of
qualities? Of two syllables is Mrityu (death); of three syllable is the
eternal Brahman. Mineness is death, and the reverse of mineness is the
eternal. <span id="fr_158"></span>[3](#fn_158) Some men who are led by
bad understanding applaud action. Those, however, that are numbered
among the high-souled ancients never applaud action. By action is a
creature born with body which is made up of the sixteen. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[4](#fn_159) (True) Knowledge swallows up Purusha
(Self with consciousness of

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

body). Even this is what is highly acceptable to eaters of Amrita. <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160) Therefore, those whose vision extends to
the other end (of the ocean of life) have no attachment for actions.
This Purusha, however, is full of knowledge and not full of
action. <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_161) He dies not who
understands Him that is immortal, immutable, incomprehensible, eternal
and indestructible--Him that is the restrained Soul and that transcends
all attachments. He who thus understands the Soul to which there is
nothing prior which is uncreated, immutable, unconquered, and
incomprehensible even to those that are eaters of nectar, certainly
becomes himself incomprehensible and immortal through these means.
Expelling all impressions and restraining the Soul in the Soul, he
understands that auspicious Brahman than which nothing greater exists.
Upon the understanding becoming clear, he succeeds in attaining to
tranquillity. The indication of tranquillity is like what takes place in
a dream. <span id="fr_162"></span>[3](#fn_162) This is the goal of these
emancipated ones who are intent on knowledge. They behold all those
movements which are born of successive developments. <span
id="fr_163"></span>[4](#fn_163) This is the goal of those who are
unattached to the world, This is the eternal usage. This is the
acquisition of men of knowledge. This is the uncensured mode of conduct.
This goal is capable of being attained by one that is alike to all
creatures, that is without attachment, that is without expectations, and
that looks equally on all things. I have now declared everything to you,
ye foremost of regenerate Rishis. Do you act in this way forthwith; you
will then acquire success.'

"The preceptor continued, 'Thus addressed by the preceptor Brahma, those
high-souled sages acted accordingly and then attained to many regions
(of great felicity). Do thou also, O blessed one, duly act according to
the words of Brahma as declared by me, O thou of pure soul. Thou wilt
then attain to success.'

"Vasudeva said,--'Thus instructed in the principles of high religion by
the preceptor, the pupil, O son of Kunti, did everything accordingly,
and then attained to Emancipation. Having done all that he should have
done, the pupil, O perpetuator of Kuru's race, attained to that seat
repairing whither one has not to grieve.'

"Arjuna said, 'Who, indeed, was that Brahmana, O Krishna, and who the
pupil, O Janarddana. Truly, if it is fit to be heard by me, do thou then
tell me, O lord!'

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

"Vasudeva said, 'I am the preceptor, O mighty-armed one, and know that
the mind is my pupil. Through my affection for thee, O Dhananjaya, I
have related this mystery to thee. If thou hast any love for me, O
perpetuator of Kuru's race, do thou then, after having heard these
instructions relating to the Soul, always act duly (according to them),
O thou of excellent vows. Then when this religion has been duly
practised, O mower of foes, thou wilt become freed from all thy sins and
attain to absolute emancipation. Formerly, when the hour of battle came,
this very religion, O thou of mighty arms, was declared by me (to thee)!
Do thou, therefore, set thy mind on it. And now, O chief of Bharata's
race, it is long since that I saw the lord my sire. I wish to see him
again, with thy leave, O Phalguna!'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Unto Krishna who had said so, Dhananjaya said
in reply,--We shall go to-day from this town to the city called after
the elephant. Meeting king Yudhishthira of virtuous soul there, and
informing him (of thy intention) thou shalt then repair to thy own
city!'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_155"></span>[88:1](m14051.htm#fr_155) The understanding
operates on what is placed before it by the mind. The understanding,
therefore, is, as it were, the lord exercising power or sovereignty,
being served by the mind.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[89:1](m14051.htm#fr_156) *Sarvan srijati*
*i.e.*, creates all things by attaining to the condition of the
universal cause, for the unmanifest is the universal cause. Between such
a one and the Supreme Soul there is no difference. Even this is said in
the last sentence.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[89:2](m14051.htm#fr_157) The man who reads the
book called Veda is not truly conversant with the Veda. He, however, who
knows *Kshetrajna*, is regarded as truly knowing the Veda.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[89:3](m14051.htm#fr_158) The argument is that
*Mrityu* or death being of two syllables, the correspondence is
justifiable between it and *Mama* or mineness which also is of two
syllables. So in the case of Brahman and *na-mama*. Of course, what is
meant by mineness being death and not-mineness being Brahman or
emancipation, cannot be unintelligible to one who has carefully read the
preceding sections.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[89:4](m14051.htm#fr_159) *i.e.*, the five
great elements, four organs of knowledge with mind, and the four organs
of action.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[90:1](m14051.htm#fr_160) The word *Purusha*
here is used in the sense of *dehabhimani Jiva* or individual self with
consciousness of body. True knowledge destroys this condition of Jiva,
for the man of knowledge identifies himself with the universe and
thereby assimilates himself to Brahman. By eaters of Amrita are meant
they who never take any food without offering portions thereof to the
deities, Pitris, and guests. Of course, Yogins of piety are implied by
it.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[90:2](m14051.htm#fr_161) *Purusha* here
implies Jiva divested of consciousness of body.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[90:3](m14051.htm#fr_162) The meaning is this:
in a dream what is seen is all unreal. So, when tranquillity has been
attained, all the surroundings become unreal. Nilakantha gives a
slightly different interpretation; it is this: when tranquillity has
been attained, the Soul lives without attachment to the body and all
external objects. Indeed, the Soul then lives completely in itself even
as it works in course of a dream.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[90:4](m14051.htm#fr_163) The sense is that
they behold all worldly objects, present, past and future, which are, of
course, due to development of previous causes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LII](m14052)
