[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14020) 
[Next](m14022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXI

"The Brahmana said, 'In this connection is cited the following ancient
story. Do thou understand, of what kind the institution is of the ten
Hotris (sacrificing priests). The ear, the skin, the two eyes, the
tongue, the nose, the two feet, the two hands, the genital organ, the
lower duct, and speech,--these, O beautiful one, are the ten sacrificing
priests. Sound and touch, colour and taste, scent, speech, action,
motion, and the discharge of vital seed, of urine and of excreta, are
the ten libations. The points of the compass, Quarters, Wind, Sun, Moon,
Earth, Fire, Vishnu, Indra, Prajapati, and Mitra,--these, O beautiful
one, are the ten (sacrificial) fires. The ten organs (of knowledge and
action) are the sacrificing priests. The libations, O beautiful one, are
ten. The objects of the senses are the fuel that are cast into these ten
fires, <span id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53) as also the mind, which is
the ladle, and the wealth (*viz.*, the good and bad acts of the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

sacrificer). What remains is the pure, highest knowledge. We have heard
that all this universe was well differentiated (from Knowledge). All
objects of knowledge are Mind. Knowledge only perceives (*i.e.*,
discovers the Mind without being attached to it). The knower (or Jiva),
encased in subtle form, lives within the gross body that is produced by
the vital seed. The bearer of the body is the Garhapatya fire. From that
is produced another. Mind is the Ahavaniya fire. Into it is poured the
oblation. From that was produced the Veda (or Word); (then was born
Mind); Mind (desirous of creation) sets itself on the Veda (or the
Word). Their arises form (or colour) undistinguished by particular
colours. It runs towards the Mind.'" <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54)

"The Brahmana's wife said, 'Why did Word first arise and why did Mind
arise afterwards, seeing that Word starts into existence after having
been thought upon by Mind? Upon that authority can it be said that Mati
(Prana) takes refuge in Mind. Why, again, in dreamless slumber, though
separated from Mind, does not Prana apprehend (all objects)? What is
that which restrains it then?'" <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55)

"The Brahmana said, 'The Apana breath, becoming the lord (*i.e.*,
bringing the Prana under its control), in consequence of such lordship
over it, makes it identical with itself. That restrained motion of the
Prana breath (which for the time becomes identical with that of the
Apana) has been said to be the motion of the mind. Hence the mind is
dependent upon Prana, not Prana upon the mind. Therefore, in dreamless
slumber, upon the disappearance of mind, Prana does not disappear. But
since thou askest me a question about word and mind, I shall, therefore,
relate to thee a discourse between them. Both Word and Mind, repairing
to the Soul of matter, <span id="fr_56"></span>[3](#fn_56) asked
him,--Do thou say who amongst us is superior. Do thou, O puissant one,
dispel our doubt.--On that occasion, the holy one made this answer.--The
mind undoubtedly (is superior). Unto him Word said,--'I yield to thee
the fruition of all thy desires!' <span id="fr_57"></span>[4](#fn_57)

"The Brahmana said, 'Know that I have two minds, immovable and movable.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

\[paragraph continues\] That which is immovable is, verily, with me; the
movable is in your dominion. <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) That
mind is verily called movable which, in the form of Mantra, letter, or
voice, is referable to your dominion. Hence, thou art superior (to the
other mind which concerns itself with only the external world). But
since, coming of thy own accord, O beautiful one, thou enterest into the
engagement (about the fruition of all wishes), therefore, filling myself
with breath, I utter thee. <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) The
goddess Word used always to dwell between Prana and Apana. But, O
blessed one, sinking into Apana, though urged upwards, in consequence of
becoming dissociated from Prana, she ran to Prajapati and said,--Be
gratified with me, O holy one.--The Prana appeared, once more fostering
Word. Hence, Word, encountering deep exhalation, never utters anything.
Word always flows as endued with utterance or unendued with it. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[3](#fn_60) Amongst those two, Word without utterance
is superior to Word with utterance. Like a cow endued with excellent
milk, she (Word without utterance) yields diverse kinds of meaning. This
one always yields the Eternal (*viz.*, Emancipation), speaking of
Brahman. O thou of beautiful smiles, Word is a cow, in consequence of
her puissance which is both divine and not divine. Behold the
distinction of these two subtle forms of Word that flow.'" <span
id="fr_61"></span>[4](#fn_61)

"The Brahmana's wife said, 'What did the goddess of Word then say, in
days of old, when, though impelled by the Wish to speak, Speech could
not come out?'"

"The Brahmana said, 'The Word that is generated in the body by Prana,
then attains to Apana from Prana. Then transformed into Udana and
issuing out of the body, envelops all the quarters, with Vyana. After
that, she dwells in Samana. Even in this way did Word formerly speak.
Hence Mind, in consequence of being immovable, is distinguished, and the
goddess Word, in consequence of being movable, is also distinguished."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[38:1](m14020.htm#fr_52) The meaning seems to be
this: they who renounce sensuous objects can create them when they like.
One casting off smell that has earth for its object can create earth
when he likes.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[38:2](m14021.htm#fr_53) What is stated in this
passage is, shortly, this: the ear, etc, are the *Hotris* or sacrificing
priests who are to pour libations on the sacrificial fire. The
perceptions and functions of those organs constitute the *Havi* or
libations that are to be poured. The points, wind, etc, are the Agni or
sacred fires on which they are to be poured. These statements are
recapitulated in verse 5. The objects of the senses, of the same as
those in verse 3, are the fuel, previously described as *Havi* or
libations, which are to be burnt off by being cast into the fires.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[39:1](m14021.htm#fr_54) The *Hridaya* or heart
is the *Garhapatya* fire. From it is produced another fire, the
*Ahavaniya*, *viz.*, the mind. 'The heart was pierced. From the heart
arose mind, for the mind arose Chandramas,' is the declaration of the
Sruti cited by Nilakantha. The *Ahavaniya* fire or mind is the mouth.
*Asyam ahavaniya* is the Sruti. *Annamayam hi Somya manas, apomayah
pranah, tejomayi vak* is the Sruti that bears upon this. Food or fire,
poured into the mouth develops into speech or word. *Vachaspati* implies
the Veda or word. First arises the word, the mind sets itself upon it,
desirous of creation. This corresponds with the Mosaic Genesis.--'God
said; let there be light, and there was light.' The word was first.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[39:2](m14021.htm#fr_55) The last question seems
to be this: in dreamless slumber, the mind disappears totally. If it is
the mind upon which Prana rests, why does not Prana also disappear? It
is seen to separate itself from mind, for it continues to exist while
mind does not exist. If so, *i.e.*, if existing, as it must be admitted
to do, why does it not apprehend objects? What is it that restrains its
powers of apprehension?

<span id="fn_56"></span>[39:3](m14021.htm#fr_56) *Bhutatmanam* is
ordinary Prajapati. Nilakantha takes it to mean here individual Jiva or
self.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[39:4](m14021.htm#fr_57) It is, through words
that desirable fruits, visible and invisible, are acquired. Of course,
word means both ordinary speech and Vedic Mantras.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[40:1](m14021.htm#fr_58) The speaker is the
Brahmana, which Nilakantha explains to mean 'the Brahmana named Manas or
Mind'. Instead of such a learned interpretation, we may take it as
implying that the Brahmana is repeating the answer which *Bhutatman*,
*i.e.*, Prajapati or Jiva, made to Word. The Brahmana is the real
speaker. He recites the words of Jiva. Immovable, according to
Nilakantha, means 'that which is seizable by the external senses'; and
'movable', that which is beyond the ken of the senses, such as heaven,
etc. The external world being only a manifestation of the mind, it is
spoken of here as identical with it. So, the ideas in the mind which are
not due to the senses, are only the mind. This is the movable mind. That
mind depends on word or the scriptures.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[40:2](m14021.htm#fr_59) Telang gives a
different version of this verse. I offer a verbal tendering, without
attempting to explain it.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[40:3](m14021.htm#fr_60) *i.e.*, as noisy or
noiseless.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[40:4](m14021.htm#fr_61) I have given as close a
verbal rendering of the passage as possible. The sense, however, is not
very intelligible to me. The gloss of Nilakantha is as unintelligible as
the text. Telang also has given a verbal rendering which differs from
the above slightly. His foot-notes do not, I think, bring out the
meaning at all. As regards the two vernacular versions, both are
useless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXII](m14022)
