[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14031) 
[Next](m14033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXII

"The Brahmana said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative, O
lady, of the discourse between a Brahmana and (king) Janaka. King Janaka
(on a certain occasion), desirous of punishing him, said unto a Brahmana
who had become guilty of some offence, 'Thou shalt not dwell within my
dominions.' Thus addressed, the Brahmana replied unto that best of
kings, saying, 'Tell me, O king, what the limits are of the territories
subject to thee. I desire, O lord, to dwell within the dominions of
another king. Verily, I wish to obey thy behest, O lord of Earth,
agreeably to the scriptures.--Thus addressed by that celebrated
Brahmana, the king, hearing repeated and hot sighs, said not a word in
reply. Like the planet Rahu overwhelming the Sun, a cloudedness of
understanding suddenly overwhelmed that king of immeasurable energy as
he sat plunged in thought. When that cloudedness of understanding passed
away and the king became comforted, he spoke after a short while these
words unto that Brahmana.'

"Janaka said, 'Although a (large) inhabited tract is subject to me
within this ancestral kingdom of mine, yet I fail to find my dominion,
searching through the whole Earth. When I failed to find it on the
Earth, I then searched Mithila (for it). When I failed to find it in
Mithila, I then searched for it among my own children. When I failed to
find it even there, a cloudedness of understanding came over me. After
that cloudedness of understanding passed away, intelligence came back to
me. Then I thought that I have no dominion, or that everything is my
dominion. Even this body is not mine, or the whole Earth is mine. At the
same time, O best of regenerate persons, I think that that is as much
mine as it is of others. Do thou, therefore, dwell (here) as long as thy

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

choice leads thee, and do thou enjoy as long as thou pleasest.'

"The Brahmana said, 'When there is a large inhabited tract in thy
ancestral kingdom, tell me, depending upon what understanding, has the
idea of *meum* been got rid of by thee. What also is that understanding
depending upon which thou hast come to the conclusion that everything
constitutes thy dominion? What, indeed, is the notion through which thou
hast no dominion, or everything is thy dominion?'

"Janaka said, 'All conditions here, in all affairs, have been understood
by me to be terminable. Hence, I could not find that which should be
called mine. <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87) (Considering) whose is
this, I thought of the Vedic text about anybody's property, I could not,
therefore, find, by my understanding, what should be (called)
mine. <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88) Depending upon this notion, I
got rid of idea of mineness. Hear now what that notion is depending upon
which I came to the conclusion that I have dominion everywhere. I do not
desire for my own self those smells that are even in my nose. Therefore,
the earth, subjugated by me, is always subject to me. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_89) I do not desire for my own self those
tastes that exist in contact with even my tongue. Therefore, water,
subjugated by me, is always subject to me. I do not desire for my own
self the colour or light that appertains to my eye. Therefore, light
subjugated by me, is always subject to me. I do not desire for my own
self those sensations of touch which are in contact with even my skin.
Therefore, the wind, subjugated by me, is always subject to me. I do not
desire for my own self those sounds which are in contact with even my
ear. Therefore sounds, subjugated by me, are always subject to me. I do
not desire for my own self the mind that is always in my mind. Therefore
the mind, subjugated by me, is subject to me. All these acts of mine are
for the sake of the deities, the Pitris, the Bhutas, together with
guests. <span id="fr_90"></span>[4](#fn_90)--The Brahmana then, smiling,
once more said unto Janaka,--Know that I am Dharma, who have come here
today for examining thee. Thou art verily the one person for setting
this wheel in motion, this wheel that has the quality of Goodness for
its circumference, Brahmin for its nave, and the understanding for its
spokes, and which never turns back!'" <span
id="fr_91"></span>[5](#fn_91)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[55:1](m14031.htm#fr_86) think Telang renders
this verse wrongly. *Samhatadehabandhanah* does not mean 'with bodily
frame destroyed' but 'with bodily frame united.' If *samhata* be taken
as destroyed, the compound *bhinna-vikirna-dehah* in the second line
would be a useless repetition. The meaning is that with bodily frame or
the bonds of body united, he takes birth. When he dies, that frame
becomes dismembered and scattered.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[56:1](m14032.htm#fr_87) The conditions referred
to are affluence and indigence, as explained by Nilakantha.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[56:2](m14032.htm#fr_88) This is, rather,
obscure. Nilakantha observes that the Vedic text referred to is: 'Do not
covet anybody's property.' What Janaka says seems to be this: Thinking
of this prohibition about coveting other people's property, I thought
how could it be ascertained what belongs to others.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[56:3](m14032.htm#fr_89) The sense seems to be
this: the property of smell attaches to earth. I do not desire smell for
my own enjoyment. If it is perceived, it is perceived by the organ of
smell. The earth, therefore, is subject to me, not I to the earth. I
have transcended my sensations, and, therefore, the objects to which
they inhere. The whole world represents only the objects of the
sensations. The latter being mastered, the whole world has been mastered
by me.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[56:4](m14032.htm#fr_90) *i.e.*, I live and act
for these and not my own self.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[56:5](m14032.htm#fr_91) Nilakantha's reading is
erroneous, *Brahma-labhasya* should be *Brahmana-bhasya*. So also
*durvarasya* is incorrect. *Nemi* may also mean the line or track that
is made by a wheel as it moves. If taken in this sense, it would mean
'that is confined to, or that cannot deviate from the track constituted
by goodness'. The nave, Brahman, is, of course, the Vedas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXIII](m14033)
