[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14033) 
[Next](m14035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXIV

"The Brahmana's wife said, 'This is incapable of being understood by a
person of little intelligence as also by one whose soul has not been
cleansed. My intelligence is very little, and contracted, and confused.
Do thou tell me the means by which the knowledge (of which thou
speakest) may be acquired. I wish to learn from thee the source from
which this knowledge flows.'

"The Brahmana said, 'Know that intelligence devoted to Brahman, is the
lower Arani; the preceptor is the upper Arani; penances and conversance

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

wit tithe scriptures are to cause the attrition. From this is produced
the fire of knowledge.'

"The Brahmana's wife said, 'As regards this symbol of Brahman, which is
designated Kshetrajna, where, indeed, occurs a description of it by
which it is capable of being seized?'

"The Brahmana said, 'He is without symbols, and without qualities.
Nothing exists that may be regarded as his cause. I shall, however, tell
thee the means by which he can be seized or not. A good means may be
found; *viz.*, perception of hearing, etc. as flowers are perceived by
bees. That means consists of an understanding cleansed by action. Those
whose understandings have not been so cleansed, regard that entity,
through their own ignorance, as invested with the properties of
knowledge and others. <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) It is not laid
down that this should be done, of that this should not be done, in the
rules for achieving Emancipation,--those, that is, in which a knowledge
of the soul arises only in him who sees and hears. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97) One should comprehend as many parts,
unmanifest and manifest by hundreds and thousands, as one is capable of
comprehending here. Indeed, one should comprehend diverse objects of
diverse import, and all objects of direct perception. Then will come,
from practice (of contemplation and self-restraint, etc.), that above
which nothing exists.' <span id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_98)

"The holy one continued, 'Then the mind of that Brahmana's wife, upon
the destruction of the Kshetrajna, became that which is beyond
Kshetrajna, in consequence of the knowledge of Kshetra.' <span
id="fr_99"></span>[4](#fn_99)

"Arjuna said, 'Where, indeed, is that Brahmana's wife, O Krishna, and
where is that foremost of Brahmanas, by both of whom was such success
attained. Do thou, tell me about them, O thou of unfading glory.'

"The blessed and holy one said, 'Know that my mind is the Brahmana, and
that my understanding is the Brahmana's wife. He who has been spoken of
as Kshetrajna is I myself, O Dhananjaya!"'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[58:1](m14034.htm#fr_96) I expand this verse a
little for making it intelligible. A literal version would run as
follows: Good means may be seen, perceived as by bees. Action is
(cleansed) understanding; through folly it is invested with the symbols
of knowledge. *Karmabudhhi* never means 'action and knowledge' as
rendered by Telang. *Abudhitwatt* means 'through ignorance.' This
ignorance is of those persons whose understandings have not been
cleansed by action.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[58:2](m14034.htm#fr_97) What is stated here is
this. In the matter of achieving Emancipation, no ordinances have been
laid down, positive or negative, like those in respect of other things.
If one wishes to attain to Heaven, he should do this and abstain from
the other. For achieving Emancipation, however, only seeing and hearing
are prescribed. Seeing implies contemplation, and hearing, the receiving
of instructions from the preceptor. Nilakantha explains hearing as
*Vedantadisravanam* (vide his comment on the word 'srutam' in verse 3
above).

<span id="fn_98"></span>[58:3](m14034.htm#fr_98) The speaker wishes to
inculcate that one should first contemplate an object of direct
perception, such as earth, etc. Then on such 'unperceived' objects as
operations of the mind. Such contemplation will gradually lead to that
which is Supreme. The *abhyasa* or practice referred to in the second
line is the practice of *sama*, *dama*, etc. I do not think that
Telang's version of 8 and 9 brings out the meaning clearly.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[58:4](m14034.htm#fr_99) The sense is that when
her individual soul became merged into the Supreme soul, she became
identified with Brahman. This, was, of course, due to the knowledge of
*Kshetra* as something separate from *Kshetrajna*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXV](m14035)
