[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14044) 
[Next](m14046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XLV

"Brahmana said, 'The wheel of life moves on. It has the understanding
for its strength; the mind for the pole (on which it rests); the group
of senses for its bonds, the (five) great elements for its nave, and
home for its circumference. <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131) It is
overwhelmed by decrepitude and grief, and it has diseases and calamities
for its progeny. That wheel relates in time and place. It has toil and
exercise for its noise. Day and Night are the rotations of that wheel.
It is encircled by heat and cold. Pleasure and pain fire its joints, and
hunger and thirst are the nails fixed into it. Sun-shine and shade are
the ruts (it causes). It is capable of being agitated during even such a
short space of time as is taken up by the opening and the closing of the
eyelid. It is enveloped in the terrible waters of delusion. It is ever
revolving and void of consciousness. It is measured by months and
half-months. It is not uniform (being ever-changing), and moves through
all the worlds. Penances and vows are its mud. Passion's force is its
mover. It is illuminated by the great egoism, and is sustained by the
qualities. Vexations (caused by the non-acquisition of what is desired)
are the fastenings that bind it around. It revolves in the midst of
grief and destruction. It is endued with actions and the instruments of
action. It is large and is extended by attachments. It is rendered
unsteady by cupidity and desire. It is produced by variegated Ignorance.
It is attended upon by fear and delusion, and is the cause of the
delusion of all beings. It moves towards joy and pleasure, and has
desire and wrath for its possession. It is made up of entities beginning
with Mahat and ending with the gross elements. It is characterised by
production and destruction going on ceaselessly. Its speed is like that
of the mind, and it has the mind for its boundary. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132) This wheel of

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

life that is associated with pairs of opposites and devoid of
consciousness, the universe with the very immortals should cast away,
abridge, and check. That man who always understands accurately the
motion and stoppage of this wheel of life, is never seen to be deluded,
among all creatures. Freed from all impressions, divested of all pairs
of opposites, released from all sins, he attains to the highest goal.
The householder, the Brahmacharin, the forest recluse and the
mendicant,--these four modes of life have all been said to have the
householder's mode for their foundation. Whatever system of rules is
prescribed in this world, their observance is beneficial. Such
observance has always been highly spoken of. He who has been first
cleansed by ceremonies, who has duly observed vows, who belongs in
respect of birth to a race possessed of high qualifications, and who
understands the Vedas, should return (from his preceptor's house). <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133) Always devoted to his wedded spouse,
conducting himself after the manner of the good, with his senses under
subjugation, and full of faith, one should in this world perform the
five sacrifices. He who eats what remains after feeding deities and
guests, who is devoted to the observance of Vedic rites, who duly
performs according to his means sacrifices and gifts, who is not unduly
active with his hands and feet, who is not unduly active with his eye,
who is devoted to penances, who is not unduly active with his speech and
limits, comes under the category of Sishta or the good. One should
always bear the sacred thread, wear white (clean) clothes, observe pure
vows, and should always associate with good men, making gifts and
practising self-restraint. One should subjugate one's lust and stomach,
practise universal compassion, and be characterised by behaviour that
befits the good. One should bear a bamboo-stick, and a water-pot filled
with water. Having studied, one should teach; likewise should also make
sacrifices himself and officiate at the sacrifices of others. One should
also make gifts made to oneself. Verily, one's conduct, should be
characterised by these six acts. Know that three of these acts should
constitute the livelihood of the Brahmanas, *viz.*, teaching (pupils),
officiating at the sacrifices of others, and the acceptance of gifts
from a person that is pure. As to the other duties that remain,
numbering three, *viz.*, making of gifts, study, and sacrifice, these
are accompanied by merit. <span id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_134)
Observant of penances, self-restrained, practising universal compassion
and forgiveness, and looking upon all creatures with an equal eye, the
man that is conversant with duties should never be heedless with regard
to those three acts. The learned Brahmana of pure heart, who observes
the domestic mode of life and practises rigid vows, thus devoted and
thus discharging all duties to the best of his power, succeeds in
conquering Heaven.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[76:1](m14045.htm#fr_131) It is difficult to
understand which part of the wheel is intended to be expressedly
'*bandhanam*' or the bond; I take it for the spokes. *Pariskandha* is
*Samuha* or the materials that together compose an object. Here it may
be taken for the nave or centre. Home is called the circumference,
because, as the circumference limits the wheel, even so home (wife and
children) limits the affections and acts of life.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[76:2](m14045.htm#fr_132) The words
*Kalachakram pravartate* have been rendered in the first verse of this
lesson. In verse 9, the words *asaktaprabhavapavyam* are explained by
Nilakantha differently. *Manas-krantam*, I take, is equivalent to 'be
bounded by the mind,' I do not know whence Telang gets 'never fatigued'
as the substitute of this word.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[77:1](m14045.htm#fr_133) Implying that he
should go to the house of his preceptor, study and serve there, and
after completing his course, return for leading a life of domesticity.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[77:2](m14045.htm#fr_134) The sense seems to be
that these last three duties are productive of merit and should,
therefore, be performed. The first three however, are sources of living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XLVI](m14046)
