[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs35)  [Next](mhs37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# V. SALT-SPILLING AS AN OMEN

The widespread notion that the spilling of salt produces evil
consequences is supposed to have originated in the tradition that Judas
overturned a salt-cellar at the Paschal Supper, as portrayed in Leonardo
da Vinci's painting. But it appears more probable that the belief is due
to the sacred character of salt in early times. Any one having the
misfortune to spill salt was formerly supposed to incur the anger of all
good spirits, and to be rendered susceptible to the malevolent
influences of demons. When, in oriental lands, salt was offered to
guests as a token of hospitality, it was accounted a misfortune if any
particles were scattered while being so presented, and in such cases a
quarrel or dispute was anticipated.

Bishop Hall wrote, in 1627, that when salt fell towards a superstitious
guest at dinner, he was wont to exhibit signs of mental agitation, and
refused to be comforted until one of the waiters had poured wine in his
lap. And in Gayton's "Art of Longevity" we find these lines:--

I have two friends of either sex, which do eat little salt or none, yet
are friends too; of both which persons I can truly tell, they are of
patience most invincible; whom out of temper no mischance at all can
put; no, if towards them the salt should fall.

The Germans have a saying, "Whoever spills salt arouses enmity," and in
some places the overthrow of a salt-cellar is thought to be the direct
act of the Devil, the peace-disturber. The superstitious Parisian, who
may have been the unfortunate cause of such a mishap, is quite ready to
adopt this view, and tosses a little of the spilled salt behind him, in
order, if possible, to hit the invisible Devil in the eye, which,
temporarily at least, prevents him from doing further mischief. This is
probably a relic of an ancient idolatrous custom; and salt thus thrown
was formerly a kind of sop to Cerberus, an offering to pacify some
particular deity. In like manner the natives of Pegu, a province of
British Burmah, in the performance of one of their rites in honor of the
Devil, are wont to throw food over their left shoulders to conciliate
the chief spirit of evil.

When salt was spilled at table the pious Roman was wont to exclaim, "May
the gods avert the omen!" and the modern Sicilian in such a case,
invokes "the Mother of Light."

Among the Greeks it was customary to present salt to the gods as a
thank-offering at the beginning of every meal. Louis Figuier, in "Les
merveilles de l'industrie," places these three happenings in the
category of ominous mishaps in a Grecian household:(1) the omission of a
salt-cellar from among the furnishings of a dinner-table; (2) the
falling asleep of one of the guests at a banquet, before the removal of
the salt-cellar to make place for the dessert; (3) the overturning of
this important vessel. It seems evident, therefore, that the origin of
the belief in the ominous character of salt-spilling is of far greater
antiquity than is popularly supposed; and Leonardo da Vinci, in
portraying Judas as upsetting a salt-cellar, probably had in mind the
already well-known portentous significance of such an act. But some
observers have failed to discover any trace of a salt-cellar in the
original Cenacolo on the refectory wall of the Milanese convent. In the
well-known engraving by Raphael Morghen, however, the overthrown
salt-cellar is clearly delineated, and the spilled salt is seen issuing
from it. An animated discussion on this moot-point enlivened the columns
of "Notes and Queries" some years ago.

The following passage is to be found in a work entitled "Hieroglyphica,
a Joanne Valeriano" (1586), being a treatise on ancient symbols:--

Alioqui sal amicitiae symbolum fuit, durationis gratia. Corpora enim
solidiora facit et diutissime conservat. Unde hospitibus ante alios
cibos apponi solitum, quo amicitiae firmitas ac perseverantia
significetur. Quare plerique ominosum habent si sal in mensam profundi
contigerit. Contra vero faustum si vinum atque id merum effusum sit.

Which has been rendered into English as follows: "Salt was formerly a
symbol of friendship, because of its lasting quality. For it makes
substances more compact and preserves them for a long time: hence it was
usually presented to guests before other food, to signify the abiding
strength of friendship. Wherefore many consider it ominous to spill salt
on the table, and, on the other hand, propitious to spill wine,
especially if unmixed with water."

In Gaule's "Magastromancer" (1652), overturning the salt is mentioned in
a list of "superstitious ominations." According to a popular Norwegian
belief, one will shed as many tears as may suffice to dissolve the
quantity of salt which he has spilled; and in east Yorkshire, also,
every grain of spilled salt represents a tear to be shed. Moreover,
saltness has been thought to be an essential attribute of tears, and
this intimate connection between the two may have given rise to some of
the many superstitions connected with salt. In Bucks County,
Pennsylvania, in order to avert ill-luck after salt has been spilled,
one should not only toss a pinch of the spilled salt over the left
shoulder, but should also crawl under a table and come out on the
opposite side.

In the "British Apollo" (1708) are these lines:--

We 'el tel you the reason  
Why spilling of Salt  
Is esteemed such a Fault,  
Because it doth ev'rything season.  
Th' antiques did opine  
'T was of Friendship a sign,  
So served it to guests in decorum,  
And thought Love decayed,  
When the negligent Maid  
Let the salt-cellar tumble before them.

In New England the gravity of salt-spilling as an omen, its deplorable
severance of friendship's ties, and the necessity for prompt remedial
measures, are all fully recognized.

And here the deft toss of the spilled particles over the left shoulder
is not always adequate; for in order thoroughly to break the spell,
these particles must be thrown on the stove.

Gypsies have a saying, "The salt of strife has fallen."

From the idea of the desecration of a sacred substance, to which
allusion has been made, doubtless arose the remarkable superstition
that, as a penalty for spilling salt, one must wait outside the gate of
Paradise for as many years as there are grains of salt spilled.

In the Lansdowne MSS. 231 (British Museum) occurs this passage:--

The falling of salt is an authentic psagemt of ill-luck, nor can every
temper contemn it; nor was the same a grall pgnostic among the ancients
of future evil, but a pticular omination concerning the breach of
friendship. For salt as incorruptible was ye symbole of friendship, and
before ye other service was offered unto yeir guests. But whether salt
were not only a symbol of friendship wh man, but also a fig. of amity
and recociliation wh God, and was therefore offered in sacrifices, is an
higher speculation.

Herbert Spencer affirms that the consciousness which harbors a notion
that evil will result from spilling salt is manifestly allied to the
consciousness of the savage, and is prone to entertain other
superstitious beliefs like those prevalent in barbarous lands. And
although idolatry and fetich-worship do not flourish in civilized
communities, yet many popular superstitions are akin in nature to the
sentiments which prompt the savage to bow down before images of wood or
stone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Helping To Salt At Table](mhs37)
