[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs45)  [Next](mhs47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IV. THE DOCTRINE OF DEMONIACAL POSSESSION

The natural instinct of the untutored savage is to regard the act of
sneezing as the manifestation of an attack by a demon. Certain African
tribes, for instance, are said to believe that whoever sneezes is
possessed of an evil spirit, to whose malicious agency is due the
violence of the paroxysm and its utter disregard of times and seasons.

Dr. Edward B. Tylor, in his "Primitive Culture" (vol. i. p. 97), asserts
that the Zulus have faith in the agency of kindly spirits as well, and
says that, when one of these people sneezes, he is wont to exclaim: "I
am now blessed; the ancestral spirit is with me. Let me hasten and
praise it, for it is that which causes me to sneeze." Thereupon he
praises the spirits of the dead, and asks for various blessings. But
among most uncivilized peoples sneezing is placed in the category of
paroxysmal diseases, and reckoned to be of demoniac origin.

Inasmuch as sneezing is often one symptom of an incipient cold, which is
a physical ailment, and as among savage tribes every physical ailment is
regarded as a case of demoniacal possession, the use of charms and
exorcisms to counteract the efforts of the evil spirits seems a natural
expedient.

When an American Indian falls sick, he believes his illness to be the
work of some spiteful demon. Therefore, when he gets well, he changes
his name, so that the demon may not be able to recognize him again.

The chief aim of the medicine-man, in treating a patient, is the
expulsion of the evil spirit; and this is the prime object of the
various superstitious ceremonies and incantations which are a prominent
feature in medical practice among savages. The medicine-man strives to
drive away the demon by frightful sounds and gesticulations, and by
hideous grimaces and contortions. Sometimes he makes a small image
typifying the spirit of sickness, and this image is then maliciously
broken in pieces.

The natives of West Africa believe that the mere mention of unpleasant
names suffices to frighten away the demons who cause sickness; and these
spirits may moreover be deceived by simply changing the name of a sick
child. In the province of Tonquin, a French possession in southeastern
Asia, hateful names given to ailing children are likewise thought to
terrify the evil spirits; but when the little patients are convalescent,
pleasanter names are substituted.

The Indians of Nootka Sound, Vancouver Island, attribute physical
ailments either to the absence or irregular conduct of the soul, or to
the agency of spirits, and medical practice is governed accordingly;
therefore the Okanogons of the State of Washington subject patients
affected with serious illnesses to the magical treatment of the
medicine-man.

The islanders of the South Pacific have their own doctrine about the
philosophy of sneezing. They believe that, when the spirit goes
traveling about, its return naturally occasions some commotion, as is
evident from the violent act of sneezing. They therefore deem it proper
to welcome back the wandering spirit, the form of greeting varying in
the different islands. The phrase employed by the natives of Raratonga,
for example, means "Ha! you have come back!"

The "Sadda," one of the sacred books of the Parsees, counsels the
faithful to have recourse to prayer when they sneeze, because at that
critical moment the demon is especially active.

The Parsees regard sneezing as a manifestation that the evil spirits,
who are constantly seeking to enter the body, have been forcibly
expelled by the interior fire which, in their belief, animates every
human being. When, therefore, a Parsee hears any one sneeze, he
exclaims, "Blessed be Ormuzd!" thus praising his chief deity. The
Parsees are forbidden to talk while eating, because at such times demons
are on the alert, watching for opportunities to gain admission to the
body through the mouth while a person is engaged in conversation.

Pious Brahmins are careful to touch the right ear when they happen to
sneeze either during the performance of a religious ceremony or at
certain other times specified in the "Shastra," or holy books of the
Hindus. Evil spirits were believed to enter the body through the ears,
as well as by the nose or mouth, and the object of touching the ear was
to prevent their gaining admission there.

In reference to this subject, Gerald Massey says, in the "Natural
Genesis" (vol. i. pp. 83-80-):--

Sneezing is not only a vigorous form of breathing, but it is
involuntary; hence inspired, or of extraordinary origin. A hearty
sneeze, when one is ill and faint, would imply a sudden accession of the
breathing power, which was inwardly inspiring and outwardly expelling.
The good spirit enters and the bad spirit departs, cast out by the
sudden impulsion. The expulsion and repudiation implied in sneezing is
yet glanced at in the saying that such a thing is "not to be sneezed
at."

The natives of Turkistan consider yawning to be a reprehensible act,
originating from an evil place in one's heart, and indicative of a state
of preparedness for the reception of demons. When, therefore, they yawn,
the hand is placed, palm outwards, before the open mouth, thus barring
out the demons.

The once popular opinion, which is still met with today, that the
efficacy of a medicine is proportionate to its harshness of flavor, is
probably a relic of the ancient theory which attributed illnesses to
possession by evil spirits. When one's body was believed to be the abode
of such a spirit, the natural desire was to drive out the unwelcome
visitor, and to force him to seek some other habitation. Nowadays we
have so far abandoned this theory that, while we may have faith in the
virtues of bitter herbs, we are ready to welcome also the palatable
remedies of the modern pharmacopoeia; but until comparatively recent
times the science of therapeutics was dominated by superstition, and
physicians prescribed remedies composed of the most repulsive and
uncanny ingredients.

In Tibet antiseptics are employed in surgical operations, the rationale
of their use in that country being the preservation of the wound from
evil spirits; and when smallpox rages in the neighborhood of the city of
Leh, capital of the province of Ladakh, the country people seek to ward
off the epidemic by placing thorns on their bridges and at their
boundary lines. This practice is strikingly analogous in principle to
some of the superstitious uses of iron and steel in the form of sharp
instruments, of which mention has been made elsewhere in this volume.

The aboriginal Tibetans ascribe illnesses to the spite of demons, and
hence a chief object of their religious rites is the pacification of
these malignant beings by the sacrifice of a cow, pig, goat, or other
animal.

Throughout Christendom it is customary for those present to invoke the
divine blessing upon a person who sneezes, and the Moslem, under like
circumstances, prays to Allah for aid against the powers of evil. In
either case the underlying idea appears to be the same, namely, the
doctrine of invading spirits.

In ancient Egypt illnesses were thought to be caused by demons who had
somehow entered the patient's body and taken up their abode there; and
the Chaldean physicians, actuated by the same belief, were wont to
prescribe the most nauseating medicines in order to thoroughly disgust
the demon in possession, and thus enforce his departure.

This doctrine of spiritual possession was formerly even supposed to be
warranted by Scripture, and especially by a verse of the 141st Psalm:
"Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips." This
passage was interpreted as an entreaty for preservation from evil
spirits, who were likely to enter the body through the mouth, especially
during the acts of yawning, sneezing, talking, and eating. The Hindus
consider yawning as dangerous for this reason, and hence the practice of
mouth-washing, which is a part of their daily ritual. Hence also their
custom of cracking their fingers and exclaiming "Great God!" after
yawning, to intimidate the Bhuts, or malignant spirits. Sneezing is
usually accounted lucky in India, except at the commencement of an
undertaking, because it means the expulsion of a Bhutt.

Josephus relates having seen a Jew named Eleazar exorcise devils from
people who were possessed, in the presence of the Emperor Vespasian and
many of his soldiers. His mode of procedure consisted in applying to the
demoniacs nose a ring containing a piece of the root of a magical herb,
and then withdrawing the evil spirit through the nostrils, meanwhile
repeating certain incantations originally composed by Solomon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Salutation After Sneezing](mhs47)
