[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs50)  [Next](mhs52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# II. ROMAN SUPERSTITION CONCERNING DAYS

The Romans had their dies fasti, corresponding to the modern court days
in England. On such days, of which there were thirty-eight in the year,
it was lawful for the praetor to administer justice and to pronounce the
three words, Do, dico, addico, "I give laws, declare right, and adjudge
losses."

The days on which the courts were not held were called nefasti (from ne
and fari), because the three words could not then be legally spoken by
the praetor. But these days came to be regarded as unlucky, a fact
rendered evident by an expression of Horace. The Romans also classed as
unfortunate the days immediately following the calends, nones, and ides
of each month. Unlucky days were termed dies atri, because they were
marked in the calendar with black charcoal, the lucky ones being
indicated by means of white chalk. There were also days which were
thought especially favorable for martial operations, but the anniversary
of a national misfortune was considered very inauspicious. Thus after
the defeat of the Romans by the Gauls under Brennus on the banks of the
river Allia, July 16, 390 B. C., that date was given a prominent place
among the black days of the calendar. But not every general was
influenced by such superstitions. Lucullus, when an attempt was made to
dissuade him from attacking Tigranes, king of Armenia (whom he defeated
B. C. 69), because upon that date the Cimbri had vanquished a Roman
army, replied, "I will make it a day of good omen for the Romans." The
Roman ladies, we are told, gave less heed to the unlucky days of their
own calendar than to the works of Egyptian astrologers, among whom
Petosiris was their favorite authority, when they wished to ascertain
the proper day, and even the hour, for the performance of household and
other duties.

Horace (book ii. ode xiii.) thus apostrophizes a tree, by whose fall he
narrowly escaped being crushed at Sabinum: "Thou cursed tree! whoever he
was that first planted thee did it surely on an unlucky day, and with a
sacrilegious hand."

The Latin writer, Macrobius, stated that when one of the nundinoe or
market days fell upon New Year's, it was considered very unfortunate. In
such an event the Emperor Augustus, who was very superstitious, adopted
the method of inserting an extra day in the previous year and
subtracting one from that ensuing, thus preserving the regularity of the
Julian style of reckoning time. Ordinarily, however, New Year's Day was
deemed auspicious, and on that day, as now, people were accustomed to
wish each other happiness and good fortune.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Medieval Belief In Day-fatality](mhs52)
