[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs54)  [Next](mhs56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VI. FRIDAY IN MODERN TIMES

Friday is the Sabbath of the Moslems, corresponding to the Sunday of the
Christians and the Saturday of the Jews. In Egypt Friday is therefore
blessed above all other days, while Saturday is the most unfortunate.

However, although Friday was the day selected by Mahomet for the holding
of the Moslem Assembly, it was not wholly devoted to religious worship,
and at the conclusion of public prayers business was transacted as on
any other week-day. Among Mohammedans Friday is considered the most
lucky of days; and it is also the most popular for commencing any
enterprise of importance, whether building a house, planting a garden,
embarking on a voyage, contracting a marriage, or making a garment.

One reason for Mahomet's choice of Friday as the day for public prayers
was probably because this day was consecrated by the people of many
nations to Alilat, the celestial Venus or Urania, whom the ancient Arabs
worshipped. Mahomet said that whoever bathed on Friday and walked to the
public religious service, taking a seat near the Imam or Khalifah (the
leader of a Moslem tribe), and listened attentively to the sermon,
avoiding meanwhile frivolous conversation, would obtain the reward of a
whole year's prayers at night for every step which he took between his
home and the place of this assembly.

The Moslems among the peasants inhabiting the frontier region between
Afghanistan and Hindostan have a special reverence for Friday; for they
believe that on that day God rested, after having created the world. On
Friday eve, according to their belief, the spirits of the departed are
wont to revisit their former abodes, and hence the custom prevails of
sending delicacies to the mosque at such times.

Friday was the most popular day for weddings among the Jews in mediaeval
times, and its selection appears to have been due to expediency, because
of its nearness to the Jewish Sabbath, and the convenience of
associating the marriage ceremony with the services in the synagogue on
the latter day. The bridal pair fasted on the morning of the wedding,
and ashes were sprinkled over their heads during the ceremony.

According to the teachings of the Talmud, a second soul was believed to
enter men's bodies every Friday evening and to remain throughout the
following day, its presence being indicated by an increased appetite for
food.

On Friday, says an old tradition, is held the Witches' Sabbath or
Assembly, and one should be careful not to speak of these creatures on
that day, for their hearing is then especially acute, and disrespectful
remarks will render one liable to incur their spite.

In the popular belief of the Swabians, Friday is the day when the
witches celebrate their joint festival with the Devil on the Heuberg,
Dear Rotenburg, and afterward scour the country, intent on working all
manner of mischief upon the people and their cattle.

According to a Scotch superstition, however, witches were supposed to
hold their weekly meetings on Saturdays, in unfrequented places. The
formal proceedings on these occasions included an address by the Devil,
and the holding of a court, wherein each witch was expected to give a
detailed statement of her doings; and those who had been idle were given
a beating with their own broomsticks, the diligent being rewarded by
gifts of enchanted bones. A dance followed, the Devil playing on the
bag-pipes, and leading the music.

The Irish are careful not to mention fairies by name either on
Wednesdays or Fridays, for these invisible creatures are unusually alert
on these two days.

On Fridays especially, their power for evil is very strong. On that day,
therefore, a careful watch is kept over the children and cattle; a
lighted wisp of straw is waved about the baby's head, and a quenched
coal is placed under the cradle and churn. And if the horses are more
than usually restive in their stalls, it is a sure sign that the fairies
are riding them; therefore the people spit three times at the animals,
and the fairies thereupon immediately take their departure.

In Ireland Friday is facile princeps among unlucky days, and especial
care should be taken not to open the door of one's dwelling to any
stranger on that day. Neither butter nor milk should be given away, nor
should a cat be taken from one house to another on a Friday. To undo a
sorcerer's spell, one should eat barley cakes over which an incantation
has been said; but the cakes must be eaten on a Monday or Thursday, and
never on Friday.

In Welsh tradition the water-sprites are thought to keep an especially
watchful eye over the sea on Fridays, making it rough and tempestuous.

On a Friday morning in the year 1600, says an old legend a ship set sail
from a Northern port, having on board a young man and a maiden of rare
beauty, whose strange actions and demeanor seemed to betoken that they
were supernatural beings. The vessel never reached port, but one stormy
night a phantom ship was seen, enveloped in an uncanny light; and on its
deck stood the youth and his sweetheart, a weird vision, as the spectral
craft moved along over the stormy sea against the wind.

In Hesse Frau Hölle, the modern Freyja, is the special guardian and
protectress of newly married people, and so tenacious has been this old
belief in the minds of the Hessian peasants that the day of Venus is
still in high favor among them as the most propitious for weddings.

In some places it is unlucky to receive any news, whether good or bad,
on a Friday; and, according to a Shropshire saying, "if you hear
anything new on a Friday, it gives you another wrinkle on your face, and
adds another year to your age." Indeed, the term "Friday-faced" was used
to denote a gloomy or dejected visage, as in the following quotation:--

Marry, out upon him! what a friday-fac'd slave it is! I think in my
conscience his face never keeps holiday.

In Servia children born on Friday are thought to be invulnerable to the
assaults of the whole army of hags and sorcerers. In Germany Friday is
reckoned the most fateful of all the week-days, whether for good or
evil. The beliefs vary in different portions of the empire, but there is
a universal prejudice against setting out on a journey, moving into a
new house, or changing servants on this day. In eastern Prussia, whoever
bakes on a Friday will get but little bread; but Sunday baptisms are
thought to offset the unlucky auspices of children born on Friday. The
North German farmers consider Friday the best day on which to begin
gathering the harvest.

In olden times Friday was the most favorable day for courtship and
weddings in Germany, and, unless a bride first entered her new home on
that day, domestic strife was likely to ensue.

If she wished to tame a bad-tempered husband, her first care was to
prepare for him a soup made with the rain-water of a Friday's shower.
The magic charm of words wherewith cattle were freed from the mange was
spoken on a Friday morning; and a hare which had been shot on the first
Friday in March was of great therapeutic value, especially its eyes,
which were dried and carried about as a sovereign remedy for defective
vision.

Only on a Friday did the church-bells strike the hour for the release of
bewitched spirits, and the delivery of enchanted souls from their
spells.

Doctor M. Höfler, in his "Volksmedizin und Aberglauben in Oberbayern"
(p. 208), says that Bavarian peasants still cherish many superstitions
about the sixth day of the week, the day sacred to Freyja, the old
German Goddess of Love. Moreover, wonderful amuletic virtues are
attributed to hens' eggs laid during Good Friday night, and whoever eats
these eggs is thought to be thereby insured against bodily harm. How
long this immunity holds good does not appear; but probably until
another Good Friday night egg is eaten. In farmers' households these
precious eggs are therefore eagerly sought by the house-mistress, who is
wont to give them to her husband and the farm-hands; or else she uses
them as an ingredient of the dough figures which ornament the Easter
bread.

In some districts of Hungary the following peculiar custom is in
vogue:--

Whenever any one's name-day happens on a Friday, that person selects a
piece of one of his cast-off garments, rubs thereon a few drops of his
own blood and saliva, and then burns the fragment of clothing. By so
doing he burns up also all the ill luck which else might have befallen
him during the next year. In southeastern Transylvania a rag mystically
dealt with as above is hung on a tree before sunrise on the day in
question; if it disappear before dawn of the next day, the person who
thus superstitiously celebrates the occurrence of his name-day on a
Friday may laugh at ill luck for a year.

The Magyars begin no work on a Friday, for it is bound to miscarry;
neither do they give any milk out of the house on that day, for by so
doing they imagine the usefulness of the cow to be impaired. In Bihar
County, Hungary, a loaf of bread baked on Friday and impaled upon a
stick is accounted a safeguard against the spread of fire. The natives
of this district likewise entertain various curious fancies which are
decidedly unique. For example, when a newly born child is knock-kneed,
the mother regards it as a changeling. She therefore seats herself on
the threshold on a Tuesday or Friday, when witches are abroad, and
peremptorily addresses those creatures, demanding the restoration of her
own child, whom she believes they have stolen away. "Pfui! Pfui! you
scoundrels!" she exclaims, "give it back!"

The Sicilians have a host of superstitions on this subject. The
following are among the more interesting items of their folk-lore
relating to Friday. On this day the owner of a rented house will not
hand over the keys to a new tenant, neither would the latter receive
them. In the southern part of the province of Palermo no thief dares
steal on a Friday, and the accuracy of this statement is corroborated by
the criminal statistics. Indeed, on this day the most timid householder
may journey in safety anywhere in the province, a fact which the
sagacious traveler in a land notorious for brigandage will not fail to
note. This immunity is not attributable to any special veneration for
Freyja's day, but rather to a popular belief that thefts and other
misdemeanors then committed are sure of speedy detection. Laughter is
thought to offend the goddess, and the proverb runs, "He who laughs on
Friday weeps on Saturday." In an anonymous manuscript in the municipal
library of Palermo appears a statement that whoever cuts out garments on
a Tuesday or a Friday runs the risk of making them too short and of
losing the cloth. Such clothing has little wear in it, for nothing begun
on these days has any durability.

The inhabitants of ancient Gascony are no less credulous, as is apparent
from the following bits of Friday lore. Any one rash enough to start on
a journey on horseback runs especial risk of falling off his horse, and
of being drowned in attempting to ford a stream. It has even happened
that newly baked loaves have been found tinged with blood in the oven.
However, Friday is a good day for making vinegar, and the casks filled
at three o'clock in the afternoon of that day are found to be superior
to others. This is because our Lord, while on the cross, was given
vinegar to drink, mingled with gall, at three o'clock on the afternoon
of Good Friday.

In Normandy, also, Friday is the favorite day for putting water in wine
or cider, for the people believe that on any other day the mixture would
become sour.

According to a quaint Italian belief, whoever is born on a Friday, will
be of sanguine temperament, passionate, light-hearted, and handsome. He
will delight in music, both vocal and instrumental, and will have a
liking for fine clothes. Moreover, he will be voluble in speech, though
of unstable character.

The Tyrolese have a saying, "Whoever is born on a Friday must experience
trouble," and they regard it as folly to marry on that day.

The French people share fully the general distrust of the sixth day of
the week. This is shown by statistics of the Parisian theatres, where
there are produced on an average nearly two hundred new pieces annually,
and for many years not one of these has had its first performance on a
Friday.

In Alsace Wednesday and Friday are unlucky days, and the former is never
chosen for a wedding or baptism. But of the two, Friday is the more
undesirable, and no business of importance is done thereon, nor any
journey undertaken. It is foremost among witch days, for evil spirits
are then abroad, and their activity on a Friday is proverbial. These
sentiments prevail in other German districts, and are entertained by
people of cultivation and learning. Indeed, it may be affirmed truly
that the possession of intellectual force is by no means incompatible
with a superstitious belief in the luck or misfortune of particular
days. The credulousness of the great Napoleon in this regard is well
known. Bismarck is said to have once written to his wife from
Letzlingen, a village of Prussian Saxony: "I have not had such good luck
in hunting to-day as I had three years ago; but then--it is a Friday."
The French statesman, Gambetta, is reported to have arranged his
journeyings and business affairs with reference to auspicious hours, as
determined by a professional reader of cards; and President Felix Faure,
we are told, is similarly credulous. Indeed, so prevalent are notions of
this kind in the French capital that tastefully ornamented cards with a
list of "hours to be avoided" find a ready sale in the streets.

Among the Slavonians St. Prascovia, the modern successor of Venus and
Freyja, is believed to visit the peasants' houses every Friday, and woe
to the luckless woman whom she then finds engaged in certain
occupations. Local tradition says that sewing, spinning, and weaving on
that day are sinful, and are especially distasteful to St. Prascovia,
familiarly known as "Mother Friday," because the dust so produced gets
into her eyes. She is very apt to take revenge by inflicting upon the
offenders divers physical ailments, such as sore eyes, whitlows, or
hang-nails. In some districts the peasants retire earlier than usual on
Friday evenings, under the impression that Mother Friday will punish
those whom she may find awake when she makes her evening visits. These
popular beliefs are exemplified in the following tradition:--

There was once a certain woman who did not pay due reverence to Mother
Friday, but set to work on a distaff full of flax, combing it and
whirling it. She spun away until dinner-time, then sleep fell upon her.
Suddenly the door opened, and in came Mother Friday, before the eyes of
all who were there, clad in a white dress, and in such a rage! And she
went straight up to the woman who had been spinning, and scooped up from
the floor a handful of the dust that had fallen out of the flax, and
began stuffing and stuffing that woman's eyes full of it! After she had
stuffed them full, she went off in a rage,--disappeared without saying a
word.

When the woman awoke, she began squalling, at the top of her voice,
about her eyes, but could not tell what was the matter with them. The
other women, who had been much frightened, began to cry out: "Oh, you
wretch, you! you've brought a terrible punishment on yourself from
Mother Friday." Then they told her all that had taken place. She
listened to it all, and then began imploring: "Mother Friday, forgive
me! Pardon me, the guilty one! I'll offer thee a taper, and I'll never
let friend or foe dishonor thee, mother!"

"Well, what do you think? During the night, back came Mother Friday, and
took the dust out of that woman's eyes, so that she was able to get
about again. It's a great sin to dishonor Mother Friday, combing and
spinning flax, forsooth!"

Professor Max Müller, in his "Contributions to the Science of Mythology"
(New York and Bombay, 1897), cites a tradition of the as yet little
known mythology of the Mordvinians, a Finnish race inhabiting the middle
Volga provinces of Russia. A woman who had been working all day long on
a Friday, baking bread for some orphan children, was taken up in a dream
to the still, and when she was nearly exhausted, owing to the effects of
the heat, and to the rapidly increasing size of a piece of dough which
she had put into her mouth, she was accosted by Chkai, the large-eyed
Mordvine sun-god, who told her that she was being punished because she
had baked bread for the orphans on a Friday. She was charged, moreover,
to tell all the people so. "But who will be such a fool as to believe
me?" asked the woman most disrespectfully. Thereupon Chkai placed his
mark in scarlet and blue upon her forehead,--an emblem which is thought
to bring luck. And after that the Mordvine women were careful to bake no
bread, nor to do any other work, on a Friday.

It was a very early custom in England to appoint Friday as the day for
the execution of criminals, and until recently the same was true in this
country, but through the persistent efforts of the "Thirteen Club," of
New York, whose object is the discouragement of certain popular
superstitions, the sixth day of the week has been partially relieved of
the odium of being "hangman's day" in the United States.

A writer of an inventive turn of mind has suggested that Friday's
unpopularity is partly owing to its being late in the week and money
runs short to the poor. Saturday being the close of the week, and
pay-day as well, there is no time then to be superstitious.

Some modern writers have displayed a misguided zeal in the collection of
statistical evidence that Friday has been a most auspicious day in
American history, and have cited among other events the surrender of
Burgoyne at Saratoga, and that of Cornwallis at Yorktown, as occurring
on that day. But will such an argument appeal with success to English
readers? If by general consent we should teach our children that Friday
was the luckiest day of the week, evidence in favor of this theory would
no doubt rapidly accumulate, and the new belief would soon be worth just
as much as the old one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Superstitious Dealings With Animals](mhs56)
