[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs68)  [Next](mhs70) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IV. ODD NUMBERS IN WITCHCRAFT

Odd numbers are intimately associated with the black art, for witches'
incantations are commonly repeated three or nine times. Who ever heard
of a witch performing any of her mystic rites exactly four or six times?
Apropos of this may be quoted the following story, taken from the
advance sheets of a work entitled "Golspie," edited by Edward W. B.
Nicholson, M. A., Bodley's Librarian in the University of Oxford,
England, and loaned by him to the writer. The book contains much
interesting folk-lore of the extreme north of Scotland:--

A woman who lived near Golspie was always telling her neighbors that a
woman whom they all believed to be a witch had cast an evil eye upon the
cow and herself. "Her milk and butter were spoiled," she said; and she
also told them that in a dream she saw the witch in the shape of a hare
come into her milk-house and drink the milk. One day when she was in the
wood for sticks, her neighbors went into her byre, and seeing a
petticoat on a nail, cut a number of crosses on it and put it in the
cow's stall. Then they tied nine rusty nails to a cord with nine knots
on it. This cord they tied to the chain on the cow's neck, and then went
away. Shortly after the woman came home, she went into the byre, and
seeing the petticoat, nails, etc., ran out to her neighbors screaming,
and calling to them to go and see what the witch had done on her. To
make sure that it was the witch's work, she showed them the unequal
number of nails and knots. Then she took everything that she thought the
witch had handled, and made a fire of them, saying that she could no
longer harm any person, because her power was destroyed by fire.

The employment of odd numbers in magical formulae is exemplified in the
following recipe for a drink against all temptations of the Devil, used
by the Saxons in England:--

Take betony, bishopwort, lupins, githrife, attorlothe, wolfscomb,
yarrow; lay them under the altar, sing nine masses over them, scrape the
worts into holy water, give the man to drink at night, fasting, a
cup-full, and put the holy water into all the meat which the man taketh.
Work thus a good salve against the temptations of the fiend.

A Hindu woman, on returning with her young child from a strange village,
is careful, before entering her own dwelling, to pass seven small stones
seven times around the baby's head, and throw them away in different
directions, in order thus to disperse any evil which may have been
contracted during her trip.

And as a preliminary to other mystic procedures, in order to avert the
Evil Eye, the Hindus wave around the patient's face seven pebbles taken
from a spot where three roads meet, seven leaves of the date-palm, and
seven bunches of leaves of the bor tree. It may not be surprising that
such mysterious rites, whose efficacy depends chiefly on the magical
potency of certain odd numbers, should be popular among the natives of
India, but it is noteworthy that these numbers are equally influential
in Christian lands. A multiplication of examples might serve to
emphasize this fact, but would occupy too much space. Charms and
formulas are commonly thrice repeated, probably in reference to the Holy
Trinity.

Of all the numbers arithmeticall,  
The number three is heald for principall,  
As well in naturall philosophy,  
As supernaturall theologie.

The Bavarian peasant, in passing through a haunted place, considers
himself amply fortified against evil if he takes the precaution to carry
three things; namely, (1) a new knife which has never cut anything,
marked on the blade with three crosses; (2) a loaf of bread baked on
Epiphany Eve; (3) a black cat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Odd Numbers In Folk-medicine](mhs70)
