[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs69) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# V. ODD NUMBERS IN FOLK-MEDICINE

In a volume containing a great variety of ancient charms and magical
cures, collected by Marcellus Empiricus, a Latin writer of the fourth
century A. D., in which volume various remedial measures are described
with great minuteness, the even numbers seldom appear. Thus, for the
removal of a foreign substance from the eye, one should rub the affected
organ with the five fingers of the hand of the same side, and repeat
thrice a charm of words. Again, for the cure of a sty on the eyelid,
take nine grains of barley and poke the sty with each one separately,
meanwhile repeating a magic formula in Greek. Then throw away the nine
and do the same with seven, throw away the seven and do the same with
five, and so with three and one.

The early Saxon physicians in England seem also to have had faith in the
peculiar virtues of the number nine, as is evident from many of their
prescriptions, of which the following prefix to a lengthy Latin charm is
a fair specimen:--

For flying venom and every venomous swelling, on a Friday churn butter
which has been milked from a neat or hind all of one colour, and let it
not be mingled with water. Sing over it nine times a litany and nine
times the Paternoster, and nine times this incantation.

In an ancient English manuscript (Harleian Collection, No. 585),
frequent examples are given of the employment of odd numbers in
therapeutics. Thus, for dropsical affections, a beverage containing
alexander betony, and fennel is to be drunk daily for seven days. "To
expel venom," centaury is to be taken for fifteen days, and a potion
prepared from the seed of cress is extolled for its curative qualities
if taken faithfully during three days.

Indeed, the odd numbers are prominent in the annals of folk-medicine
throughout Great Britain. The three chief duties of a physician were
declared to be as follows: the restoration of health when lost, its
amelioration when weak, and its preservation when recovered. So also
three qualities were requisite in a surgeon; namely, an eagle's eye, a
lion's heart, and a lady's hand, attributes equally essential to the
skillful operator of the present day.

The natives of the Hebrides inherit the old Scandinavian and Celtic
partiality for certain odd numbers. Thus in Tiree a favorite cure for
jaundice consists in wearing a shirt previously dipped in water taken
from the tops of nine waves, and in which nine stones have been boiled.
These same people formerly employed a peculiar method of treating sick
cattle. The veterinary, holding in his hands a cup of cream and an
oat-cake, takes his seat upon the animal, and repeats a Celtic charm of
words "nine times nine times," taking "a bit and a sip" before each
repetition.

In Cornwall, for the cure of inflammatory affections, the invocation of
three angels is thrice repeated to each one of nine bramble leaves; and
a popular remedy for whooping cough is to pass a child nine times under
and over a three-year-old donkey. In the south of England, for
intermittent fever, the patient is recommended to eat seven sage leaves
on seven successive mornings, fasting meanwhile; and in northern
Scotland scrofulous affections are thought to yield to the touch of a
seventh son, when accompanied by an invocation of the Trinity.

The belief in the magical curative qualities of the number nine was not
limited to the northern nations. Thus the inhabitant of ancient Apulia,
when bitten by a scorpion, proceeded to walk nine times around the walls
of his native town.

Dr. D. G. Brinton, in his "Nagualism, a Study of Native American
Folk-Lore and History," remarks that the number nine recurs very often
in the conjurations of Mexican magicians.

The women of Canton, China, attribute magical properties for the cure of
cutaneous affections to water drawn after midnight of the seventh day of
the seventh month.

When a gypsy child bumps its head, a knife-blade is first pressed upon
the swelling, after which an incantation is pronounced three, seven, or
nine times, and the knife is stuck into the earth a like number of
times. Many charms employed by gypsies could be mentioned in
illustration of the avoidance of even numbers in all their mystic rites.

In regard to the luck of odd numbers, the exception, which is commonly
supposed to prove the rule, is the much maligned thirteen.

In the Scandinavian mythology Loki, the Principle of Evil and the chief
author of human misfortunes, accompanied the twelve AEsir, or Demigods,
and was reckoned the thirteenth among them. Moreover, the Valkyrs, or
Virgins, who waited upon the heroes in Valhalla, were thirteen in
number, and from these sources is believed to have sprung the very
common superstition concerning the ill luck and fatality of the number
thirteen, especially in connection with a party of guests at table.

The most generally received explanation of the origin of this popular
belief refers it to the Last Supper of our Lord, where Judas is
sometimes represented as the thirteenth guest. But why Judas rather than
John, the beloved disciple? However, this is the generally accepted
starting-point of this notable superstition. As with the Jews the
thirteenth month, and with the Christians the thirteenth day of the
year, which began with Christmas, were accounted ominous, so, with the
inhabitants of India, the thirteenth year was considered to be of evil
import. It is evident, therefore, that the source of this nearly
world-wide belief cannot be attributed wholly either to the mythology of
the north or to the Paschal Supper.

When the year was reckoned as thirteen lunar months of twenty-eight days
each, the number thirteen, according to one view, was considered
auspicious; but when, under the present method of solar time, the number
of months was reduced to twelve, thirteen's reputation was changed for
the worse.

In early times the Feast of the Epiphany, which is the thirteenth day
after Christmas Eve, was feared because at that time the three
goddesses, Berchta, Holle, and Befana, with their ghostly companions,
were especially active; and, as a guard against their machinations, the
initial letters of the names of the three kings, or wise men, were
written on many a door.

Of the former trio, Berchta was represented as a shaggy monster, whose
name was used as a bugbear with which to frighten children. She was
intrusted with the oversight of spinning, and on the eve of Epiphany she
visited the homes of the countryfolk, distributing empty reels, which
she required to be filled within a specified time; if her demands were
not complied with, she retaliated by tangling and befouling the flax.

Holle, or Holda, was a benignant and merciful goddess, of an obliging
disposition, who was usually most lenient, except when she noticed
disorder in the affairs of a household. Her favorite resorts were the
lakes and fountains, but she had also an oversight over domestic
concerns, and shared with Berchta the supervision of spinning.
Sometimes, however, she appeared as an old hag, with bristling, matted
hair and long teeth.

Befana, the third goddess, was of Italian origin, and her name signifies
Epiphany. On that day the women and children used to place a rag doll in
the window in her honor. In personal appearance she was black and ugly,
but her disposition was not unfriendly.

So universal has been the superstition regarding the number thirteen at
table, that it has long been a matter of etiquette in France to avoid
having exactly that number of guests at dinner-parties. The Parisian
pique-assiette, a person whose title corresponds to the English
"trencher friend" or "sponger," is also known as a quatorziême, his
chief mission being to occupy the fourteenth seat at a banquet.

The ancients, we learn, had ideas of their own regarding the proper size
of festive gatherings, their favorite number of convives being between
three and nine, the number of the Graces and Muses respectively.

Opinions have differed as to whether misfortune were likely to befall
the whole company of thirteen persons rash enough to dine together, or
only the one leaving the room first after the repast. All evil, however,
was supposed to be averted by the entire company rising to their feet
together. It has been wittily remarked that the only occasion when
thirteen plates at table should cause disquietude is when the food is
only sufficient for twelve persons.

At the thirteenth annual dinner of that unique organization, the
Thirteen Club, held in New York city, January 13, 1895, at 7:13 o'clock,
P.M., the custodian delivered an address in which were recounted the
circumstances of the club's formation. So prevalent was the apprehension
of evil likely to result from the assembling together of thirteen
persons that, when at length the requisite number were seated at table,
it was found desirable to lock the doors of the banquet-room, lest some
faint soul should retire abruptly.

Field-Marshal Lord Roberts, in his "Forty-One Years in India" (vol. i.
p. 24), mentions a circumstance occurring in his own experience, which
affords evidence, were any needed, of the falsity of the superstition in
question. On New Year's Day, A. D. 1853, Lord Roberts was one of a party
of thirteen who dined together at a staff-officers' mess at Peshawer, on
the Afghan frontier. Eleven years later all these officers were alive,
the greater number having participated in the suppression of the great
Sepoy Mutiny of 1857, during which several of them were wounded.

In Italy shrewd theatrical managers have found it expedient to change
the number of Box 13 to 12A, and in many streets of Rome and Florence
one may search in vain for house-numbers between 12-1/2 and 14. A
gentleman of the writer's acquaintance, living in Washington, D. C.,
sent a formal petition to the authorities asking leave to change the
number of his house, for the sole reason that it contained the ominous
figures.

As an illustration of the popular distrust of the number thirteen among
the villagers of the Department of Ille-et-Villaine, France, may be
cited the following custom, which is in vogue in that district. Children
are there usually taught the art of knitting by devout elderly women.
The little ones are first seated in a circle, and, to facilitate the
work, on the completion of the first round of knitting they are made to
repeat the following words: One, the Father;" at the close of the second
round, "Two, the Son;" and so on, as follows: "Three, the Holy Spirit;
the four Evangelists; the five wounds of our Lord; the six commandments
of the church; seven sacraments; eight beatitudes; nine choirs of
angels; ten commandments of God; eleven thousand virgins twelve
apostles;" and at the close of the thirteenth round, the children
mention the name of Judas.

This remarkable and unreasonable prejudice against an innocent number
seems to pervade all classes and communities. The possession of
intelligence and culture is no effective barrier against it. Arguments
and reasoning are alike vain. Even at this writing, an evening journal
records that at a recent meeting of a newly elected board of aldermen in
an enlightened city of eastern Massachusetts, one of the members
objected to casting lots for seats because he did not relish the idea of
drawing number thirteen. However, his scruples having been in a measure
overcome, he was much relieved to find that the number eleven, which is
both uneven and lucky, had fallen to his share.

Brand quotes as follows from Fuller's "Mixt Contemplations" (1660) in
reference to this subject:--

A covetous Courtier complained to King Edward the sixt of Christ
Colledge in Cambridge, that it was a superstitious foundation,
consisting of a Master and twelve Fellowes, in imitation of Christ and
His twelve Apostles. He advised the King also to take away one or two
Fellowships, so as to discompose that superstitious number. "Oh, no!"
said the King, "I have a better way than that to mar their conceit; I
will add a thirteenth Fellowship unto them;" which he did accordingly,
and so it remaineth unto this day.

Persians regard the number thirteen as so unlucky that they refrain from
naming it. When they wish to allude to this number, instead of
mentioning the proper term, they use words meaning "much more" or
"nothing."

The Moors, or Arabs, of northern Africa have similar prejudices, whereas
the American negro, ordinarily a most credulous being, appears to be
quite indifferent to the evil influences of the fateful number; but in
Turkey, so great is the popular dislike of it that the word for thirteen
is seldom used.

In Scotland this number is known as the "Deil's Dozen," a phrase which
has been supposed to have some connection with card-playing, there being
thirteen cards in each suit of the "Deil's Books." John Jamieson, in his
Scottish Dictionary, avows his inability to trace the superstition to
its source, but believes that it includes the idea of the thirteenth
being the Devil's lot. The number thirteen is also sometimes known as a
"baker's dozen," because it was formerly a common practice to give
thirteen loaves for twelve, the extra piece being called the in-bread or
to-bread. This custom is supposed to have originated at a time when
heavy fines were imposed for short weights, the additional bread being
given by bakers as a precautionary measure.

In certain cases, contrary to the general rule, thirteen is accounted a
fortunate numeral, or even as one possessing extraordinary virtues.

Dr. Daniel G. Brinton, in "A Primer of Mayan Hieroglyphics" (p. 25),
says that in the old language of the Mayas, an aboriginal tribe of
Yucatan, the numbers nine and thirteen were used to denote indefinite
greatness and supreme excellence. Thus a very fortunate man was
possessed of nine souls, and the phrase, "thirteen generations old,"
conveyed the idea of perpetuity. The "Demon with thirteen powers" was a
prominent figure in the mythology of the Tzentals, a Mayan tribe.

According to a widely prevalent popular impression, a brood is usually
odd in number, and therefore it is folly to set an even number of eggs
under a hen. In spite of the falsity of this idea, it is still quite
customary to set thirteen eggs, an even number in this case being
accounted unlucky.

Gerald Massey, in "The Natural Genesis," remarks that "there were
thirteen kinds of spices set out in the Jewish religious service, along
with the zodiacal number of twelve loaves of shew-bread. There are
thirteen articles to the Hebrew faith, and the Cabalists have thirteen
rules by which they are enabled to penetrate the mysteries of the Hebrew
Scriptures. Thirteen are the dialectical canons of the Talmudical
doctors for determining the sense of the law in all civil and
ecelesiastieal cases."

In England the day of twenty-four hours was formerly divided into
thirteen parts, as follows:

1\. After midnight.  
2. Cock-crow.  
3. Between the first cock-crow and daybreak.  
4. The Dawn.  
5. Morning.  
6. Noon.  
7. Afternoon.  
8. Sunset.  
9. Twilight.  
10. Evening.  
11. Candle-time.  
12. Bed-time.  
13. Dead of night.

Recurring now to the prevalent notions regarding the sinister and
portentous character of this number, one may well inquire in all
seriousness whether the harboring of this and other firmly rooted
superstitious fancies is compatible with a deep and abiding Christian
faith. The answer is plainly in the negative. Therefore it is doubtless
true--and the truth should make us free--that the greater our
indifference to the various alleged omens and auguries which so easily
beset us, the more readily shall we acquire and retain a firm and
enduring dependence on Divine Providence.

END
