[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index) 
[Iceland](../../ice/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tnm06) 
[Next](tnm08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl06"></span>

[![PLATE VI.&lt;br&gt; FIG.
1.                                        FIG. 2.&lt;br&gt; CROSS-SLAB,
KIRK BRIDE.](tn/pl06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl06.jpg)  
PLATE VI.  
FIG. 1.                                        FIG. 2.  
CROSS-SLAB, KIRK BRIDE.  

 

### V.--ODIN, THOR, GIANTS, DEMONS, DWARVES.

A remarkable uninscribed stone at Kirk Bride, never yet figured nor
fully described ([pl. VI.](#img_pl06)), exhibits a wealth of
mythological carvings equal to that on the shield given by Thorleif the
Wise to Thiodwolf.

On one face (fig. 1), below the head of the cross, on the right, is the
figure of a man resting on his spear. It is almost obliterated, but can
still be traced, and is probably intended for Odin.

On the other face (fig. 2), below the circle, on the left, the figure
with a spear, having a raven or other bird behind it, might be taken for
Odin also, but it is attacking a stag, and there is no story of Odin and
a stag, nor would there be, for that beast was not introduced into
Scandinavia till the sixteenth century.

Below the first figure (fig. 1), separated by a panel of plaitwork, we
find human forms among the feet of horses. This, I think, must be
intended for the trampling to death of Swanhild beneath the hoofs of
Jormanrek's horses; a deed suggested to the Gothic king by Odin in his
capacity of Bikke, the evil counsellor, on the ground of her sympathy
with his enemies the Huns--"For he was moved to wrath by the treacherous
desertion of her husband"--(A lost Jormanrek lay). In the lay known as
Gudrun's "Chain of Woe," we read:--"She was like a glorious sunbeam in
my bower. I endowed her with gold and goodly raiment or ever I married
her into Gothland. That was the hardest

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

of all my sorrows when they trod Swanhild's fair hair in the dust under
the hoofs of the horses."

On the other face of the stone (fig. 2) we find a reference to one of
Thor's most famous adventures. <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) The
slayer of giants and monsters was destined in the end to meet with the
dread dragon Jormungandr; he tried to anticipate matters, and we are
told that once upon a time he went in the guise of a young man to the
house of the Giant Hymi, where he tarried as guest for the night. At
dawn Hymi made ready to go a-fishing, and Thor would go too. He asked
what they should have for bait, but the giant, who did not want him,
answered surlily that he might go look for bait for himself. Thor
noticed on the hillside Hymi's herd of oxen; he went up to the biggest,
a coal-black one called *Himinbriotr* (Heavenly Bull), "wrung" off its
head and ran back to the strand. The giant had then shoved off his
skiff, but Thor got on board and began to row. At last the giant, who
had thought to tire and frighten him by the distance they would pull,
himself objected to go further, as, he said, they were already in
mid-ocean and were likely to be over the Midgardsorm. Then, we are told,
"the sturdy Hymi kept pulling up whales, two at once, on his hook." Thor
baited his angle with the ox's head and cast it overboard. The
God-abhorred Serpent gulped down the bait, and tugged so hard that both
Thor's fists were dashed against the gunwale. Then he put forth his
god's strength and hauled with such force that he drove both his feet
through the bottom of the boat. He grasped his hammer, but the giant,
quaking with fear, fumbled at his fishing knife and cut the line. Back
sank the dragon into the deep. Thor flung his Hammer after him, then,
with his fist, tumbled Hymi overboard, and waded to land.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

In our figure, below the circle on the right, we see Thor, bearded, with
his strength-belt on, carrying in one hand the ox-head, and hastening
with great strides to reach the strand before the giant will have put
off.

On the fragment of a stone at Gosforth, Cumberland, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) of the same period, and carved by the same
people, we have the figure of a boat with the Giant hauling in the
whales, and Thor in the stern casting his line. On another we see Thor
with his two feet dashed through the bottom of the boat.

Hymi was the first of the Hrímthursar, or Giants, formed by the heat
from Muspell meeting the rime of Ginnúnga gap. Another adventure of
Thor's with him is related in Hymiskvidar as one with the last, but, in
the "Prose Edda" (Gylfi's Mocking) that is treated as a separate
incident, as indeed it must have been. This is the recovery of the
*Caldron*, a myth derived possibly from the Celtic one of Cúchulainn
(the Sun Hero) and the Caldron of Mider, King of Falga (the Isle of
Man). ("Celtic Heathendom," 261, 476.)

The giant Eager, a sea-god (Oceanos), set Thor the task of procuring the
famous Caldron, which was a mile deep, promising if he did so to make a
Brew for the gods. None of the blessed gods knew how this could be
accomplished, but Tew offered to accompany Thor and try what could be
done. They came to Hymi's Hall, at the end of Heaven; the giantess hid
them behind the pillar. Then Hymi came home from hunting. He looked
towards them and the pillar flew asunder, the beam broke in twain, and
the caldrons which were set upon it came down, and all except one broke.
Then the giant challenged them to break the caldron. Thor dashed it at
the pillars, but in

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

vain; but the giantess whispered to throw it at Hymi's skull, which was
harder even than the caldron; so he sprang up and hurled it at his head,
and it was cracked all across. As a last task the giant required him to
carry the caldron out of his court. Tew tried twice, but could not lift
it, but Thor clapped it on his head and the chains rattled about his
heels. "So he came to the Gods Thing bringing the Caldron that Hymi had
owned."

Now we see, in front of Thor (fig. 1), and above another strange-looking
giant, a very curious figure which must have some meaning. I suggest
that it is meant to represent this Caldron.

Just below it is a monstrous figure, arms a-kimbo, legs outspread. This
may well be the Lord of the Giants, Rungnir, of whom we read in
Thiodwolf's "Shield Song " and in the "Edda." Once, having been allowed
by Odin to enter Asgard, and treated with hospitality, he grew boastful,
and--an unheard of thing--challenged Thor to combat! A date being fixed,
and a battle-place (Rockgarth) pitched, Rungnir took up his position. He
was very huge, his head was of stone--his heart also was of hard
stone--pointed into three horns. He stood with his great stone shield
set before him, and, for weapon, had a hone, which he bore on his
shoulders. Thor's arrival is finely described. He came down "in a ring
of flame"; the heavens thundered beneath him; "the earth was rent
asunder as the goats drew the chariot-god on to his tryst with Rungnir."
Thor's man Delvr ran before, and, seeing the giant's safe position, gave
him to understand that Thor had seen him and was going down into the
earth to come up against him from below. Thereupon Rungnir thrust the
shield under his feet and stood upon it, and took hold of the hone with
both hands. Thor cast his hammer at him

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

from afar; Rungnir threw the hone, which met the hammer in its flight
and broke asunder, one half falling to earth, whence come all rocks of
hone, the other crashing into Thor's head, so that he fell forward. But
the Hammer broke Rungnir's skull into little bits, and he fell over
Thor, so that his foot lay athwart his neck.

Here, then, we may see Rungnir, Lord of the Giants, standing on his
shield awaiting Thor's attack.

The figure just above--a bearded man, belted, attacking a serpent, is
undoubtedly intended for Thor, who at Ragnarök slays Jörmundgandr, the
Midgardsorm. He retreats nine steps, when he is so overcome by the
venomous fumes from the monster that he himself succumbs. The
step-pattern border of the slab on one face ends ingeniously in the head
of a great Serpent, evidently another figure of Jörmungand; it is close
by Thor with the Ox head, an anticipation of his further adventures!

At the feet of Thor, between the coils of the Serpent and the Giant, is
a small figure, intended probably for the Dwarf Lit, which, at Balder's
funeral, when Thor stood up and hallowed the pyre with his Hammer, ran
before him, but Thor "spurned at him with his foot and dashed him into
the fire, and he was burned."

Among numerous other Dwarves, we are told of four at the cardinal points
of the compass, which support the firmament (Hymi's skull) at the four
corners, namely, Austri, Vestri, Nordri, and Sudri. Two of these may be
seen on this face of the stone, one on either side above the head of the
cross, the curved border of the stone suggesting the firmament. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

On the other face of the stone (fig. 2) their places are taken by
figures of a Cock, which, though an early Christian symbol of the
Resurrection, appears on our Manks monuments only on Scandinavian
pieces, and may have reference to the cock Gollin-Kambi
(Gold-comb):--"The cock Gold-comb is crowing to the Anses, waking the
warriors of the Father of Hosts. Another cock, Sooty-red, crows under
the earth in the halls of Hell." ("Sh. Volu-spa," 122-5.)

Just below the figure of Thor in the fishing adventure is that of a
large bird--possibly the Eagle which dwells in the branches of
Ygg-drasil. The tree itself would be suggested by the line of
"vertebral" pattern down the middle of the stone.

Lastly, in a panel below, at the right corner, we find two great hounds
or wolves; doubtless Garm, who at Ragnarök is to swallow the moon, and
that other that takes the sun. "Fiercely bays Garm before the cave of
the rock, the chain shall snap and the Wolf range free." ("Volu-spa,"
II.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[23:1](tnm07.htm#fr_18) Hymis-kvida, 70.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[24:1](tnm07.htm#fr_19) "Crosses, &c., in the
Diocese of Carlisle." Rev. W. S. Calverley, p. 168.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[26:1](tnm07.htm#fr_20) So on a Hog-hacked stone
at Heysham. See "Transactions of the Lancashire and Cheshire Antiquarian
Society," Vol. V., Pl. VI., and Vol. IX., P1. IX., X., XI. Note also the
use of the Chevron as on the Bride Stone!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI.--The Wind-Giant, Hræ-svelgr, Carrion-Swallower](tnm08)
