[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index.md) 
[Iceland](../../ice/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tnm02.md) 
[Next](tnm04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_fig01"></span>

[![ODIN'S BOOTY. THEFT OF THE HOLY MEAD.&lt;br&gt; (¼ actual
size.)](tn/fig01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig01.jpg.md)  
ODIN'S BOOTY. THEFT OF THE HOLY MEAD.  
(¼ actual size.)  

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

# ILLUSTRATIONS.

### I.--ORIGIN OF POETRY.

My first illustration <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) (fig. 1, p.
16) is from the handsome cross on the steps at Michael Church gates. The
inscription recites that "Joalf, son of Thorulf the Red, raised this
cross after Fritha, his mother." On one face, above the head of the
cross, we find the figures of two birds flying--an eagle chasing a
falcon; referring, I suggest, to Odin's adventure in the recovery of the
Holy Mead--the Soma-draught, source of Inspiration and Poetry.

Once, in order to commemorate a treaty between the Anses and the Vanir,
a being was formed by them in the shape of a man called Quasi, who was
so wise there was nothing he could not unfold. Certain Dwarves--Fealar
and Galar--treacherously slew him and let his blood run into a kettle or
cauldron--*Odrearer* (spirit raiser)--and two cups--*Soma* and *Bodn*.
They mixed honey with it, and so brewed the sacred drink--origin of
Poetry and of Wisdom. Long afterwards these Dwarfs, by way of sport,
drowned a Giant named Gilling by upsetting a boat, and afterwards let
fall a millstone on the head of his wife because, they said, "her
shrieking was most horrible to hear! "When their son, Suftung, heard
these tidings, he caught the Dwarves and set them on a reef the tide ran
over. Then, for weregild, they offered the precious mead, which

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

was accepted, and the Giants kept it for ages in the centre of a
mountain. At last, Odin, under the name of Bale-work, in order to
procure the precious drink, took service under the Giant Baugi,
Suftung's brother, asking only for one draught of the mead as his wage.
At the end of the term they sought Suftung, who denied them even a drop.
So Odin gave Baugi an auger, and told him to bore through the hill, and
so he did. Then Balework turned himself into a serpent and crept
through, but Baugi treacherously stabbed at him with the auger, missing
him, however. Now Gundfled, Suftung's daughter, kept the mead in the
centre of the hill. Odin made friends and persuaded her to let him have
three draughts of it. He drank it all up, and, returning to the surface
took on him his falcon's coat and flew away as hard as he could. But
Suftung spied him and, taking his eagle skin, flew after him. When the
Anses saw Odin coming, they set vessels out in the court, and, as soon
as he got to Asgard he threw up the mead into the vessels. So Poesy is
called Odin's booty or find, his drink or gift.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[17:1](tnm03.htm#fr_14.md) In describing the
carvings, I feel bound to follow the usual custom of speaking of "right"
and "left," as *viewed by the spectator*, not as it really is on the
stone. I think it wrong, but to do otherwise in a small pamphlet dealing
only with local sculptures would but cause needless confusion!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II.--Odin Carries the Hero to Valhall](tnm04.md)
