[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls04)  [Next](rls06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Sa*m*nyâsins or Saints.

Similar ideas existed already among the Brahmans, and we meet among
them, even before the rise of Buddhism,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

with men who had shaken off all social fetters who had left their home
and family, lived by themselves in forests or in caves, abstained from
all material enjoyment, restricted their food and drink to a startling
minimum, and often underwent tortures which make us creep when we read
of them or see them as represented in pictures and, in modern times, in
faithful photographs. Such men were naturally surrounded by a halo of
holiness, and they received the little they wanted from those who
visited them and who profited by their teaching. Some of these saints,
but not many, were scholars, and became teachers of ancient lore. Some,
however, and we need not be surprised at it, turned out to be impostors
and hypocrites, and brought disgrace on the whole profession. We must
not forget that formerly the status of a Sa*m*nyâsin presupposed a very
serious discipline during the many years of the student and the domestic
life. Such discipline might generally be accepted as a warrant for a
well-controlled mind and as security against the propensity to
self-indulgence, not quite uncommon even in the lives of so-called
Saints. When this security is removed, and when anybody at any time of
life may proclaim himself a Sa*m*nyâsin, the temptations even of a Saint
are very much increased. But that there were real Sa*m*nyâsins, and that
there are even now men who have completely shaken off the fetters of
passion, who have disciplined their body and subdued the imaginations of
their mind to a perfectly marvellous extent, cannot be doubted. They are
often called Yogins, as having exercised Yoga.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ascetic Exercises or Yoga](rls06.md)
