[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls07)  [Next](rls09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Dayânanda Sarasvatî.

Of the life of the first, of Dayânanda Sarasvatî, we have very full
accounts. He initiated a great reform of Brahmanism, and seems to have
been a liberal-minded man, so far as social reforms were concerned. He
also was willing to surrender his belief in the divine revelation of the
Brâhma*n*as,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

though he retained it in full strength with regard to the Vedic hymns.
He published large commentaries on the Vedas, which show great
familiarity with Sanskrit and very wide reading, though at the same time
an utter want of critical judgement. He sanctioned the remarriage of
widows, supported the movement in favour of raising the marriageable age
of boys and girls, and altogether showed himself free from many
prejudices as to caste, food, and all the rest. He condemned idolatry
and even polytheism. His name became better known in Europe also, from
the time that he fell into the net spread for him by Madame Blavatsky.
But this lasted for a short time only, and when he perceived what her
real objects were, the Sa*m*nyâsin would have nothing more to say to
her. She was not quite the Maitreyî he had expected. He did not know
English, she did not know Bengâli or Sanskrit; hence they did not
understand each other at first, while later on, as some people said,
they understood each other but too well. However that may be, he
certainly seems to have been a powerful disputant, his influence became
greater and greater, till at last his opponents, the orthodox and
unchanging Brahmans, were suspected of having poisoned their dangerous
rival. He died suddenly, but his followers, under the name of
Ârya-Samâj, form still a very important and growing sect in India, that
keeps aloof from all European influences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pawâri Bâba](rls09.md)
