[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls08)  [Next](rls10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Pawâri Bâba.

The second Saint was Pawâri Bâba of Ghazipur. Little Is known of him,
but his recent death has created a painful

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

sensation all over India. He had lived for about thirty years at
Ghazipur, and was venerated as a Saint by the whole native community.
The last nine years, however, he had almost entirely withdrawn from the
world <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md), living by himself in a compound
surrounded by high walls and protected by a formidable gate. Inside
there was a small flower-garden, a well, a small temple, and his own
dwelling-house, which consisted of one room. He never allowed the gate
to be opened, and no one ever saw him except his younger brother. Once
every week or ten days, however, he would come up to the gate and
converse for a few moments from within with any one who happened to be
there. His younger brother always remained within calling-distance. But
though his saintly brother had told him that he could not any longer
bear the misery which the Kâlî-yuga, i.e. the present age, had brought
upon India, he little suspected what his brother meant. The venerable
man, after taking his usual bath and performing his devotions, seems to
have covered his whole body with clarified butter, to have sprinkled
himself all over with incense, then to have set fire to the four corners
of his lonely house, and when the flames had taken hold of it on all
sides, to have deliberately thrown himself into the fire, thus
performing his last sacrifice. Before anybody could rescue him, the old
man was burnt to ashes, and what remained of him was consigned with due
ceremony to the sacred waters of the Ganges. All this happened only a
few months ago. It is always difficult to get an exact account of
anything that

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

happens in India. The conflagration of the house in which the old Saint
had lived for many years cannot be doubted, nor the discovery of his
burnt body. But some of his friends, unwilling to admit his
self-immolation, ascribe the fire to an accident, while others consider
his voluntary sacrifice as the proper ending to his saintly life.

His name Pawâri, sometimes spelt Pahâri, is explained as a contraction
of Pavanâhâri, he who lives on air.

His teaching was probably much the same as that of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, but
I have not been able to get a more accurate account of it. His position,
however, as a Sage and a Saint seems to have been generally recognised,
and Keshub Chunder Sen is a sufficient authority for the fact that he
well deserved a place by the side of such men as Dayânanda Sarasvatî and
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. The people of India evidently distinguish clearly
between these professed ascetics and saints on one side, and mere
reformers such as Rammohun Roy and Keshub Chunder Sen on the other. They
evidently want to see a complete surrender of the world and its
pleasures, riches, and honours before they quite believe in the truth
and the sincerity of any teachers and reformers. Having undergone severe
tortures and penances is likewise an essential condition of Sainthood,
and for the crowd at large even the power of working miracles is by no
means out of fashion yet as a test of being an inspired sage.

The best-known name by which some of these sages are called is
Paramaha*m*sa, a name that hardly lends itself to translation in
English. Scholars who like to cavil and raise a smile

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

at every custom or tradition of the Hindus, translate it literally by
Great Goose, but it would be more faithful to render that ancient title
by High-soaring Eagle. Besides, ha*m*sa, though it is the same word as
goose, is not the same bird. But though these Paramaha*m*sas form an
elite by themselves, we know how many men there have been and are even
now in India who, by the asceticism and saintliness of their lives,
deserve a place very near to the Paramaha*m*sas in our estimation. We
know how Udayashankar, the Prime Minister of Bhavnagar, tried hard to
revive, in his own case, the strict rules of life prescribed for the
ancient Sa*m*nyâsins. The life of Keshub Chunder Sen also, though he was
a married man and travelled much and moved in the world, was a life of
extreme self-denial, as much as that of any Paramaha*m*sa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[14:1](rls09.htm#fr_5.md) *Interpreter*, June, 1898.
*Indian Social Reformer*, June 19, 1898.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Debendranâth Tagore](rls10.md)
