[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls17)  [Next](rls19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

### Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's Wife.

Another charge which Mozoomdar seems to consider as proved against
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a is what he calls his almost barbarous treatment of his
wife. What he means is evidently that he forgot or neglected her till
she was seventeen years of age. But this can hardly be called barbarous
in India, where it is a recognised custom that a girl of five years of
age, as his wife was when he married her, should remain at her parents'
house for years before she migrated to the house of her husband and his
parents. And that a man in a state such as Râmak*ri*sh*n*a is described
to have been in should decline to live *maritalement*, is again by no
means unusual in Eastern, nay, in Western countries also.

Vivekânanda told us that when at the age of seventeen his wife went to
find him, he received her with real kindness, and that she was quite
satisfied to live with him on his own terms, if he would only enlighten
her mind and make her to see and to serve God. Such a relationship is by
no means without a precedent, and cannot be called barbarous, for
*volenti non fit injuria*. Strange to say, I received not many days ago
a letter from an American lady who had gone to visit Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's
widow, Mrs. S. C. Ole Bull, the widow of the famous violin player, and
deeply interested in the religious movements in India. On July 11, 1898,
she writes from *S*rînâgar in Kashmir: 'We were the first foreigners who
were allowed to see Sarada-devî, the widow of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. She
called us her children, and saying that our visit to her was of the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lord, she felt no strangeness in being with us.
When asked to define the obedience to a Guru, who in her case was her
husband, she replied to the effect that when one had chosen a Guru or
teacher, one should listen to and obey all his directions for spiritual
advancement, but in things temporal one could most truly serve a Guru by
using one's own best discernment, even if at times it were not in
agreement with suggestions given.

'When she gladly gave her husband, to whom she had been united by
child-marriage, her assent that he should lead a Sa*m*nyâsin's life, she
gained his intimate friendship, and became his disciple, receiving daily
instruction. During the years of her life with him she was his adviser,
praying earnestly for such purity of motive that she might never fail
him. She had also taken the vow of poverty and chastity, and in
renouncing the natural joys of a mother, she became with him the
spiritual parent of many children.'

It is strange that a man of Mozoomdar's knowledge and experience should
have considered the resolve of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's wife to live with him
as a Sa*m*nyâsinî as barbarous treatment. She herself evidently did not
think so, nor have I heard of any other cruelties on the part of her
husband. If she was satisfied with her life, who has any right to
complain; and is love between husband and wife really impossible without
the procreation of children? We must learn to believe in Hindu honesty,
however incredulous we might justly be on such matters in our own
country. Anyhow, I know of no one else who has taken offence at
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's spiritual marriage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's Influence on Keshub Chunder Sen](rls19.md)
