[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls10)  [Next](rls12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Rai Shaligrâm Saheb Bahadur.

One more case and I have done with my imperfect sketch of the stage on
which Râmak*ri*sh*n*a appears before us to act his part, together with
his fellow-actors who supported and often guided him in his unselfish
and devoted endeavours. We read in the Prabuddha Bhârata, May, 1898, p.
132 seq., of one Rai Shaligrâm Saheb Bahadur. Saheb Bahadur, who is now
about seventy years of age, has spent a very active and useful life as
an official in the Post Office, where he rose to be Postmaster-General
of the North-Western Provinces. It seems that the horrors of the mutiny
in 1857 made a deep impression on his mind.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He saw thousands of men, women, and children
butchered before his eyes, the rich reduced to poverty, the poor raised
to unexpected and undeserved wealth, so that the idea of the world's
impermanent and transient nature took complete possession of him and
estranged him from all that had formerly enlisted his interest and
occupied his energies. From his very youth, however, his mind had been
filled with religious and philosophical questions, and he is said to
have devoted much time from his youth onward through all the years of
his official life to the study of the Sacred Scriptures. No wonder
therefore that after witnessing the horrors of the mutiny and its
suppression, he should have wished to flee from this den of misery and
to get happiness unalloyed and permanent where alone it could be found.
He went to consult several Sa*m*nyâsins and Yogins, but they could not
help him. At last one of his colleagues at the Post Office recommended
his elder brother as a spiritual guide who could be trusted. For two
years he attended his lectures, compared his teaching with that of the
Upanishads and other holy writings, and then became his devoted pupil or
Chela. During his stay at Agra he allowed no one else to serve his
master. He used to grind the flour for him, to cook his meals, and feed
him with his own hands. Every morning he could be seen carrying a
pitcher of pure water on his head for the Guru to bathe in, which he
fetched from a place two miles distant. His monthly salary also was
handed over to the Saint, who used it for the support of his pupils,
wife and children, and spent the rest in charity. All his home affairs
were superintended by his Guru, and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

this was done in spite of the opposition of his castemen who were
Kayasthas, and did not approve of one of their caste cooking the Saint's
food and eating from his dishes, because the Saint was a member of
another caste, that of the Khetris. After some time the pupil wished to
retire from the postal service, but the Saint would not allow it. When
he was appointed Postmaster-General of the North-West he fell on his
knees before the Saint and begged his permission to retire and enter
soul and body into the true spiritual life, but the Saint once more
refused, saying that the discharge of his official duties would in no
way interfere with his spiritual progress. Accordingly he left Agra, and
for many years held his new post at Allahabad, as it is said, with great
success, having introduced many reforms and useful changes in the Postal
Department.

It was not till the death of his Guru in 1897 that the
Postmaster-General felt himself free and justified in leaving the
service. He then became a Guru himself, and imparted spiritual
instruction to those who came to seek for his help. Often those who came
to listen to him were so inspired by his teaching that they renounced
the world and began to lead the life of Sa*m*nyâsins, so that it became
a general belief that whoever went to Rai Shaligrâm would forsake his
family and become an ascetic. Nay, it was said that no one could even
look at the lamp burning on the upper story of his house without being
influenced to renounce the world, to forsake his relations, and thus to
become useless to the community at large. When last heard of the old man
was still alive, his house besieged every

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

day by large numbers of persons, both male and female, who flock there
from different parts of the country. He holds five meetings day and
night for the purpose of imparting religious instruction, so that he has
hardly more than two hours left for sleep. Everybody is welcome, and no
distinction is made between Brahman and !*S*ûdra, rich and poor, good
and bad. The people are convinced that he can work miracles, but he
himself regards such things as unbecoming, and below his dignity. It is
said that the late Doctor Makund Lai, Assistant-Surgeon to the Viceroy,
was in the habit of sending to him patients who had made themselves
senseless by excessive practice of Prâ*n*âyâma, restraint of the breath,
and that by a mere look he brought them back to their senses, and taught
them that this practice was of little good, and in many cases injurious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Râmak*ri*sh*n*a](rls12.md)
