[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls14)  [Next](rls16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Remarks on Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's Life.

This is all that Vivekânanda sent me when I had asked him to write down
whatever he could gather from his own memory and from communication with
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's other disciples. I had warned him repeatedly not to
send me

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

mere fables, such as I had read about his Guru in several Indian
periodicals, and I believe he fully understood what I meant. Yet we can
hardly fail to see the first beginnings of the ravages which the
Dialogic Process works even in the first generation. Given his own
veneration for his departed master, there is a natural unwillingness,
nay, an incapability, to believe or to repeat anything that might place
his master in an unfavourable light. Besides, his master was dead when
these records were written, and the *de mortuis nihil nisi bonum* is
deeply engraved in every human heart. What is believed and told by
everybody in a small village, chiefly by his friends and admirers, is
not likely to be contradicted; and if once a man is looked upon as
different from others, as possessed of superhuman and miraculous powers,
everybody has something new to add in confirmation of what everybody is
ready to believe, while a doubt or a denial is treated as a sign of
unkindness, possibly of envy or malice. The story, for instance, of the
Brahman lady who was sent as a messenger and teacher to Râmak*ri*sh*n*a,
will sound to us far from probable. But when I first heard of it, this
lady was represented as a kind of goddess who met her pupil in a forest
and instructed him, like another Sarasvatî, in all the Vedas, Purâ*n*as,
and philosophies. The difficulty that had to be solved by this heavenly
apparition was, no doubt, the fact that Râmak*ri*sh*n*a had never
received a proper classical education, and yet spoke with authority
about the ancient literature and religion of his countrymen. The fact
that he was ignorant of Sanskrit, nay, that he did not know a single
word of the sacred language of India, is

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

denied by nobody, and has been distinctly asserted by one of his great
admirers, the Rev. P. C. Mozoomdar. Of course he knew Bengâli, and a man
who speaks Bengâli can guess the meaning of Sanskrit as an Italian may
guess the meaning of Latin. Some of the classical Sanskrit texts exist
in Bengâli translations, and may have given him all the information
which he wanted for his own purposes, to say nothing of his constant
intercourse with learned men who would have warned him against mistakes
and answered any question he chose to ask. Thus the *Dea ex machina* was
really not wanted. If this Brahman lady was called a goddess, we must
remember that Devî is not much more than a title of honour given to
high-born and illustrious ladies, nay, that an exceptionally
well-informed and en-lightened lady might well have been spoken of as an
incarnation of the goddess Sarasvatî. In India the distance between
deity and humanity is very small; gods are believed to become men, and
men gods, without much ado about it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mozoomdar's Judgement](rls16)
