[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls11)  [Next](rls13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Râmak*ri*sh*n*a.

The few cases mentioned here may suffice to show that Râmak*ri*sh*n*a
was by no means a solitary instance, and that, however much the old
social system of the Four Stages as described by Manu may have changed,
there are still Sa*m*nyâsins in India who live the life of the ancient
Sa*m*nyâsins, though of course in different surroundings and under
different conditions. These cases are as well authenticated as anything
that comes to us from India is ever likely to be. If we turned our eyes
to the ancient literature of that country, we should see Sa*m*nyâsins in
large numbers, but their performances would probably be considered as
fabulous, nor should I venture to say that they

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

are what we mean by well authenticated. The fact, how-ever, that some of
these Sa*m*nyâsins reduced themselves by ascetic exercises to mere
skeletons <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) or became raving mad-men can
hardly be doubted, if we may judge by the warnings against such excesses
which appear at a very early time in the ancient literature of the
country. A well-known instance is that of Buddha himself, who, before he
founded his own religion, went through all the tortures of Brâhmanic
*ascesis*, but derived so little benefit from them that he denounced the
whole system, as then practised, not only as useless but as mischievous,
preferring in all things what he called the *via media*.

If now we turn our attention again to the fourth of the Paramaha*m*sas,
recognised by Keshub Chunder Sen as pre-eminent among his
contemporaries, we shall feel less surprised by his life and his
doctrines, but accept him as one of a class which has always existed in
India. We possess indeed full accounts of his life, but they are often
so strangely exaggerated, nay so contradictory, that it seemed almost
hopeless to form a correct and true idea of his earthly career and his
character. I applied therefore to one of his most eminent pupils,
Vivekânanda, asking him to write down for me what he could tell of his
own knowledge of his venerable teacher, and I received from him a full
description of his Master's life. It will be easily seen, however, that
even this account is not quite free from traditional elements. If I give
it as much as possible unaltered, I have a reason for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[24:1](rls12.htm#fr_7) See a remarkable instance
in Mrs. Flora Annie Steel's 'In the Permanent Way,' 1898.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dialogic Process](rls13)
