[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls12)  [Next](rls14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### The Dialogic Process.

Such as it is, it will give us an insight into the way in which a new
religion, or rather a new sect, springs up and grows. It will place
before our eyes the transformation which mere repetition, conversation,
or what is called oral tradition will and must produce in the
description of the facts as they really happened. We can watch here what
is really a kind of Dialectic Process which is at work in all history,
both ancient and modern. This Dialectic Process as applied to the facts
of history comprehends all the changes which are inevitably produced by
the mere communication and interchange of ideas, by the give and take of
dialogue, by the turning of thoughts from one side to the other. It is
in reality what is called in German the threshing out of a subject, a
kind of *Durchsprechen*, or what the Greeks called a speaking forward
and backward, or dialogue. Even Hegel's Dialectic Process, the movement
of the idea by itself, that leads irresistibly from positive to negative
and to conciliation, has its origin in what I should prefer to call by a
wider name the *Dialogic Process*, of the greatest importance in
history, both ancient and modern. There is hardly a single fact in
history which can escape being modified by this process before it
reaches the writer of history. It must be distinguished from the
*Mythological Process*, which forms indeed a part of it, but acts under
much more special rules. We can watch the Dialogic Process in Modern
History also, though we have here reporters, and newspapers, the
autobiographies and reminiscences

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

of great statesmen which would seem to render this Dialogic infection
impossible or harmless. We can only guess what it must have been in
times when neither shorthand nor printing existed, when writing and
reading were the privilege of a small class, and when very often two or
three generations had passed away before the idea of recording certain
facts and certain sayings occurred to a chronicler or a historiographer.
It is extraordinary that so many historians should have completely
neglected this Dialogic Process through which everything must pass
before it reaches even the first recorder, forgetting that it could
never have been absent. How many difficulties would have been solved,
how many contradictions explained, nay how many miracles would become
perfectly natural and intelligible, if historians would only learn this
one lesson, that we do not and cannot know of any historical event that
has not previously passed through this Dialogic Process.

Let us take so recent an event as the telegram sent from Ems, where I am
writing. It was meant to tell the world of the supposed insult which
Benedetti had offered to the King of Prussia. That telegram marks one of
the most decisive events in modern history, it has really helped to
change the whole face of Europe. What do we know of it, even after
Bismarck's own confessions, beyond what he thought and spoke in his own
mind, beyond what he said to my friend Abeken, who wrote it out and sent
it off, beyond what the people in Germany and in France thought of it,
said of it, made of it, whether as justifying or condemning the war that
sprang out of it. Shall we ever know the *ipsissima verba* 

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

of Benedetti, his tone of voice, the tone of voice in the Emperor's
reply, the consternation or chuckle when the iron chancellor heard from
all parts of Europe the echo of his own words and thoughts. And yet all
this happened but yesterday. Benedetti himself has told us what he
actually said, what the Emperor replied; Bismarck himself has told us
what he meant when he had the cooked telegram published to all the
world. Does the historian know then what really happened, what was
intended by the words used by Benedetti, by the Emperor, and by
Bismarck? Here in Ems the very spot is shown where the words were
spoken, though opinions vary even on this point. We possess now the
version given by the French diplomatist which is totally different from
that given by Bismarck, and yet they had passed through one Dialogic
Process only, that of the old King in his conversation with Benedetti
and in his communications with his ministers. Again, every reader of
modern history is acquainted with the words put into the mouth of the
French officer at Waterloo, *La guarde meurt, mais ne se rend pas*; and
every reader of French Memoirs knows by this time the real word which is
said to have been uttered at that historical moment. How can we ever
hope to escape from the transforming power of oral tradition?

The changes wrought by that power are of course more or less violent
according to circumstances; entirely absent, I believe, they never are.
And nowhere are they more evident than in the accounts which have
reached us of the founding of new religions and of their founders. In

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the case of Buddhism, it is well known that some excellent scholars have
actually denied that there ever was such a person as the young prince of
Kapilavâstu, of whose life and doings and sayings we possess fuller
accounts than of the founders of any other religion. And let it be
remembered that no revealed or miraculous character is claimed for
Buddha's biographies, nay that Buddha himself rejected any such
exceptional claims for himself and for his apostles, being satisfied
with having been a man on earth, which, according to him, is the highest
form of being in the world, potentially, and is, even in reality, high
above all angels and above all gods (devas), such as they were in his
time. Atideva, above all gods, is one of the names assigned to Buddha,
showing the estimation in which Buddha and in which the gods were held
by their followers.

This inevitable influence of the Dialogic Process in history cannot be
recognised too soon. It will remove endless difficulties by which we are
ensnared, endless dishonesties in which we have ensnared ourselves. If
we once understand that after only one day, one week, one year any
communication, even a communication given from heaven, must suffer the
consequences of this Dialogic Process, must be infected by the breath of
human thought and of human weakness, many a self-made difficulty will
vanish, many a story distorted by the childish love of the miraculous
will regain its true moral character, many a face disguised by a
misplaced apotheosis will look upon us again with his truly human,
loving, and divine eyes. All honest hearts, whatever religion they may
profess, will feel relieved and

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

grateful if they once thoroughly understand the dialectic or dialogic
working of oral tradition, particularly where it can be traced back to
pure and perfectly natural sources.

It is for this very reason, and because this process can be so seldom
watched, but can generally be traced in its later results only, that
even this slight sketch of what a disciple of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, with
every wish to be truthful, can tell us of his master, may be of some
interest to ourselves both for its own sake and for the light which it
throws on the conditions under which every religion has to grow up and
to be recorded. Nothing is so human as religion, nothing so much exposed
to the frailties inherent in human nature. Whatever the origin of a
religion may be supposed to have been, its growth from the very first
depends clearly on the recipient soil, that is, on human nature, and to
study that human nature as it reacts on religion is one of the most
useful lessons of Comparative Theology.

I had made it as clear as possible to Vivekânanda that the accounts
hitherto published of his Master, however edifying they might be to his
followers, would sound perfectly absurd to European students, that
stories of miraculous events in childhood, of apparitions of goddesses
(devî) communicating to the Sa*m*nyâsin a knowledge of languages and
literatures which, as we know, he never possessed in real life, would
simply be thrown away on us poor unbelievers, and that descriptions of
miracles performed by the Saint, however well authenticated, ''would
produce the very opposite effect of what they were intended for.
Vivekânanda himself is a man who knows

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

\[paragraph continues\] England and America well, and perfectly
understood what I meant. Yet even his unvarnished description of his
Master discloses here and there the clear traces of what I call the
Dialogic Process, and the irrepressible miraculising tendencies of
devoted disciples. And I am really glad that it does so, if only it
helps to teach us that no historian can ever pretend to do more than to
show us what a man or a fact seemed to be to him or to the authorities
whom he has to follow, and not what he or it actually was. I have also,
as far as I could, consulted another account of the life of
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a published in the late numbers of the Brahmavâdin. But I
am sorry to say that this account stops with No. 19, and has not been
continued.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's Life](rls14)
