[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls13)  [Next](rls15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's Life.

Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, we are told, was born in the village of Kamârpukar, in
the Zillah Hugli, situated about four miles to the west of the Jahânâbad
subdivision, and thirty-two miles south of Burdwan. His life on earth
began on the 20th of February, 1833, and ended the 16th of August, 1886,
1 a.m. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) The village in which he was
born was inhabited chiefly by people of the lower castes, mostly
blacksmiths, Karmakars, or in familiar abbreviation, Kamars, and hence
called Kamârpukar, with some sprinkling of carpenters, cowherds
(Gowalas), husbandmen (Kaivartas), and oilmen (Telis). His father was
the head

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

of the only Brâhmanic family settled in the village. Though very poor,
he would rather starve than stray from the strictest path of Brâhmanical
orthodoxy. The original name given to his child was Gadâdhara, a name of
Vish*n*u, which means one who holds the club, and it was given him, we
are told, on account of a prophetic dream of his father, to whom, while
on a pilgrimage to Gya, Vish*n*u appeared, telling him that he, the
deity, would be born as his son. It was later in life that he began to
be called Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. We are told, and we could hardly have
expected anything else, that his father, whose name was Khudiram
Chattopâdhyâya, was a great lover of God, a man pure in mind, handsome
of figure, straightforward and independent. Rumour says--and what is
rumour but another name for the Dialogic Process of which we spoke--that
he possessed supernatural powers, particularly what is called
Vâk-siddhi, power of speech, which means that everything he told, good
or bad, of anybody, would always come to pass. He was highly reverenced
by all the people of his village, who stood up whenever they saw him
coming, and saluted him, nay who would never talk frivolity in his
presence.

It could hardly have been otherwise than that his mother also,
Chandrama*n*i Devî, was a pattern of simplicity and kindness. We are
told that Mathurâ Nâth, the rich and devoted disciple of her son, came
to her once and pressed her to accept a present of a few thousand
rupees, but to his astonishment she declined the offer.

The father proved his independence while still living at

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Dere, on his own ancestral property. The
Zemindar of the village wanted him to appear as a witness on his side,
threatening him with confiscation of his property and expulsion from his
village, if he refused. Khudiram refused, left his village, and migrated
to Kâmârpur, a village two or three miles east of Dere. There, through
the help of some true friends, he managed to make a poor living, and yet
he was always profusely generous to the poor and hospitable to
everybody, living chiefly in the company of religious men, performing
every kind of worship, and trying to realise religion to its fullest
extent.

There is a story that Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's father was going to pay a visit
to his daughter one day, some twelve or fourteen miles from the place
where he lived. After travelling more than half the way, he came across
a Bel-tree, beautifully covered with new-grown green leaves. These
leaves are very sacred to a Hindu, and they, use them in worshipping the
god *S*iva. It was spring-time. The Bel-trees were casting off their old
leaves, and the man had not recently been able to find any good leaves
to offer to *S*iva. On finding these, he at once climbed up the tree,
gathered as many leaves as he could carry, and returned home to worship
*S*iva, without going to see his daughter. He was a great lover of Râma,
and his tutelary deity was the pure and divine *S*rî Râma*k*andra. He
had a little plot of land outside the village, and in the sowing time,
after getting a man to plough the field, he would go himself, put a few
grains of rice in the name of Raghuvîra on the ground first, and then
order the labourers to finish

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

the work. It is said that that little plot of land produced enough, as
long as he lived, to maintain the whole of the family. He ever depended
upon his Raghuvîra, or the hero of the race of Raghu, the divine Râma,
and never cared for the morrow. His son Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, we are told,
had something in him which attracted everybody and made people love him,
as if he were of their own kith and kin, even at the first appearance.

The young child used to repeat the whole of the religious operas and
dramas, the acting, the music, and everything, after hearing them once.
He had a very good musical voice and a taste for music. He was a very
good judge of the merits and defects of the statues or images of gods or
goddesses, and his judgment was held as final by the old people of the
village, even from his childhood. He could draw and make images of gods
himself. One of the broken stone images of *S*rî K*ri*sh*n*a, which he
repaired in later days, is still to be seen in the temple of
Dakshi*n*e*s*vara of Râni Râsmoni, about four miles to the north of
Calcutta. After hearing a religious drama, e. g. the doings of *S*rî
K*ri*sh*n*a, he would gather his playmates, teach them the different
parts, and enact it in the fields, under the trees. Sometimes he would
build an image of the god *S*iva, and worship it with his companions. At
the age of six he was well versed in the Purâ*n*as, likewise in the
Râmâya*n*a, the Mahâbhârata, and the *S*rîmad Bhâgavata, by hearing them
from the Ka*th*aks, a class of men who preach and read these Purâ*n*as
for the enlightenment of the uneducated masses all over India. (His
knowledge of

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

the Purâ*n*as, the Mahâbhârata, the Râmâya*n*a, and the Bhâgavata must
have been in Bengâli, as he never, according to Mozoomdar, who was his
friend, knew a word of Sanskrit.)

The pilgrim road to Purî passes through the outskirts of the village
where he lived, and very often a whole host of ascetics and religious
men would come and take shelter in the Dharmasâlâ or pilgrim-house,
built by the Lâhâ family, the Zemindar of the village. Râmak*ri*sh*n*a
used to go there very often, talk to them on religious subjects, mark
their habits, and hear their tales of travel.

It is the custom in India to gather all the learned pandits or
professors of the neighbourhood at a funeral ceremony. In one of these
gatherings in the house of the Lâhâ family, a question arose about some
intricate points of theology, and the professors could not come to a
conclusion. The boy Râmak*ri*sh*n*a went to them and decided it quickly
with his simple language, and all present were astonished. (This might
be taken from any *Evangelium infantiae*.)

Before he reached his teens, he was walking in the fields one day. The
sky was very clear and blue, and he saw a flight of white cranes moving
along it. The contrast of colours was so very beautiful and dazzling to
his imagination, and produced such thoughts in him, that he fell down in
a trance. (This would admit of a very natural pathological explanation,
and may therefore be perfectly true, though it would easily lend itself
to further poetical expansion.)

He was the youngest child of a family of three sons and two daughters.
His eldest brother, Râmkumâr Chattopâdhyâya,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

was a very learned professor of the old school. He had his own school at
Calcutta. At the age of sixteen Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, having been invested by
his own father with the sacred Brâhmanic thread, was taken to this
school, but what was his disgust to find that after all their high talk
on being and non-being, on Brahman and Mâyâ, on how the soul is
liberated by the realisation of Âtman, they would never dream of
practising these precepts in their own lives, but run after lust and
gold, after name and fame. He told his brother plainly he would never
care for that kind of learning, the sole aim of which was to gain a few
pieces of silver, or a few maunds of rice and vegetables. He yearned to
learn something which would raise him above all these, and give him as a
recompense God Himself. From that time he kept aloof from the school.

The temple of the goddess Kâlî at Dakshi*n*e*s*vara, about five miles to
the north of Calcutta, was established in 1853 A.D. It stands on the
side of the Ganges, and is one of the finest temples in India. The
temple deeds were drawn in the name of the Guru, or spiritual director
of Râni Râsmoni, for she being of a lower caste, none of the higher
castes would come to the temple and take food there if she drew the
deeds in her own name. The eldest brother of *S*rî Râmak*ri*sh*n*a was
appointed as priest to the temple. The two brothers came on the day when
the temple was first opened and established, but such were the caste
prejudices of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a at that time that he protested vehemently
against his brother's taking service under a *S*ûdra woman, or one of
the lowest caste, and would not take any cooked food in

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the temple precincts, because it was forbidden in the *S*âstras. So,
amidst all the rejoicings of the day, in which some fifteen to twenty
thousand people were sumptuously entertained, he was the only man who
kept his fast. At night he went to the grocer's close by, took a
pice-worth of fried paddy, and returned to Calcutta. But after a week
his love for his brother made him return again, and at his entreaty he
consented to live there, on condition, however, that he should be
allowed to cook his own meals by the side of the Ganges, which is the
holiest place according to the Hindus. A few months afterwards his
brother became incapable of conducting the services through illness, and
requested Râmak*ri*sh*n*a to take charge of the duties. He consented at
last, and became a recognised worshipper of the goddess Kâlî.

Sincere as he always was, he could do nothing from mercenary motives,
nor did he ever do anything which he did not 'thoroughly believe. He now
began to look upon the image of the goddess Kâlî as his mother and the
mother of the universe. He believed it to be living and breathing and
taking food out of his hand. After the regular forms of worship he would
sit there for hours and hours, singing hymns and talking and praying to
her as a child to his mother, till he lost all consciousness of the
outward world. Sometimes he would weep for hours, and would not be
comforted, because he could not see his mother as perfectly as he
wished. People became divided in their opinions regarding him. Some held
the young priest to be mad, and some took him to be a great lover of
God, and all this

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

outward madness as the manifestation of that love. His mother and
brothers, thinking that his imagination would calm down when he had a
young wife and a family of his own to look after, took him to his native
village and married him to the daughter of Râma Chandra Mukhopâdhyâya,
who was then five years of age, *S*rîmatî Sârodâ Devî or Saradamani Devî
by name. It is said when his mother and brothers were looking after a
suitable bride for him, he himself told them that the daughter of such
and such a man was destined to be joined to him in marriage, and that
she was endowed with all the qualities of a goddess or Devî, and they
went and found the bride.

He used to hold that some women were born with all the qualities of a
Devî, and some with the opposite qualities--the Âsurî, or the
demoniacal. The former would help their husbands in becoming religious,
and would never lead them to lust and sensuality, and he could
distinguish them by their mere appearance. A woman, a perfect stranger
to him, came to see him once at Dakshi*n*e*s*vara many years afterwards.
She was of a noble family, the wife of a gentleman, and mother of five
or six children, yet looked still very young and beautiful.
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a told his disciples at once that she had the qualities of
a Devî in her, and he would prove it to them. He ordered them to burn
some incense before her, and taking some flowers, placed them on her
feet and addressed her as 'mother.' And the lady who never knew anything
before of meditation, or Samâdhi, and had never seen him before, fell
into a deep trance with her hands lifted as in the act of blessing. That
trance did not

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

leave her for some hours, and he got frightened at the thought that her
husband would accuse him of some black magic. He began, therefore, to
pray to his mother Kâlî (the goddess) to bring her back to her senses.
By-and-by she came to herself, and when she opened her eyes they were
quite red, and she looked as if she were quite drunk. Her attendants had
to support her while she got into a carriage, then she drove back home.
This is one of many instances of the same kind (evidently cases of
hypnosis).

Of men he used to tell the same. In his later days, when crowds of men
and boys came to him to learn, he would select and point out some who,
he said, would realise religion in this life, and of the rest he would
say that they must enjoy life a little longer before they would have a
sincere desire for religion. He used to say, 'That man who had been an
emperor in his former birth, who had enjoyed the highest pleasures the
world can give, and who had seen the vanities of them all, would attain
to perfection in this life on earth.'

After his marriage he returned to Calcutta and took upon himself the
charges of the temple again, but instead of toning down, his fervour and
devotion increased a thousand-fold. His whole soul, as it were, melted
into one flood of tears, and he appealed to the goddess to have mercy on
him and reveal herself to him. No mother ever shed such burning tears
over the death-bed of her only child. Crowds assembled round him and
tried to console him, when the blowing of the conch-shells proclaimed
the death of another day, and he gave vent to his sorrow, saying,
'Mother, oh my

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

mother, another day has gone, and still I have not found thee.' People
thought he was mad, or that he was suffering from some acute pain, for
how was it possible for them, devoted as they were to lust and gold, to
name and fame, to imagine that a man could love his God or Goddess
Mother with as much intensity as they loved their wives and children?
The son-in-law of Râni Râsmoni, Babu Mathurânâth, who had always had a
love for this young Brahman took him to the best physicians in Calcutta
to get him cured of his madness. But all their skill was of no avail.
Only one physician of Dacca told them that this man was a great Yogin or
ascetic, and that all their pharmacopoeia was useless for curing his
disease, if indeed it were a disease at all. So his friends gave him up
as lost.

Meanwhile he increased in love and devotion day by day. One day as he
was feeling his separation from Devî very keenly, and thinking of
putting an end to himself; as he could not bear his loneliness any
longer, he lost all outward sensation, and saw his mother (Kâlî) in a
vision. These visions came to him again and again, and then he became
calmer. Sometimes he doubted whether these visions were really true, and
then he would say, 'I would believe them true, if such and such a thing
happened,' and it would invariably happen, even at the very hour he
expected. For instance, he said one day, 'I could believe them true, and
not resulting from a disease of my brain, if the two young daughters of
Râni Râsmoni, who never once came to this temple, would come under the
big banyan-tree this afternoon, and would speak to me,' though he was

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

a perfect stranger to them. And what was his astonishment when he saw
them standing under the tree at the exact hour, and calling him by name,
and telling him to be consoled, for the Mother Kâlî would surely have
mercy on him. These ladies of the Zenana had never come to a public
place, especially when young, but somehow or other they got a strong
desire to see that temple that very day, and they got permission to go
there.

These visions grew more and more, and his trances became longer and
longer in duration, till every one saw it was no longer possible for him
to perform his daily course of duties. For instance, it is prescribed in
the *S*âstras that a man should put a flower over his own head and think
of himself as the very god or goddess he is going to worship, and
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, as he put the flower, and thought himself as identified
with his mother, would get entranced, and would remain in that state for
hours. Then again, from time to time, he would entirely lose his own
identity, so much so as to appropriate to himself the offerings brought
for the goddess. Sometimes forgetting to adorn the image, he would adorn
himself with the flowers. Mathurânâth at first objected to this, but
shortly after-wards, it is said, he saw the body of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a
transfigured into that of the god *S*iva, and from that day forward he
looked upon him as God Himself, and addressed him always as Father
whenever he spoke to him. He appointed the nephew of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a to
conduct the regular services, and left him free to do whatever he liked.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

The ardent soul of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a could not remain quiet with these
frequent visions, but ran eagerly to attain perfection and realisation
of God in all His different aspects. He thus began the twelve years of
unheard-of tapasya, or ascetic exercises. Looking back to these years of
self-torture in his later days, he said, 'that a great religious
tornado, as it were, raged within him during these years and made
everything topsy-turvy.' He had no idea then that it lasted for so long
a time. He never had a wink of sound sleep during these years, could not
even doze, but his eyes would remain always open and fixed. He thought
some-times that he was seriously ill, and holding a looking-glass before
him, he put his finger within the sockets of the eye, that the lids
might close, but they would not. In his despair he cried out, 'Mother,
oh! my mother, is this the result of calling upon thee and believing in
thee?' And anon a sweet voice would come, and a sweeter smiling face,
and said, 'My son! how could you hope to realise the highest truth, if
you don't give up the love of your body and of your little self?' 'A
torrent of spiritual light,' he said, 'would come then, deluging my mind
and urging me forward. I used to tell my mother, "Mother! I could never
learn from these erring men; but I will learn from thee, and thee
alone," and the same voice would say, "Yea, my son!"' 'I did not once,'
he continued, 'look to the preservation of my body. My hair grew till it
became matted, and I had no idea of it. My nephew, H*ri*daya, used to
bring me some food daily, and some days succeeded and some days did not
succeed in forcing a few mouthfuls

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

down my throat, though I had no idea of it. Sometimes I used to go to
the closet of the servants and sweepers and clean it with my own hands,
and prayed, "Mother! destroy in me all idea that I am great, and that I
am a Brahman, and that they are low and pariahs, for who are they but
Thou in so many forms?"'

'Sometimes,' he said, 'I would sit by the Ganges, with some gold and
silver coins and a heap of rubbish by my side, and taking some coins in
my right hand and a handful of rubbish in the left, I would tell my
soul, "My soul! this is what the world calls money, impressed with the
queen's face. It has the power of bringing you rice and vegetables, of
feeding the poor, of building houses, and doing all that the world calls
great, but it can never help thee to realise the ever-existent knowledge
and bliss, the Brahman. Regard it, therefore, as rubbish." Then mixing
the coins and the rubbish in my hands, while repeating all the time,
"money is rubbish, money is rubbish," I lost all perception of
difference between the two in my mind, and threw them both into the
Ganges. No wonder people took me for mad.' About this time Mathurânâtha,
who was very devoted to him, one day put a shawl fringed with gold round
him, which cost about 1,500 Rs. At first he seemed to be pleased with
it. But what was the astonishment of Mathurânâtha when the next moment
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a threw it on the ground, trampled and spat on it, and
began to cleanse the floor of the room with it, saying, 'It increases
vanity, but it can never help to realise the ever-existent knowledge and
bliss

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (Sat-*k*it-ânanda), and therefore is no better
than a piece of torn rag.'

'About this time,' he said, 'I felt such a burning sensation all over my
body; I used to stand in the waters of the Ganges, with my body immersed
up to the shoulders and a wet towel over my head all through the day,
for it was insufferable. Then a Brahman lady came and cured me of it in
three days. She smeared my body with sandal-wood paste and put garlands
on my neck, and the pain vanished in three days.'

Now this Brahman lady was, we are told, an extraordinary Bengâli woman.
She was versed in the philosophies and mythologies of India, and could
recite book after book from memory. She could hold her ground in
argument with the best pandits of the country. Tall and graceful, she
combined in herself all the physical and intellectual qualities that
would raise any man or woman high above ordinary mortals. She had a fine
voice and was well versed in music. She had given up the world,
practised Yoga (ascetics), attained to some wonderful Yogic powers, and
was roaming all over India in the red garb of a Sa*m*nyâsin. Nobody knew
anything of her birth or family or name even, and nobody could induce
her to say anything about them. She was as if some goddess had come to
this earth to help men to perfection, moved by the sorrows and sins of
this wicked world. She seemed to have known full well that she was
destined to help three particular personages, who were very advanced in
attaining perfection. Râmak*ri*sh*n*a had been informed by his divine

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

mother that she would come and teach him the certain way to attain
perfection. He recognised her at once, and she recognised him and said,
'I have found out the other two, and have been searching for thee for a
long, long time, and to-day I have found thee.' Up to this time
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a had not found a single soul who could understand his
superhuman devotion and perfect purity, and the arrival of this woman
was therefore a great relief to him. His devotion and love knew no
bounds.

All people were astonished at the wonderful learning of this Brahman
lady, but they could not understand how she could sympathise and place
even above herself this half-crazed Râmak*ri*sh*n*a they took him for.
To prove that he was not mad, the lady mentioned some Vaish*n*ava
scriptures, got the manuscripts from some learned pandits, and quoted
passage after passage, showing that all these physical manifestations
come to an ardent lover of God. It was recorded in these books that all
these states physical and mental did happen to the great religious
reformer of Bengal, *S*rî Chaitanya, four hundred years back, and the
remedies were given, too, by which he overcame them. For instance, this
burning sensation, as if all the body were in flames, from which *S*rî
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a was suffering at the time, was mentioned in these
Vaish*n*ava scriptures as having happened to the shepherdess of Braja,
to the stainless *S*rî Râdhâ, the beloved of K*ri*sh*n*a, centuries
before, and again in later times to *S*rî Chaitanya, when both of them
felt deeply the pain of separation from their beloved (God). In both
these cases relief came by smearing the body with sandalwood

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

paste and wearing garlands of sweet-scented flowers. The lady held it to
be no real disease, but a state of physical disturbance, which would
come to all who arrive at that stage of Bhakti, or love of God. She
applied the same remedies for three days, and the trouble passed away.

At another time during her stay he suffered much from an insatiable
appetite. However much he might eat, the appetite was there, preying
upon him as if he had taken nothing. The Brahman lady assured him that
the same had happened to Chaitanya and other Yogins, and ordered all
sorts of dishes to be put into his room on every side, day and night.
This practice was continued for a few days, and the sight of so much
food gradually acted upon the mind, and the false sensation passed away.

The lady lived there for some years, and made her friend practise all
the different sorts of Yoga which make a man complete master of his body
and mind, render his passions subservient to his reason, and produce a
thorough and deep concentration of thought, and, above all, the fearless
and unbiased disposition which is essential to everybody who desires to
know the truth and the whole truth.

About this time Râmak*ri*sh*n*a began to practise Yoga, or the physical
discipline, which makes the body strong and enduring. He began by
regulating his breath, and went through the eight-fold methods
prescribed by Patañ*g*ali. His teachers were astonished at the short
time in which he came to the realisation and attained the end of all
these ascetic practices. One night, when he was practising Yoga, he was
very much frightened at two strings of clotted blood

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

coming out of his mouth. The temple services were then in the hands of
one of his cousins, Haladhâri, a man of great learning and purity and
possessed of certain psychical powers, such as Vâk-siddhi, power of
speech. A few days before, Râmak*ri*sh*n*a had offended him by pointing
out to him certain defects of his character, so much so that his cousin
cursed him and said that blood should come out of his mouth. So
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a was frightened, but a great Yogin who was living there
at the time came to his help, and after inquiring into his case assured
him that it was very good that the blood had come out that way. It was
because he had to teach many men, and to do good to them, that he was
not permitted to enter into that Samâdhi (trance) from which nobody
returns. He explained to him that when a man has attained to the
perfection of this Yoga his blood rushes to his brain, and he becomes
absorbed in Samâdhi, perceives his identity with the Supreme Self, and
never returns any more to speak of his religious experiences to others.
Only a few returned, namely, those who by the will of God were born to
be the great teachers of mankind. In their case the blood rushes to the
brain, and they feel the identity for some time, but after that the
blood flows out again and they are able to teach.

By this time Râmak*ri*sh*n*a had learnt all that the Brahman lady could
teach, but he was still hankering after higher truths, when a *Gñ*ânîn
(a true philosopher) came and initiated him into the truths of the
Vedânta. This was a Sa*m*nyâsin named Totâ-puri, tall, muscular, and
powerful. He had taken the vow of the order from his

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

very boyhood, and after a hard struggle had succeeded in realising the
highest truths of the Vedânta. He wore no clothes whatever, and never
rested under a roof. When the doors of palaces might have been opened to
him if he had only wished, he passed the night always under a tree or
the blue canopy of the heavens, even in winter and in the rainy season,
never remaining more than three days in any place, and never caring to
ask for food from anybody. Free as the wind, he was roaming all over the
country, teaching and exhorting wherever he could find a sincere soul,
and helping them to attain to that perfection which he had himself
reached. He was a living illustration of the truth that Vedânta, when
properly realised, can become a practical rule of life. On seeing *S*rî
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a sitting on the border of the Ganges, he at once
recognised in him a great Yogin and a perfectly-prepared ground for the
reception of the seeds of the highest truths of religion. He addressed
him at once and said, 'My son! do you want to learn the way to perfect
freedom? Come, then, and I will teach it to you.' Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, who
never did anything without first asking his mother (the goddess Kâlî),
said that he did not know what he should do, but he would go and ask his
mother. He came back in a few minutes and told the Sa*m*nyâsin that he
was ready. Totâ-puri made him take the vow, and told .him how he was to
meditate and how to realise unity. After three days of practice he
attained to the highest, the Nirvikalpa stage of Samâdhi, where there is
no longer any perception of the subject or of the object. The
Sa*m*nyâsin was perfectly bewildered at the

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

rapid progress of his protégé, and said, 'My boy! what I realised after
forty years of hard struggle, you have arrived at in three days. I dare
not call you my disciple; henceforth I will address you as my friend.'
And such was the love of this holy man for *S*rî Râmak*ri*sh*n*a that he
stayed with him for eleven months, and in his turn learnt many things
from his own disciple. There is a story told of the Sa*m*nyâsin. He
always kept a fire and regarded it as very holy. One day as he was
sitting by this fire and talking to *S*rî Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, a man came
and lighted his pipe out of the same fire. The Sa*m*nyâsin felt enraged
at this sacrilege, when a gentle scolding came from his disciple, who
said, 'Is this the way that you look upon everything as Brahman? Is not
the man himself Brahman as well as the fire? What is high and what is
low in the sight of a *Gñ*ânîn?' The Sa*m*nyâsin was brought to his
senses, and said, 'Brother, you are right. From this day forth you shall
never find me angry again,' and he kept his word. He could never
understand, however, Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's love for his Mother (the goddess
Kâlî). He would talk of it as mere superstition, and ridicule it, when
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a made him understand that in the Absolute there is no
thou, nor I, nor God, nay, that it is beyond all speech or thought. As
long, however, as there is the least grain of relativity left, the
Absolute is within thought and speech and within the limits of the mind,
which mind is subservient to the universal mind and consciousness; and
this omniscient, universal consciousness was to him his mother and God.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

After the departure of Totâ-puri, Râmak*ri*sh*n*a himself tried to
remain always in union with the absolute Brahman and in the Nirvikalpa
state. Looking back to this period of his life in his later days, he
said, 'I remained for six months in that state of perfect union which
people seldom reach, and if they reach it, they cannot return to their
individual consciousness again. Their bodies and minds could never bear
it. But this my body is made up of Sattwa particles (pure elements) and
can bear much strain. In those days I was quite unconscious of the outer
world. My body would have died for want of nourishment, but for a Sâdhu
(an advanced religious ascetic) who came at that time and stayed there
for three days for my sake. He recognised my state of Samâdhi, and took
much interest to preserve this body, while I was unconscious of its very
existence. He used to bring some food every day, and when all methods
failed to restore sensation or consciousness to this body of mine, he
would even strike me with a heavy club, so that the pain might bring me
back to consciousness. Sometimes he succeeded in awakening a sort of
partial consciousness in me, and he would immediately force down one or
two mouthfuls of food before I was lost again in deep Samâdhi. Some days
when he could not produce any response, even after a severe beating, he
was very sorrowful.' After six months the body gave way under these
severe irregularities, and Râmak*ri*sh*n*a was laid up with dysentery.
This disease, he said, did much in bringing him back to consciousness,
slowly and gently, in a month or two. When the native physicians had
cured him, his

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

deep religious zeal took another turn. He began to practise and realise
the Vaish*n*ava ideal of love for God. This love, according to the
Vaish*n*avas, becomes manifested practically in any one of the following
relations--the relation of a servant to his master, of a friend to his
friend, of a child to his parents, or vice versa, and a wife to her
husband. The highest point of love is reached when the human soul can
love his God as a wife loves her husband. The shepherdess of Braja had
this sort of love towards the divine K*ri*sh*n*a, and there was no
thought of any carnal relationship. No man, they say, can understand
this love of *S*rî Râdhâ and *S*rî K*ri*sh*n*a until he is perfectly
free from all carnal desires. They even prohibit ordinary men to read
the books which treat of this love of Râdhâ and K*ri*sh*n*a, because
they are still under the sway of passion. Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, in order to
realise this love, dressed himself in women's attire for several days,
thought of himself as a woman, and at last succeeded in gaining his
ideal. He saw the beautiful form of *S*rî K*ri*sh*n*a in a trance, and
was satisfied. After having thus devoted himself to Vaish*n*avism, he
practised in turn many other religions prevalent in India, even
Mohammedanism, always arriving at an understanding of their highest
purposes in an incredibly short time. Whenever he wished to learn and
practise the doctrines of any faith, he always found a good and learned
man of that faith coming to him and advising him how to do it. This is
one out of many wonderful things that happened in his life. They may be
explained as happy coincidences, which is much the same as to say they
were

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

wonderful, and cannot be explained. To give another such instance. At
the time when he perceived the desire of practising and realising
religion, he was sitting one day under the big banyan-tree (called the
Pancha-vatî, or the place of the five banyans) to the north of the
temple. He found the place very secluded and fit for carrying out his
religious practices without disturbance. He was thinking of building a
little thatched hut in the place, when the tide came up the river and
brought along with it all that was necessary to make a little hut--the
bamboos, the sticks, the rope and all--and dropped them just a few yards
off the place where he was sitting. He took the materials joyfully, and
with the help of the gardener built his little hut, where he practised
his Yoga.

In his later days he was thinking of practising the tenets of
Christianity. He had seen Jesus in a vision, and for three days he could
think of nothing and speak of nothing but Jesus and His love. There was
this peculiarity in all his visions--that he always saw them outside
himself, but when they vanished they seemed to have entered into him.
This was true of Râma, of *S*iva, of Kâlî, of K*ri*sh*n*a, of Jesus, and
of every other god or goddess or prophet.

After all these visions and his realisations of different religions he
came to the conclusion that all religions are true, though each of them
takes account of one aspect only of the Akha*nd*a Sa*kkh*idânanda, i.e.
the undivided and eternal existence, knowledge, and bliss. Each of these
different religions seemed to him a way to arrive at that One.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

During all these years he forgot entirely that he had been married,
which was not unnatural for one who had lost all idea of the existence
even of his own body. The girl had in the meantime attained the age of
seventeen or eighteen. She had heard rumours that her husband had become
mad, and was in deep grief. Then again she heard that he had become a
great religious man. She determined therefore to find him and to learn
her fate from himself. Having obtained permission from her mother, she
walked all the way, about thirty or forty miles, to the
Dakshi*n*e*s*vara temple. Râmak*ri*sh*n*a received her very kindly, but
told her that the old Râmak*ri*sh*n*a was dead, and that the new one
could never look upon any woman as his wife. He said that even then he
saw his mother, the Goddess Kâlî, in her, and however much he might try
he could never see anything else. He addressed her as his mother,
worshipped her with flowers and incense, asked her blessings, as a child
does from his mother, and then became lost in a deep trance. The wife,
who was fully worthy of such a hero, told him she wanted nothing from
him as her husband, but that he would teach her how to realise God, and
allow her to remain near him and cook his meals and do what little she
could for his health and comfort. From that day forward she lived within
the temple compound, and began to practise whatever her husband taught
her. Mathurânâtha offered her the sum of 10,000 Rs., but she declined,
saying that her husband had attained perfection by renouncing gold and
all pleasures, and she did not care for any, as she was determined to
follow him. She is living

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

still, revered by all for her purity and strength of character, helping
others of her sex to religion and perfection, looking upon her husband
as an incarnation of God Himself, and trying to forward the work her
husband began.

Though Râmak*ri*sh*n*a had no proper education, he had such a wonderful
memory that he never forgot what he once heard. In his later days he had
a desire to hear the Adhyâtma Râmâya*n*a, and he requested one of his
disciples to read it to him in the original verse. As he was hearing,
another of his disciples came and asked him whether he was understanding
the original verses. He said he had heard the book before, with an
explanation of it, and therefore knew all of it, but he wanted to hear
it again because the book was so beautiful, and he repeated at once the
purport of some of the verses which followed, and which were about to be
read.

He had attained to great Yoga powers, but he never cared to display
these marvellous powers to anybody. He told his disciples that all these
powers would come to a man as he advanced, but he warned them never to
take any heed of the opinions of men. They had not to please men, but to
try to attain the highest perfection, that is, unity with Brahman. The
power of working miracles was rather a hindrance in the way to
perfection, inasmuch as it diverted the attention of man from his
highest goal. But persons who went to him have found abundant proofs of
his possessing such powers as thought-reading, predicting future events,
seeing things at a distance, and healing a disease by simply willing.
The one great power of

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

which he made most use, and which was by far the most wonderful, was
that he was able to change a man's thoughts by simply touching his body.
In some this touch produced immediate Samâdhi, in which they saw visions
of gods and goddesses, and lost for some hours all sensation of the
out-ward world. In others it produced no outward changes, but they felt
that their thoughts had received a new direction and a new impetus, by
which they could easily travel in the path of progress in religion. The
carnally minded, for instance, would feel that their thoughts never ran
after carnal pleasures afterwards, the miser would find that he did not
love his gold, and so on.

About that time Mathurânâtha and his family went on a pilgrimage, and
took Râmak*ri*sh*n*a with them. They visited all the sacred places of
the Hindus as far as B*ri*ndâbana, and Râmak*ri*sh*n*a took the
opportunity not only of seeing the temples, but of forming acquaintances
with all the religious men, and with the Sa*m*nyâsins who were living in
these places, such as the famous Tailanga Swâmin of Benares and Gangâ
Mâtâ of B*ri*ndabana. These Sâdhus assigned to him a very high position,
and regarded him not only as a Brâhma*gñ*ânin, but as a great religious
teacher (Âchârya), nay, as an incarnation of God Himself. At
B*ri*ndabana he was so much struck by the natural scenery and
associations of the place, that he nearly made up his mind to reside
there for ever. But the memory of his old mother made him return home.
On his way back he was so much struck by the poverty of a village near
Vaidyanâth, that he wept bitterly, and would not go from

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

the place without seeing them happy. So Mathurânâtha fed the whole
village for several days, gave proper clothing and some money to each of
the villagers, and departed with Râmak*ri*sh*n*a contented.

'When the rose is blown, and sheds its fragrance all around, the bees
come of themselves. The bees seek the full-blown rose, and not the rose
the bees.' This saying of *S*rî Râmak*ri*sh*n*a has been verified often
and often in his own life. Numbers of earnest men, of all sects and
creeds, began to flock to him to receive instruction and to drink the
waters of life. From day-dawn to night-fall he had no leisure to eat or
drink, so engaged was he in teaching, exhorting, and ministering to the
wants of these hungry and thirsty millions. Men possessed of wonderful
Yoga powers and great learning came to learn from this illiterate
Paramaha*m*sa of Dakshi*n*e*s*vara, and in their turn acknowledged him
as their spiritual director (Guru), touched as they were by the
wonderful purity, the childlike simplicity, the perfect unselfishness,
and by the simple language in which he propounded the highest truths of
religion and philosophy. But the people of Calcutta knew him not till
Babu Keshub Chunder Son went to him and wrote about him.
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's interview with Keshub was brought about in this way.
It was in the year 1866 that Keshub was leading a life of prayer and
seclusion in a garden house at Belgharia, about two miles from the
temple of Dakshi*n*e*s*vara. Râmak*ri*sh*n*a heard of him, and went to
see him. Keshub was so much impressed with the simple words, full of the
highest knowledge, the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

wonderful love of God, and the deep trances of *S*rî Râmak*ri*sh*n*a,
that he began to come often and often to him. He would sit for hours at
the feet of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a and listen with rapture to the wonderful
sayings on religion of that wonderful man. From time to time
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a would be lost in a deep Samâdhi, and Keshub would gently
touch his feet that he might thereby be purified. Sometimes he would
invite the Paramaha*m*sa to his house, or would take him in a boat and
proceed a few miles up and down the river. He then used to question him
on some points of religion to clear away his own doubts. A strong and
deep love grew up between the two, and Keshub's whole life became
changed, till, a few years later, he proclaimed his views of religion as
the New Dispensation, which was nothing but a partial representation of
the truths which Râmak*ri*sh*n*a had taught for a long time.

A brief sketch of the teachings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, and a few of his
sayings, which Keshub published, were sufficient to rouse a wide
interest in the Paramaha*m*sa, and numbers of highly-educated men of
Calcutta and women of noble family began to pour in to receive
instruction from this wonderful Yogin. Râmak*ri*sh*n*a began to teach
them and talk to them from morn till evening. At night, too, he had no
rest, for some of the more earnest would remain and spend the night with
him. He then forgot his sleep, and talked to them incessantly about
Bhakti (devotion) or *Gñ*âna (knowledge) and his own experiences, and
how he arrived at them. Though this incessant labour

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

began at last to tell upon him, yet he would not rest. In the meanwhile
the crowds of men and women began to increase daily, and he went on as
before. When pressed to take rest, he would say, 'I would suffer
willingly all sorts of bodily pains, and death also, a hundred thousand
times, if by so doing I could bring one single soul to freedom. and
salvation.'

In the beginning of 1885 he suffered from what is known as 'the
clergyman's throat,' which by-and-by developed into cancer. He was
removed to Calcutta, and the best physicians were engaged, such as Babu
Mohindra Lal Sircar, &c., who advised him to keep the strictest silence;
but the advice was to no effect. Crowds of men and women gathered
wherever he went, and waited patiently to hear a single word from his
mouth, and he, out of compassion for them, would not remain silent. Many
a time he would be lost in a Samâdhi, losing all consciousness of his
body and of his disease, and coming back he would talk incessantly as
before. Even when the passage of his throat became so constricted that
he could not swallow even liquid food, he would never stop his efforts.
He was undaunted and remained as cheerful as ever, till on August 16,
1886, at 10 o'clock in the night, he entered into Samâdhi, from which he
never returned. His disciples took it at first to be an ordinary
Samâdhi, such as he used to have every day, during which the best
doctors even could not find any pulsation or beating of the heart; but,
alas, they were mistaken.

Râmak*ri*sh*n*a felt such an aversion to gold and silver

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

that he could not even touch them, and a simple touch, even when he was
asleep, would produce physical contortions. His breath would stop, and
his fingers would become contorted and paralysed for a few minutes, even
when the metal had been removed. In his later days he could touch no
metals, not even iron.

He was a wonderful mixture of God and man. In his ordinary state he
would talk of himself as servant of all men and women. He looked upon
them all as God. He himself would never be addressed as Guru, or
teacher. Never would he claim for himself any high position. He would
touch the ground reverently where his disciples had trodden. But every
now and then strange fits of God-consciousness came upon him. He then
became changed into a different being altogether. He then spoke of
himself as being able to do and know everything. He spoke as if he had
the power of giving anything to anybody. He would speak of himself as
the same soul that had been born before as Râma, as K*ri*sh*n*a, as
Jesus, or as Buddha, born again as Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. He told
Mathurânâtha, long before anybody knew him, that he had many disciples
who would come to him shortly, and he knew all of them. He said that he
was free from all eternity, and the practices and struggles after
religion which he went through were only meant to show the people the
way to salvation. He had done all for them alone. He would say he was a
Nitya-mukta, or eternally free, and an incarnation of God Himself. 'The
fruit of the pumpkin,' he said, 'comes out first, and then the flowers;
so it is with the Nitya-muktas,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

or those who are free from all eternity, but come down for the good of
others.'

During the state of Samâdhi he was totally unconscious of himself and of
the outward world. At one time he fell down upon a piece of live coal
during this state. It burned deep into his flesh, but he did not know
for hours, and the surgeon had to come in to extract the coal, when he
came back to consciousness, and felt the wound.

At another time his foot slipped, and he broke his hand. The surgeon
carne and bound it up and advised him not to use it till it was quite
cured. But it was impossible. As soon as anybody spoke anything of
religion or on God, he went straight into the state of Samâdhi, and his
hands became straight and stiff, and the injured hand had to be bound up
again. This went on for months, and it took six months or more to cure
that simple fracture.

Mathurânâtha proposed again and again to hand over to him the temple of
Dakshi*n*e*s*vara and a property yielding an income of 25,000 Rs. a
year, but he declined the proposal, and added that he would have to fly
away from the place if Mathurânâtha pressed his gift upon him. At
another time another gentleman made an offer of some 25,000 Rs. to him,
with the same result.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[30:1](rls14.htm#fr_8.md) Even dates are inaccurate
in the biographical notices of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, as published in various
Indian papers immediately after his death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Remarks on Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's Life](rls15.md)
