[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls21)  [Next](rls23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Γνῶθι σεαυτόν.

We may try now another door for an entrance into the Vedânta-philosophy,
which may help in bringing the Vedânta nearer to ourselves, or ourselves
nearer to the Vedânta, so that it may be looked upon not simply as a
strange and curious system, but as a system of thought with which we can
sympathise, nay, which, with certain modifications, we can appropriate
for our own purposes <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11). One of the
most ancient commands of Greek philosophy was the famous Γνῶθι σεαυτόν,
know thyself. Here the Hindu philosopher would step in at once and say
that

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

this is likewise the very highest object of their own philosophy, only
that they express it more fully by Âtmânam âtmanâ pa*s*ya, See the Self
by the Self! But like true philosophers they would let no word pass
unchallenged, and would ask at once, who or what is meant by the αὐτός,
or by the Self? The Vedânta-philosophy has been called a philosophy of
negation, which tries to arrive at the truth by a repeated denial of
what cannot be the truth. It often defines its own character by Na, na,
Not this, not that. First of all then the Vedânta would say, the αὐτός,
or that which is what we are, the Self; cannot be the body. In the true
sense of the word, the body is not, has no right to be called being,
sat, because sooner or later it ceases to be, and nothing can ever cease
to be, if it really is. As the body is not eternal, it is not real in
the highest sense of reality. If therefore we want to know what is truly
real, the body (deha or sthûla*s*arîra) cannot be the αὐτός or the Self.

But if we see that all we know comes to us through the five senses of
seeing, hearing, touching, tasting, and smelling, that we cannot go
beyond the senses, that we never have nor can have more than sensuous
images of the world and of ourselves, and that what we call our
knowledge consists in the first instance of these images, not of any
realities, which we may postulate, indeed, as underlying these images,
but which we can never reach, except by hypothesis, might we not say
that our senses as a whole are our αὐτός or Self? The Vedântist would
reply again, No, no. Our senses are wonderful indeed, but they are only
the instruments of our knowledge, they

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

form part of our body, they perish with the body, and cannot therefore
constitute our real Self. Besides the five senses which the Hindus call
*gñ*ânendriyas, senses of knowledge, they admit five other senses which
they call karmendriyas, senses of action, namely, the senses of
speaking, grasping, moving, excretion, and procreation. This is an idea
peculiar to the Hindus, the former five being intended for action from
without to within (upalabdhi), the latter for action from within to
without (karman). The images brought to us by the senses, on which we
depend for all our knowledge, are what we should call states of
consciousness, they are not even our Ego, much less our Self. They come
and go, arise and vanish, and cannot therefore be called real or
eternal, as little as the body. In all these images we may distinguish
the subject or the active element, and the object or the passive
element. The passive or objective elements are what we are accustomed to
call matter, and this matter, according to the five senses by which it
is perceived, is divided into five kinds, viz. ether, corresponding to
hearing; light, corresponding to seeing; air, corresponding to touching;
water, corresponding to tasting; and earth, corresponding to smelling.
This is all that we can legitimately mean by the five elements. They are
to us states of consciousness, or vi*gñ*ana only. But though to us
elementary matter exists, and can exist as known, or in the form of
knowledge only, the Vedânta does not deny its existence, whatever it may
say about its reality. If the objects of our sensuous knowledge are all
the result of Avidyâ, the elements also

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

must share that fate, and cannot claim more than a phenomenal reality.

As, however, there are few, if any, sensations corresponding to one
element only, without being mixed up with others, each element is
supposed to be five-folded, that is, to contain one preponderating
quality, and small portions of the others. This so-called
Pa*ñk*îkara*n*a or quintupling is not to be found, however, in the
ancient Vedânta; it belongs to the refinements, and not always
improvements, of a later age to which we owe such works as the very
popular Vedântasâra. A different and, as it would seem, far more
primitive conception of the elements is found in the Upanishads, for
instance, the *Kh*ândogya Upanishad VI, 2. We generally find in India
four elements, or, with the addition of âkâ*s*a, ether, as the vehicle
of sound, five. The most primitive conception of the constituent
elements of the world, however, would seem to have been three; namely,
what is earthy, what is fiery, and what is watery. These three elements
could not possibly be overlooked, and this threefold division is
actually found in the *Kh*ândogya, where the three elements are called
Anna, Te*g*as, and Ap, or, as they are arranged there, first, Te*g*as,
including fire, light, and warmth, then Ap, water, and lastly Anna,
earth. It is true that Anna means otherwise food, but it can here be
taken in the sense of earth only, as sup-plying food. The first is
represented as red, the second as white, the third as black. These three
elements also are represented as being mixed in three proportions, and
as constituent elements of the human body they are

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

represented as passing through three forms of development, the earthy
portion being manifested in faeces, flesh, and Manas, the watery portion
in urine, blood, and life, the fiery portion in bones, marrow, and
speech. There are many of these purely fanciful speculations to be found
in the Upanishads. This, however, should not be allowed to prejudice us
against what is simple and primitive and rational in these depositories
of ancient thought. But if it is asked, Can these passive and active
senses be the Self? the Vedântist says again, No, no; they are not what
we are in search of, they cannot be the αὐτός, which must be real,
unchanging, and eternal.

If this applies to the ten senses, it applies with equal strength to
what is sometimes called the eleventh sense, the Manas, all treated as
material, and as products of the earthy element. Manas is etymologically
closely connected with *mens* and has therefore been generally
translated by *mind*. But though it may be used in that sense in
ordinary language, it has a narrower meaning in Sanskrit philosophy. It
is meant for the central and combining organ of the senses of perception
and action. This Manas performs originally, what we ascribe to the
faculty of attention (avadhâna): it acts, as we are told, as a
doorkeeper, pre-venting the impressions of the different senses from
rushing in simultaneously, and producing nothing but confusion. It is
easy to show that this central sense also falls under the Vedântic No,
no. It cannot be the Self, which must be permanent and real; it is an
instrument only, and therefore called anta*h*kara*n*a--the inner organ.
We see here the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

same confusion which exists elsewhere. There is such an abundance of
words expressive of what is going on within us, our anta*h*kara*n*a, our
mind in its various manifestations, that we are embarrassed rather than
helped by this wealth. The worst of it is that as there are so many
words, it was supposed at a later time that each must have its own
peculiar meaning; and, if it had not, scholastic definition soon came in
to assign to each that special meaning which it was to have in future.
In the meantime the stream of languages flowed on in complete disregard
of such artificial barriers, and with every new philosophy the confusion
became greater and greater. It is easy to understand that if each
language by itself can seldom give us well-defined terms for the various
manifestations of our perceptive and reasoning powers, the confusion
becomes still greater when we attempt to render the psychological terms
of one by those of another language. For instance, if we translated
Âtman, as is mostly done, by soul, we should be rendering what is free
from all passions by a word which generally implies the seat of the
passions. And if we were to follow the example of others and translate
Manas by understanding or *Verstand*, we should render what is meant as
chiefly a perceptive and arranging faculty by a name that implies
reasoning from the lowest to the highest form. With us *Verstand* is
what distinguishes men from animals, while in the Vedânta, Manas is not
denied to animals, not even, as it would seem, to plants <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12).

It seems better therefore to retain as much as possible

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

the technical terms of Sanskrit philosophy, and to speak of Âtman or the
Self instead of soul, of Manas, or possibly mind, instead of
understanding or *Verstand*.

We shall see that even in Sanskrit itself the confusion is very great,
there being more terms than can be accommodated or be kept distinct one
from the other. By the side of the Indriyas, or senses, for instance, we
also find Prâ*n*as, literally vital spirits, which include the Manas,
and as a *conditio sine qua non*, but not as one of the Indriyas, the
so-called Mukhya Prâ*n*a, the vital breath, that passes from the lungs
through the mouth, and which again in a very artificial, if not to say
foolish, manner is divided into five varieties. The Manas is then
treated, like the senses, as part of the body, being meant at first, I
believe, for no more than the central and superintending perceptive
organ But it has many functions, and the names of some of them are
interchanged with the names of the Manas itself. We have Buddhi, the
general name for perception and mental activity, *K*itta, thought or
what is thought, Vi*gñ*âna, discrimination, some of which are sometimes
treated as separate faculties. Sa*m*kara, however, shows his powerful
grasp by comprising all under Manas, so that Manas is sometimes reason,
sometimes understanding, or mind or thought. This simplifies his
psychology very much, though it may lead to misunderstandings also.
Manas gives us the images (Vorstellungen) which consist of the
contributions of the different senses; it tells us this is this
(nis*k*aya) and fixes it (adhyavasâya). Images are formed into concepts
and words (sa*m*kalpa); these may be called into question sa*m*saya),

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

and weighed (vikalpa) against each other, so as to give us judgements.
Here then we should have in a rough form the elements of our psychology,
but it must be confessed that they were never minutely elaborated by the
Vedânta philosophers. Even the meanings here assigned to the different
psychological terms, were so assigned etymologically rather than from
definitions given by Sa*m*kara himself. According to him, Manas gives us
everything; impressions, images, concepts, and judgements, nay even
self-consciousness or Aha*m*kâra, i.e. the Ego-making, and consequently
the distinguishing between subjects and objects, all are Manas. But when
we ask, is the Manas, or the Aha*m*kâra, or Buddhi, or *K*itta, are any
of the attributes of Manas, such as Kâma, desire, Dhî, fear, Hrî, shame,
Dhî, wisdom, Vi*k*ikitsâ, doubt, *S*raddhâ, belief, A*s*raddhâ,
unbelief, Dh*ri*ti, decision, Adh*ri*ti, wavering,--are all or any of
these the true Self? the Vedântist answers again, No, no; they are
temporal, they are composite, they come and they go, they cannot be what
we are in search of, the true and eternal Self. It is clear that when we
say my body, there are two things presupposed, one thing the body, the
other he to whom it belongs. So again when we speak of my senses, my
mind, nay of my Ego, we distinguish between a possessor and what for the
time being he possesses. But we should never say my Self, because that
is tautological: the Self cannot belong to any one else. If we were to
say my Self, we could only mean our Ego, but if we say our Self, i.e.
the Self of all, or simply Self, we mean Brahman, Brahman as hidden
within us and

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

within the world. At the time of death the organs of knowledge are not
supposed to be destroyed absolutely, but while there is another life
before us, they are reduced to a seminal or potential form only, and
though the outward organs themselves will decay, their potentia or
powers remain, dwelling in what is called the Sûkshma-*S*arîra, the
subtile body, the body that migrates from birth to birth and becomes
again and again a Sthûla-*S*arîra, a material body. But when real
freedom has once been obtained, this Sûkshma-*S*arîra also vanishes and
there remains the Âtman only, or Brahman as he was and always will be.
The form assumed by the body in every new existence is determined by the
deeds and thoughts during former existences: it is still, so to say,
under the law of causality.

Then what remains for the surds, for the Âtman? The Greek sages have
hardly any answer to give; to them the αὐτός was seldom more than the
Ego, Aha*m*kâra, while with the Vedântist it is distinctly not the Ego
as opposed to a Non-Ego, but something beyond, something not touched by
the law of causality, something neither suffering, nor enjoying, nor
acting, but that without which neither the gross nor the subtile body
could ever exist. This Self, this the true αὐτός, was discovered in the
lotus of the heart in true Self-consciousness, it was discovered as
not-personal; though dwelling in the personal or living Âtman, the
*G*îva, it remained for ever a mere looker-on, untouched by anything. As
I said before, the Vedânta-philosophy is a philosophy of negation; it
says No, no, it says all that the Self is not, but what the Self is,
defies all words and all thoughts.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Our thoughts and our words return from it
baffled, as the Veda says. There are passages in the Upanishads where
attempts are made to bring us nearer to a conception of the Self,
whether we call it the Brahman or the Âtman, but these attempts never go
so far as a definition of these two, or of this One Power. In the
*Kh*ândogya Upanishad III, 14, we read: 'Surely this universe is
Brahman. It should be worshipped in silence as the beginning, the being,
and the end of all. Its matter is thought, life its body, light its
form. Its will is truth, its Self the infinite (ether). It works all, it
wills all, it scents all, it tastes all, embracing the Universe, silent
and unconcerned. This is the Self in the innermost heart, smaller than a
mustard-seed or the kernel of it. This is the Self in the innermost
heart, larger than the earth, larger than the atmosphere, larger than
the sky, larger than all worlds. The all-working, all-willing,
all-scenting, all-tasting one, the all-embracing, silent, unconcerned
one, this is the Self in the innermost heart, this is Brahman, this I
shall become when parting from hence. He who has this, does not doubt.'

This subject is treated again and again. Very much as we saw it treated
in the *Kh*ândogya, we find it treated in the Taittiriya Upanishad II,
1-7. One covering after another is there removed, till there remains in
the end the pure Self. First the body of flesh and blood is re-moved,
then the vital breath, then the Manas, and with it thought, till at last
nothing remains but the Self full of bliss. This is called the sap or
the essence. It is this Self

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

that brings bliss, finding peace and rest in the invisible, the
immaterial, the inexpressible, the unfathomable. So long as anything
else is left, hidden anywhere, there is no peace and no rest, however
wise a man may think himself. Or, as Yâ*gñ*avalkya says: 'He who knows
this, knows everything.' Every name that can be imagined for expressing
what is really inexpressible, is assigned in the Upanishads to Brahman.
Brahman is neither long nor short, neither subtile nor gross; he is
without parts, without activity, still, without spot, without fraud, he
is unborn, never growing old, not fading nor dying, nor fearing
anything; he is without and within.' Whether such a being can be called
he, is very doubtful, for he is neither he nor she; he is It in the very
highest sense of that undifferentiated pronoun.

We thus see that both methods, the first that started from the postulate
that the true Self must be one, without a second, and the second, which
holds that the true Self must be unchanging, eternal, without beginning
or end, arrive at the same final result, viz. that the Self of the world
can be nothing that is perceived in this changing world, and that our
own Self too can be nothing that is perceived as changing, as being
born, as living and dying. Both may, in one sense of the word, be called
nothings; though they are in reality that in comparison with which
everything else is nothing. If the world is real the Self is not, if the
Self is real the world is not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[80:2](rls22.htm#fr_11) Cf. Deussen, l.c. p. 60
seq.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[85:1](rls22.htm#fr_12) Deussen, 1.c. p. 258.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Final Conclusion, Tat tvamasi](rls23)
