[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls27)  [Next](rls29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a: 300-395

300\. The new-born calf looks very lively, blithe, and merry. It jumps
and runs all day long, and only stops to suck the sweet milk from its
darn. But no sooner is the rope placed round its neck than it begins to
pine away gradually, and, far from being merry, wears a dejected and
sorry appearance, and gets almost reduced to a skeleton. So long as a
boy has no concern with the affairs of the world he is as merry as the
day is long. But when he once

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

feels the weight of the responsibilities of a man of family, by binding
himself in time to the world by the indissoluble tie of wedlock, then he
no longer appears jolly, but wears the look of dejection, care, and
anxiety, and is seen to lose the glow of health from his cheeks, while
wrinkles gradually make their appearance over the forehead. Blessed is
he that remains a boy throughout his life, free as the morning air,
fresh as a newly-blown flower, and pure as a dewdrop.

301\. A boat may stay in the water, but water should not stay in the
boat. An aspirant may live in the world, but the world should not live
in him.

302\. He who thinks his spiritual guide a mere man, can-not derive any
benefit from him.

303\. What you think you should say. Let there be a harmony between your
thoughts and your words; otherwise, if you merely tell that God is your
all in all, while your mind has made the world its all in all, you
cannot derive any benefit thereby.

304\. A young plant should be always protected by a fence from the
mischief of goats and cows and little urchins. But when once it becomes
a big tree, a flock of goats or a herd of cows may find shelter under
its spreading boughs, and fill their stomachs with its leaves. So when
you have but little faith within you, you should protect it from the
evil influences of bad company and worldliness. But when once you grow
strong in faith, no worldliness or evil inclination will dare approach
your holy presence; and many who are wicked will become godly through
your holy contact.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

305\. If you wash the body of an elephant and set him at large, he is
sure to get himself dirtied in no time, but if after washing him you tie
him down to his own room he will remain clean. So if by the good
influences of holy men you once become pure in spirit, and then allow
yourself the liberty to mix freely with worldly men, you are sure to
lose that purity soon; but if you keep your mind fixed on your God, you
will never more get soiled in spirit.

306\. Where does the strength of an aspirant lie? It is in his tears. As
a mother gives her consent to fulfil the desire of her importunately
weeping child, so God vouchsafes to His weeping son whatever he is
crying for.

307\. Meditate on God either in an unknown corner, or in the solitude of
forests, or within your own mind.

308\. Chant forth the sweet name of Hari (God), keeping time all the
while by clapping your hands, then you will acquire mental
concentration. If you clap your hands, sitting under a tree, the birds
on the boughs thereof will fly away in all directions, and when you
chant forth the name of Hari and clap your hands, all evil thoughts will
fly away from your mind.

309, 310. As the same fish is dressed into soup, curry, or cutlet, and
each has his own choice dish of it, so the Lord of the Universe, though
one, manifests Himself differently according to the different likings of
His worshippers, and each of these has his own taste of God, which he
values the most. To some He is a kind master or a loving father,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

a sweet smiling mother or a devout friend, and to others a faithful
husband or a dutiful and obliging son.

311\. Bow down and adore where others kneel, for where so many hearts
have been paying the tribute of adoration, the kind Lord will manifest
Himself, for He is all mercy.

312\. There are men, who, although they have nothing to attract them in
this world, create some attachments for themselves, and so try to bind
themselves to this earth. They do not want and do not like to be free. A
man who has no family to care for, no relatives to look after, generally
takes a cat, or a monkey, or a dog, or a bird for a pet object and
companion; and thus slakes his thirst for milk by drinking mere whey.
Such is the power of Mâyâ or Nescience over humanity.

313, 314. A patient, in high fever and excess of thirst, imagines that
he can drink away quite a sea of water; but when that fit of fever goes
and he regains his normal temperature, he can barely quaff off a single
cupful of water, and his thirst is at once appeased with even a very
small quantity of it. So a man, being under the feverish excitement of
Mâyâ, and forgetful of his own littleness, imagines that he can embrace
the whole of Divinity within his own bosom, but when the illusion passes
away a single ray of Divine Light is seen to be sufficient to flood him
with eternal divine bliss.

315\. A man, under the influence of very high fever and in excessive
thirst, is placed between a row of pitchers

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

filled with cold water and a set of open-mouthed bottles filled with
flavoury sauces. Is it possible for the thirsty and restless patient in
such a case to refrain from either drinking the water or from tasting
the sauces placed so near him, although thereby his case may become
worse? Even such is the case with the man who is under the maddening
influence of his ever-active and misleading senses when he is placed
between the attractions of woman's charm on the one side and those of
wealth on the other. It is then difficult for him to behave properly,
and he is liable to deviate often from the true path and thus make his
case worse.

316\. None ventures to keep milk in a vessel in which curd had formerly
formed, lest the milk itself should get curdled. Nor can the vessel be
safely used for other working purposes lest it should crack upon the
fire. It is therefore almost useless. A good and experienced preceptor
does not entrust to a worldly man valuable and exalting precepts, for he
is sure to misinterpret and misuse them to suit his own mean designs.
Nor will he ask him to do any useful work that may cost a little labour,
lest he should think that the preceptor was taking undue advantage of
him.

317\. When a certain quantity of pure milk is mixed with double the
quantity of water, it takes a long time and much labour to thicken it to
the consistency of Kshîra (condensed milk). The mind of a worldly man is
largely diluted with the filthy water of evil and impure thoughts, and
it requires

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

much time and labour before anything can be done to purify and give the
proper consistency to it.

318\. The vanities of all others may gradually die out, but the vanity
of a saint as regards his sainthood is hard indeed to wear away.

319\. Of the grains of paddy which are fried in a frying-pan, the few
which leap out of the pan and burst outside are the best fried, being
without the slightest mark of any tinge; while every one of the
properly-fried grains in the pan itself is sure to have at least a very
small charred mark of a burn. So of all good devotees, the few who
altogether give up the world and go out of it are perfect without any
spot, while even the best of those devotees who are in the world must
have at least some small spot of imperfection in their character.

320\. We cannot say that God is gracious because He feeds us, for every
father is bound to supply his children with food; but when He keeps us
from going astray, and holds us back from temptations, then He is truly
gracious.

321\. If you can detect and find out the universal illusion or Mâyâ, it
will fly away from you, just as a thief runs away when found out.

322\. Fire itself has no definite shape, but in glowing embers it
assumes certain forms, and the formless fire is then endowed with forms.
Similarly, the formless God sometimes invests Himself with definite
forms.

323\. Should we pray aloud unto God? Pray unto Him

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

in any way you like. He is sure to hear you, for He can hear even the
footfall of an ant.

324\. He who tries to give one an idea of God by mere book-learning is
like the man who tries to give one an idea of Kâ*s*î (Benares) by means
of a map or a picture.

325\. A man began to sink a well, but having dug down to the depth of
twenty cubits he could not find the least trace of the water-spring
which was to feed his well. So he desisted from the work and selected
another place for the purpose. There he dug deeper than before, but even
then he could not find any water. So again he selected another spot and
dug still deeper than before, but it was also of no avail. At last in
utter disgust he gave up the task altogether. The sum total of the
depths of these three wells was little short of a hundred cubits. Had he
had the patience to devote even a half of the whole of this labour to
his first well, without shifting the site of the well from place to
place, he would surely have been successful in getting water. Such is
the case with men who continually shift their positions in regard to
faith. In order to meet with success we should devote ourselves entirely
to a single object of faith, without being doubtful as to its efficacy.

326\. Although in a grain of paddy the germ is considered the only
necessary thing (for germination and growth), while the husk or chaff is
considered to be of no importance, still if the unhusked grain be put
into the ground it will not sprout up and grow into a plant and produce
rice. To get a crop one must needs sow the grain with the husk on; but

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

if one wants to get at the germinating matter itself he must first
perform the operation of removing the husk from the seed. So rites and
ceremonies are necessary for the growth and perpetuation of a religion.
They are the receptacles that contain the seeds of truth, and
consequently every man must perform them before he reaches the central
truth.

327\. The pearl-oyster that contains the precious pearl is in itself of
very little value, but it is essential for the growth of the pearl. The
shell itself is of no use to the man who has got the pearl, neither are
ceremonies and rites necessary for him who has attained the Highest
Truth --God.

328\. A woodcutter led a very miserable life with the small means he
could procure by daily selling the load of wood brought from a
neighbouring forest. Once a Sa*m*nyâsin, who was wending his way through
the forest, saw him at work, and advised him to proceed onward into the
interior recesses of the forest, intimating to him that he would be a
gainer thereby. The woodcutter obeyed the injunction and proceeded
onward till he came to a sandal-wood tree, and being much pleased he
took away with him as many sandal-logs as he could carry, and sold them
in the market and derived much profit. Then he began to think within
himself why the good Sa*m*nyâsin did not tell him anything about the
wood of the sandal-trees, but simply advised him to proceed onward into
the interior of the forest. So the next day he went on even beyond the
place of the sandal-wood, and at last

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

came upon a copper-mine, and he took with him as much copper as he could
carry, and selling it in the market got much money by it. Next day,
without stopping at the copper-mine, he proceeded further still, as the
Sâdhu had advised him to do, and came upon a silver-mine, and took with
him as much of it as he could carry, and sold it all and got even more
money; and so daily proceeding further and further he got at gold-mines
and diamond-mines, and at last became exceedingly rich. Such is also the
case with the man who aspires after true knowledge. If he does not stop
in his progress after attaining a few extraordinary and supernatural
powers, he at last becomes really rich in the eternal knowledge of
truth.

329\. If you first smear the palms of your hands with oil and then break
open the jack-fruit, the sticky milky exudation of the fruit will not
stick to your hands and trouble you. So if you first fortify yourself
with the true knowledge of the Universal Self, and then live in the
midst of wealth and women, they will affect you in no way.

330\. He who would learn to swim must attempt swimming for some days. No
one can venture to swim in the sea after a single day's practice. So if
you want to swim in the sea of Brahman, you must make many ineffectual
attempts at first, before you can successfully swim therein.

331\. When does a man get his salvation? When his egoism dies.

332\. When a sharp thorn finds its way into the sole of one's foot, one
takes another thorn to get the former out,

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

and then casts both of them away. So relative knowledge alone can remove
the relative ignorance which blinds the eye of the Self. As both such
knowledge and ignorance are comprised truly under Nescience, the man who
attains the highest *Gñ*âna, or knowledge of the Absolute, does away
with both knowledge and ignorance in the end, being himself free from
all duality.

333\. To drink pure water from a shallow pond, one should gently take
the water from the surface, and not disturb it. If it is disturbed the
sediments will rise up from the bottom and make the whole water muddy.
If you desire to be pure, have firm faith and slowly go on with your
devotional practices, and waste not your energies in useless scriptural
discussions and arguments. The little brain will otherwise be muddled.

334\. If this body is worthless and transitory, why do pious and devout
men take care of it? No one takes care of an empty box. All protect with
care a chest full of precious jewels, gold, and costly articles. The
pious soul cannot help taking care of the body in which the Divine one
dwells, for all our bodies form the playground of the Deity.

335\. The tender bamboo can be easily bent, but the full-grown bamboo
breaks when an attempt is made to bend it. It is easy to bend young
hearts towards good, but the heart of the old escapes the hold when so
drawn.

338\. The locomotive engine easily drags along a train of

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

heavily-laden carriages. So the loving children of God, firm in their
faith and devotion to Him, feel no trouble in passing through all the
worries and anxieties of life, and leading many men along with them to
God.

337\. Every man should follow his own religion. A Christian should
follow Christianity, a Mohammedan should follow Mohammedanism, and so
on. For the Hindus the ancient path, the path of the Aryan Rishis, is
the best.

338, 339. He alone is the true man who is illumined with the light of
true knowledge. Others are men in name only.

340\. The magnetic needle always points towards the North, and hence it
is that the sailing-vessel does not lose her course. So long as the
heart of man is directed towards God he cannot be lost in the ocean of
worldliness.

341\. As the village maidens in India carry four or five pots of water
placed one over the other upon their heads, talking all the way with one
another about their own joys and sorrows, and yet do not allow one drop
of water to be spilt, so must the traveller in the path of virtue walk
along. In whatever circumstances he may be placed, let him always take
heed that his heart does not swerve from the true path.

342\. In our theatrical exhibitions wherein the life and exploits of
K*ri*sh*n*a are exhibited, the performance commences with the beating of
drums and the singing aloud of 'O K*ri*sh*n*a, come; come, O dear one.'
But the person who plays the part of K*ri*sh*n*a pays no heed to this
noise and turmoil, and goes on complacently chatting and smoking

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

in the green-room behind the stage. But as soon as the noise ceases, and
the pious sage Nârada enters on the stage with sweet and soft music and
calls upon K*ri*sh*n*a to come out with a heart overflowing with love,
K*ri*sh*n*a finds that he can no longer remain indifferent, and
hurriedly comes on to the stage. So long as the religious devotee cries,
'Come, O Lord; come, O Lord,' with lip-prayers only, verily the Lord
will never come; when the Lord does come, the heart of the devotee will
melt in divine emotion, and his loud utterances will all cease for ever.
The Lord cannot delay in coming when man calls upon Him from the depths
of his heart overflowing with deep love and devotion.

343\. There is no Path safer and smoother than that of ba-kalamâ
(*sic*). Ba-kalamâ means resigning the self to the will of the Almighty,
to have no consciousness that anything is 'mine.'

344\. What is the nature of absolute reliance? It is that happy state of
comfort felt by a fatigued worker, when reclining on a pillow he smokes
at leisure after a hard day's toil: it is a cessation of all anxieties
and worries.

345\. As dry leaves are blown about here and there by the wind, and have
no choice of their own, and make no exertion: so those who depend upon
God move in harmony with His will, and can have no will, and put forth
no effort, of their own.

346, 347. What do you think of the man who is a good orator and
preacher, but whose spirituality is undeveloped? He is like a person who
squanders another's property left in

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

trust with him. He can easily advise others, for it costs him nothing,
as the ideas he expresses are not his own, but borrowed.

348\. A worldly man is best known by his antipathy to whatever savours
of religion. He does not like to hear any sacred music or psalm, or to
utter the holy name of God, and even dissuades others from doing the
same. He scoffs at prayers, and pours down a volley of abuse upon all
religious societies and men.

349\. As a boy holding on to a post or a pillar gyrates round it with
headlong speed without fear of a fall, so, fixing thy hold firmly on
God, perform thy worldly duties, and thou shalt be free from all
dangers.

350\. As an unchaste woman, busily engaged in household affairs, is all
the while thinking of her secret lover, even so, O thou man of the
world, do thy round of worldly duties, but fix thy heart always on the
Lord.

351\. As a wet-nurse in a rich family brings up the child of her master,
loving the baby as if it were her own, but knows well that she has no
claim upon it; so think ye also that you are but trustees and guardians
of your children whose real father is the Lord God in Heaven.

352\. It is useless to pore over holy scriptures and sacred Shastras
without a discriminating and dispassionate mind. No spiritual progress
can be made without discrimination (Viveka) and dispassion (Vairâgya).

353\. Know thyself, and thou shalt then know the non-self

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

and the Lord of all. What is my ego? Is it my hand, or foot, or flesh,
or blood, or muscle, or tendon? Ponder deep, and thou shalt know that
there is no such thing as I. As by continually peeling off the skin of
the onion, so by analysing the ego it will be found that there is not
any real entity corresponding to the ego. The ultimate result of all
such analysis is God. When egoism drops away, Divinity manifests itself.

354\. The truly devotional and spiritual practice suited for this
Iron-age (Kâlî-yuga) is the constant repetition of the name of the Lord
of Love.

355\. If thou wishest to see God, have firm faith in the efficacy of
repeating the name of Hari, and try to discriminate the real from the
unreal.

356\. When an elephant is let loose, it goes about uprooting trees and
shrubs, but as soon as the driver pricks him on the head with the goad
he becomes quiet; so the mind when unrestrained wantons in the
luxuriance of idle thoughts, but becomes calm at once when struck with
the goad of discrimination.

357\. Devotional practices are necessary only so long as tears of
ecstasy do not flow at hearing the name of Hari. He needs no devotional
practices whose heart is moved to tears at the mere mention of the name
of Hari.

358\. The companionship of the holy and wise is one of the main elements
of spiritual progress.

359\. The soul reincarnates in a body of which it was

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

thinking just before its last departure from this world. Devotional
practices may therefore be seen to be very necessary. When, by constant
practice, no worldly ideas arise in the mind, then the god-idea alone
fills the soul, and does not leave it even when on the brink of
eternity.

360\. How should one love God? As the true and chaste wife loves her
husband and the niggardly miser loves his hoarded wealth, so the devotee
should love the Lord with all his heart and soul.

361\. How may we conquer the old Adam in us? When the fruit grows out of
the flower, the petals of the flower drop off of themselves. So, when
the divinity in thee increases, the weaknesses of thy human nature will
all vanish of their own accord.

362, 363. When does the attraction of sensual and worldly pleasures die
away? In God, who is Indivisible Ever-Existing Bliss, there is a
consolidation of all happiness and of all pleasures. They who enjoy Him
can find no attraction in the cheap and worthless pleasures of the
world.

364\. In what condition of the mind does God-vision take place? God is
seen when the mind is tranquil. When the mental sea is agitated by the
wind of desires, it cannot reflect God, and then God-vision is
impossible.

365\. How may we find our God? The angler, anxious to hook a big and
beautiful Rohitta-fish, waits calmly for hours together, having thrown
the bait and the hook into the water, watching patiently until the bait
is caught by the

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

fish. Similarly, the devotee who patiently goes on with his devotions is
sure at last to find his God.

386\. The heart of a sinner is like a curled hair. You may pull it ever
so long, but will not succeed in making it straight. So also the heart
of the wicked cannot be easily changed.

367\. Knowledge leads to unity, and Ignorance to diversity.

368, 369. The society of pious men is like the water in which rice is
washed. The rice-water dissipates intoxication. So doth the society of
the pious relieve worldly men, intoxicated with the wine of desires,
from their intoxication.

370\. The agent of a rich Zemindar, when he goes into the mofussil or
interior, tyrannises in various ways over the tenants. But when he comes
back to the head-quarters under the eyes of his master, he changes his
ways, becomes very pious, treats the tenants kindly, inquires fully into
all their grievances, and tries to mete out impartial justice to all.
The tyrannical agent even becomes good through the fear of the landlord,
and by the effect of his society. Similarly doth the society of the
pious make even the wicked righteous, awakening awe and reverence within
them.

371\. Moist wood placed upon a fire soon becomes dry, and ultimately
begins to burn. Similarly, the society of the pious drives away the
moisture of greed and lust from the hearts of worldly men and women, and
then the fire of Viveka (Discrimination) burns in them.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

372\. How should one pass his or her life? As the fire on the hearth is
stirred from time to time with a poker to make it burn brightly and
prevent it from going out, so the mind should be invigorated
occasionally by the society of the pious.

373\. As the blacksmith keeps alive the fire of his furnace by the
occasional blowing of his bellows, so the mind should be kept a-burning
by the society of the pious.

374\. Throw an unbaked cake of flour into hot ghee, it will make a sort
of boiling noise. But the more it is fried, the less becomes the noise;
and when it is fully fried the bubbling ceases altogether. So long as a
man has little knowledge, he goes about lecturing and preaching, but
when the perfection of knowledge is obtained, he ceases to make vain
displays.

375\. That man who, living in the midst of the temptations of the world,
attains perfection, is the true hero.

376\. We must dive deep into the ocean of the Eternal-Intelligent-Bliss.
Fear not the deep-sea monsters, Avarice and Anger. Coat thyself with the
turmeric of Discrimination and Dispassion (Viveka and Vairâgya) and
those alligators will not approach thee, as the scent of this turmeric
is too much for them.

377\. When unavoidably entering into places where there may be
temptation, carry always with thee the thought of thy Divine Mother. She
will protect thee from the many evils that may be lurking even in thy
heart. Cannot the

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

presence of thy mother shame thee away from evil deeds and evil
thoughts?

378\. How may we conquer the love of life? The human frame is made up of
decaying things; of flesh and blood and bone. It is a collection of
flesh, bone, marrow, blood, and other filthy substances subject to
putrefaction. By thus analysing the body, our love thereof vanishes.

379\. Should the devotee adopt any particular costume? The adoption of a
suitable costume is good. Dressed in the Sa*m*nyâsin's orange robes, or
carrying the religious mendicant's tambourine and cymbals, a man can
never utter light and profane things, or sing profane songs. But a man
dressed in the smart style of a beau will naturally have his heart
inclined to think low thoughts and sing low songs.

380\. Sometimes peace reigns in the heart, but why does it not always
last long? The fire made by the burning of the bamboo is soon
extinguished unless kept alive by constant blowing. Continual devotion
is necessary to keep alive the fire of spirituality.

381\. Those who live in the world and try to find salvation are like
soldiers that fight protected by the breast-work of a fort, while the
ascetics who renounce the world in search of God are like soldiers
fighting in the open field. To fight from within the fort is safer than
to fight in the open field. (Is this right or should it be transposed?)

382\. Pray to the Divine Mother in this wise. Give me,

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

\[paragraph continues\] O Mother! love that knows no incontinence, and
faith adamantine that cannot be shaken.

383\. As persons living in a house infested by venomous snakes are
always alert and cautious, so should men living in the world be always
on their guard against the allurements of lust and greed.

384\. If there is a small hole in the bottom of a jar of water, the
whole water flows out of it by that small aperture. Similarly, if there
be the smallest tinge of worldliness in the neophyte, all his exertions
come to naught.

385\. When the butter is produced by churning the whey, it should not be
kept in the same vessel containing the remaining whey, for then it will
lose something of its sweetness and cohesion. It should be kept in pure
water and in a different vessel. So after attaining some partial
perfection in the world, if one still continues to mix with the worldly,
and remains in the midst of the world, it is likely that he will be
tainted; but he will remain pure if he lives out of it.

386\. You cannot live in a sooty room without blackening your body to
some extent, however small it may be, with all your caution. So, if a
man or a woman lives in the company of one of his or her opposite sex of
the same age, with the greatest circumspection and control over his or
her passion, still some carnal thought, however small, is sure to arise
in his or her mind.

387\. Two persons, it is said, began together the rite of

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

invoking the Goddess Kâlî by the terrible process called
'*S*avasâdhana.' (This Tantrik invocation is performed in the cemetery
yard, the invoker sitting on the body of a corpse in a dark night.) One
invoker was frightened to insanity by the horrors of the earlier portion
of the night; the other was favoured with the vision of the Divine
Mother at the end of the night. Then he asked her, 'Mother! why did the
other man become mad?' The Deity answered, Thou too, O child! didst
become mad many times in thy various previous births, and now at last
thou seest me.'

388\. There are various sects among the Hindus; which sect or which
creed should we then adopt? Pârvatî once asked Mahâdeva, 'O Lord! what
is the root of the Eternal, Everlasting, All-embracing Bliss?' To her
Mahâdeva thus replied, 'The root is faith.' The peculiarities of creeds
and sects matter little or nothing. Let every one perform with faith the
devotions and the duties of his own creed.

389\. As a little boy or a girl can have no idea of conjugal affection,
even so a worldly man cannot at all comprehend the ecstasy of Divine
communion.

390\. The body is transient and unimportant. Why then is it so much
looked after? No one cares for an empty box. But people carefully
preserve the box that contains money and other valuable property. The
virtuous cannot but take care of the body, the temple of the soul in
which God has manifested Himself or which has been blessed by God's
advent.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

391\. How long does godliness remain in man? The iron is red so long as
it is in fire. It is black the moment it is removed from fire. So the
human being is godly so long as he is in communion with God.

392\. Soft clay admits of forms, but the burnt clay does not. So those
whose hearts are consumed with the desire of worldly things cannot
realise higher ideas.

393\. As the water and its bubbles are one, and as the bubbles have
their birth in the water, float on the water, and ultimately are
resolved into water; so the *G*îvâtman and the Paramâtman are one and
the same: the difference is in degrees--the one is finite and small, the
other is infinite; the one is dependent, the other independent.

394, 395. When the tail of the tadpole drops off, it can live both in
water and on land. When the tail of ignorance drops off, man becomes
free. He can then live both in God and in the world equally well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index to the Sayings](rls29.md)
