[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls22)  [Next](rls24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

### Final Conclusion, Tat tvamasi.

Then follows the final conclusion that these two Selfs are one and the
same, only reached by different methods. Man is man phenomenally, the
world is world phenomenally, the gods of the world are gods
phenomenally, but in full reality all are the Godhead, call it Âtman or
Brahman, metamorphosed and hidden for a time by Avidyâ or Nescience, but
always recoverable by Vidyâ or by the Vedânta-philosophy.

These ideas in a more or less popular form seem to pervade the Hindu
mind from the earliest to the latest date. They are taught in the
schools, but even without the schools they seem to be imbibed with the
mother's milk. They are often exaggerated and caricatured so as to
become repulsive to a European mind, but in their purity and simplicity
they contain an amount of truth which can no longer be safely neglected
by any student, whether of philosophy or religion. It can no longer be
put aside as merely curious, or disposed of as mystic, without a
definition of what is meant by mystic, and without an argument that
everything that is called mystic has really nothing to do with either
religion or philosophy. That it may lead to dangerous consequences no
one would deny, but the same may be said of almost every religion and
every philosophy, if carried to its last consequences. I have already
drawn attention to the false reasoning, that because good works cannot
secure salvation, therefore bad works also are indifferent or harmless.
Good works, according to the Vedânta, certainly do not lead straight to
salvation, but

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

they represent the first essential step that leads on to salvation,
while evil deeds form a barrier that keeps a man from making even the
first step in his progress towards knowledge and beatitude. That a Saint
cannot sin, or that *Sciens non peccat*, has been held true not in India
only, but it is easily seen in what sense this is either true or false,
whether in India or at home. It cannot be deeply enough impressed on the
minds of the modern apostles of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a that nothing would be
more likely to lower their master and their own work in the eyes of
serious people than the slightest moral laxity on their part, or a
defence of any such laxity on the ground that a *Gñ*ânin, a Knower, is
above morality. It is one thing to say that such a man cannot sin
because his passions are completely subdued, another that if he should
from any defect of knowledge lapse from his passionless and perfect
state it could not be imputed to him as sin. I confess there is a little
uncertainty on that point even among ancient authorities, but we know as
yet far too little of the classical Vedântic writings to speak with
confidence on such a point. There are too many passages in which strict
morality is enjoined as a *sine qua non* for Vedântic freedom to allow
any one to use a few doubtful passages in defence of immorality. When we
have first learnt all that can be learnt from the Vedânta, it will be
time to begin to criticise it, or, if possible, to improve it. We study
the systems of Plato and Aristotle, of Spinoza and Kant, not as
containing the full and perfect truth, cut and dry, but as helping us on
towards the truth. Every one of these contains partial

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

truths which might easily be proved to lead to dangerous consequences.
What is necessary to us at present, more than at any previous time, is a
historical study of all philosophy, that of India not excluded, in its
genetic or dialectic development, so that we may not be swayed by every
philosophical breeze that announces itself as new, though it has been
discussed again and again before, and, it may be, far more thoroughly
than by its most recent advocates. It will hereafter sound almost
incredible that in our time the philosophical public should have been
startled by the idea of evolution as a philosophical novelty, nay, that
there should have been an angry contest as to who was really the first
discoverer of what has been discussed again and again during the last
two thousand years. What is pari*n*âma, if not evolution, the evolution
advocated by Râmânu*g*a, but rejected by Sa*m*kara. That the
illustration of this evolutionary process of the world, as given in our
time, should stand incomparably higher than anything attempted from
Râmânu*g*a down to Herder, who would deny? But to the historian of
philosophy the idea is one thing, its illustration of it quite another.
It is most unfair to represent a man like Darwin, who was the most
eminent observer of nature, as a philosopher, an abstract philosopher;
the very thing which he himself would have most strongly deprecated.

At present, however, I am not concerned with Indian philosophy, *pure et
simple*, but with its effects on the popular mind of India, as shown by
one of its recent representatives, Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. He himself
distinguishes very clearly between philosophy or *Gñ*âna (knowledge) and

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

devotion or Bhakti, and he himself was a Bhakta, a worshipper <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) or lover of the deity, much more than a
*Gñ*ânin or a knower. It was in order to show the background from which
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a emerges, and the lights and shades of the atmosphere in
which he moved, that I thought it useful to add a short sketch of
Vedântic thought. Râmak*ri*sh*n*a was in no sense of the word an
original thinker, the discoverer of a new idea or the propounder of any
new view of the world. But he saw many things which others had not seen,
he recognised the Divine Presence where it was least suspected, he was a
poet, an enthusiast, or, if you like, a dreamer of dreams. But such
dreams also have a right to exist, and have a claim on our attention and
sympathy. Râmak*ri*sh*n*a never composed a philosophical treatise; he
simply poured out short sayings, and the people came to listen to them,
whether the speaker was at the time in full possession of his faculties,
or in a dream, or in a trance. From all we can learn, it is quite clear
that he had, by a powerful control of his breath, and by long continued
ascetic exercises, arrived at such a pitch of nervous excitability that
he could at any moment faint away or fall into a state of
unconsciousness, the so-called Samâdhi. This Samâdhi may be looked at,
however, from

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

two points, as either purely physical or as psychical. From an ordinary
Samâdhi a man may recover as one recovers from a fainting fit, but the
true Samâdhi consists in losing oneself or finding oneself entirely in
the Supreme Spirit. From this Samâdhi there is no return, because there
is nothing left that can return. A few men only who have reached it, are
enabled to return from it by means of a small remnant of their Ego, and
through the efficacy of their wish to become the instructors and
saviours of mankind. Something very like Samâdhi is the state of deep
dreamless sleep, during which the soul is supposed to be with Brahman
for a time, but able to return. This deep, unconscious sleep is one of
the four states, waking, sleeping with dreams, sleeping without dreams,
and dying. With Râmak*ri*sh*n*a it often happened that when he had
fallen into this deep sleep, he remained in it so long that his friends
were afraid he would never return to consciousness, and so it was at
last at the time of his death. He had fallen into a trance, and he never
awoke, but even death could lay hold of his body and his breath only;
his Self, no longer his, had recovered its Brahmahood, had become what
it had always been and always will be, the Âtman, the Highest Self, in
all its glory, freed from all the clouds of appearances, and independent
of individuality, personality, and of the whole phenomenal world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[94:1](rls23.htm#fr_13.md) This difference between
Bhakti, devotion, and *Gñ*âna, knowledge, is fully treated by Kishori
Lal Sarkar in his interesting little book, The Hindu System of Religious
Science and Art, or the Revelations of Rationalism and Emotionalism,
Calcutta, 1898. '*Gñ*âna,' the author says, 'sees with a telescopic,
Bhakti with a microscopic eye. *Gñ*âna perceives the essence, Bhakti
feels the sweetness. *Gñ*âna discovers the Supreme Intelligence, Bhakti
reciprocates the Supreme Loving Will.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a](rls24.md)
