[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls23)  [Next](rls25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a.

His sayings or Logia were collected and written down by his pupils, in
Bengâli; some were translated into Sanskrit

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

and into English. There are many that remind us of old Sanskrit sayings,
of which there are several collections, all, however, in metrical form.
The sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a are different, because they are in prose,
uttered evidently on the spur of the moment, and tinged here and there
with European ideas which must have reached Râmak*ri*sh*n*a through his
intercourse with Anglo-Indians, and not from books, for he was ignorant
of English. I received a complete collection of them from
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's own pupil, Vivekânanda, well known by his missionary
labours in the United States and England. I give them as they were sent
to me, with such corrections only as seemed absolutely necessary. I
thought at first of arranging them under different heads, but found that
this would have destroyed their character and made them rather
monotonous reading. I believe as they are, they give a true picture of
the man and of his way of teaching, suggested by the impulses of the
moment, but by no means systematic, and by no means free from
repetitions and contradictions. I should have liked very much to leave
out some of his sayings, because, to our mind, they seem insipid, in bad
taste, or even blasphemous. But should I not in doing so have offended
against historic truth? We want to know the man who has exercised and is
exercising so wide an influence, such as he was, not such as we wish him
to have been. He himself never wished to appear different from what he
was, and he often seems to have made himself out worse than he was.
Besides, if I had done so, I know that there are men who would not have
been ashamed of suspecting me

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

of a wish to represent the religions of the East, both modern and
ancient, as better than they really are. These are the very men who
would find many a lesson to learn from Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's sayings. No, I
said, let the wheat and the tares remain together. Few thoughtful
readers will go through them without finding some thought that makes
them ponder, some truth that will startle them as coming from so
unexpected a quarter. Nothing, on the other hand, would be easier than
to pick out a saying here and there, and thus to show that they are all
insipid and foolish. This is a very old trick, described in India as the
trick of the rice-merchants who wish to sell or to buy a rice-field, and
who offer you a handful of good or bad grains to show that the field is
either valuable or worthless. To my mind these sayings, the good, the
bad, and the indifferent, are interesting because they represent an
important phase of thought, an attempt to give prominence to the
devotional and practical side of the Vedânta, and because they show the
compatibility of the Vedânta with other religions. They will make it
clear that the Vedânta also possesses a morality of its own, which may
seem too high and too spiritual for ordinary mortals, but which in India
has done good, is doing good, and may continue to do good for centuries
to come.

In conclusion, I have to thank my friend Mozoomdar, and several of the
disciples of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, more particularly Vivekânanda and the
editor of the Brahmavâdin, for the ready help they have rendered me in
publishing this collection of the sayings of their departed Master.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a: 1-99](rls25.md)
