[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls26)  [Next](rls28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a: 200-299

200\. Creeds and sects matter nothing. Let every one perform with faith
the devotions and practices of his creed. Faith is the only clue to get
to God.

201\. He who has faith has all, and he who wants faith wants all.

202\. The faith-healers of India order their patients to repeat with
full conviction the words, 'There is no illness in me, there is no
illness at all.' The patient repeats it, and, thus mentally denying, the
illness goes off. So if you think yourself to be morally weak and
without goodness,

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

you will really find yourself to be so in no time. Know and believe that
you are of immense power, and the power will come to you at last.

203\. Bhagavân *S*rî Râma*k*andra had to bridge the ocean before he
could cross over to La*m*kâ (Ceylon). But Hanumân, his faithful
monkey-servant, with one jump crossed the ocean through the firmness of
his faith in Râma. Here the servant achieved more than the master,
simply through faith.

204\. A man wanted to cross the river. A sage gave him an amulet and
said, This will carry thee across.' The man, taking it in his hand,
began to walk over the waters. When he reached the middle of the river
curiosity entered into his heart, and he opened the amulet to see what
was in it. Therein he found, written on a bit of paper, the sacred name
of Râma. The man at this said deprecatingly, Is this the only secret?'
No sooner had he said this than he sank down. It is faith in the name of
the Lord that works miracles, for faith is life, and doubt is death.

205\. Q. How can I perform devotion when I must always think of my daily
bread? A. He for whom thou workest will supply thy necessities. God hath
made provision for thy support before he sent thee here.

208\. *Q*. When shall I be free? *A*. When thy I-hood (egoism) will
vanish, and thy self-will be merged in the Divinity.

207\. Out of the myriads of paper kites that are made to

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

fly in the air, only one or two rend the string and get free. So out of
hundreds of Sâdhakas, only one or two get free from worldly bonds.

208\. As a piece of lead, thrown into a basin of mercury, is soon
dissolved therein, so the human soul loses its individual existence when
it falls into the ocean of Brâhma.

209\. *Q*. What do you say about the method of religious preaching
employed now-a-days? *A*. It is inviting hundreds of persons to dinner,
when the food supply is sufficient for one only.

210\. Instead of preaching to others, if one worships God all that time,
that is enough preaching. He who strives to make himself free, is the
real preacher. Hundreds come from all sides, no one knows whence, to him
who is free, and are taught. When a flower opens the bees come from all
sides uninvited and unasked.

211\. Hast thou got, O preacher, the badge of authority? As the humblest
subject wearing the badge of the King is heard with respect and awe, and
can quell the riot by showing his badge; so must thou, O preacher,
obtain first the order and inspiration from God. So long as thou hast
not this inspiration, thou mayest preach all thy life, but that will be
mere waste of breath.

212\. He alone is the true 'man' who is illumined with the Spiritual
Light.

213\. The soul enchained is 'man,' and free from chain is '*S*iva'
(God).

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

214\. The heavier scale of a balance goes down while the lighter one
rises up. Similarly he who is weighed down with too many cares and
anxieties of the world, goes down to the world, while he who has less
cares rises up towards the Kingdom of Heaven.

215\. God is in all men, but all men are not in God: that is the reason
why they suffer.

216\. There are two sorts of men. The Guru said to one of his disciples,
'What I impart to thee, my dear, is invaluable; keep it to thyself,' and
the disciple kept it all to himself. But when the Guru imparted that
knowledge to another of his disciples, the latter, knowing its
inestimable worth, and not liking to enjoy it all alone, stood upon a
high place and began to declare the good tidings to all the people. The
Avatâras are of the latter class, while the Siddhas are of the former.

217\. No man keeps a total fast. Some get food at 9 a.m., others at
noon, others at 2 p.m., and others in the evening Similarly, at some
time or other, in this life or after many lives, all will see God.

218\. When fruit becomes ripe and falls of itself, it tastes very sweet;
but when unripe fruit is plucked and artificially ripened it does not
taste so sweet and becomes shrivelled up. So when one has attained
perfection, the observance of caste distinctions falls off of itself
from him, but so long as this exalted knowledge is not reached, one must
observe caste distinctions.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

219\. When a storm blows, it is impossible to distinguish an A*s*vattha
(pippal) and a Va*t*a (banian) tree. So when the storm of true knowledge
(the knowledge of one universal existence) blows, there can be no
distinction of caste.

220\. When a wound is perfectly healed, the slough falls off of itself;
but if the slough be taken off earlier, it bleeds. Similarly, when the
perfection of knowledge is reached by a man, the distinctions of caste
fall off from him, but it is wrong for the ignorant to break such
distinctions.

221\. *Q*. Is it proper to keep the Brâhmanical thread? *A*. When the
knowledge of self is obtained, all fetters fall off of themselves. Then
there is no distinction of a Brâhma*n*a Or a *S*ûdra, a high caste or a
low caste. In that case the sacred thread-sign of caste falls away of
itself. But so long as a man has the consciousness of distinction and
difference he should not forcibly throw it off.

222\. *Q*. Why do you not lead a family life with your wife? *A*. The
God Kârtikeya, the leader of the Heavenly army, once happened to scratch
a cat with his nail. On going home he saw there was the mark of a
scratch on the cheek of his Mother. Seeing this, he asked of her,
'Mother, dear, how have you got that ugly scratch on your cheek?' The
Goddess Durgâ replied, 'Child, this is thy own handiwork,--the mark
scratched by thy own nail.' Kârtikeya asked in wonder, 'Mother, how is
it? I never remember to have scratched thee!' The Mother replied,
'Darling, hast thou forgotten having scratched a cat this morning?'

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kârtikeya said, 'Yes, I did scratch a cat; but
how did your cheek get marked?' The Mother replied, 'Dear child, nothing
exists in this world but myself. I am all creation. Whomsoever thou
hurtest, thou hurtest me.' Kârtikeya was greatly surprised at this, and
determined thenceforward never to marry; for whom would he marry? Every
woman was mother to him. I am like Kârtikeya. I consider every woman as
my Divine Mother.

223\. When I look upon chaste women of respectable families, I see in
them the Mother Divine arrayed in the garb of a chaste lady; and again,
when I look upon the public women of the city, sitting in their open
verandas, arrayed in the garb of immorality and shamelessness, I see in
them also the Mother Divine, sporting in a different way.

224\. The light of the gas illumines various localities with various
intensities. But the life of the light, namely, the gas, comes from one
common reservoir. So the religious teachers of all climes and ages are
but as many lamp-posts through which is emitted the light of the spirit
flowing constantly from one source, the Lord Almighty.

225\. As the rain-water from the top of a house may be discharged
through pipes having their mouth-pieces shaped like the head of a tiger,
a cow or a bull, &c., although the water does not belong to these pipes,
but comes from the heaven above, so are the holy Sâdhus (saints) through
whose mouths eternal and heavenly truths are discharged into this world
by the Almighty.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

226\. The cries of all jackals are alike. The teachings of all the wise
men of the world are essentially one and the same.

227\. Whatever gives happiness in this world contains a bit of divine
enjoyment in it. The difference between the two is as between treacle
and refined candy.

228\. He who is absorbed in others' affairs, forgets his own outer and
inner affairs (i.e. does not think about his own lower and higher self,
but is absorbed in the affairs of other selfs).

228\. When the mind dwells in evil propensities, it is like a high-caste
Brâhma*n*a living in the quarters of the out-castes, or like a gentleman
dwelling in the back slums of the town.

230\. If a man sees a pleader he naturally thinks of cases and causes;
similarly, on seeing a pious devotee, the man remembers his God and the
hereafter.

231\. *Q*. What is the reason that a Prophet is not honoured by his own
kinsmen? *A*. The kinsmen of a juggler do not crowd round him to see his
performances, while strangers stand agape at his wonderful tricks.

232\. The seeds of Va*g*ravântula do not fall to the bottom of the tree.
From the shell they shoot far away from the tree and take root there. So
the Spirit of a Prophet manifests itself at a distance, and he is
appreciated there.

233\. There is always a shade under the lamp while its light illumines
the surrounding objects. So the man in the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

immediate proximity of a Prophet does not understand him. Those who live
afar off are charmed by his spirit and extra-ordinary power.

234\. The waters of a swiftly-flowing current move round and round in
eddies and whirlpools, but quickly crossing these they resume their
former course. So the hearts of the pious fall sometimes into the
whirlpools of despondency, grief, and unbelief, but it is only a
momentary aberration. It does not last long.

235\. A tree, laden with fruit, always bends low. So, if thou wantest to
be great, be low and meek.

236\. The heavier scale goes down and the lighter one rises up. So the
man of merit and ability is always humble, but the fool is always puffed
up with vanity.

237\. The anger of the good is like a line drawn on the surface of
water, which does not last long.

238\. If a white cloth is stained with a small speck the blackness
appears very ugly indeed by the contrast; so the smallest fault of a
holy man becomes painfully prominent by his surrounding purity.

239\. The sunlight is one and the same wherever it falls; but bright
surfaces like water, mirror and polished metals, &c., can reflect it
fully. So is the Light Divine. It falls equally and impartially on all
hearts, but the pure and clean hearts of the good and holy Sâdhus only
can fully reflect it.

240\. As in a pane of glass on which quicksilver has

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

been laid, one can see his face reflected, so in the chaste heart of a
totally abstinent man is reflected the image of the Almighty

241\. So long as one does not become simple like a child, one does not
get Divine illumination. Forget all the worldly knowledge that thou hast
acquired, and become as ignorant about it as a child, and then thou wilt
get the knowledge of the True.

242\. The Hindu almanacs contain predictions of the annual rainfall. But
squeeze the book, and not a drop of water will be got out of it. So also
many good sayings are to be found in books, but merely reading them will
not make one religious. One has to practise the virtues taught therein.

243\. *Q*. Why do religions degenerate? *A*. The rain-water is pure, but
becomes soiled according to the medium it passes through. If the roof
and the pipe be dirty, the discharge is dirty.

244\. Money can procure bread and butter only. Do not consider it
therefore as if it were thy sole end and aim.

245\. As by rubbing gold and brass on a touch-stone, their real worth
becomes known; so a sincere Sâdhu and a hypocrite are found out when
they are rubbed through the touch-stone of persecution and adversity.

246\. The iron must be heated several times and hammered before it
becomes good steel. Then only it becomes fit to be made into a sharp
sword, and can be bent any way you

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

like. So a man must be heated several times in the furnace of
tribulations, and hammered with the persecutions of the world, before he
becomes pure and humble.

247\. Remain always strong and steadfast in thy own faith, but eschew
all bigotry and intolerance.

248\. Be not like the frog in the well. The frog in the well knows
nothing bigger and grander than its well. So are all bigots: they do not
see anything better than their own creeds.

249\. There was a man who worshipped *S*iva, but hated all other
Deities. One day *S*iva appeared to him and said,

I shall never be pleased with thee, so long as thou hatest the other
gods.' But the man was inexorable. After a few days *S*iva again
appeared to him. This time he appeared as Hari-Hara, that is, one side
of his body was that of *S*iva, and the other side that of Vish*n*u. At
this the man was half pleased and half displeased. He laid his offerings
on the side representing *S*iva, and did not offer anything to the side
representing Vish*n*u, and when he offered the burning incense to his
beloved God (*S*iva) he was careful as well as audacious enough to press
the nostril of Vish*n*u, the other half of Hari-Hara, lest the fragrance
should be pleasing to Vish*n*u. Seeing him altogether inexorable, the
God *S*iva was sorely displeased with him, and at once vanished from his
sight. But the man was as undaunted as ever. However, the children of
the village began to tease him by uttering the name of Vish*n*u in his
hearing. Displeased with this, the man hung two bells to his ears, which
he used to

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

ring as soon as the boys cried out the names of Vish*n*u, in order to
prevent the sound entering his ears. And thus he was known by the name
of Bell-eared, or Gha*nt*â-kar*n*a. He is still so much hated for his
bigotry that every year at a certain period the boys of Bengal break
down his effigy with a cudgel, and this serves him right.

250\. As the young wife in a family shows her love and respect to her
father-in-law, mother-in-law, and every other member of the family, and
at the same time loves her husband more than these; similarly, being
firm in thy devotion to the Deity of thy own choice (Ish*t*a-Devatâ), do
not despise other Deities, but honour them all.

251\. A truly religious man should think that other religions also are
paths leading to the truth. We should always maintain an attitude of
respect towards other religions.

252\. The difference between the modern Brâhmaism and Hinduism is like
the difference between the single note of music and the whole music. The
modern Brâhmas are content with the single note of Brahman, while the
Hindu religion is made up of several notes producing a sweet and
melodious harmony.

253\. Some years ago, when the Hindus and the Brâhmas were preaching
their respective religions with true earnestness and great zeal, some
one asked Bhagavân *S*rî Râmak*ri*sh*n*a his opinion about both parties,
on which he replied, I see that my Mother Divine is getting her work
done through both parties.'

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

254\. Hari (from h*ri*, to steal) means 'He who steals our hearts,' and
Haribala means 'Hari is our strength.'

255\. Sin like quicksilver can never be kept concealed. (When a man
takes calomel, sooner or later it is sure to show itself in the shape of
eruptions on the skin.)

256\. The tears of repentance and the tears of happiness flow from the
two different corners of the eye. The tears of repentance flow from the
side near the nose, and the tears of happiness flow from the other
extremity.

257\. Visit not miracle workers. They are wanderers from the path of
truth. Their minds have become entangled in the meshes of psychic
powers, which lie in the way of the pilgrim towards Brahman, as
temptations. Beware of these powers, and desire them not.

258\. A man after fourteen years of hard asceticism in a lonely forest
obtained at last the power of walking over the waters. Overjoyed at this
acquisition, he went to his Guru, and told him of his grand feat. At
this the Master replied, 'My poor boy, what thou hast accomplished after
fourteen years' arduous labour, ordinary men do the same by paying a
penny to the boatman.'

259\. A youthful disciple of *S*rî Râmak*ri*sh*n*a once acquired the
power of reading the heart of another. When he related this experience
to the Master, he rebuked him and said, 'Shame on thee, child, do not
waste thy energies on these petty things.'

260\. A washerman keeps a large store of clothes and has

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

a rich wardrobe, but these are not his. As soon as the clothes are
washed his wardrobe becomes empty. Men having no original thoughts of
their own are like the washerman.

261\. Greed brings woe, while contentment is all happiness. A barber was
once passing under a haunted tree when he heard a voice say, 'Wilt thou
accept of seven jars of gold?' The barber looked round, but could see no
one. The mysterious voice again repeated the words, and the cupidity of
the barber being greatly roused by the spontaneous offer of such vast
wealth he spoke aloud, 'When the merciful God is so good as to take pity
even on a poor barber like me, is there anything to be said as to my
accepting the kind offer so generously made?' At once the reply came,
'Go home, I have already carried the jars thither.' The barber ran in
hot haste to his house, and was transported to see the promised jars
there. He opened them one after another and saw them all filled, save
one which was half filled. Now arose the desire of filling this last jar
in the heart of the barber. So he sold all his gold and silver ornaments
and converted them into coins and threw them into the jar. But the jar
still remained empty. He now began to starve himself and his family by
living upon insufficient, coarse, and cheap food, throwing all his
savings into the jar, but the jar remained as empty as ever. The barber
then requested the King to increase his pay as it was not sufficient to
maintain him and his family. As he was a favourite of the King, the
latter granted his request.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The barber now began to save all his pay and
emoluments, and throw them all into the jar, but the greedy jar showed
no sign of being filled. He now began to live by begging, and became as
wretched and miserable as ever. One day the King seeing his sad plight,
inquired of him by saying, 'Hallo! when thy pay was half of what thou
gettest now, thou wast far happier and more cheerful, contented, and
healthy, but with double that pay I see thee morose, care-worn, and
dejected. Now what is the matter with thee? Hast thou accepted the seven
jars of gold?' The barber was taken aback by this home-thrust, and with
clasped hands asked the King as to who had informed his majesty about
the matter. The King answered, 'Whosoever accepts the riches of a Yaksha
is sure to be reduced to such an abject and wretched plight. I have
known thee through this invariable sign. Do away with the money at once.
Thou canst not spend a farthing of it. That money is for hoarding and
not for spending.' The barber was brought to his senses by this advice
and went to the haunted tree and said, 'O Yaksha, take back thy gold,'
and he returned home to find the seven jars vanished, taking with them
his life-long savings. Nevertheless he began to live happily after it.

262\. It is very pleasant to scratch a ringworm, but the after-sensation
is very painful and intolerable; so the pleasures of the world are very
pleasant in the beginning, but their after-consequences are very
terrible to contemplate.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

263\. *Q*. What is the world like? *A*. It is like an Âmlâ fruit, all
skin and stone with but very little pulp, the eating of which produces
colic.

264\. Like unto a miser that longeth after gold, let thy heart pant
after Him.

265\. So long as the heavenly expanse of the heart is troubled and
disturbed by the gusts of desire, there is little chance of our
beholding therein the brightness of God. The beatific vision occurs only
in the heart which is calm and rapt up in divine communion.

266\. The soiled mirror never reflects the rays of the sun, and the
impure and unclean in heart who are subject to Mâyâ (illusion) never
perceive the glory of the Bhagavân (the Venerable). But the pure in
heart see the Lord, as the clear mirror reflects the sun. Be holy, then.

267\. As on the troubled surface of rolling waters the moon shines in
broken images, so on the unsettled mind of a worldly man engrossed in
Mâyâ, the perfect God shines with partial light only.

268\. Why does a Bhakta (one full of the love of God) forsake everything
for the sake of God? An insect flies from the darkness as soon as any
light meets its eyes; the ant loses its life in molasses, but never
leaves them. So the Bhakta cleaves unto his God for ever, and leaves all
else.

269\. As one can ascend to the top of a house by means of a ladder or a
bamboo or a staircase or a rope, so diverse

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

also are the ways and means to approach God, and every religion in the
world shows one of these ways.

270\. If God is Omnipresent, why do we not see Him? Standing by the bank
of a pool thickly overspread with scum and weeds, you will say that
there is no water in it. If you desire to see the water, remove the scum
from the surface of the pond. With eyes covered with the film of Mâyâ
you complain that you cannot see God. If you wish to see Him, remove the
film of Mâyâ from off your eyes.

271\. Why cannot we see the Divine Mother? She is like a high-born lady
transacting all her business from behind the screen, seeing all, but
seen by none. Her devout sons only see Her, by going near Her and behind
the screen of Mâyâ.

272\. Dispute not. As you rest firmly on your own faith, allow others
also the same liberty to stand by their own faiths. By mere disputation
you shall never succeed in convincing another of his error. When the
grace of God descends on him, every one will understand his own
mistakes.

273\. A husbandman was watering a sugar-cane field the whole of a day.
After finishing his task he saw that not a drop of water had entered the
field; all the water had gone underground through several big rat-holes.
Such is the state of that devotee who, cherishing secretly in his heart
worldly desires (of fame, pleasures, and comforts) and ambitions,
worships God. Though daily praying, he

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

makes no progress because the entire devotion runs to waste through the
rat-holes of his desires, and at the end of his life-long devotion he is
the same man as before, and has not advanced one step.

274\. Keep thyself aloof at the time of thy devotion from those who
scoff, and those who ridicule piety and the pious.

275\. Is it good to create sects? (Here is a pun on the word 'Dal,'
which means both a 'sect' or 'party' as well as 'the rank growth on the
surface of a stagnant pool.') The 'Dal' cannot grow in a current of
water: it grows only in the stagnant waters of petty pools. He whose
heart earnestly longs after the Deity has no time for anything else. He
who looks for fame and honour, forms sects (Dal). (Cf. 105.)

278\. The Vedas, Tantras, and the Purâ*n*as, and all the sacred
scriptures of the world, have become as if defiled (as food thrown out
of the mouth becomes polluted): because they have been constantly
repeated by and have come out of human mouths. But the Brahman or the
Absolute has never been defiled, for no one as yet has been able to
express Him by human speech.

277\. The parable of a Brahman and his low-caste servant:

As soon as Mâyâ is found out, she flies away. A priest was once going to
the village of a disciple. He had no servant with him. On the way,
seeing a cobbler, he addressed him, saying, 'Hallo! good man, wilt thou
accompany me as a servant? Thou shalt dine well and

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

wilt be cared for; come along.' The cobbler replied, Reverend Sir, I am
of the lowest caste, how can I represent your servant?' The priest said,
'Never mind that. Do not tell anybody what thou art, nor speak to or
make acquaintance with any one.' The cobbler agreed. At twilight, while
the priest was sitting at prayers in the house of his disciple, another
Brahman came and addressed the priest's servant, 'Fellow, go and bring
my shoes from there.' The servant, true to the words of his master, made
no response. The Brahman repeated the order a second time, but the
servant remained silent. The Brahman repeated it again and again, but
the cobbler moved not an inch. At last, getting annoyed, the Brahman
angrily said, 'Hallo Sirrah! How darest thou not obey a Brahman's
command! What is thy caste? Art thou not a cobbler?' The cobbler hearing
this began to tremble with fear, and piteously looking at the priest
said, '0 venerable Sir, O venerable Sir! I am found out. I cannot stay
here any longer, let me flee.' So saying he took to his heels.

278\. What is the relation between *G*îvâtman and Paramâtman, the
personal and the Highest Self?

As when a plank of wood is stretched across a current of water, the
water seems to be divided into two, so the indivisible appears divided
into two by limitations (Upâdhi) of Mâyâ. In truth they are one and the
same.

279\. There is little chance of a ship running astray, so long as its
compass points towards the true North. So if the mind of man--the
compass-needle of the ship of life

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

is turned always towards the Parabrahman without oscillation, it will
steer clear of every danger.

280\. The Avadhûta saw a bridal procession passing through a meadow,
with the beating of drums and the blowing of trumpets, and with great
pomp. Hard by the road through which the procession was passing he saw a
hunter deeply absorbed in aiming at a bird, and perfectly inattentive to
the noise and pomp of the procession, casting not even a passing look at
it. The Avadhûta, saluting the hunter, said, 'Sir, you are my Guru. When
I sit in meditation let my mind be concentrated on its object of
meditation as yours has been on the bird.'

281\. An angler was fishing in a pond. The Avadhûta, approaching him,
asked, 'Brother, which way leads to such and such a place?' The float of
the rod at that time was indicating that the fish was nibbling the bait:
so the man did not give any reply, but was all attention to his
fishing-rod. When the fish was caught, he turned round and said, 'What
is it you have been saying, sir?' The Avadhûta saluted him and said,
'Sir, you are my Guru. When I sit in the contemplation of the
Paramâtman, let me follow your example, and before finishing my
devotions let me not attend to anything else.'

282\. A heron was slowly walking to catch a fish. Behind, there was a
hunter aiming an arrow at it; but the bird was totally unmindful of this
fact. The Avadhûta, saluting the heron, said, 'When I sit in meditation
let me

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

follow your example, and never turn back to see who is behind me.'

283\. A kite with a fish in its beak was followed by a host of crows and
other kites, which were screeching and pecking at it, and were trying to
snatch the fish away. In whatever direction it went the crowd of kites
and crows followed it, screeching and cawing. Getting tired of this
annoyance, the kite let go the fish, when it was instantly caught by
another kite, and at once the crowd of kites and crows transferred their
kind attentions to the new owner of the fish. The first kite was left
unmolested, and sat calmly on the branch of a tree. Seeing this quiet
and tranquil state of the bird the Avadhûta, saluting it, said, 'You are
my Guru, O Kite; for you have taught me that so long as man does not
throw off the burden of the worldly desires he carries, he cannot be
undisturbed and at peace with himself.'

284\. The human Guru whispers the sacred formula into the ear; the
Divine Guru breathes the spirit into the soul.

285\. If thou wishest to thread the needle, make the thread pointed, and
remove all extraneous fibres. Then the thread will easily enter into the
eye of the needle. So if thou wishest to concentrate thy heart on God,
be meek, humble, and poor in spirit, and remove all filaments of desire.

286\. A snake dwelt in a certain place. No one dared to pass by that
way. For whoever did so was instantaneously

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

bitten to death. Once a Mahâtman passed by that road, and the serpent
ran after the sage in order to bite him. But when the snake approached
the holy man he lost all his ferocity, and was overpowered by the
gentleness of the Yogin. Seeing the snake, the sage said, 'Well, friend,
thinkest thou to bite me?' The snake was abashed and made no reply. At
this the sage said, 'Hearken, friend, do not injure anybody in future.'
The snake bowed and nodded assent. The sage went his own way and the
snake entered his hole, and thenceforward began to live a life of
innocence and purity without even attempting to harm any one. In a few
days all the neighbourhood began to think that the snake had lost all
his venom, and was no more dangerous, and so every one began to tease
him. Some pelted him, others dragged him mercilessly by the tail, and in
this way there was no end to his troubles. Fortunately the sage again
passed by that way, and seeing the bruised and battered condition of the
good snake, was very much moved, and inquired the cause of his distress.
At this the snake replied, 'Holy sir, this is because I do not injure
any one, after your advice. But alas! they are so merciless!' The sage
smilingly said, 'My dear friend, I simply advised you not to bite any
one, but I did not tell you not to frighten others. Although you should
not bite any creature, still you should keep every one at a considerable
distance by hissing at him.'

Similarly, if thou livest in the world, make thyself feared and
respected. Do not injure any one, but be not, at the same time, injured
by others.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

287\. When the bird has flown away from it, one cares no longer for the
cage. So when the bird of life has flown away, no one cares any longer
for the carcase.

288\. As a lamp does not burn without oil, so a man cannot live without
God.

289, 290. A learned Brahman once went over to a wise king and said,
'Hear, O king, I am well versed in the holy scriptures. I intend to
teach thee the holy book of the Bhâgavata.' The king, who was the wiser
of the two, well knew that a man who has read the Bhâgavata would seek
more to know his own Self than honour and wealth in a king's court. He
replied, 'I see, O Brahman, that you yourself have not mastered that
book thoroughly. I promise to make you my tutor, but go first and learn
the scripture well.' The Brahman went his way, thinking within himself,
'How foolish the king is to say I have not mastered the Bhâgavata well,
when I have been reading the book over and over again for all these
years.' However, he went over the book carefully once more and appeared
before the king. The king told him the same thing again and sent him
away. The Brahman was sore vexed, but thought there must be some meaning
for this behaviour of the king. He went home, shut himself up in his
closet, and applied himself more than ever to the study of the book. By
and by the hidden meanings began to flash before his intellect; the
vanity of running after the bubbles, riches and honour, kings and
courts, wealth and fame, all vanished before his unclouded vision. From
that day forward he gave

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

himself up entirely to attain perfection by the worship of God, and
never returned to the king. A few years after the king thought of the
Brahman, and went to his house to see what he was about. Seeing the
Brahman, all radiant with the divine light and love, he fell upon his
knees and said, 'I see you have now arrived at the true meaning of the
scriptures; I am ready to be your disciple, if you will duly condescend
to make me one.'

291\. As long as there is no breeze blowing, we fan ourselves to
alleviate heat, but when the breeze blows both for rich and poor, we
give up fanning. We should persevere ourselves to reach our final goal
as long as there is no help from above; but when that help comes to any,
let him then stop labouring and persevering; otherwise not.

292\. *Q*. Where is God? How can we get to Him? *A*. There are pearls in
the sea, you must dive deep again and again until you get the pearls. So
there is God in the world, but you should persevere to see Him.

293\. How does the soul stay in the body? As the piston stays in a
syringe.

294\. As in mid-ocean a bird, which found its perch upon the topmast of
a ship, getting tired of its position, flies away to discover a new
place of rest for itself, and alas! without finding any, returns at last
to its old roost upon the masthead, weary and exhausted; so when an
ordinary aspirant, being disgusted with the monotony of the task and the
discipline imposed upon him by his well-wishing and thoroughly
experienced preceptor (Guru),

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

loses all hope, and, having no confidence in him, launches forth into
the broad world ever in search of a new adviser, he is sure at last to
return to his original master after a fruitless search, which has,
however, increased the reverence of the repentant aspirant for the
master.

295\. In the month of June a young goat was playing near his mother,
when, with a merry frisk, he told her that he meant to make a feast of
Râs-flowers, a species of flowers budding abundantly during the time of
the Râslîlâ festival. 'Well, my darling,' replied the dam, 'it is not
such an easy thing as you seem to think. You will have to pass through
many crises before you can hope to feast on Râs-flowers. The interval
between the coming September and October is not very auspicious to you;
for some one may take you for a sacrifice to the Goddess Durgâ; then,
again, you will have to get through the time of Kâlî-pû*g*â, and if you
are fortunate enough to escape through that period, there comes the
*G*agaddhât*ri*-pû*g*â, when almost all the surviving male members of
our tribe are destroyed. If your good luck leads you safe and sound
through all these crises, then you can hope to make a feast of
Râs-flowers in the beginning of November.' Like the dam in the fable, we
should not hastily approve of all the aspirations which our youthful
hopes may entertain, remembering the manifold crises which one will have
to pass through in the course of one's life.

296\. As the fly sits, now on the unclean sore of the human body, and
now on the offerings dedicated to the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

gods, so the mind of the worldly man is at one time deeply engaged in
religious topics and at the next moment loses itself in the pleasures of
wealth and lust.

297\. As the rain-water falling upon the roof of a house Rows down to
the ground through spouts grotesquely shaped like the tiger's head, thus
seeming to come out of tigers' mouths, while in reality it descends from
the sky; even so are the holy instructions that come out of the mouths
of godly men, which seem to be uttered by those men themselves, while in
reality they proceed from the throne of God. (See 225.)

298\. As it is very difficult to gather together the mustard-seeds that
escape out of a torn package, and are scattered in all directions; so,
when the human mind runs in diverse directions and is occupied with many
things in the world, it is not a very easy affair to collect and
concentrate it.

299\. As thieves cannot enter the house the inmates of which are wide
awake, so, if you are always on your guard, no evil spirits will be able
to enter your heart to rob it of its goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a: 300-395](rls28.md)
