[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls24)  [Next](rls26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

#### THE

# SAYINGS OF RÂMAK*RI*SH*N*A <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md).

### 1-99

1\. Thou seest many stars at night in the sky, but findest them not when
the sun rises. Canst thou say that there are no stars, then, in the
heaven of day? So, O man, because thou beholdest not the Almighty in the
days of thy ignorance, say not that there is no God.

2\. As one and the same material, viz. water, is called by different
names by different people--one calling it 'water,' another 'vâri,' a
third 'aqua,' and another 'pa*n*i'--so the one Sat-*k*it-ânanda, the
Everlasting-Intelligent-Bliss, is invoked by some as God, by some as
Allah, by some as Hari, and by others as Brahman.

3\. Two persons were hotly disputing as to the colour of a chameleon.
One said, 'The chameleon on that palm-tree is of a beautiful red
colour.' The other, contradicting him, said, 'You are mistaken, the
chameleon is not red, but blue.' Not being able to settle the matter by
arguments, both went to the person who always lived under that tree and
had watched the chameleon in all its phases of colour.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

\[paragraph continues\] One of them said, 'Sir, is not the chameleon on
that tree of a red colour?' The person replied, 'Yes, sir.' The other
disputant said, 'What do you say? How is it? It is not red, it is blue.'
That person again humbly replied, 'Yes, sir.' The person knew that the
chameleon is an animal that constantly changes its colour; thus it was
that he said 'yes' to both these conflicting statements. The
Sat-*k*it-ânanda likewise has various forms. The devotee who has seen
God in one aspect only, knows Him in that aspect alone. But he who has
seen Him in His manifold aspects, is alone in a position to say, 'All
these forms are of one God, for God is multiform.' He has forms and has
no forms, and many are His forms which no one knows.

4\. Many are the names of God, and infinite the forms that lead us to
know Him. In whatsoever name or form you desire to call Him, in that
very form and name you will see Him.

5\. Four blind men went to see an elephant. One touched the leg of the
elephant, and said, 'The elephant is like a pillar.' The second touched
the trunk, and said, The elephant is like a thick stick or club.' The
third touched the belly, and said, 'The elephant is like a big jar.' The
fourth touched the ears, and said, 'The elephant is like a winnowing
basket.' Thus they began to dispute amongst themselves as to the figure
of the elephant. A passer-by seeing them thus quarrelling, said, 'What
is it that you are disputing about?' They told him everything, and asked
him to arbitrate. That man said, 'None of you

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

has seen the elephant. The elephant is not like a pillar, its legs are
like pillars. It is not like a big water-vessel, its belly is like a
water-vessel. It is not like a winnowing basket, its ears are like
winnowing baskets. It is not like a thick stick or club, but its
proboscis is like that. The elephant is the combination of all these.'
In the same manner those quarrel who have seen one aspect only of the
Deity.

6\. As the same sugar is made into various figures of birds and beasts,
so one sweet Mother Divine is worshipped in various climes and ages
under various names and forms. Different creeds are but different paths
to reach the Almighty.

7\. As with one gold various ornaments are made, having different forms
and names, so one God is worshipped in different countries and ages, and
has different forms and names. Though He may be worshipped variously,
some loving to call him Father, others Mother, &c., yet it is one God
that is being worshipped in all these various relations and modes.

8\. *Q*. If the God of every religion is the same, why is it then that
the God is painted differently by different religionists? *A*. God is
one, but His aspects are different: as one master of the house is father
to one, brother to another, and husband to a third, and is called by
these different names by those different persons, so one God is
described and called in various ways according to the

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

particular aspect in which He appears to His particular worshipper.

9\. In a potter's shop there are vessels of different shapes and
forms--pots, jars, dishes, plates, &c.--but all are made of one clay. So
God is one, but is worshipped in different ages and climes under
different names and aspects.

10\. God is one, but his aspects are many. One and the same fish may be
made to taste differently, according to the different modes of preparing
it, so one God is enjoyed variously (i.e. in His various aspects) by His
devotees.

11\. Man is like a pillow-case. The colour of one may be red, another
blue, another black, but all contain the same cotton So it is with
man--one is beautiful, one is black, another is holy, a fourth wicked;
but the Divine dwells in them all.

12\. All waters are brooded over by Nârâya*n*a, but every kind of water
is not fit for drink. Similarly, though it is true that the Almighty
dwells in every place, yet every place is not fit to be visited by man.
As one kind of water may be used for washing our feet, another may serve
the purpose of ablution, and others may be drunk, and others again may
not be touched at all; so there are different kinds of places. We may
approach some, we can enter into the inside of others, others we must
avoid, even at a distance.

13\. It is true that God is even in the tiger, but we must not go and
face the animal. So it is true that God dwells

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

even in the most wicked, but it is not meet that we should associate
with the wicked.

14\. The manifestation of the Divinity must be under-stood to be in
greater degree in those who are honoured, respected, and obeyed by a
large following, than in those who have gained no such influence.

15\. The Master said: 'Everything that exists is God.' The pupil
understood it literally, but not in the true spirit. While he was
passing through a street, he met with an elephant. The driver (mâhut)
shouted aloud from his high place, 'Move away, move away!' The pupil
argued in his mind, 'Why should I move away? I am God, so is the
elephant also God. What fear has God of Himself?' Thinking thus he did
not move. At last the elephant took him up by his trunk, and dashed him
aside. He was severely hurt, and going back to his Master, he related
the whole adventure. The Master said, 'All right, you are God. The
elephant is God also, but God in the shape of the elephant-driver was
warning you also from above. Why did you not pay heed to his warnings?'

18\. God, His scripture (the Bhâgavata), and His devotee are all to be
regarded as one, i.e. in one and the same light.

17\. Every being is Nârâya*n*a. Man or animal, sage or knave, nay, the
whole universe, is Nârâya*n*a, the Supreme Spirit.

18\. As many have merely heard of snow but not seen it, so many are the
religious preachers who have read only in books about the attributes of
God, but have not realised

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

them in their lives. And as many may have seen but not tasted it, so
many are the religious teachers who have got only a glimpse of Divine
Glory, but have not understood its real essence. He who has tasted the
snow can say what it is like. He who has enjoyed the society of God in
different aspects, now as a servant, now as a friend, now as a lover, or
as being absorbed in Him, &c., he alone can tell what are the attributes
of God.

19\. As the lamp does not burn without oil, so man cannot live without
God.

20\. The human body is like a boiling pot, and the mind and the senses
are like water, rice or potato, &c. in it. Put the pot with its
ingredients on the fire; it will be so hot as to burn your finger when
you touch it. But the heat does not belong to the pot, nor anything
contained in it, but is in the fire. So it is the fire of Brahman in man
that causes the mind and the senses to perform their functions, and when
that fire ceases to act, the senses also, or the organs, stop.

21\. Says God, 'I am the snake that biteth and the charmer that healeth;
I am the judge that condemneth and the executioner that whippeth.'

22\. God tells the thief to go and steal, and at the same time warns the
householder against the thief.

23\. How doth the Lord dwell in the body? He dwells in the body like the
plug of a syringe, i.e. in the body, and yet apart from it.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

24\. The Lord can pass an elephant through the eye of a needle. He can
do whatever He likes.

25\. As fishes playing in a pond covered over with reeds and scum cannot
be seen from outside, so God plays in the heart of a man invisibly,
being screened by Mâyâ. from human view.

26\. A man sitting under the shade of the Kalpa-v*ri*ksha (wishing-tree)
wished to be a king, and in an instant he was a king. The next moment he
wished to have a charming damsel, and the damsel was instantly by his
side. The man then thought within himself, if a tiger came and devoured
him, and alas! in an instant he was in the jaws of a tiger! God is like
that wishing-tree: whosoever in His presence thinks that he is destitute
and poor, remains as such, but he who thinks and believes that the Lord
fulfils all his wants, receives everything from Him.

27\. The landlord may be very rich, but when a poor cultivator brings a
humble present to him with a loving heart, he accepts it with the
greatest pleasure and satisfaction.

28\. While a bell is being rung, the repeated ding-dongs can be
distinguished one from the other, but when we stop ringing, then an
undistinguishable sound only remains audible. We can easily distinguish
one note from the other, as if each distinct note had a certain shape;
but the continued and unbroken sound when the ding-dongs have ceased is
undistinguishable, as if formless. Like the sound of the bell, God is
both with and without form.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

29\. As a boy begins to learn writing by drawing big scrawls, before he
can master the small-hand, so we must learn concentration of the mind by
fixing it first on forms; and when we have attained success therein, we
can easily fix it upon the formless.

30\. As a marksman learns to shoot by first taking aim at large and big
objects, and the more he acquires the facility, the greater becomes the
ease with which he can shoot at the smaller marks on the target, so when
the mind has been trained to be fixed on images having form, it becomes
easy for it to be fixed upon images having no form.

31\. God is the Absolute and Eternal Brahman, as well as the Father of
the Universe. The indivisible Brahman is like a vast shoreless ocean,
without bounds and limits, in which I can only struggle and sink. But
when I approach the always sportive (active) personal Deity (Hari), I
get peace, like the sinking man who nears the shore.

32\. God is formless, and is with form too, and He is that which
transcends both form and formlessness. He alone can say what else He is.

33\. At a certain stage of his path of devotion, the devotee finds
satisfaction in God with form; at another stage, in God without form.

34\. The God with form is visible, nay, we can touch Him face to face,
as with one's dearest friend.

35\. As at one time I am clothed, and at another time naked, so Brahman
is at one time with attributes and at another without.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

38\. As water when congealed becomes ice, so the visible form of the
Almighty is the materialised manifestation of the all-pervading formless
Brahman. It may be called, in fact, Sat-*k*it-ânanda solidified. As the
ice, being part and parcel of the water, remains in the water for a time
and afterwards melts in it, so the Personal God is part and parcel of
the Impersonal. He rises from the Impersonal, remains there, and
ultimately merges into it and disappears.

37\. His name is Intelligence; His abode is Intelligence too, and He,
the Lord, is Intelligence Himself.

38\. Two are the occasions when the Lord smiles. First, when brothers
remove the chains which partition off the family property, saying, This
is mine and that is thine;' and secondly, when the patient is on the
point of death, and the physician says, 'I will cure him.'

39\. Lunatics, drunkards, and children sometimes give out the truth
unconsciously, as if inspired by Heaven.

40\. The sun is many times larger than the earth, but owing to the great
distance it appears like a small disk. So the Lord is infinitely great,
but owing to our being too far from Him we fall very, very short of
comprehending His real greatness.

41\. Knowingly or unknowingly, consciously or unconsciously, in whatever
state we utter His name, we acquire the merit of such utterance. A man
who voluntarily goes into a river and bathes therein gets the benefit of
the bath;

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

so does likewise he who has been pushed into the river by another, or
who while sleeping soundly has water thrown upon him by another.

42\. Satan never enters the house wherein are always sung the praises of
Hari.

43\. A king having committed the mortal crime of killing a Brâhma*n*a,
went to the hermitage of a sage to learn what penance he must perform in
order to be purified. The sage was absent from home, but his son was
there. The son hearing the case of the king, said, 'Repeat the name of
God (Râma) three times and your sin will be expiated.' When the sage
came back and heard the penance prescribed by his son, he said to him in
great wrath, 'Sins committed in myriads of births are purged at once by
but once uttering the name of the Almighty; how weak must be thy faith,
O son, that thou hast ordered that name to be repeated thrice! For this
offence of thine go and become a Kâ*nd*âla.' And the son became the
Guhaka Kâ*nd*âla of the Râmâya*n*a.

44\. Consciously or unconsciously, in whatever way one falls into the
trough of nectar, one becomes immortal. Similarly, whosoever utters the
name of the Deity voluntarily or involuntarily finds immortality in the
end.

45\. As a large and powerful steamer moves swiftly over the waters,
towing rafts and barges in its wake, so when a Saviour descends, He
easily carries thousands across the ocean of Mâyâ (illusion).

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

46\. When the flood comes, it overflows rivers and streams, and makes
one watery surface of all adjacent lands. But the rain-water flows away
through fixed channels. When the Saviour becomes incarnate, all are
saved through His grace. The Siddhas (perfect ones) only save themselves
with much pain and penance.

47\. When a mighty raft of wood floats down a stream, it can carry a
hundred men, and still it does not sink. A reed floating down may sink
with the weight of even a crow. So when a Saviour becomes incarnate,
innumerable are the men who find salvation by taking refuge under Him.
The Siddha only saves himself with much toil and trouble.

48\. The locomotive engine reaches the destination itself, and also
draws and takes with it a long train of loaded wagons. So likewise act
the Saviours. They carry multitudes of men, heavily laden with the cares
and sorrows of the world, to the feet of the Almighty.

48\. When Bhagavân *S*rî Râma*k*andra came to this world, seven sages
only could recognise Him to be the God incarnate. So when God descends
into this world, few only can recognise His Divine nature.

50\. On the tree of Sat-*k*it-ânanda there are innumerable Râmas,
K*ri*sh*n*as, Christs, &c.; one or two of them come down into this world
now and then, and produce mighty changes and revolutions.

51\. The Avatâra or Saviour is the messenger of God. He is like the
Viceroy of a mighty monarch. As when

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

there is some disturbance in a far-off province the king sends his
viceroy to quell it; so whenever there is any waning of religion in any
part of the world, God sends His Avatâra there.

52\. It is one and the same Avatâra that, having plunged into the ocean
of life, rises up in one place and is known as K*ri*sh*n*a, and diving
again rises in another place and is known as Christ.

53\. In some seasons water can be obtained from the great depths of the
wells only and with great difficulty, but when the country is flooded in
the rainy season, water is obtained with ease everywhere. So ordinarily,
God is reached with great pains through prayers and penances, but when
the flood of Incarnation descends, God is seen anywhere and everywhere.

54\. A Siddha-purusha (perfect one) is like an archaeologist who removes
the dust and lays open an old well which was covered up during ages of
disuse by rank growth. The Avatâra, on the other hand, is like a great
engineer who sinks a new well in a place where there was no water
before. Great men can give salvation to those only who have the waters
of piety and goodness hidden in themselves, but the Saviour saves him
too whose heart is devoid of all love, and dry as a desert.

55\. Think not that Râma, Sitâ, *S*rî K*ri*sh*n*a, Râdhâ, Ar*g*una, &c.,
were not historical personages, but mere allegories, or that the
Scriptures have an inner and esoteric meaning only. Nay, they were human
beings of flesh and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

blood just as you are, but because they were Divinities, their lives can
be interpreted both historically and spiritually.

56\. None knoweth the immensity of the sacrifice which the Godhead
maketh when it becomes incarnate or becomes flesh.

57\. The Saviours are to Brahman as the waves are to the ocean.

58\. What is the state which a Siddha attains? (A perfect man and
well-cooked food are both called siddha. There is a pun here on the
word.) As potato or brinjal, &c., when boiled properly (siddha), becomes
soft and tender, so when a man reaches perfection (Siddha) he becomes
all humility and tenderness.

59\. Five are the kinds of Siddhas found in this world:--

\(1\) The Svapna Siddhas are those who attain perfection by means of
dream inspiration.

\(2\) The Mantra Siddhas are those who attain perfection by means of any
sacred mantra.

\(3\) The Ha*th*at Siddhas are those who attain perfection suddenly. As
a poor man may suddenly become rich by finding a hidden treasure, or by
marrying into a rich family, so many sinners become pure all of a
sudden, and enter the Kingdom of Heaven.

\(4\) The K*ri*pâ Siddhas are those who attain perfection through the
tangible grace of the Almighty, as a poor man is made wealthy by the
kindness of a king.

\(s\) The Nitya Siddhas are those who are ever-perfect. As a gourd or a
pumpkin-creeper brings forth fruit first and

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

then its flower, so the ever-perfect is born a Siddha, and all his
seeming exertions after perfection are merely for the sake of setting
examples to humanity.

60\. There is a fabled species of birds called 'Homâ,' which live so
high up in the heavens, and so dearly love those regions, that they
never condescend to come down to the earth. Even their eggs, which, when
laid in the sky, begin to fall down to the earth attracted by gravity,
are said to get hatched in the middle of their downward course and give
birth to the young ones. The fledgelings at once find out that they are
falling down, and immediately change their course and begin to fly up
towards their home, drawn thither by instinct. Men such as *S*uka Deva,
Nârada, Jesus, Sa*m*karâ*k*ârya and others, are like those birds, who
even in their boyhood give up all attachments to the things of this
world and betake themselves to the highest regions of true Knowledge and
Divine Light. These men are called Nitya Siddhas.

61\. The Divine sages form, as it were, the inner circle of God's
nearest relatives. They are like friends, companions, kinsmen of God.
Ordinary beings form the outer circle or are the creatures of God.

62\. When the shell of an ordinary cocoa-nut is pierced through, the
nail enters the kernel of the nut too. But in the case of the dry nut,
the kernel becomes separate from the shell, and so when the shell is
pierced the kernel is not touched. Jesus was like the dry nut, i.e. His
inner soul

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

was separate from His physical shell, and consequently the sufferings of
the body did not affect Him.

63\. Once a holy man, while passing through a crowded street,
accidentally trod upon the toe of a wicked person. The wicked man,
furious with rage, beat the Sâdhu mercilessly, till he fell to the
ground in a faint. His disciples took great pains and adopted various
measures to bring him back to consciousness, and when they saw that he
had recovered a little, one of them asked, 'Sir, do you recognise who is
attending upon you?' The Sâdhu replied, 'He who beat me.' A true Sâdhu
finds no distinction between a friend and a foe.

64\. The swan can separate the milk from water; it drinks only the milk,
leaving the water untouched. Other birds cannot do so. Similarly God is
intimately mixed up with Mâyâ; ordinary men cannot see Him separately
from Mâyâ. Only the Paramaha*m*sa (the great soul--here is a pun on the
word 'ha*m*sa,' which means both soul and swan) throws off Mâyâ, and
takes up God only.

65\. The wind carries the smell of the sandal-wood as well as that of
ordure, but does not mix with either. Similarly a perfect man lives in
the world, but does not mix with it.

66\. A perfect man is like a lotus-leaf in the water or like a mud-fish
in the marsh. Neither of these is polluted by the element in which it
lives.

67\. As water passes under a bridge but never stagnates,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

so money passes through the hands of 'The Free' who never hoard it.

68\. As a rope that is burnt retains its shape intact, but has become
all ashes, so that nothing can be bound with it; similarly,(the man who
is emancipated retains the form of his egoism, but not an idea of vanity
(Aha*m*kâra).

69\. As an aquatic bird, such as a pelican, dives into water, but the
water does not wet its plumage, so the perfect man lives in the world,
but the world does not touch him.

70\. When the head of a goat is severed from its body, the trunk moves
about for some time, still showing the signs of life. Similarly, though
the Aha*m*kâra (vanity or egoism) is beheaded in the perfect man, yet
sufficient of its vitality is left to make such a man carry on the
functions of physical life; but that much is not sufficient to bind him
again to the world.

71\. Ornaments cannot be made of pure gold. Some alloy must be mixed
with it. A man totally devoid of Mâyâ. will not survive more than
twenty-one days. So long as the man has body, he must have some Mâyâ,
however small it may be, to carry on the functions of the body.

72\. In the play of hide-and-seek, if the player once succeeds in
touching the non-player, called the grand-dame (Boo*rî*), he is no
longer liable to be made a thief. Similarly, by once seeing the
Almighty, a man is no longer bound down by the fetters of the world. The
boy, by touching

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the Boo*rî*, is free to go wherever he wishes, without being pursued,
and no one can make him a thief. Similarly, in this world's playground,
there is no fear to him who has once touched the feet of the Almighty.

73\. The iron, once converted into gold by the touch of the
Philosopher's stone, may be kept under the ground, or thrown into a
rubbish-heap, but it remains always gold, and will never return to its
former condition. Similar is the case with him who has once touched the
feet of the Almighty. Whether he dwells in the bustle of the world, or
in the solitude of forests, nothing will ever contaminate him.

74\. The steel sword turns into a golden sword by the touch of the
Philosopher's stone, and though it retains its former form it becomes
incapable of injuring any one. Similarly, the outward form of a man who
has touched the feet of the Almighty is not changed, but he no longer
doeth any evil.

75\. The loadstone rock under the sea attracts the ship sailing over it,
draws out all its iron nails, separates its planks, and sinks the vessel
into the deep. Thus, when the human soul is attracted by the magnetism
of Universal Consciousness, the latter destroys in a moment all its
individuality and selfishness, and plunges it in the ocean of God's
infinite Love.

76\. Milk and water, when brought into contact, are sure to mix so that
the milk can never be separated again. So if the neophyte, thirsting
after self-improvement, mixes

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

indiscriminately with all sorts of worldly men, he not only loses his
ideals, but his former faith, love, and enthusiasm also die away
imperceptibly. When, however, you convert the milk into butter, it no
longer mixes with water, but floats over it. Similarly, when the soul
once attains God-head, it may live in any company, without ever being
affected by its evil influences.

77\. So long as no child is born to her, the newly-married girl remains
deeply absorbed in her domestic duties. But no sooner is a son born,
than she leaves off all her house-hold concerns, and no longer finds any
pleasure in them. On the contrary, she fondles the newborn baby the
livelong day, and kisses it with intense joy. Thus man, in his state of
ignorance, performs all sorts of worldly works, but no sooner does he
see the Almighty, than he finds no longer any relish in them. On the
contrary, his happiness now consists only in serving the Deity and doing
His works alone.

78\. So long as a man is far from the market, he hears a loud and
indistinct buzzing only, something like 'Ho! Ho!' But when he enters the
market he no longer hears the uproar, but perceives distinctly that some
one is bargaining for potatoes, another for Brinjal, and so on. As long
as a man is far away from God, he is in the midst of the noise and
confusion of reason, argument, and discussion; but when once a person
approaches the Almighty, all reasonings, arguments, and discussions
cease, and he understands the mysteries of God with vivid and clear
perception.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

79\. So long as a man calls aloud, 'Allah Ho! Allah Ho! (O God! O God!),
be sure that he has not found God, for he who has found him becomes
still.

80\. So long as the bee is outside the petals of the lotus, and has not
tasted its honey, it hovers round the flower, emitting its buzzing
sound; but when it is inside the flower, it drinks its nectar
noiselessly. So long as a man quarrels and disputes about doctrines and
dogmas, he has not tasted the nectar of true faith; when he has tasted
it he becomes still.

81\. Little children play with dolls in a room apart just as they like,
but as soon as their mother comes in they throw aside the dolls and run
to her crying, 'Mamma, Mamma!' You also are now playing in this world
deeply absorbed with the dolls of wealth, honour, and fame, and have no
fear or anxiety. But if you once see the Divine Mother entering in, you
will not find pleasure any more in wealth, honour, and fame. Leaving off
all these you will run to Her.

82\. The naked Sage, Totâpuri, used to say, 'If a brass pot be not
rubbed daily, it will get rusty. So if a man does not contemplate the
Deity daily, his heart will grow impure.' To him *S*rî Râmak*ri*sh*n*a
replied, 'Yes, but if the vessel be of gold, it does not require daily
cleaning. The man who has reached God requires prayers or penances no
more.'

83\. He who has once tasted the refined and crystalline sugar-candy,
finds no pleasure in raw treacle; he who has slept in a palace, will not
find pleasure in lying down in

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

a dirty hovel. So the soul that has once tasted the sweetness of the
Divine Bliss finds no delight in the ignoble pleasures of the world.

84\. She who has a king for her lover will not accept the homage of a
street beggar. So the soul that has once found favour in the sight of
the Lord does not want the paltry things of this world.

85\. When a man is in the plains he sees the lowly grass and the mighty
pine-tree and says, 'How big is the tree and how small is the grass!'
But when he ascends the mountain and looks from its high peak to the
plain below, the mighty pine-tree and the lowly grass blend into one
indistinct mass of green verdure. So in the sight of worldly men there
are differences of rank and position, but when the Divine sight is
opened there remains no distinction of high and low.

86\. When water is poured into an empty vessel a bubbling noise ensues,
but when the vessel is full no such noise is heard. Similarly, the man
who has not found God is full of vain disputations. But when he has seen
Him, all vanities disappear, and he silently enjoys the Bliss Divine.

87\. A woman naturally feels shy to relate to all the talk she daily has
with her husband, save to her own companions. Similarly, a devotee does
not like to relate to any one but a true Bhakta (devotee) the ecstatic
joys which he experiences in his Divine communion; nay, sometimes he
becomes impatient of relating his experiences even to those of his own
class.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

88\. The moth once seeing the light never returns to darkness; the ant
dies in the sugar-heap, but never retreats therefrom. Similarly, a good
devotee gladly sacrifices his life for his God by renunciation.

89\. Why does the God-lover find such pleasure in addressing the Deity
as Mother? Because the child is more free with its mother, and
consequently she is dearer to the child than any one else.

90\. The pious man, like a hemp-smoker, finds no pleasure in singing the
praises of the Almighty alone. (The hemp-smoker never finds pleasure in
smoking alone.)

91\. If a strange animal enters a herd of cows, it is driven off by the
combined attacks of the whole herd. But let only a cow enter, and all
the other cows will make friends with her by mutual licking of bodies.
Thus, when a devotee meets with another devotee, both experience great
happiness and feel loth to separate, but when a scoffer enters the
circle they carefully avoid him.

92\. What is the strength of a devotee? He is a child of God, and tears
are his greatest strength.

93\. The young of a monkey clasps and clings to its mother. The young
kitten cannot clasp its mother, but mews piteously whenever it is near
her. If the young monkey lets go its hold on its mother, it falls down
and gets hurt. This is because it depends upon its own strength; but the
kitten runs no such risk, as the mother herself carries it about from
place to place. Such is the difference between self-reliance and entire
resignation to the will of God.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

94\. It is fabled that the pearl oyster leaves its bed at the bottom of
the sea and comes up to the surface to catch the rain-water when the
star Svâti is in the ascendant. It floats about on the surface of the
sea with its mouth agape, until it succeeds in catching a drop of the
marvellous Svâti-rain. Then it dives down to its sea-bed and there
rests, till it has succeeded in fashioning a beautiful pearl out of that
rain-drop. Similarly, there are some true and eager aspirants who travel
from place to place in search of that watchword from a godly and perfect
preceptor (Sad-guru) which will open for them the gate of eternal bliss,
and if in their diligent search one is fortunate enough to meet such a
Guru and get from him the much-longed-for *logos*, which is sure to
break down all fetters, he at once retires from society, enters into the
deep recess of his own heart and rests there, till he has succeeded in
gaining eternal peace.

95\. The flint may remain for myriads of years under water, still it
does not lose its inner fire. Strike it with iron whenever you like and
out flows the glowing spark. So is the true devotee firm in his faith.
Though he may remain surrounded by all the impurities of the world, he
never loses his faith and love. He becomes entranced as soon as he hears
the name of the Almighty.

96\. The Stone may remain for myriads of years in water, and the water
will never penetrate it. But clay is soon softened into mud by the
contact of water. So the strong heart of the faithful does not despair
in the midst of trials

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

and persecutions, but the man of weak faith is easily shaken even by the
most trifling cause.

97\. How sweet is the simplicity of the child! He prefers a doll to all
riches and wealth. So is the faithful devotee. No one else can throw
aside wealth and honour to take God only.

98\. God is like unto a hill of sugar. A small ant carries away from it
a small grain of sugar, the bigger ant takes from it a larger grain. But
the hill remains as large as before. So are the devotees of God. They
become ecstatic with even a grain of one Divine attribute. No one can
contain within him all His attributes.

99\. A logician once asked *S*rî Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, 'What are knowledge,
knower, and the object known?' To which he replied, 'Good man, I do not
know all these niceties of scholastic learning. I know only my Mother
Divine, and that I am Her son.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[98:1](rls25.htm#fr_14.md) Some more of
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's sayings have been sent to me lately, but their
publication will have to wait for another opportunity

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a: 100-199](rls26.md)
