[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cf105)  [Next](cf107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

# Chapter II

### The Fairies' Revenge

In th' olde dayes of the king Arthour,  
Of which that Britons speken greet honour,  
Al was this land fulfild of fayerye.  
The elf-queen, with hir joly companye,  
Daunced ful ofte in many a grene mede;  
This was the olde opinion, as I rede.  
I speke of manye hundred yeres ago.

CHAUCER.

I.

THE best living authority I have found on the folklore of Beddgelert,
Drws y Coed, and the surrounding district, is Mr. William Jones, of
Llangollen. He has written a good deal on the subject in the *Brython*,
and in essays intended for competition at various literary meetings in
Wales. I had the loan from him of one such essay, and I have referred to
the Brython; and I have also had from Mr. Jones a number of letters,
most of which contain some additional information. In harmony, moreover,
with my usual practice, I have asked Mr. Jones to give me a little of
his own history. This he has been kind enough to do; and, as I have so
far followed no particular order in these jottings, I shall now give the
reader the substance of his letters in English, as I am anxious that no
item should be lost or left inaccessible to English students of
folklore. What is unintelligible to me may not be so to those who have
made a serious study of the subject. Mr. Jones' words are in substance
to the following effect:--

'I was bred and born in the parish of Beddgelert,

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

one of the most rustic neighbourhoods and least subject to change in the
whole country. Some of the old Welsh customs remained within my memory,
in spite of the adverse influence of the Calvinistic Reformation, as it
is termed, and I have myself witnessed several Knitting Nights and
Nuptial Feasts (Neithiorau), which, be it noticed, are not to be
confounded with weddings, as they were feasts which followed the
weddings, at the interval of a week. At these gatherings song and story
formed an element of prime importance in the entertainment at a time
when the Reformation alluded to had already blown the blast of
extinction on the Merry Nights (Noswyliau Llawen) and Saints'
Fêtes <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) (Gwyliau Mabsant) before the
days of my youth, though many of my aged acquaintances remembered them
well, and retained a vivid recollection of scores of the amusing tales
which used to be related for the best at the last mentioned long-night
meetings. I have heard not a few of them reproduced by men of that
generation. As an example of the old-fashioned habits of the people of
Beddgelert in my early days, I may mention the way in which wives and
children used to be named. The custom was that the wife never took her
husband's family name, but retained the one she had as a spinster. Thus
my grandmother on my mother's side was called Ellen Hughes, daughter to
Hugh Williams,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

of Gwastad Annas. The name of her husband, my grandfather, was William
Prichard \[= W. ab Rhisiart, or Richard's son\], son to Richard William,
of the Efail Newydd. The name of their eldest son, my uncle (brother to
my mother), was Hugh Hughes, and the second son's name was Richard
William. The mother had the privilege of naming her first-born after her
own family in case it was a boy; but if it happened to be a girl, she
took her name from the father's family, for which reason my mother's
maiden name was Catharine Williams. This remained her name to the day of
her death: and the old people at Beddgelert persisted in calling me, so
long as I was at home, William Prichard, after my grandfather, as I was
my mother's eldest child.

'Most of the tales I have collected,' says Mr. Jones, 'relate to the
parishes of Beddgelert and Dolwyddelen. My kindred have lived for
generations in those two parishes, and they are very numerous: in fact,
it used to be said that the people of Dolwyddelen and Beddgelert were
all cousins. They were mostly small farmers, and jealous of all
strangers, so that they married almost without exception from the one
parish into the other. This intermixture helped to carry the tales of
the one parish to the other, and to perpetuate them on the hearths of
their homes from generation to generation, until they were swept away by
another influence in this century. Many of my ancestors seem to have
been very fond of stories, poetry, and singing, and I have been told
that some of them were very skilled in these things. So also, in the
case of my parents, the memory of the past had a great charm for them on
both sides; and when the relatives from Dolwyddelen and Beddgelert met
in either parish, there used to be no end to the recounting of pedigrees
and the repeating of tales for

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

the best. By listening to them, I had been filled with desire to become
an adept in pedigrees and legends. My parents used to let me go every
evening to the house of my grandfather, William ab Rhisiart, the clerk,
to listen to tales, and to hear edifying books read. My grandfather was
a reader "without his rival," and "he used to beat the parson hollow."
Many people used to meet at Pen y Bont in the evenings to converse
together, and the stories of some of them were now and then exceedingly
eloquent. Of course, I listened with eager ears and open mouth, in
order, if I heard anything new, to be able to repeat it to my mother.
She, unwilling to let herself be beaten, would probably relate another
like it, which she had heard from her mother, her grandmother, or her
old aunt of Gwastad Annas, who was a fairly good verse-wright of the
homely kind. Then my father, if he did not happen to be busy with his
music-book, would also give us a tale which he had heard from his
grandmother or grandfather, the old John Jones, of Tyn Llan Dolwyddelen,
or somebody else would do so. That is one source from which I got my
knowledge of folklore; but this ceased when we moved from Beddgelert to
Carnarvon in the year 1841. My grandfather died in 1844, aged
seventy-eight.

'Besides those,' Mr. Jones goes on to say, 'who used to come to my
grandfather's house and to his workshop to relate stories, the
blacksmith's shop used to be, especially on a rainy day, a capital place
for a story, and many a time did I lurk there instead of going to
school, in order to hear old William Dafydd, the sawyer, who, peace be
to his ashes! drank many a hornful from the *Big Quart* without ever
breaking down, and old Ifan Owen, the fisherman, tearing away for the
best at their yarns, sometimes a tissue of lies and sometimes truth. The
former was funny, and a great wag, up to all kinds

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

of tricks. He made everybody laugh, whereas the latter would preserve
the gravity of a saint, however lying might be the tale which he
related. Han Owen's best stories were about the Water Spirit, or, as he
called it, *Llamhigyn y Dwr*, "the Water Leaper." He had not himself
seen the *Llamhigyn*, but his father had seen it "hundreds of times."
Many an evening it had prevented him from catching a single fish in Llyn
Gwynan, and, when the fisherman got on this theme, his eloquence was apt
to become highly polysyllabic in its adjectives. Once in particular,
when he had been angling for hours towards the close of the day, without
catching anything, he found that something took the fly clean off the
hook each time he cast it. After moving from one spot to another on the
lake, he fished opposite the Benlan Wen, when something gave his line a
frightful pull, "and, by the gallows, I gave another pull," the
fisherman used to say, "with all the force of my arm: out it came, and
up it went off the hook, whilst I turned round to see, as it dashed so
against the cliff of Benlan that it blazed like a lightning." He used to
add, "If that was not the *Llamhigyn*, it must have been the very devil
himself." That cliff must be two hundred yards at least from the shore.
As to his father, he had seen the Water Spirit many times, and he had
also been fishing in the Llyn Glâs or Ffynnon Lâs, once upon a time,
when he hooked a wonderful and fearful monster: it was not like a fish,
but rather resembled a toad, except that it had a tail and wings instead
of legs. He pulled it easily enough towards the shore, but, as its head
was coming out of the water, it gave a terrible shriek that was enough
to split the fisherman's bones to the marrow, and, had there not been a
friend standing by, he would have fallen headlong into the lake, and
been possibly dragged like a sheep into

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

the depth; for there is a tradition that if a sheep got into the Llyn
Glâs, it could not be got out again, as something would at once drag it
to the bottom. This used to be the belief of the shepherds of Cwm Dyli,
within my memory, and they acted on it in never letting their dogs go
after the sheep in the neighbourhood of this lake. These two funny
fellows, William Dafydd and Ifan Owen, died long ago, without leaving
any of their descendants blessed with as much as the faintest gossamer
thread of the story-teller's mantle. The former, if he had been still
living, would now be no less than 129 years of age, and the latter about
120.'

Mr. Jones proceeds to say that he had stories from sources besides those
mentioned, namely, from Lowri Robart, wife of Rhisiart Edwart, the 'Old
Guide'; from his old aunt of Gwastad Annas; from William Wmffra, husband
to his grandmother's sister; from his grandmother, who was a native of
Dolwyddelen, but had been brought up at Pwllgwernog, in Nanmor; from her
sister; and from Gruffudd Prisiart, of Nanmor, afterwards of Glan
Colwyn, who gave him the legend of Owen Lawgoch of which I shall have
something to say later, and the story of the bogie of Pen Pwll Coch,
which I do not know. 'But the chief story-teller of his time at
Beddgelert,' Mr. Jones goes on to say, 'was Twm Ifan Siams (pronounced
Siams or Shams), brother, I believe, to Dafydd Siôn Siams, of the
Penrhyn, who was a bard and pedigree man. Twm lived at Nanmor, but I
know not what his vocation was; his relatives, however, were small
farmers, carpenters, and masons. It is not improbable that he was also
an artisan, as he was conversant with numbers, magnitude, and letters,
and left behind him a volume forming a pedigree book known at Nanmor as
the Barcud Mawr, or "Great Kite," as Gruffudd Prisiart told me. The
latter had been reading it many

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

a time in order to know the origin of somebody or other. All I can
remember of this character is that he was very old--over 90--and that he
went from house to house in his old age to relate tales and recount
pedigrees: great was the welcome he had from everybody everywhere. I
remember, also, that he was small of stature, nimble, witty, exceedingly
amusing, and always ready with his say on every subject. He was in the
habit of calling on my grandfather in his rambles, and very cordial was
the reception which my parents always gave him on account of his tales
and his knowledge of pedigrees. The story of the afanc, as given in my
collection, is from his mouth. You will observe how little difference
there is between his version <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) and
that known to Edward Llwyd in the year 1695. I had related this story to
a friend of mine at Portmadoc, who was grandson or great-grandson to
Dafydd Siôn Siams, of Penrhyn, in 1858, when he called my attention to
the same story in the *Cambrian Journal* from the correspondence of
Edward Llwyd. I was surprised at the similarity between the two
versions, and I went to Beddgelert to Gruffudd Rhisiart, who was related
to Twm Siôn Siams. I read the story to him, and I found that he had
heard it related by his uncle just as it was by me, and as given in the
Cambrian Journal. Twm Ifan Siams had funny stories about the tricks of
*Gwrach y Rhibyn*, the *Bodach*  <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33)
*Glas*, and the *Bwbach Llwyd*, which he localized in Nanmor and
Llanfrothen; he had, also, a very eloquent tale about the courtship
between a sailor from Moel y Gest, near Portmadoc, and a mermaid, of
which I retain a fairly

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

good recollection. I believe Twm died in the year 1835-6, aged about
ninety-five.'

So far, I have merely translated Mr. Jones' account of himself and his
authorities as given me in the letter I have already referred to, dated
in June of last year, 1881. I would now add the substance of his general
remarks about the fairies, as he had heard them described, and as he
expressed himself in his essay for the competition on folklore at the
Carnarvon Eisteddfod of 1880:--The traditions, he says, respecting the
*Tylwyth Teg* vary according to the situation of the districts with
which they are connected, and many more such traditions continue to be
remembered among the inhabitants of the mountains than by those of the
more level country. In some places the *Tylwyth Teg* are described as a
small folk of a thieving nature, living in summer among the fern bushes
in the mountains, and in winter in the heather and gorse. These were
wont to frequent the fairs and to steal money from the farmers' pockets,
where they placed in its stead their own fairy money, which looked like
the coin of the realm, but when it was paid for anything bought it would
vanish in the pockets of the seller. In other districts the fairies were
described as a little bigger and stronger folk; but these latter were
also of a thieving disposition. They would lurk around people's houses,
looking for an opportunity to steal butter and cheese from the dairies,
and they skulked about the cow-yards, in order to milk the cows and the
goats, which they did so thoroughly that many a morning there was not a
drop of milk to be had. The principal mischief, however, which those
used to do, was to carry away unbaptized infants, and place in their
stead their own wretched and peevish offspring. They were said to live
in hidden caves in the mountains, and he had heard one old man asserting
his firm

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

belief that it was beneath Moel Eilio, also called Moel Eilian, a
mountain lying between Llanberis and Cwellyn, the *Tylwyth Teg* of Nant
y Bettws lived, whom he had seen many a time when he was a lad; and, if
any one came across the mouth of their cave, he thought that he would
find there a wonderful amount of wealth, 'for they were thieves without
their like.' There is still another species of *Tylwyth Teg*, very
unlike the foregoing ones in their nature and habits. Not only was this
last kind far more beautiful and comely than the others, but they were
honest and good towards mortals. Their whole nature was replete with joy
and fun, nor were they ever beheld hardly, except engaged in some
merrymaking or other. They might be seen on bright moonlight nights at
it, singing and carolling playfully on the fair meadows and the green
slopes, at other times dancing lightly on the tops of the rushes in the
valleys. They were also wont to be seen hunting in full force on the
backs of their grey horses; for this kind were rich, and kept horses and
servants. Though it used to be said that they were spiritual and
immortal beings, still they ate and drank like human beings: they
married and had children. They were also remarkable for their
cleanliness, and they were wont to reward neat maidservants and
hospitable wives. So housewives used to exhort their maids to clean
their houses thoroughly every night before going to bed, saying that if
the *Tylwyth Teg* happened to enter, they would be sure to leave money
for them somewhere; but they were to tell no one in case they found any,
lest the *Tylwyth* should be offended and come no more. The mistresses
also used to order a tinful of water to be placed at the foot of the
stairs, a clean cloth on the table, with bread and its accompaniments
(*bara ac enllyn*) placed on it, so that, if the *Tylwyth* came in to
eat, the maids should

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

have their recompense on the hob as well as unstinted praise for keeping
the house clean, or, as Mr. Jones has it in a couplet from Goronwy
Owen's Cywydd y Cynghorfynt--

Cael eu rhent ar y pentan,  
A ffwyr glod o bai ffawr glân.

Finding the fairies' pay on the hob,  
With full credit for a clean floor.

Thus, whether the fairies came or not to pay a visit to them during
their sleep, the house would be clean by the morning, and the table
ready set for breakfast. it appears that the places most frequently
resorted to by this species were rushy combes surrounded by smooth hills
with round tops, also the banks of rivers and the borders of lakes; but
they were seldom seen at any time near rocks or cliffs. So more tales
about them are found in districts of the former description than
anywhere else, and among them maybe mentioned Penmachno, Dolwyddelen,
the sides of Moel Siabod, Llandegái Mountain, and from there to
Llanberis, to Nantlle Lakes, to Moel Tryfan <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) and Nant y Bettws, the upper portion of
the parish of Beddgelert from Drws y Coed to the Pennant, and the
district beginning from there and including the level part of Eifion, on
towards Celynnog Fawr. I have very little doubt that there are many
traditions about them in the neighbourhood of the Eifl and in Lleyn; I
know but little, however, about these last. This kind of fairies was
said to live underground, and the way to their country lay under hollow
banks that overhung the deepest parts of the lakes, or the deepest pools
in the rivers, so that mortals could not follow them further than the
water, should they try to go after them. They used to come out in broad
daylight,

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

two or three together, and now and then a shepherd, so the saying went,
used to talk and chat with them. Sometimes, moreover, he fell over head
and ears in love with their damsels, but they did not readily allow a
mortal to touch them. The time they were to be seen in their greatest
glee was at night when the moon was full, when they celebrated a merry
night (*noswaith lawen*). At midnight to the minute, they might be seen
rising out of the ground in every combe and valley; then, joining hands,
they would form into circles, and begin to sing and dance with might and
main until the cock crew, when they would vanish. Many used to go to
look at them on those nights, but it was dangerous to go too near them,
lest they should lure the spectator into their circle; for if that
happened, they would throw a charm over him, which would make him
invisible to his companions, and he would be detained by the fairies as
long as he lived. At times some people went too near to them, and got
snatched in; and at other times a love-inspired youth, fascinated by the
charms of one of their damsels, rushed in foolhardily to try to seize
one of them, and became instantly surrounded and concealed from sight.
If he could be got out before the cock crew he would be no worse; but
once the fairies disappeared Without his having been released, he would
never more be seen in the land of the living. The way to get the
captured man out was to take a long stick of mountain ash (*pren
criafol*), which two or more strong men had to hold with one of its ends
in the middle of the circle, so that when the man came round in his turn
in the dance he might take hold of it, for he is there bodily though not
visible, so that he cannot go past without coming across the stick. Then
the others pull him out, for the fairies, no more than any other spirit,
dare touch the mountain ash.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

We now proceed to give some of Mr. Jones' legends, The first is one
which he published in the fourth volume of the *Brython*, p. 70, whence
the following free translation is made of it:--

'In the north-west corner of the parish of Beddgelert there is a place
which used to be called by the old inhabitants the Land of the Fairies,
and it reaches from Cwm Hafod Ruffydd along the slope of the mountain of
Drws y Coed as far as Llyn y Dywarchen. The old people of former times
used to find much pleasure and amusement in this district in listening
every moonlight night to the charming music of the fair family, and in
looking at their dancing and their mirthful sports. Once on a time, a
long while ago, there lived at upper Drws y Coed a youth, who was joyous
and active, brave and determined of heart. This young man amused himself
every night by looking on and listening to them. One night they had come
to a field near the house, near the shore of Llyn y Dywarchen, to pass a
merry night. He went, as usual, to look at them, when his glances at
once fell on one of the ladies, who possessed such beauty as he had
never seen in a human being. Her appearance was like that of alabaster;
her voice was as agreeable as the nightingale's, and as unruffled as the
zephyr in a flower-garden at the noon of a long summer's day; and her
gait was pretty and aristocratic; her feet moved in the dance as lightly
on the grass as the rays of the sun had a few hours before on the lake
hard by. He fell in love with her over head and ears, and in the
strength of that passion--for what is stronger than love!--he rushed,
when the bustle was at its height, into the midst of the fair crowd, and
snatched the graceful damsel in his arms, and ran instantly with her to
the house. When the fair family saw the violence used by a mortal, they
broke up the dance and ran after her

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

towards the house; but, when they arrived, the door had been bolted with
iron, wherefore they could not get near her or touch her in any way; and
the damsel had been placed securely in a chamber. The youth, having her
now under his roof, as is the saying, endeavoured, with all his talent,
to win her affection and to induce her to wed. But at first she would on
no account hear of it; on seeing his persistence, however, and on
finding that he would not let her go to return to her people, she
consented to be his servant if he could find out her name; but she would
not be married to him. As he thought that was not impossible, he half
agreed to the condition; but, after bothering his head with all the
names known in that neighbourhood, he found himself no nearer his point,
though he was not willing to give up the search hurriedly. One night, as
he was going home from Carnarvon market, he saw a number of the fair
folks in a turbary not far from his path. They seemed to him to be
engaged in an important deliberation, and it struck him that they were
planning how to recover their abducted sister. He thought, moreover,
that if he could secretly get within hearing, he might possibly find her
name out. On looking carefully around, he saw that a ditch ran through
the turbary and passed near the spot where they stood. So he made his
way round to the ditch, and crept, on all fours, along it until he was
within hearing of the family. After listening a little, he found that
their deliberation was as to the fate of the lady he had carried away,
and he heard one of them crying, piteously, "O Penelop, O Penelop, my
sister, why didst thou run away with a mortal?" "Penelop," said the
young man to himself, "that must be the name of my beloved: that is
enough." At once he began to creep back quietly, and he returned home
safely without having been seen by the fairies.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

\[paragraph continues\] When he got into the house, he called out to the
girl, saying, "Penelop, my beloved one, come here!" and she came forward
and asked, in astonishment, "O mortal, who has betrayed my name to
thee?" Then, lifting up her tiny folded hands, she exclaimed, "Alas, my
fate, my fate!" But she grew contented with her fate, and took to her
work in earnest. Everything in the house and on the farm prospered under
her charge. There was no better or cleanlier housewife in the
neighbourhood around, or one that was more provident than she. The young
man, however, was not satisfied that she should be a servant to him,
and, after he had long and persistently sought it, she consented to be
married, on the one condition, that, if ever he should touch her with
iron, she would be free to leave him and return to her family. He agreed
to that condition, since he believed that such a thing would never
happen at his hands. So they were married, and lived several years
happily and comfortably together. Two children were born to them, a boy
and a girl, the picture of their mother and the idols of their father.
But one morning, when the husband wanted to go to the fair at Carnarvon,
he went out to catch a filly that was grazing in the field by the house;
but for the life of him he could not catch her, and he called to his
wife to come to assist him. She came without delay, and they managed to
drive the filly to a secure corner, as they thought; but, as the man
approached to catch her, she rushed past him. In his excitement, he
threw the bridle after her; but, who should be running in the direction
of it, but his wife! The iron bit struck her on the cheek, and she
vanished out of sight on the spot. Her husband never saw her any more;
but one cold frosty night, a long time after this event, he was awakened
from his sleep by somebody rubbing the glass of his window, and, after
he had given

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

a response, he recognized the gentle and tender voice of his wife saying
to him:--

Lest my son should find it cold,  
Place on him his father's coat;  
Lest the fair one find it cold,  
Place on her my petticoat.

It is said that the descendants of this family still continue in these
neighbourhoods, and that they are easy to be recognized by their light
and fair complexion. A similar story is related of the son of the farmer
of Braich y Dinas, in Llanfihangel y Pennant, and it used to be said
that most of the inhabitants of that neighbourhood were formerly of a
light complexion. I have often heard old people saying, that it was only
necessary, within their memory, to point out in the fair at Penmorfa any
one as being of the breed of the Tylwyth, to cause plenty of fighting
that day at least.'

The reader may compare with this tale the following, for which I have to
thank Mr. Samuel Rhys Williams, whose words I give, followed by a
translation:--

Yr oedd gwr ieuanc o gymydogaeth Drws y Coed yn dychwelyd adref o
Beddgelert ar noswaith loergan lleuad; pan ar gyfer Llyn y Gader gwelai
nifer o'r boneddigesau a elwir y Tylwyth Teg yn myned trwy eu chwareuon
nosawl. Swynwyd y llanc yn y fan gan brydferthwch y rhianod hyn, ac yn
neillduol un o honynt. Collodd y llywodraeth arno ei hunan i'r fath
raddau fel y penderfynodd neidio i'r cylch a dwyn yn ysbail iddo yr hon
oedd wedi myned a'i galon mor llwyr. Cyflawnodd ei fwriad a dygodd y
foneddiges gydag ef adref. Bu yn wraig iddo, a ganwyd plant iddynt. Yn
ddamweiniol, tra yn cyflawni rhyw orchwyl, digwyddodd iddo ei tharo a
haiarn ac ar amrantiad diflannodd ei anwylyd o'i olwg ac nis gwelodd hi
mwyach, ond ddarfod iddi ddyfod at ffenestr ei ystafell wely un noswaith
ar ol hyn a'i annog i fod yn dirion wrth y plant a'i bod hi yn aros
gerllaw y ty 

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

yn Llyn y Dywarchen. Y mae y traddodiad hefyd yn ein hysbysu ddarfod i'r

gwr hwn symud i fyw o Ddrws y Coed i Ystrad Betws Garmon.

'A young man, from the neighbourhood of Drws y Coed, was returning home
one bright moonlight night, from Beddgelert; where he came opposite the
lake called Llyn y Gader, he saw a number of the ladies known as the
*Tylwyth Teg* going through their nightly frolics. The youth was charmed
at once by the beauty of these ladies, and especially by one of them. He
so far lost his control over himself, that he resolved to leap into the
circle and carry away as his spoil the one who had so completely robbed
him of his heart. He accomplished his intention, and carried the lady
home with him. She became his wife, and children were born to them.
Accidentally, while at some work or other, it happened to him to strike
her with iron, and, in the twinkling of an eye, his beloved one
disappeared from his sight. He saw her no more, except that she came to
his bedroom window one night afterwards, and told him to be tender to
the children, and that she was staying, near the house, in the lake
called Llyn y Dywarchen. The tradition also informs us that this man
moved from Drws y Coed to live at Ystrad near Bettws Garmon.'

The name Llyn y Dywarchen, I may add, means the Lake of the Sod or Turf:
it is the one with the floating island, described thus by Giraldus, ii.
9 (p. 135):--*Alter enim insulam habet erraticam, vi ventorum
impellentium ad oppositas plerumque lacus partes errabundam. Hic armenta
pascentia nonnunquam pastores ad longinquas subito, partes translata
mirantur*. 'For one of the two lakes holds a wandering island, which
strays mostly with the force of the winds impelling it to the opposite
parts of the lake. Sometimes cattle grazing on it are,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

to the surprise of the shepherds, suddenly carried across to the more
distant parts.' Sheep are known to get on the floating islet, and it is
still believed to float them away from the shore. Mr. S. Rhys Williams,
it will be noticed, has given the substance of the legend rather than
the story itself. I now proceed to translate the same tale as given in
Welsh in *Cymru Fu* (pp. 474--7 of the edition published by Messrs.
Hughes and Son, Wrexham), in a very different dress--it is from
Glasynys' pen, and, as might be expected, decked out with all the
literary adornments in which he delighted. The language he used was his
own, but there is no reason to think that he invented any of the
incidents:--'The farmer of Drws y Coed's son was one misty day engaged
as a shepherd on the side of the mountain, a little below Cwm Marchnad,
and, as he crossed a rushy flat, he saw a wonderfully handsome little
woman standing under a clump of rushes. Her yellow and curly hair hung
down in ringed locks, and her eyes were as blue as the clear sky, while
her forehead was as white as the wavy face of a snowdrift that has
nestled on the side of Snowdon only a single night. Her two plump cheeks
were each like a red rose, and her pretty-lipped mouth might make an
angel eager to kiss her. The youth approached her, filled with love for
her, and, with delicacy and affection, asked her if he might converse
with her. She smiled kindly, and reaching out her hand, said to him,
"Idol of my hopes, thou hast come at last!" They began to associate
secretly, and to meet one another daily here and there on the moors
around the banks of Llyn y Gader; at last, their love had waxed so
strong that the young man could not be at peace either day or night, as
he was always thinking of Bella or humming to himself a verse of poetry
about her charms. The yellow-haired youth was now and

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

then lost for a long while, and nobody could divine his history. His
acquaintances believed that he had been fascinated: at last the secret
was found out. There were about Llyn y Dywarchen shady and concealing
copses: it was there he was wont to go, and the she-elf would always be
there awaiting him, and it was therefore that the place where they used
to meet got to be called *Llwyn y Forwyn*, the Maiden's Grove. After
fondly loving for a long time, it was resolved to wed; but it was
needful to get the leave of the damsel's father. One moonlight night it
was agreed to meet in the wood, and the appointment was duly kept by the
young man, but there was no sign of the subterranean folks coming, until
the moon disappeared behind the Garn. Then the two arrived, and the old
man at once proceeded to say to the suitor: "Thou shalt have my daughter
on the condition that thou do not strike her with iron. If thou ever
touch her with iron, she will no longer be thine, but shall return to
her own." The man consented readily, and great was his joy. They were
betrothed, and seldom was a handsomer pair seen at the altar. It was
rumoured that a vast sum of money as dowry had arrived with the pretty
lady at Drws y Coed on the evening of her nuptials. Soon after, the
mountain shepherd of Cwm Marchnad passed for a very rich and influential
man. In the course of time they had children, and no happier people ever
lived together than their parents. Everything went on regularly and
prosperously for a number of years: they became exceedingly wealthy, but
the sweet is not to be had without the bitter. One day they both went
out on horseback, and they happened to go near Llyn y Gader, when the
wife's horse got into a bog and sank to his belly. After the husband had
got Bella off his back, he succeeded with much trouble in getting the
horse out, and then

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

he let him go. Then he lifted her on the back of his own, but,
unfortunately, in trying quickly to place her foot in the stirrup, the
iron part of the same slipped, and struck her--or, rather, it touched
her at the knee-joint. Before they had made good half their way home,
several of the diminutive *Tylwyth* began to appear to them, and the
sound of sweet singing was heard on the side of the hill. Before the
husband reached Drws y Coed his wife had left him, and it is supposed
that she fled to Llwyn y Forwyn, and thence to the world below to Faery.
She left her dear little ones to the care of her beloved, and no more
came near them. Some say, however, that she sometimes contrived to see
her beloved one in the following manner. As the law of her country did
not permit her to frequent the earth with an earthly being, she and her
mother invented a way of avoiding the one thing and of securing the
other. A great piece of sod was set to float on the surface of the lake,
and on that she used to be for long hours, freely conversing in
tenderness with her consort on shore; by means of that plan they managed
to live together until he breathed his last. Their descendants owned
Drws y Coed for many generations, and they intermarried and mixed with
the people of the district. Moreover, many a fierce fight took place in
later times at the *Gwyl-fabsant* at Dolbenmaen or at Penmorfa, because
the men of Eifionydd had a habit of annoying the people of Pennant by
calling them Bellisians.'

In a note, Glasynys remarks that this tale is located in many districts
without much variation, except in the names of the places; this,
however, could not apply to the latter part, which suits Llyn y
Dywarchen alone. With this account of the fairy wife frequenting a lake
island to converse with her husband on shore, compare the Irish story of
the Children of Lir, who, though

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

transformed into swans, were allowed to retain their power of reasoning
and speaking, so that they used to converse from the surface of the
water with their friends on the dry land: see Joyce's Old Celtic
Romances, pp. x, 1-36. Now I return to another tale which was sent me by
Mr. William Jones: unless I am mistaken it has not hitherto been
published; so I give the Welsh together with a free translation of it:--

Yr oedd ystori am jab Braich y Dinas a adroddai y diweddar hybarch Elis
Owen o Gefn y Meusydd yn lled debyg i chwedl mab yr Ystrad gan Glasynys,
sef iddo hudo un o ferched y Tylwyth Teg i lawr o Foel Hebog, a'i chipio
i mewn i'r ty drwy orthrech; ac wedi hynny efe a'i perswadiodd i
ymbriodi ag ef ar yr un telerau ag y gwnaeth mab yr Ystrad. Ond clywais
hen foneddiges o'r enw Mrs. Roberts, un o ferched yr Isallt, oed' lawer
hyn na Mr. Owen, yn ei hadrodd yn wahanol. Yr oedd yr hen wreigan hon yn
credu yn nilysrwydd y chwedl, oblegid yr oedd hi 'yn cofio rhai o'r
teulu, waeth be' ddeudo neb.' Dirwynnai ei hedau yn debyg i hyn:--Yn yr
amser gynt--ond o ran hynny pan oedd hi yn ferch ifanc--yr oedd llawer
iawn o Dylwyth Teg yn trigo mewn rhyw ogofau yn y Foel o Gwm Ystradllyn
hyd i flaen y Pennant. Yr oedd y Tylwyth hwn yn llawer iawn harddach na
dim a welid mewn un rhan arall o'r wlad. Yr oeddynt o ran maint yn fwy o
lawer na'r rhai cyffredin, yn lan en pryd tu hwnt i bawb, eu gwallt yn
oleu fel llin, eu llygaid yn loyw leision. Yr oeddynt yn ymddangos mewn
rhyw le neu gilydd yn chwareu, canu ac ymddifyru bob nos deg a goleu; a
byddai swn eu canu yn denu y llanciau a'r merched ifainc i fyned i'w
gweled; ac os byddent yn digwydd bod o bryd goleu hwy a ymgomient a
hwynt, ond ni adawent i un person o liw tywyll ddod yn agos atynt, eithr
cilient ymaith o ffordd y cyfryw un. Yrw^an yr oedd mab Braich y Dinas
yn llanc hardd, heini, bywiog ac o bryd glan, goleu a serchiadol. Yr
oedd 

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

hwn yn hoff iawn o edrych ar y Tylwyth, a byddai yn cael ymgom a rhai o
honynt yn aml, ond yn bennaf ag un o'r merched oedd yn rhagori arnynt
oll mewn glendid a synwyr; ac o fynych gyfarfod syrthiodd y ddau mewn
cariad a'u gilydd, eithr ni fynai hi ymbriodi ag ef, ond addawodd fyned
i'w wasanaeth, a chydunodd i'w gyfarfod yn Mhant--nid wyf yn cofio yr
enw i gyd--drannoeth, oblegid nid oedd wiw iddi geisio myned gydag ef yn
ngwydd y lleill. Felly drannoeth aeth i fynu i'r Foel, a chyfarfyddodd y
rhian ef yn ol ei haddewid, ag aeth gydag ef adref, ac ymgymerodd a'r
swdd o laethwraig, a buan y dechreuodd popeth lwyddo o dan ei llaw: yr
oedd yr ymenym a'r caws yn cynhyddu beunydd. Hir a thaer y bu'r llanc yn
ceisio ganddi briodi. A hi a addawodd, os medrai ef gael allan ei henw.
Ni wyddai Mrs. Roberts drwy ba ystryw y llwyddodd i gael hwnnw, ond
hynny a fu, a daeth ef i'r ty un noswaith a galwodd ar 'Sibi,' a phan
glywodd hi ei henw, hi a aeth i lewygfa; ond 'pan ddaeth ati ei hun, hi
a ymfoddlonodd i briodi ar yr amod nad oedd ef i gyffwrdd a hi a haiarn
ac nad oedd bollt haiarn i fod ar y drws na chlo ychwaith, a hynny a fu:
priodwyd hwynt, a buont fyw yn gysurus am lawer o flynyddoedd, a ganwyd
iddynt amryw blant. Y diwedd a fu fel hyn: yr oedd ef wedi myned un
diwrnod i dori baich o frwyn at doi, a tharawodd y cryman yn y baich i
fyned adref; fel yr oed yr nesu at y gadlas, rhedodd Sibi i'w gyfarfod,
a thaflodd ynteu y baich brwyn yn ddireidus tu ag ati, a rhag iddo
ddyfod ar ei thraws ceisiodd ei atal a'i llaw, yr hon a gyffyrddod a'r
cryman; a hi a ddiflannodd o'r golwg yn y fan ym nghysgod y baich brwyn:
ni welwyd ac ni chlywyd dim

oddiwrthi mwyach.

'There was a story respecting the son of the farmer of Braich y Dinas,
which used to be told by the late respected Mr. Ellis Owen, of Cefn y
Meusydd, somewhat in the same way as that about the Ystrad youth, as
told by Glasynys; that is to say, the young man enticed one

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

of the damsels of the fair family to come down from Moel Hebog, and then
he carried her by force into the house, and afterwards persuaded her to
become his wife on the same conditions as the heir of Ystrad did. But I
have heard an old lady called Mrs. Roberts, who had been brought up at
Isallt, and who was older than Mr. Owen, relating it differently. This
old woman believed in the truth of the story, as "she remembered some of
the family, whatever anybody may say." She used to spin her yarn
somewhat as follows:--In old times--but, for the matter of that, when
she was a young woman--there were a great many of the fair family living
in certain caves in the Foel from Cwm Strallyn <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) down to the upper part of Pennant. This
Tylwyth was much handsomer than any seen in any other part of the
country. In point of stature they were much bigger than the ordinary
ones, fair of complexion beyond everybody, with hair that was as light
as flax, and eyes that were of a clear blue colour. They showed
themselves in one spot or another, engaged in playing, singing, and
jollity every light night. The sound of their singing used to draw the
lads and the young women to look at them; and, should they be of clear
complexion, the fairies would chat with them; but they would let no
person of a dark hue come near them: they moved away from such a one.
Now the young man of Braich y Dinas was a handsome, vigorous, and lively
stripling of fair, clear, and attractive complexion. He was very fond of
looking at the fair family, and had a chat with some of them often,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

but chiefly with one of the damsels, who surpassed all the rest in
beauty and good sense. The result of frequently meeting was that they
fell in love with one another, but she would not marry him. She
promised, however, to go to service to him, and agreed to meet him at
Pant y--I have forgotten the rest of the name--the day after, as it
would not do for her to go with him while the others happened to be
looking on. So he went up the. next day to the Foel, and the damsel met
him according to her promise, and went with him home, where she took to
the duties of a dairymaid. Soon everything began to prosper under her
hand; the butter and the cheese were daily growing in quantity. Long and
importunately did the youth try to get her to marry him. She promised to
do so provided he could find out her name. Mrs. Roberts did not know by
what manœuvre he succeeded in discovering it, but it was done, and he
came into the house one night and called to "Sibi," and when she heard
her name she fainted away. When, however, she recovered her
consciousness, she consented to marry on the condition that he was not
to touch her with iron, and that there was not to be a bolt of iron on
the door, or a lock either. It was agreed, and they were married; they
lived together comfortably many years, and had children born to them.
The end came thus: he had gone one day to cut a bundle of rushes for
thatching, and planted the reaping-hook in the bundle to go home. As he
drew towards the haggard, Sibi ran out to meet him, and he wantonly
threw the bundle of rushes towards her, when she, to prevent its hitting
her, tried to stop it with her hand, which touched the reaping-hook. She
vanished on the spot out of sight behind the bundle of rushes, and
nothing more was seen or heard of her.'

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Mr. Ellis Owen, alluded to above, was a highly respected gentleman, well
known in North Wales for his literary and antiquarian tastes. He was
born in 1789 at Cefn y Meusydd near Tremadoc, where he continued to live
till the day of his death, which was January 27, 1868. His literary
remains, preceded by a short biography, were published in 1877 by Mr.
Robert Isaac Jones of Tremadoc; but it contains no fairy tales so far as
I have been able to find.

A tale which partially reminds one of that given by Dewi Glan Ffrydlas
respecting the Corwrion midwife. referred to at p. 63 above, was
published by Mr. W. Jones in the fourth volume of the *Brython*, p. 251:
freely rendered into English, it runs thus:--

'Once on a time, when a midwife from Nanhwynan had newly got to the
Hafoddydd Brithion to pursue her calling, a gentleman came to the door
on a fine grey steed and bade her come with him at once. Such was the
authority with which he spoke, that the poor midwife durst not refuse to
go, however much it was her duty to stay where she was. So she mounted
behind him, and off they went, like the flight of a swallow, through
Cwmlltan, over the Bwlch, down Nant yr Aran, and over the Gader to Cwm
Hafod Ruffydd, before the poor woman had time even to say Oh! When they
reached there, she saw before her a magnificent mansion, splendidly lit
up with such lamps as she had never seen before. They entered the court,
and a crowd of servants in expensive liveries came to meet them, and she
was at once led through the great hall into a bedchamber, the like of
which she had never seen. There the mistress of the house, to whom she
had been fetched, was awaiting her. The midwife got through her duties
successfully, and stayed there until the lady had completely recovered,
nor had she spent any part of her

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

life so merrily, for there nought but festivity went on day and night:
dancing, singing, and endless rejoicing reigned there. But merry as it
was, she found that she must go, and the nobleman gave her a large
purse, with the order not to open it until she had got into her own
house. Then he bade one of his servants escort her the same way that she
had come. When she reached home she opened the purse, and, to her great
joy, it was full of money: she lived happily on those earnings to the
end of her life.'

With this ending of the story one should contrast Dewi Glan Ffrydlas'
tale to which I have already alluded; and I may here refer to Mr. Sikes'
British Goblins, pp. 86-8, for a tale differing from both Dewi's and
Jones', in that the fairies are there made to appear as devils to the
nurse, who had accidentally used a certain ointment which she was not to
place near her own eyes. Instead of being rewarded for her services she
was only too glad to be deposited anyhow near her home. 'But,' as the
story goes on to relate, 'very many years afterwards, being at a fair,
she saw a man stealing something from a stall, and, with one corner of
her eye, beheld her old master pushing the man's elbow. Unthinkingly she
said, "How are you, master? how are the children?" He said, "How did you
see me?" She answered, "With the corner of my left eye." From that
moment she was blind of her left eye, and lived many years with only her
right! Such is the end of this tale given by Mr. Sikes.

'But the fair family did not,' Mr. William Jones goes on to say, 'always
give mortals the means of good living: sometimes they made no little fun
of them. Once on a time the Drws y Coed man was going home from
Beddgelert Fair, rather merry than sad, along the old road over the
Gader, when he saw, on coming near

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

the top of the Gader, a fine, handsome house near the road, in which
there was a rare merrymaking. He knew perfectly well that there was no
such a building anywhere on his way, and it made him think that he had
lost his way and gone astray; so he resolved to turn into the house to
ask for lodgings, which were given him. At once, when he entered, he
took it to be a nuptial feast (neithior) by reason of the jollity, the
singing, and the dancing. The house was full of young men, young women,
and children, all merry, and exerting themselves to the utmost. The
company began to disappear one by one, and he asked if he might go to
bed, whereupon he was led to a splendid chamber, where there was a bed
of the softest down with snow-white clothes on it. He stripped at once,
went into it, and slept quietly enough till the morning. The first thing
to come to his mind when he lay half asleep, half awake, was the jollity
of the night before, and the fact of his sleeping in a splendid chamber
in the strange house. He opened his eyes to survey his bedroom, but it
was too wide: he was sleeping on the bare swamp, with a clump of rushes
as his pillow, and the blue sky as his coverlet.'

Mr. Jones mentions that, within his memory, there were still people in
his neighbourhood who believed that the fairies stole unbaptized
children and placed their own in their stead: he gives the following
story about the farmer's wife of Dyffryn Mymbyr, near Capel Curig, and
her infant:--

Yr oedd y wraig hon wedi rhoddi genedigaeth i blentyn iach a heinif yn
nechreu y cynheuaf ryw haf blin a thymhestlog: ac o herwydd fod y tyddyn
getyn o ffordd oddiwrth lan na chapel, a'r hin mor hynod o lawiog,
esgeuluswyd bedyddio y plentyn yn yr amser arferol, sef cyn ei fod yn
wyth niwrnod oed. Ryw diwrnod teg yn 

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

nghanol y cynheuaf blin aeth y wraig allan i'r maes gyda'r rhelyw o'r
teulu i geisio achub y cynheuaf, a gadawodd y baban yn cysgu yn ei gryd
o dan ofal ei nain, yr hon oedd hen a methiantus, ac yn analluog i fyned
lawer o gwmpas. Syrthiodd yr hen wreigan i gysgu, a thra yr oedd hi
felly, daeth y Tylwyth i fewn, a chymerasant y baban o'r cryd, a
dodasant un arall yn ei le. Yn mhen ennyd dechreuodd hwn erain a chwyno
nes deffro y nain, ac aeth at y cryd, lle y gwelodd gleiriach hen eiddil
crebachlyd yn ymstwyrian yn flin. 'O'r wchw!' ebai hi, 'y mae yr hen
Dylwyth wedi bod yma;' ac yn ddioed chwythodd yn y corn i alw y fam, yr
hon a daeth yno yn ddiatreg; a than glywodd y crio yn y cryd, rhedodd,
ato, a chododd y bychan i fynu heb sylwi arno, a hi a'i cofleidiodd, a'i
suodd ac a'i swcrodd at ei bronnau, ond nid oedd dim yn tycio, parhau i
nadu yn ddidor yr oedd nes bron a hollti ei chalon; ac ni wyddai ba beth
i wneud i'w ddistewi. O'r diwedd hi a edrychodd arno, a gwelodd nad oedd
yn debyg i'w mhebyn hi, ac aeth yn loes i'w chalon: edrychodd arno
drachefn, ond po fwyaf yr edrychai arno, hyllaf yn y byd oedd hi yn ei
weled; anfonodd am ei gwr o'r cae, a gyrrodd ef i ymholi am wr cyfarwydd
yn rhywle er mwyn cael ei gynghor; ac ar ol hir holi dywedod, rhywun
wrtho fod person Trawsfynydd yn gyfarwydd, yn nghyfrinion yr ysprydion;
ac efe a aeth ato, ac archodd hwnnw iddo gymeryd rhaw a'i gorchwddio a
halen, a thori llun croes yn yr halen; yna ei chymeryd i'r ystafell lle
yr oedd mab y Tylwyth, ac ar ol agor y ffenestr, ei rhoddi ar y tan hyd
nes y llosgai yr halen; a hwy a wnaethant felly, a phan aeth yr halen yn
eiriasboeth fe aeth yr erthyl croes ymaith yn anweledig iddynt hwy, ac
ar drothwy y drws hwy a gawsant y baban arall yn iach a dianaf.

'This woman had given birth to a healthy and vigorous child at the
beginning of the harvest, one wretched and

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

inclement summer. As the homestead was a considerable distance from
church or chapel, and the weather so very rainy, it was neglected to
baptize the child at the usual <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) time,
that is to say, before it was eight days old. One fine day, in the
middle of this wretched harvest, the mother went to the field with the
rest of the family to try to save the harvest, and left her baby
sleeping in its cradle in its grandmother's charge, who was so aged and
decrepit as to. be unable to go much about. The old woman fell asleep,
and, while she was in that state, the *Tylwyth Teg* came in and took
away the baby, placing another in its stead. Very shortly the latter
began to whine and groan, so that the grandmother awoke: she went to the
cradle, where she saw a slender, wizened old man moving restlessly and
peevishly about. "Alas! alas!" said she, "the old *Tylwyth* have been
here"; and she at once blew in the horn to call the mother home, who
came without delay. As she heard the crying in the cradle, she ran
towards it, and lifted the little one without looking at him; she hugged
him, put him to her breast, and sang lullaby to him, but nothing was of
any avail, as he continued, without stopping, to scream enough to break
her heart; and she knew not what to do to calm him. At last she looked
at him: she saw that he was not like her dear little boy, and her heart
was pierced with agony. She looked at him again, and the more she
examined him the uglier he seemed to her. She sent for her husband home
from the field, and told him to search for a skilled man somewhere or
other; and, after a long search, he was told by somebody that the parson
of Trawsfynydd was skilled in the secrets of the spirits;

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

so he went to him. The latter bade him take a shovel and cover it with
salt, and make the figure of the cross in the salt; then to take it to
the chamber where the fairy child was, and, after taking care to open
the window, to place the shovel on the fire until the salt was burnt.
This was done, and when the salt had got white hot, the peevish abortion
went away, seen of no one, and they found the other baby whole and
unscathed at the doorstep.' Fire was also made use of in Scotland in
order to detect a changeling and force him to quit: see the British
Association's *Report*, 1896, p. 650, where Mr. Gomme refers to Mr.
Gregor's *Folklore of the North-east of Scotland*, pp. 8-9.

In answer to a question of mine with regard to gossamer, which is called
in North Wales *edafedd gwawn*, *'gwawn* yarn,' Mr. Jones told me in a
letter, dated April, 1881, that it used to be called *Rhaffau'r Tylwyth
Teg*, that is to say, the Ropes of the Fair Family, which were
associated with the diminutive, mischievous, and wanton kind of fairies
who dwelt in marshy and rushy places, or among the fern and the heather.
It used to be said that, if a man should lie down and fall asleep in any
such a spot, the fairies would come and bind him with their ropes so
that he could not move, and that they would then cover him with a sheet
made of their ropes, which would make him invisible. This was
illustrated by him by the following tale he had heard from his mother:--

Clywais fy mam yn adrodd chwedl am jab y Ffridd, yr hwn wrth ddychwelyd
adref o ffair Beddgelert yn rhywle oddeutu Pen Cae'r Gors a welodd beth
afrifed o'r Tylwyth Bach yn neidio a phrancio ar bennau y grug. Efe a
eisteddodd i lawr i edrych arnynt, a daeth hun drosto; ymollyngodd i
lawr a chysgodd yn drwm. A phan oedd felly, ymosododd yr holl lu arno a
rhwymasant ef mor dyn fel 

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

na allasai symud; yna hwy a'i cuddasant ef a'r tudded gwawn fel na allai
neb ei weled os digwyddai iddo lefain am help. Yr oedd ei deulu yn ei
ddisgwyl adref yn gynnar y nos honno, ac wrth ei weled yn oedi yn hwyr,
aethant yn anesmwyth am dano ac aethpwyd i'w gyfarfod, eithr ni welent
ddim oddiwrtho, ac aed gan belled a'r pentref, lle eu hyspyswyd ei fod
wedi myned tuag adref yn gynnar gyda gwr Hafod Ruffydd. Felly aed tua'r
Hafod i edrych a oedd yno; ond dywedodd gwr yr Hafod eu bod wedi
ymwahanu ar Bont Glan y Gors, pawb tua'i fan ei hun. Yna chwiliwyd yn
fanwl bob ochr i'r fford oddiyno i'r Ffridd heb weled dim oddiwrtho.
Buwyd yn chwilio yr holl ardal drwy y dydd drannoeth ond yn ofer. Fodd
bynnag oddeutu yr un amser nos drannoeth daeth y Tylwyth ac a'i
rhyddhasant, ac yn fuan efe a ddeffrôdd wedi cysgu o hono drwy y nos a'r
dydd blaenorol. Ar ol iddo ddeffro ni wyddai amcan daear yn mha le yr
oedd, a chrwydro y bu hyd ochrau y Gader a'r Gors Fawr hyd nes y canodd
y ceiliog, pryd yr adnabu yn mha le yr oedd, sef o fewn llai na chwarter
milltir i'w gartref.

'I have heard my mother relating a tale about the son of the farmer of
the Ffridd, who, while on his way home from Beddgelert Fair, saw,
somewhere near Pen Cae'r Gors, an endless number of the diminutive
family leaping and capering on the heather tops. He sat him down to look
at them, and sleep came over him; he let himself down on the ground, and
slept heavily. When he was so, the whole host attacked him, and they
bound him so tightly that he could not have stirred; then they covered
him with the gossamer sheet, so that nobody could see him in case he
called for help. His people expected him home early that evening, and,
as they found him delaying till late, they got uneasy about him. They
went to meet him, but no trace of him was seen,

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

and they went as far as the village, where they were informed that he
had started home in good time with the farmer of Hafod Ruffydd. So they
went to the Hafod to see if he was there; but the farmer told them that
they had parted on Glan y Gors Bridge to go to their respective homes. A
minute search was then made on both sides of the road from there to the
Ffridd, but without finding any trace of him. They kept searching the
whole neighbourhood during the whole of the next day, but in vain.
However, about the same time the following night the *Tylwyth* came and
liberated him, and he shortly woke up, after sleeping through the
previous night and day. When he woke he had no idea where on earth he
was; so he wandered about on the slopes of the Gader and near the Gors
Fawr until the cock crew, when he found where he was, namely, less than
a quarter of a mile from his home.'

The late Mr. Owen, of Cefn Meusydd, has already been alluded to. I have
not been able to get at much of the folklore with which he was familiar,
but, in reply to some questions of mine, Mr. Robert Isaac Jones of
Tremadoc, his biographer, and the publisher of the *Brython*, so long as
it existed, has kindly ransacked his memory. He writes to me in Welsh to
the following effect:--

'I will tell you what I heard from Mr. Owen and my mother when I was a
lad, about fifty-seven years ago. The former used to say that the people
of Pennant in Eifionydd had a nickname, to wit, that of Belsiaid y
Pennant, "the Bellisians of the Pennant"; that, when he was a boy, if
anybody called out Belsiaid y Pennant at the Penmorfa Fair, every man
jack of them would come out, and fighting always ensued. The antiquary
used to explain it thus. Some two or three hundred years ago, Sir Robert
of the Nant, one of Sir Richard Bulkeley's ancestors, had a son and heir
who was extravagant

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

and wild. He married a gipsy, and they had children born to them; but,
as the family regarded this marriage as a disgrace to their ancient
stem, it is said that the father, the next time the vagabonds came
round, gave a large sum of money to the father of the girl for taking
her away with him. This having been done, the rumour was spread abroad
that it was one of the fairies the youth had married, and that she had
gone with him to catch a pony, when he threw the bridle at the beast to
prevent it passing, and the iron of the bridle touched the wife; then
that she at once disappeared, as the fairies always do so when touched
with iron. However, the two children were put out to nurse, and the one
of them, who was a girl, was brought up at Plas y Pennant, and her name
was *Pelisha* <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37); her descendants
remain to this day in the Nant, and are called Bellis, who are believed
there, to this day, to be derived from the *Tylwyth Teg*. Nothing
offends them more than to be reminded of this.'

Mr. R. I. Jones goes on to relate another tale as follows:--

Dywedir fod lle a elwir yr Hafod Rugog mewn cwm anial yn y mynydd lle y
byddai y Tylwyth Teg yn arferol a mynychu; ac y byddent yn trwblio'r hen
wraig am fenthyg rhywbeth neu gilydd. Dywedodd hithau, 'Cewch os
caniatewch ddau u beth cyntaf- i'r peth cyntaf y cyffyrddaf ag ef wrth y
drws dorri, ar peth cyntaf y rhof fy llaw arno yn y ty estyn hanner
llath.' Yr oedd carreg afael, fel ei gelwir, yn y mur wrth y drws ar ei
fford,' ac yr oedd ganddi ddefnydd syrcyn gwlanen yn rhy fyr o hanner
llath. Ond yn anffodus wrth ddod a'i chawellad mawn i'r ty bu agos iddi
a syrthio: rhoes ei llaw ar ben ei chlun i ymarbed a thorodd honno, a
chan faint y boen cyffyrddod yny ty a'i thrwyn yr hwn a estynnodd hanner
llath. 

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

'It is said that there was a place called Hafod Rugog in a wild hollow
among the mountains, where the fair family were in the habit of
resorting, and that they used to trouble the old woman of Hafod for the
loan of one thing and another. So she said, one day, "You shall have the
loan if you will grant me two first things--that the first thing I touch
at the door break, and that the first thing I put my hand on in the
house be lengthened half a yard." There was a grip stone (carreg afael),
as it is called, in the wall near the door, which was in her way, and
she had in the house a piece of flannel for a jerkin which was half a
yard too short. But, unfortunately, as she came, with her kreel full of
turf on her back, to the house, she nearly fell down: she put her hand,
in order to save herself, to her knee-joint, which then broke; and,
owing to the pain, when she had got into the house, she touched her nose
with her hand, when her nose grew half a yard longer.'

Mr. Jones went on to notice how the old folks used to believe that the
fairies were wont to appear in the marshes near Cwellyn Lake, not far
from Rhyd-Ddu, to sing and dance, and that it was considered dangerous
to approach them on those occasions lest one should be fascinated. As to
the above-mentioned flannel and stone a folklorist asks me, why the old
woman did not definitely mention them and say exactly what she wanted.
The question is worth asking: I cannot answer it, but I mention it in
the hope that somebody else will.

### II.

Early in the year 1899 <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) I had a small
group of stories communicated to me by the Rev. W. Evans Jones, rector
of Dolbenmaen, who tells me that the neighbourhood

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

of the Garn abounds in fairy tales. The scene of one of these is located
near the source of Afon fach Blaen y Cae, a tributary of the Dwyfach.
'There a shepherd while looking after his flock came across a ring of
rushes which he accidentally kicked, as the little people were coming
out to dance. They detained him, and he married one of their number. He
was told that he would live happily with them as long as he would not
touch any instrument of iron. For years nothing happened to mar the
peace and happiness of the family. One day, however, he unknowingly
touched iron, with the consequence that both the wife and the children
disappeared.' This differs remarkably from stories such as have been
already mentioned at pp. 32, 35; but until it is countenanced by stories
from other sources, I can only treat it as a blurred version of a story
of the more usual type, such as the next one which Mr. Evans Jones has
sent me as follows:--

'A son of the farmer of Blaen Pennant married a fairy and they lived
together happily for years, until one day he took a bridle to catch a
horse, which proved to be rather an obstreperous animal, and in trying
to prevent the horse passing, he threw the bridle at him, which,
however, missed the animal and hit the wife so that the bit touched her,
and she at once disappeared. The tradition goes, that their descendants
are to this day living in the Pennant Valley; and if there is any
unpleasantness between them and their neighbours they are taunted with
being of the *Tylwyth Teg* family.' These are, I presume, the people
nicknamed *Belsiaid*, to which reference has already been made.

The next story is about an old woman from Garn Dolbenmaen who was
crossing y Graig Goch, 'the Red Rock,' 'when suddenly she came across a
fairy sitting down with a very large number of gold coins by

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

her. The old woman ventured to remark how wealthy she was: the fairy
replied, Wele dacw, "Lo there!" and immediately disappeared.' This looks
as if it ought to be a part of a longer story which Mr. Evans Jones has
not heard.

The last bit of folklore which he has communicated is equally short, but
of a rarer description: 'A fairy was in the habit of attending a certain
family in the Pennant Valley every evening to put the children to bed;
and as the fairy was poorly clad, the mistress of the house gave her a
gown, which was found in the morning torn into shreds.' The displeasure
of the fairy at being offered the gown is paralleled by that of the
fenodyree or the Manx brownie, described in chapter iv. As for the kind
of service here ascribed to the Pennant fairy, I know nothing exactly
parallel.

### III.

The next four stories are to be found in *Cymru Fu* at pp. 175-9, whence
I have taken the liberty of translating them into English. They were
contributed by Glasynys, whose name has already occurred so often in
connexion with these Welsh legends, that the reader ought to know more
about him; but I have been disappointed in my attempt to get a short
account of his life to insert here. All I can say is, that I made his
acquaintance in 1865 in Anglesey: at that time he had a curacy near
Holyhead, and he was in the prime of life. He impressed me as an
enthusiast for Welsh antiquities: he was born and bred, I believe, in
the neighbourhood of Snowdon, and his death took place about ten years
ago. It would be a convenience to the student of Welsh folklore to have
a brief biography of Glasynys, but as yet nothing of the kind seems to
have been written.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

\(1\) 'When the people of the Gors Goch one evening had just gone to
bed, they heard a great row and disturbance around the house. One could
not comprehend at all what it was that made a noise at that time of
night. Both the husband and the wife had waked up, quite unable to make
out what it might be. The children also woke, but no one could utter a
word: their tongues had all stuck to the roof of their mouths. The
husband, however, at last managed to move, and to ask, "Who is there?
What do you want?" Then he was answered from without by a small silvery
voice, "It is room we want to dress our children." The door was opened:
a dozen small beings came in, and began to search for an earthen pitcher
with water; there they remained for some hours, washing and titivating
themselves. As the day was breaking, they went away, leaving behind them
a fine present for the kindness they had received. Often afterwards did
the Gors Goch folks have the company of this family. But once there
happened to be there a fine plump and pretty baby in his cradle. The
fair family came, and, as the baby had not been baptized, they took the
liberty of changing him for one of their own. They left behind in his
stead an abominable creature that would do nothing but cry and scream
every day of the week. The mother was nearly breaking her heart on
account of the misfortune, and greatly afraid of telling anybody about
it. But everybody got to see that there was something wrong at the Gors
Goch, which was proved before long by the mother dying of longing for
her child. The other children died broken-hearted after their mother,
and the husband was left alone with the little elf without any one to
comfort them. But shortly after, one began to resort again to the hearth
of the Gors Goch to dress children, and the gift, which had formerly
been silver money,

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

became henceforth pure gold. In the course of a few years the elf became
the heir of a large farm in North Wales, and that is why the old people
used to say, "Shoe the elf with gold and he will grow" (*Fe ddaw gwiddon
yn fawr ond ei bedoli ag aur*). That is the legend of the Gors Goch.'

\(2\) 'Once when William Ellis, of the Gilwern, was fishing on the bank
of Cwm Silin Lake on a dark misty day, he had seen no living Christian
from the time when he left Nantlle. But as he was in a happy mood,
throwing his line, he beheld over against him in a clump of rushes a
large crowd of people, or things in the shape of people about a foot in
stature: they were engaged in leaping and dancing. He looked on for
hours, and he never heard, as he said, such music in his life before.
But William went too near them, when they threw a kind of dust into his
eyes, and, while he was wiping it away, the little family took the
opportunity of betaking themselves somewhere out of his sight, so that
he neither saw nor heard anything more of them.'

\(3\) 'There is a similar story respecting a place called Llyn y
Ffynhonnau. There was no end of jollity there, of dancing, harping, and
fiddling, with the servant man of Gelli Ffrydau and his two dogs in the
midst of the crowd, leaping and capering as nimbly as anybody else. At
it they were for three days and three nights, without stopping; and had
it not been for a skilled man, who lived not far off, and came to know
how things were going on, the poor fellow would, without doubt, have
danced himself to death. But he was rescued that time!

\(4\) The fourth story is one, of which he says, that he heard it from
his mother; but he has elaborated it in his usual fashion, and the
proper names are undoubtedly his own:--'Once on a time, a shepherd boy
had gone

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

up the mountain. That day, like many a day before and after, was
exceedingly misty. Now, though he was well acquainted with the place, he
lost his way, and walked backwards and forwards for many a long hour. At
last he got into a low rushy spot, where he saw before him many circular
rings. He at once recalled the place, and began to fear the worst. He
had heard, many hundreds of times, of the bitter experiences, in those
rings, of many a shepherd who had happened to chance on the dancing
place or the circles of the fair family. He hastened away as fast as
ever he could, lest he should be ruined like the rest; but, though he
exerted himself to the point of perspiring and losing his breath, there
he was, and there he continued to be, a long time. At last he was met by
an old fat little man, with merry blue eyes, who asked him what he was
doing. He answered that he was trying to find his way home. "Oh," said
he, "come after me, and do not utter a word until I bid thee." This he
did, following him on and on until they came to an oval stone; and the
old fat little man lifted it, after tapping the middle of it three times
with his walking-stick. There was there a narrow path with stairs
visible here and there; and a sort of whitish light, inclining to grey
and blue, was to be seen radiating from the stones. "Follow me
fearlessly," said the fat man; "no harm will be done thee." So on the
poor youth went, as reluctantly as a dog to be hanged. But presently a
fine, wooded, fertile country spread itself out before them, with well
arranged mansions dotting it all over, while every kind of apparent
magnificence met the eye and seemed to smile in the landscape; the
bright waters of the rivers meandered in twisted streams, and the hills
were covered with the luxuriant verdure of their grassy growth, and the
mountains with a glossy fleece of smooth pasture. By the time they had

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

reached the stout gentleman's mansion, the young man's senses had been
bewildered by the sweet cadence of the music which the birds poured
forth from the groves: then there was gold dazzling his eyes, and silver
flashing on his sight. He saw there all kinds of musical instruments and
all sorts of things for playing; but he could discern no inhabitant in
the whole place; and, when he sat down to-eat, the dishes on the table
came to their places of themselves, and disappeared when one had done
with them. This puzzled him beyond measure; moreover, he heard people
talking together around him, but for the life of him he could see no one
but his old friend. At length the fat man said to him: "Thou canst now
talk as much as it may please thee;" but, when he attempted to move his
tongue, it would no more stir than if it had been a lump of ice, which
greatly frightened him. At this point, a fine old lady, with health and
benevolence beaming in her face, came to them and slightly smiled at the
shepherd: the mother was followed by her three daughters, who were
remarkably beautiful. They gazed with somewhat playful looks at him, and
at length began to talk to him; but his tongue would not wag. Then one
of the girls came to him, and, playing with his yellow and curly locks,
gave him a smart kiss on his ruddy lips. This loosened the string that
bound his tongue, and he began to talk freely and eloquently. There he
was, under the charm of that kiss, in the bliss of happiness; and there
he remained a year and a day without knowing that he had passed more
than a day among them; for he had got into a country where there was no
reckoning of time. But by-and-by he began to feel somewhat of a longing
to visit his old home, and asked the stout man if he might go. "Stay a
little yet," said he, "and thou shalt go for awhile." That passed: he
stayed on, but Olwen,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

for that was the name of the damsel that had kissed him, was very
unwilling that he should depart. She looked sad every time he talked of
going away; nor was he himself without feeling a sort of a cold thrill
passing through him at the thought of leaving her. On condition,
however, of returning, he obtained leave to go, provided with plenty of
gold and silver, of trinkets and gems. When he reached home, nobody knew
who he was: it had been the belief that he had been killed by another
shepherd, who found it necessary to betake himself hastily far away to
America, lest he should be hanged without delay. But here is Einion Las
at home, and everybody wonders especially to see that the shepherd had
got to look like a wealthy man: his manners, his dress, his language,
and the treasure he had with him, all conspired to give him the air of a
gentleman. He went back one Thursday night, the first of the moon of
that month, as suddenly as he had left the first time, and nobody knew
whither. There was great joy in the country below when Einion returned
thither, and nobody was more rejoiced at it than Olwen his beloved. The
two were right impatient to get married; but it was necessary to do that
quietly, for the family below hated nothing more than fuss and noise;
so, in a sort of a half-secret fashion, they were wedded. Einion was
very desirous to go once more among his own people, accompanied, to be
sure, by his wife. After he had been long entreating the old man for
leave, they set out on two white ponies, that were, in fact, more like
snow than anything else in point of colour. So he arrived with his
consort in his old home, and it was the opinion of all that Einion's
wife was the handsomest person they had anywhere seen. Whilst at home, a
son was born to them, to whom they gave the name of Taliessin. Einion
was now in the enjoyment of high

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

repute, and his wife received due respect. Their wealth was immense, and
soon they acquired a large estate; but it was not long till people began
to inquire after the pedigree of Einion's wife: the country was of
opinion that it was not the right thing to be without a pedigree. Einion
was questioned about it, but without giving any satisfactory answer, and
one came to the conclusion that she was one of the fair family (Tylwyth
Teg). "Certainly," replied Einion, "there can be no doubt that she comes
from a very fair family; for she has two sisters who are as fair as she,
and, if you saw them together, you would admit that name to be a most
fitting one." This, then, is the reason why the remarkable family in the
Land of Enchantment and Glamour (*Hud a Lledrith*) is called the fair
family.'

The two next tales of Glasynys' appear in *Cymru Fu*, at pp. 478-9; the
first of them is to be compared with one already related (pp. 99, 100),
while the other is unlike anything that I can now recall:--

\(5\) 'Cwmllan was the principal resort of the fair family, and the
shepherds of Hafod Llan used to see them daily in the ages of faith gone
by. Once, on a misty afternoon, one of them had been searching for sheep
towards Nant y Bettws. When he had crossed Bwlch Cwmllan, and was
hastening laboriously down, he saw an endless number of little folks
singing and dancing in a lively and light-footed fashion, while the
handsomest girls he had ever seen anywhere were at it preparing a
banquet. He went to them and had a share of their dainties, and it
seemed to him that he had never in his life tasted anything approaching
their dishes. When the twilight came, they spread their tents, and the
man never before saw such beauty and ingenuity. They gave him a soft bed
of yielding down, with sheets of the finest linen, and he went to rest
as proud as if he had

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

been a prince. But, alas! next morning, after all the jollity and sham
splendour, the poor man, when he opened his eyes, found that his bed was
but a bush of bulrushes, and his pillow a clump of moss. Nevertheless,
he found silver money in his shoes, and afterwards he continued for a
long time to find, every week, a piece of coined money between two
stones near the spot where he had slept. One day, however, he told a
friend of his the secret respecting the money, and he never found any
more.'

\(6\) 'Another of these shepherds was one day urging his dog at the
sheep in Cwmllan, when he heard a kind of low noise in the cleft of a
rock. He turned to look, when he found there some kind of a creature
weeping plenteously. He approached, and drew out a wee lass; very
shortly afterwards two middle-aged men came to him to thank him for his
kindness, and, when about to part, one of them gave him a walking-stick,
as a souvenir of his good deed. The year after this, every sheep in his
possession had two ewe-lambs; and so his sheep continued to breed for
some years. But he had stayed one evening in the village until it was
rather late, and there hardly ever was a more tempestuous night than
that: the wind howled, and the clouds shed their contents in sheets of
rain, while the darkness was such that next to nothing could be seen. As
he was crossing the river that comes down from Cwmllan, where its flood
was sweeping all before it in a terrible current, he somehow let go the
walking-stick from his hand; and when one went next morning up the Cwm,
it was found that nearly all the sheep had been swept away by the flood,
and that the farmer's wealth had gone almost as it came with the
walking-stick.'

The shorter versions given by Glasynys are probably more nearly given as
he heard them, than the longer

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

ones, which may be suspected of having been a good deal spun out by him;
but there is probably very little in any of them of his own invention,
though the question whence he got his materials in each instance may be
difficult to answer. In one this is quite clear, though he does not
state it, namely the story of the sojourn of Elfod the Shepherd in
Fairyland, as given in *Cymru Fu*, p. 477: it is no other than a second
or third-hand reproduction of that recorded by Giraldus concerning a
certain Eliodorus, a twelfth-century cleric in the diocese of St.
David's <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39). But the longest tale
published by Glasynys is the one about a mermaid: see *Cymru Fu*, pp.
434-44. Where he got this from I have not been able to find out, but it
has probably been pieced together from various sources. I feel sure that
some of the materials at least were Welsh, besides the characters known
to Welsh mythology as Nefydd Naf Neifion, Gwyn ab Nudd, Gwydion ab Dôn,
Dylan, and Ceridwen, who have been recklessly introduced into it. He
locates it, apparently, somewhere on the coast of Carnarvonshire, the
chief scene being called *Ogof Deio* or David's Cave, which so far as I
know is not an actual name, but one suggested by 'David Jones' locker'
as sailors' slang for the sea. In hopes that somebody will communicate
to me any bits of this tale that happen to be still current on the Welsh
coast, I give an abstract of it here:--

'Once upon a time, a poor fisherman made the acquaintance of a mermaid
in a cave on the sea-coast; at first she screeched wildly, but, when she
got a little calmer, she told him to go off out of the way of her
brother, and to return betimes the day after. In getting away, he was
tossed into the sea, and tossed out on the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

land with a rope, which had got wound about his waist; and on pulling at
this he got ashore a coffer full of treasure, which he spent the night
in carrying home. He was somewhat late in revisiting the cave the next
day, and saw no mermaid come there to meet him according to her promise.
But the following night he was roused out of his sleep by a visit from
her at his home, when she told him to come in time next day. On his way
thither, he learnt from some fishermen that they had been labouring in
vain during the night, as a great big mermaid had opened their nets in
order to pick the best fish, while she let the rest escape. When he
reached the cave he found the mermaid there combing her hair: she
surprised him by telling him that she had come to live among the
inhabitants of the land, though she was, according to her own account, a
king's daughter. She was no longer stark naked, but dressed like a lady:
in one hand she held a diadem of pure gold, and in the other a cap of
wonderful workmanship, the former of which she placed on her head, while
she handed the latter to Ifan Morgan, with the order that he should keep
it. Then she related to him how she had noticed him when he was a ruddy
boy, out fishing in his father's white boat, and heard him sing a song
which made her love him, and how she had tried to repeat this song at
her father's court, where everybody wanted to get it. Many a time, she
said, she had been anxiously listening if she might hear it again, but
all in vain. So she had obtained permission from her family to come with
her treasures and see if he would not teach it her; but she soon saw
that she would not succeed without appearing in the form in which she
now was. After saying that her name was Nefyn, daughter of Nefydd Naf
Neifion, and niece to Gwyn son of Nudd, and Gwydion son of Dôn, she
calmed his feelings on

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

the subject of the humble cottage in which he lived. Presently he asked
her to be his wife, and she consented on the condition that he should
always keep the cap she had given him out of her sight and teach her the
song. They were married and lived happily together, and had children
born them five times, a son and a daughter each time; they frequently
went to the cave, and no one knew what treasures they had there; but
once on a time they went out in a boat pleasuring, as was their wont,
with six or seven of the children accompanying them, and when they were
far from the land a great storm arose; besides the usual accompaniments
of a storm at sea, most unearthly screeches and noises were heard, which
frightened the children and made their mother look uncomfortable; but
presently she bent her head over the side of the boat, and whispered
something they did not catch: to their surprise the sea was instantly
calm. They got home comfortably, but the elder children were puzzled
greatly by their mother's influence over the sea, and it was not long
after this till they so teased some ill-natured old women, that the
latter told them all about the uncanny origin of their mother. The
eldest boy was vexed at this, and remembered how his mother had spoken
to somebody near the boat at sea, and that he was never allowed to go
with his parents to Ogof Deio. He recalled, also, his mother's account
of the strange countries she had seen. Once there came also to Han
Morgan's home, which was now a mansion, a visitor whom the children were
not even allowed to see; and one night, when the young moon had sunk
behind the western horizon, Han and his wife went quietly out of the
house, telling a servant that they would not return for three weeks or a
month: this was overheard by the eldest son. So he followed them very
quietly until he saw them on the strand, where he

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

beheld his mother casting a sort of leather mantle round herself and his
father, and both of them threw themselves into the hollow of a billow
that came to fetch them. The son went home, broke his heart, and died in
nine days at finding out that his mother was a mermaid; and, on seeing
her brother dead, his twin sister went and threw herself into the sea;
but, instead of being drowned, she was taken up on his steed by a fine
looking knight, who then galloped away over the waves as if they had
been dry and level land. The servants were in doubt what to do, now that
Nefydd Morgan was dead and Eilonwy had thrown herself into the sea; but
Tegid, the second son, who feared nothing, said that Nefydd's body
should be taken to the strand, as somebody was likely to come to fetch
it for burial among his mother's family. At midnight a knight arrived,
who said the funeral was to be at three that morning, and told them that
their brother would come back to them, as Gwydion ab Dôn was going to
give him a heart that no weight could break, that Eilonwy was soon to be
wedded to one of the finest and bravest of the knights of Gwerddonau
Llion, and that their parents were with Gwyn ab Nudd in the Gwaelodion.
The body was accordingly taken to the beach, and, as soon as the wave
touched it, out of his coffin leaped Nefydd like a porpoise. He was seen
then to walk away arm in arm with Gwydion ab Dôn to a ship that was in
waiting, and most enchanting music was heard by those on shore; but soon
the ship sailed away, hardly touching the tops of the billows. After a
year and a day had elapsed Han Morgan, the father, came home, looking
much better and more gentlemanly than he had ever done before; he had
never spoken of Nefyn, his wife, until Tegid one day asked him what
about his mother; she had gone, he said, in search of Eilonwy, who had
run away from her husband in

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Gwerddonau Llion, with Glanfryd ab Gloywfraint.
She would be back soon, he thought, and describe to them all the wonders
they had seen. Ifan Morgan went to bed that night, and was found dead in
it in the morning; it was thought that his death had been caused by a
Black Knight, who had been seen haunting the place at midnight for some
time, and always disappearing, when pursued, into a well that bubbled
forth in a dark recess near at hand. The day of Han Morgan's funeral,
Nefyn, his wife, returned, and bewailed him with many tears; she was
never more seen on the dry land. Tegid had now the charge of the family,
and he conducted himself in all things as behoved a man and a gentleman
of high principles and great generosity. He was very wealthy, but often
grieved by the thought of his father's murder. One day, when he and two
of his brothers were out in a boat fishing in the neighbouring bay, they
were driven by the wind to the most wonderful spot they had ever seen.
The sea there was as smooth as glass, and as bright as the clearest
light, while beneath it, and not far from them, they saw a most splendid
country with fertile fields and dales covered with pastures, with
flowery hedges, groves clad in their green foliage, and forests gently
waving their leafy luxuriance, with rivers lazily contemplating their
own tortuous courses, and with mansions here and there of the most
beautiful and ingenious description; and presently they saw that the
inhabitants amused themselves with all kinds of merriment and
frolicking, and that here and there they had music and engaged
themselves in the most energetic dancing; in fact, the rippling waves
seemed to have absorbed their fill of the music, so that the faint echo
of it, as gently given forth by the waves, never ceased to charm their
ears until they reached the shore. That night the three brothers

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

had the same dream, namely that the Black Knight who had throttled their
father was in hiding in a cave on the coast: so they made for the cave
in the morning, but the Black Knight fled from them and galloped off on
the waves as if he had been riding for amusement over a meadow. That day
their sisters, on returning home from school, had to cross a piece of
sea, when a tempest arose and sunk the vessel, drowning all on board,
and the brothers ascribed this to the Black Knight. About this time
there was great consternation among the fishermen on account of a
sea-serpent that twined itself about the rocks near the caves, and
nothing would do but that Tegid and his brothers should go forth to kill
it; but when one day they came near the spot frequented by it, they
heard a deep voice saying to them, "Do not kill your sister," so they
wondered greatly and suddenly went home. But that night Tegid returned
there alone, and called his sister by her name, and after waiting a long
while she crept towards him in the shape of a sea-serpent, and said that
she must remain some time in that form on account of her having run away
with one who was not her husband; she went on to say that she had seen
their sisters walking with their mother, and their father would soon be
in the cave. But all of a sudden there came the Black Knight, who
unsheathed a sword that looked like a flame of fire, and began to cut
the sea-serpent into a thousand bits, which united, however, as fast as
he cut it, and became as whole as before. The end was that the monster
twisted itself in a coil round his throat and bit him terribly in his
breast. At this point a White Knight comes and runs him through with his
spear, so that he fell instantly, while the White Knight went off
hurriedly with the sea-serpent in a coil round his neck. Tegid ran away
for his life, but not before a monster more terrible than

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

anything he had ever seen had begun to attack him. It haunted him in all
kinds of ways: sometimes it would be like a sea, but Tegid was able to
swim: sometimes it would be a mountain of ice, but Tegid was able to
climb it: and sometimes it was like a furnace of intense fire, but the
heat had no effect on him. But it appeared mostly as a combination of
the beast of prey and the venomous reptile. Suddenly, however, a young
man appeared, taking hold of Tegid's arm and encouraging him, when the
monster fled away screeching, and a host of knights in splendid array
and on proudly prancing horses came to him: among them he found his
brothers, and he went with them to his mother's country. He was
especially welcome there, and he found all happy and present save his
father only, whom he thought of fetching from the world above, having in
fact got leave to do so from his grandfather. His mother and his
brothers went with him to search for his father's body, and with him
came Gwydion ab Dôn and Gwyn ab Nudd, but he would not be wakened. So
Tegid, who loved his father greatly, asked leave to remain on his
father's grave, where he remains to this day. His mother is wont to come
there to soothe him, and his brothers send him gifts, while he sends his
gifts to Nefyd Naf Neifion, his grandfather; it is also said that his
twin-sister, Ceridwen, has long since come to live near him, to make the
glad gladder and the pretty prettier, and to maintain her dignity and
honour in peace and tranquillity.'

The latter part of this tale, the mention of Ceridwen, invoked by the
bards as the genius presiding over their profession, and of Tegid
remaining on his father's grave, is evidently a reference to *Llyn
Tegid*, or Bala Lake, and to the legend of Taliessin in the so-called
*Hanes* or history of Taliessin, published at the end of the third
volume of Lady Charlotte Guest's *Mabinogion*. So the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

story has undoubtedly been pieced together, but not all invented, as is
proved by the reference to the curious cap which the husband was to keep
out of the sight of his mermaid wife. In Irish legends this cap has
particular importance attached to it, of which Glasynys cannot have been
aware, for he knew of no use to make of it. The teaching of the song to
the wife is not mentioned after the marriage; and the introduction of it
at all is remarkable: at any rate I have never noticed anything parallel
to it in other tales. The incident of the tempest, when the mermaid
spoke to somebody by the side of the boat, reminds one of Undine during
the trip on the Danube. It is, perhaps, useless to go into details till
one has ascertained how much of the story has been based on genuine
Welsh folklore. But, while I am on this point, I venture to append here
an Irish tale, which will serve to explain the meaning of the mermaid's
cap, as necessary to her comfort in the water world. I am indebted for
it to the kindness of Dr. Norman Moore, of St. Bartholomew's Hospital,
who tells me, in a letter dated March 7, 1882, that he and the Miss
Raynells of Killynon heard it from an old woman named Mrs. Dolan, who
lived on the property of the late Mr. Cooke of Cookesborough, in
Westmeath. The following was her tale:--'There was a man named Mahon had
a farm on the edge of Loch Owel. He noticed that his corn was trampled,
and he sat up all night to watch it. He saw horses, colts and fillies
rather, come up out of the lake and trample it. He chased them, and they
fled into the lake. The next night he saw them again, and among them a
beautiful girl with a cap of salmon skin on her head, and it shone in
the moonlight; and he caught her and embraced her, and carried her off
to his house and married her, and she was a very good housewife, as all
those lake people are, and kept his house

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

beautifully; and one day in the harvest, when the men were in the
fields, she went into the house, and there she looked on the hurdle for
some lard to make colcannon <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) for the
men, and she saw her old cap of fish skin, and she put it on her head
and ran straight down into the lake and was never seen any more, and
Mahon he was terribly grieved, and he died soon after of a decline. She
had had three children, and I often saw them in the Mullingar market.
They were farmers, too, on Loch Owel.'

### IV.

Let me now return to the fresh-water fairies of Snowdon and give a
reference to Pennant's *Tours in Wales*: in the edition published at
Carnarvon in 1883 we are told, ii. 326, how Mr. Pennant learned 'that,
in fairy days, those diminutive gentry kept their revels' on the margins
of the Snowdon lake, called Llyn Coch. There is no legend now extant, so
far as I can ascertain, about the Llyn Coch fairies. So I proceed to
append a legend differing considerably from all the foregoing: I owe it
to the kindness of my friend Mr. Howell Thomas, of the Local Government
Board. It was written out by Mr. G. B. Gattie ' and I take the liberty
of prefixing to it his letter to Mr. Thomas, dated Walham Grove, London,
S.W., April 27, T1882. The letter runs as follows:--

'I had quite forgotten the enclosed, which I had jotted down during my
recent illness, and ought to have sent you long ago. Of course, the
wording is very rough, as no care has been taken on that point. It is
interesting, as being another version of a very pretty old legend which
my mother used to repeat. She was descended from a very old north Welsh
family; indeed,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I believe my esteemed grandfather went so far as
to trace his descent from the great patriot, Owen Glendower himself! My
mother delighted not only in the ancient folklore legends and fairy
tales of the Principality, with which she was perfectly familiar, but
especially in the lovely national melodies, all of which she knew by
heart; and, being highly accomplished, would never tire of playing or
singing them. You will see the legend is, in the main, much as related
by Professor Rhys, though differing somewhat in the singular terms of
the marriage contract. The scene of the legend, as related by my late
mother, was, of course, a lake, the Welsh name of which I have,
unfortunately, forgotten, but it was somewhere, I think, near Llanberis,
and the hero a stalwart young farmer.'

The legend itself reads as follows:--

'One hot day, the farmer, riding by the lake, took his horse into the
water to drink, and, whilst looking straight down over his horse's ears
into the smooth surface, he became aware of a most lovely face, just
beneath the tide, looking up archly at him. Quite bewildered, he
earnestly beckoned, and by degrees the head and shoulders which belonged
to the face emerged from the water. Overcome with emotion, and nearly
maddened by the blaze of beauty so suddenly put before him, he leaped
from his horse and rushed wildly into the lake to try to clasp the
lovely vision to his heart. As this was a clear case of "love at first
sight," the poor young man was not, of course, answerable for his
actions. But the vision had vanished beneath the waves, to instantly
reappear, however, a yard or two off, with the most provoking of smiles,
and holding out her beautiful white hands towards her admirer, but
slipping off into deep water the moment he approached.

'For many days the young farmer frequented the

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

lake, but without again seeing the beautiful Naiad, until one day he sat
down by the margin hoping that she would appear, and yet dreading her
appearance, for this latter to him simply meant loss of all peace. Yet
he rushed on his fate, like the love-sick shepherd in the old Italian
romance, who watched the sleeping beauty, yet dreaded her
awakening:--*Io perderò la pace, quando si sveglierà*!

'The young man had brought the remains of his frugal dinner with him,
and was quietly munching, by way of dessert, an apple of rare and
delicious quality, from a tree which grew upon a neighbouring estate.
Suddenly the lady appeared in all her rare beauty almost close to him,
and begged him to "throw" her one of his apples. This was altogether too
much, and he replied by holding out the tempting morsel, exhibiting its
beautiful red and green sides, saying that, if she really wanted it, she
must fetch it herself. Upon this she came up quite close, and, as she
took the apple from his left hand, he dexterously seized tight hold of
her with his right, and held her fast. She, however, nothing daunted,
bawled lustily, at the top of her voice, for help, and made such an
outrageous noise, that at length a most respectable looking old
gentleman appeared suddenly out of the midst of the lake. He had a
superb white beard, and was simply and classically attired merely in a
single wreath of beautiful water-lilies wound round his loins, which was
possibly his summer costume, the weather being hot. He politely
requested to know what was the matter, and what the young farmer wanted
with his daughter. The case was thereupon explained, but not without the
usual amount of nervous trepidation which usually happens to love-sick
swains when called into the awful presence of "Papa" to "explain their
intentions!"

'After a long parley the lady, at length, agreed to

 

become the young man's wife on two conditions, which he was to solemnly
promise to keep. These conditions were that he was never to strike her
with *steel* or *clay* (earth), conditions to which the young man very
readily assented. As these were primitive days, when people were happy
and honest, there were no lawyers to encumber the Holy Estate with
lengthy settlements, and to fill their own pockets with heavy fees;
matters were therefore soon settled, and the lady married to the young
farmer on the spot by the very respectable old lake deity, her papa.

'The story goes on to say that the union was followed by two sons and
two daughters. The eldest son became a great physician, and all his
descendants after him were celebrated for their great proficiency in the
noble healing art. The second son was a mighty craftsman in all works
appertaining to the manufacture and use of iron and metals. Indeed it
has been hinted that, his little corracle of bull's hide having become
old and unsafe, he conceived the brilliant idea of making one of thin
iron. This he actually accomplished, and, to the intense amazement of
the wondering populace, he constantly used it for fishing, or other
purposes, on the lake, where he paddled about in perfect security. This
important fact ought to be more generally known, as it gives him a fair
claim to the introduction of iron ship-building, *pace* the shades of
Beaufort and Brunel.

'Of the two daughters, one is said to have invented the small
ten-stringed harp, and the other the spinning-wheel. Thus were
introduced the arts of medicine, manufactures, music, and woollen work.

'As the old ballad says, applying the quotation to the father and
mother:--

They lived for more than forty year  
  Right long and happillie!

 

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

'One day it happened that the wife expressed a great wish for some of
those same delicious apples of which she was so fond, and of which their
neighbour often sent them a supply. Off went the farmer, like a good
husband that he was, and brought back, not only some apples, but a
beautiful young sapling, seven or eight feet high, bearing the same
apple, as a present from their friend. This they at once proceeded to
set, he digging and she holding; but the hole not being quite deep
enough, he again set to work, with increased energy, with his spade, and
stooping very low threw out the last shovelful over his shoulder--alas!
without looking--full into the breast of his wife. She dropped the
sapling and solemnly warned him that one of the two conditions of their
marriage contract had been broken. Accident was pleaded, but in vain;
there was the unfortunate fact--*he had struck her with clay*! Looking
upon the sapling as the cause of this great trouble he determined to
return it forthwith to his kind neighbour. Taking a bridle in his hand
he proceeded to the field to catch his horse, his wife kindly helping
him. They both ran up, one on each side, and, as the unruly steed showed
no signs of stopping, the husband attempted to throw the bridle over his
head. Not having visited Mexico in his travels, and thereby learned the
use of the lasso, he missed his horse's head and--misfortune of
misfortunes--struck his wife in the face with the iron bit, thus
breaking the second condition. *He had struck her with steel*. She no
sooner received the blow than--like Esau--she "cried with a great and
exceeding bitter cry," and bidding her husband a last farewell, fled
down the hill with lightning speed, dashed into the lake, and
disappeared beneath the smooth and glassy waters! Thus, it may be said
that, if an apple--indirectly--occasioned the beginning

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

of her married life, so an apple brought about its sad termination.'

Such is Mr. Gattie's tale, and to him probably is to be traced its
literary trimming; but even when it is stripped of that accessory, it
leaves us with difficulties of somewhat the same order as those
attaching to some of the stories which have passed through the hands of
Glasynys. However, the substance of it seems to be genuine, and to prove
that there has been a Northwalian tradition which traced the medical art
to a lake lady like the Egeria of the Physicians of Myddfai.

 

### V.

Allusion has already been made to the *afanc* story, and it is
convenient to give it before proceeding any further. The *Cambrian
Journal* for 1859, pp. 142-6, gives it in a letter of Edward Llwyd's
dated 1693, and contributed to that periodical by the late Canon Robert
Williams, of Rhyd y Croesau, who copied it from the original letter in
his possession <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41), and here follows a
translation into English of the part of it which concerns Llyn yr
Afanc <span id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42), a pool on the river Conwy,
above Bettws y Coed and opposite Capel Garmon:--

'I suppose it very probable that you have heard speak of Llyn yr Afanc,
"the Afanc's Pool," and that I therefore need not trouble to inform you
where it stands. I think, also, that you know, if one may trust what the
country people say, that it was a girl that enticed the afanc to come
out of his abode, namely the pool, so as to be bound with iron chains,
whilst he

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

slumbered with his head on her knees, and with the grip of one hand on
her breast. When he woke from his nap and perceived what had been done
to him, he got up suddenly and hurried to his old refuge, taking with
him in his claw the breast of his sweetheart. It was then seen that it
was well the chain was long enough to be fastened to oxen that pulled
him out of the pool. Thereupon a considerable dispute arose among some
of the people, each asserting that he had taken a great weight on
himself and pulled far harder than anybody else. "No," said another, "it
was I," &c. And whilst they were wrangling in this way, the report goes
that the afanc answered them, and silenced their discontent by saying--

Oni bae y dai ag a dyn  
Ni ddaetha'r afanc byth o'r llyn.

Had it not been for the oxen pulling,  
The afanc had never left the pool.

'You must understand that some take the afanc to be a corporeal demon;
but I am sufficiently satisfied that there is an animal of the same
name, which is called in English a *bever*, seeing that the term
*ceillie'r afanc* signifies *bever stones*. I know not what kind of oxen
those in question were, but it is related that they were twins; nor do I
know why they were called *Ychain Mannog* or *Ychain Bannog*. But
peradventure they were called *Ychain Bannog* in reference to their
having had many a fattening, or fattening on fattening (having been for
many a year fattened). Yet the word bannog is not a good, suitable word
to signify fattened, as *bannog* is nought else than what has been made
exceeding thick by beating \[or fulling\], as one says of a thick
blanket made of coarse yarn (*y gwrthban tew-bannog*), the thick
*bannog* <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) blanket. Whilst I was
dawdling

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

behind talking about this, the oxen had proceeded very far, and I did
not find their footmarks as they came through portions of the parish of
Dolydd-Elan (Lueddog) until I reached a pass called ever since *Bwlch
Rhiw'r Ychen*, "the Pass of the Slope of the Oxen," between the upper
parts of Dolyddelan and the upper part of Nanhwynen. In coming over this
pass one of the oxen dropped one of its eyes on an open spot, which for
that reason is called *Gwaun Lygad Ych*, "the Moor of the Ox's Eye." The
place where the eye fell has become a pool, which is by this time known
as Pwll Llygad Ych, "the Pool of the Ox's Eye," which is at no time dry,
though no water rises in it or flows into it except when rain falls; nor
is there any flowing out of it during dry weather. It is always of the
same depth; that is, it reaches about one's knee-joint, according to
those who have paid attention to that for a considerable number of
years. There is a harp melody, which not all musicians know: it is known
as the *Ychain Mannog* air, and it has a piteous effect on the ear,
being as plaintive as were the groanings of these *Ychain* under the
weight of the afanc, especially when one of the pair lost an eye. They
pulled him up to Llyn Cwm Ffynnon Las, "the Lake of the Dingle of the
Green Well," to which he was consigned, for the reason, peradventure,
that some believed that there were in that lake uncanny things already
in store. In fact, it was but fitting that he should be permitted to go
to his kind. But whether there were uncanny things in it before or not,
many think that there is nothing good in it now, as you will understand
from what follows. There is much talk of Llyn Cwm Ffynnon Las besides
the fact that it is always free from ice, except in one corner where the
peat water of clear pools comes into it, and that it has also a variety
of dismal hues. The cause of this is, as I suppose, to be

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

sought in the various hues of the rocks surrounding it; and the fact
that a whirlwind makes its water mixed, which is enough to give any lake
a disagreeable colour. Nothing swims on it without danger, and I am not
sure that it would be very safe for a bird to fly across it or not.
Throw a rag into its water and it will go to the bottom, and I have with
my own ears heard a man saying that he saw a goat taking to this lake in
order to avoid being caught, and that as soon as the animal went into
the water, it turned round and round, as if it had been a top, until it
was drowned. . . . Some mention that, as some great man was hunting in
the Snowdon district (Eryri), a stag, to avoid the hounds when they were
pressing on him, and as is the habit of stags to defend themselves, made
his escape into this lake: the hunters had hardly time to turn round
before they saw the stag's antlers (*mwnglws*) coming to the surface,
but nothing more have they ever seen. . . . A young woman has been seen
to come out of this lake to wash clothes, and when she had done she
folded the clothes, and taking them under her arm went back into the
lake. One man, whose brother is still alive and well, beheld in a canoe,
on this same lake still, an angler with a red cap on his head; but the
man died within a few days, having not been in his right mind during
that time. Most people regard this as the real truth, and, as for
myself, I cannot refuse to believe that such a vision might not cause a
man to become so bewildered as to force on a disease ending with his
death. . . .'

The name Llyn Cwm Ffynnon Las would have led one to suppose that the
pool meant is the one given in the ordnance maps as Llyn y Cwm Ffynnon,
which I presume to be gibberish for Llyn Cwm y Ffynnon, and situated in
the mountains between Pen y Gwryd and the upper valley of Llanberis; but
from the writer on the parish of

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Beddgelert in the *Brython* for 1861, pp. 371-2,
it appears that this is not so, and that the tarn meant was in the upper
reach of Cwm Dyli, and was known as Llyn y Ffynnon Las, 'Lake of the
Green Well,' about which he has a good deal to say in the same strain as
that of Llwyd in the letter already cited. Among other things he remarks
that it is a very deep tam, and that its bottom has been ascertained to
be lower than the surface of Llyn Llydaw, which lies 300 feet lower. And
as to the afanc, he remarks that the inhabitants of Nant Conwy and the
lower portions of the parish of Dolwyddelan, having frequent troubles
and losses inflicted on them by a huge monster in the river Conwy, near
Bettws y Coed, tried to kill it but in vain, as no harpoon, no arrow or
spear made any impression whatsoever on the brute's hide; so it was
resolved to drag it away as in the Llwyd story. I learn from Mr. Pierce
(Elis o'r Nant), of Dolwyddelan, that the lake is variously known as
Llyn (Cwm) Ffynnon Las, and Llyn Glas or Glaslyn: this last is the form
which I find in the maps. It is to be noticed that the Nant Conwy
people, by dragging the afanc there, got him beyond their own watershed,
so that he could no more cause floods in the Conwy.

Here, as promised at p. 74, I append Lewis Glyn Cothi's words as to the
afanc in Llyn Syfaddon. The bard is dilating in the poem, where they
occur, on his affection for his friend Llywelyn ab Gwilym ab Thomas
Vaughan, of Bryn. Hafod in the Vale of Towy, and averring that it would
be as hard to induce him to quit his friend's hospitable home, as it was
to get the afanc away from the Lake of Syfaddon, as follows:--

Yr avanc er ei ovyn  
Wyv yn llech ar vin y llyn;  
O dòn Llyn Syfaddon vo <span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

Ni thynwyd ban aeth yno:  
Ni'm ty\`n mèn nag ychain gwaith,  
Oddiyma heddyw ymaith  <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44).

The afanc am I, who, sought for, bides  
In hiding on the edge of the lake;  
Out of the waters of Syfaddon Mere  
Was be not drawn, once he got there.  
So with me: nor wain nor oxen wont to toil  
Me to-day will draw from here forth.

From this passage it would seem that the Syfaddon story contemplated the
afanc being taken away from the lake in a cart or waggon drawn by oxen;
but whether driven by Hu, or by whom, one is not told. However, the
story must have represented the undertaking as a failure, and the afanc
as remaining in his lake: had it been otherwise it would be hard to see
the point of the comparison.

### VI.

The parish of Llanfachreth and its traditions have been the subject of
some contributions to the first volume of the *Taliesin* published at
Ruthin in 1859-60, pp. 132-7, by a writer who calls himself *Cofiadur*.
It was Glasynys, I believe, for the style seems to be his: he pretends
to copy from an old manuscript of Hugh Bifan's--both the manuscript and
its owner were fictions of Glasynys' as I am told. These jottings
contain two or three items about the fairies which seem to be genuine:--

'The bottom of Llyn Cynnwch, on the Nannau estate, is level with the
hearth-stone of the house of Dôl y Clochydd. Its depth was found out
owing to the sweetheart of one of Siwsi's girls having lost his way to
her from Nannau, where he was a servant. The

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

poor man had fallen into the lake, and gone down and down, when he found
it becoming clearer the lower he got, until at last he alighted on a
level spot where everybody and everything looked much as he had observed
on the dry land. When he had reached the bottom of the lake, a short fat
old gentleman came to him and asked his business, when he told him how
it happened that he had come. He met with great welcome, and he stayed
there a month without knowing that he had been there three days, and
when he was going to leave, he was led out to his beloved by the
inhabitants of the lake bottom. He asserted that the whole way was level
except in one place, where they descended about a fathom into the
ground; but, he added, it was necessary to ascend about as much to reach
the hearth-stone of Dôl y Clochydd. The most wonderful thing, however,
was that the stone lifted itself as he came up from the subterranean
road towards it. It was thus the sweetheart arrived there one evening,
when the girl was by the fire weeping for him. Siwsi had been out some
days before, and she knew all about it though she said nothing to
anybody. This, then, was the way in which the depth of Llyn Cynnwch came
to be known!

Then he has a few sentences about an old house called
Ceimarch:--'Ceimarch was an old mansion of considerable repute, and in
old times it was considered next to Nannau in point of importance in the
whole district. There was a deep ditch round it, which was always kept
full of water, with the view of keeping off vagabonds and thieves, as
well as other lawless folks, that they might not take the inmates by
surprise. But, in distant ages, this place was very noted for the
frequent visits paid it by the fair family. They used to come to the
ditch to wash themselves, and to cross the water

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

in boats made of the bark of the rowan-tree <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45), or else birch, and they came into the
house to pay their rent for trampling the ground around the place. They
always placed a piece of money under a pitcher, and the result was that
the family living there became remarkably rich. But somehow, after the
lapse of many years, the owner of the place offended them, by showing
disrespect for their diminutive family: soon the world began to go
against him, and it was not long before he got low in life. Everything
turned against him, and in times past everybody believed that he
incurred all this because he had earned the displeasure of the fair
family!

In the *Brython* for the year 1862, p. 456, in the course of an essay on
the history of the Lordship of Mawddwy in Merioneth, considered the best
in a competition at an Eisteddfod held at Dinas Mawddwy, August 2, 1855,
Glasynys gives the following bit about the fairies of that
neighbourhood:--'The side of Aran Fawddwy is a great place for the fair
family: they are ever at it playing their games on the hillsides about
this spot. It is said that they are numberless likewise about Bwlch y
Groes. Once a boy crossed over near the approach of night, one summer
eve, from the Gadfa to Mawddwy, and on his return he saw near Aber
Rhiwlech a swarm of the little family dancing away full pelt. The boy
began to run, with two of the maidens in pursuit of him, entreating him
to stay; but Robin, for that was his name, kept running, and the two
elves failed altogether to catch him, otherwise he would have been taken
a prisoner of love. There are plenty of their dancing-rings to be seen
on the hillsides between Aber Rhiwlech and Bwlch y Groes.'

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

Here I would introduce two other Merionethshire tales, which I have
received from Mr. E. S. Roberts, master of the Llandysilio School, near
Llangollen. He has learnt them from one Abel Evans, who lives at present
in the parish of Llandysilio: he is a native of the parish of Llandrillo
on the slopes of the Berwyn, and of a glen in the same, known as Cwm
Pennant, so called from its being drained by the Pennant on its way to
join the Dee. Now Cwm Pennant was the resort of fairies, or of a certain
family of them, and the occurrence, related in the following tale, must
have taken place no less than seventy years ago: it was well known to
the late Mrs. Ellen Edwards of Llandrillo:--

Ryw diwrnod aeth dau gyfaill i hela dwfrgwn ar hyd lannau afon Pennant,
a thra yn cyfeirio eu camrau tuagat yr afon gwelsant ryw greadur bychan
lliwgoch yn rhedeg yn gyflym iawn ar draws un o'r dolydd yn nghyfeiriad
yr afon. Ymaeth a nhw ar ei ol. Gwelsant ei fod wedi myned odditan
wraidd coeden yn ochr yr afon i ymguddio. Yr oedd y ddau ddyn yn meddwl
mae dwfrgi ydoedd, ond ar yr un pryd yn methu a deall paham yr
ymddangkosai i'w llygaid yn lliwgoch. Yr oeddynt yn dymuno ei ddal yn
fyw, ac ymaith yr aeth un o honynt i ffarmdy gerllaw i ofyn am sach, yr
hon a gafwyd, er mwyn rhoi y creadur ynddi. Yr oedd yno ddau dwll o tan
wraidd y pren, a thra daliai un y sach yn agored ar un twll yr oedd y
llall yn hwthio ffon i'r twll arall, ac yn y man aeth y creadur i'r
sach. Yr oedd y ddau ddyn yn meddwl eu bod wedi dal dwfrgi, yr hyn a
ystyrient yn orchest nid bychan. *Cychwynasant gartref yn llawen ond cyn
eu myned hyd lled cae, llefarodd lletywr y sach mewn ton drist gan
ddywedyd--'Y mae fy mam yn galw am danaf, O, mae fy mam yn galw am
danaf,' yr hyn a roddodd fraw mawr i'r dau heliwr, ac yn y man
taflasant* 

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

y sach i lawr, a mawr oedd eu rhyfeddod a'u dychryn pan welsant ddyn
bach mewn gwisg goch yn rhedeg o'r sach tuagat yr afon. Fe a ddiflannodd
o'i golwg yn mysg y drysni ar fin yr afon. Yr oedd y ddau wedi eu
brawychu yn ddirfawr ac yn teimlo mae doethach oedd myned gartref yn
hytrach nag ymyrraeth yn mhellach a'r Tylwyth Teg.

'One day, two friends went to hunt otters on the banks of the Pennant,
and when they were directing their steps towards the river, they beheld
some small creature of a red colour running fast across the meadows in
the direction of the river. Off they ran after it, and saw that it went
beneath the roots of a tree on the brink of the river to hide itself.
The two men thought it was an otter, but, at the same time, they could
not understand why it seemed to them to be of a red colour. They wished
to take it alive, and off one of them went to a farm house that was not
far away to ask for a sack, which he got, to put the creature into it.
Now there were two holes under the roots of the tree, and while one held
the sack with its mouth open over one of them, the other pushed his
stick into the other hole, and presently the creature went into the
sack. The two men thought they had caught an otter, which they looked
upon as no small feat. They set out for home, but before they had
proceeded the width of one field, the inmate of the sack spoke to them
in a sad voice, and said, "My mother is calling for me; oh, my mother is
calling for me!" This gave the two hunters a great fright, so that they
at once threw down the sack; and great was their surprise to see a
little man in a red dress running out of the sack towards the river. He
disappeared from their sight in the bushes by the river. The two men
were greatly terrified, and felt that it was more prudent to go home
than meddle any further with the fair family.' So far as I know,

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

this story stands alone in Welsh folklore; but it has an exact parallel
in Lancashire <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46).

The other story, which I now reproduce, was obtained by Mr. Roberts from
the same Abel Evans. He learnt it from Mrs. Ellen Edwards, and it refers
to a point in her lifetime, which Abel Evans fixes at ninety years ago.
Mr. Roberts has not succeeded in recovering the name of the cottager of
whom it speaks; but he lived on the side of the Berwyn, above Cwm
Pennant, where till lately a cottage used to stand, near which the
fairies had one of their resorts:--

Yr oed' perchen y bwthyn wedi amaethu rhyw ran fychan o'r mynydd ger
llaw y ty er mwyn plannu pytafws ynddo. Felly y gwnaeth. Mewn coeden yn
agos i'r fan canfyddodd nyth bran. Fe feddyliodd mae doeth fuasai iddo
dryllio y nyth cyn amlhau o'r brain. Fe a esgynnodd y goeden ac a
ddrylliodd y nyth, ac wedi disgyn i lawr canfyddodd gylch glas (fairy
ring) oddiamgylch y pren, ac ar y cylch fe welodd hanner coron er ei
fawr lawenydd. Wrth fyned heibio yr un fan y boreu canlynol fe gafodd
hanner coron yn yr un man ag y cafodd y dydd o'r blaen. Hynna fu am
amryw ddydiau. Un diwrnod dywedodd wrth gyfaill am ei hap dda a
ddangosodd y fan a'r lle y cawsai yr hanner coron bob boreu. Wel y boreu
canlynol nid oedd yno na hanner coron na dim arall iddo, oherwydd yr
oedd wedi torri rheolau y Tylwythion trwy wneud eu haelioni yn hysbys. Y
mae y Tylwythion o'r farn na ddylai y llaw aswy wybod yr hyn a wna Y
llaw ddehau.

'The occupier of the cottage had tilled a small portion of the mountain
side near his home in order to plant potatoes, which he did. He observed
that there was a rook's nest on a tree which was not far from this spot,
and it struck him that it would be prudent to break

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

the nest before the rooks multiplied. So he climbed the tree and broke
the nest, and, after coming down, he noticed a green circle (a fairy
ring) round the tree, and on this circle he espied, to his great joy,
half a crown. As he went by the same spot the following morning, he
found another half a crown in the same place as before. So it happened
for several days; but one day he told a friend of his good luck, and
showed him the spot where he found half a crown every morning. Now the
next morning there was for him neither half a crown nor anything else,
because he had broken the rule of the fair folks by making their
liberality known, they being of opinion that the left hand should not
know what the right hand does.'

So runs this short tale, which the old lady, Mrs. Edwards, and the
people of the neighbourhood explained as an instance of the gratitude of
the fairies to a man who had rendered them a service, which in this case
was supposed to have consisted in ridding them of the rooks, that
disturbed their merry-makings in the green ring beneath the branches of
the tree.

### VII.

It would be unpardonable to pass away from Merioneth without alluding to
the stray cow of Llyn Barfog. The story appears in Welsh in the
*Brython* for 1860, pp. 1834, but the contributor, who closely imitates
Glasynys' style, says that he got his materials from a paper by the late
Mr. Pughe of Aberdovey, by which he seems to have meant an article
contributed by the latter to the *Archæologia Cambrensis*, and published
in the volume for 1853, pp. 201-5. Mr. Pughe dwells in that article a
good deal on the scenery of the corner of Merioneth in the rear of
Aberdovey; but the chief thing in his

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

paper is the legend connected with Llyn Barfog, which he renders into
English as the Bearded Lake <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47). It is
described as a mountain lake in a secluded spot in the upland country
behind Aberdovey; but I shall let Mr. Pughe speak for himself:--

'The lovers of Cambrian lore are aware that the Triads in their record
of the deluge affirm that it was occasioned by a mystic Afanc y Llyn,
crocodile <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48) of the lake, breaking the
banks of Llyn Llion, the lake of waters; and the recurrence of that
catastrophe was prevented only by Hu Gadarn, the bold man of power,
dragging away the afanc by aid of his *Ychain Banawg*, or large horned
oxen. Many a lakelet in our land has put forward its claim to the
location of Llyn Llion; amongst the rest, this lake. Be that as it may,
King Arthur and his war-horse have the credit amongst the mountaineers
here of ridding them of the monster, in place of Hu the Mighty, in proof
of which is shown an impression on a neighbouring rock bearing a
resemblance to those made by the shoe or hoof of a horse, as having been
left there by his charger when our British Hercules was engaged in this
redoubtable act of prowess, and this impression has been given the name
of Cam March Arthur, the hoof of Arthur's horse, which it retains to
this day. It is believed to be very perilous to let the waters out of
the lake, and recently an aged inhabitant of the district informed the
writer that she recollected this being done during a period of long

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

drought, in order to procure motive power for Llyn Pair Mill, and that
long-continued heavy rains followed. No wonder our bold but
superstitious progenitors, awestruck by the solitude of the spot--the
dark sepial tint of its waters, unrelieved by the flitting apparition of
a single fish, and seldom visited by the tenants of the air--should have
established it as a canon in their creed of terror that the lake formed
one of the many communications between this outward world of ours and
the inner or lower one of Annwn--the unknown world <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)--the dominion of Gwyn ap Nudd, the mythic
king of the fabled realm, peopled by those children of mystery, Plant
Annwn; and the belief is still current amongst the inhabitants of our
mountains in the occasional visitations of the Gwragedd Annwn, or dames
of Elfin land, to this upper world of ours. A shrewd old hill farmer
(Thomas Abergraes by name), well skilled in the folk-lore of the
district, informed me that, in years gone by, though when, exactly, he
was too young to remember, those dames were wont to make their
appearance, arrayed in green, in the neighbourhood of Llyn Barfog,
chiefly at eventide, accompanied by their kine and hounds, and that on
quiet summer nights in particular, these ban-hounds were often to be
heard in full cry pursuing their prey--the souls of doomed men dying
without baptism and penance--along the upland township of Cefnrhosucha.
Many a farmer had a sight of their comely milk-white kine; many a swain
had his soul turned to romance and poesy by a sudden vision of
themselves in the guise of damsels arrayed in green, and radiant in
beauty and grace; and many a sportsman had his path crossed by their
white hounds of super-natural

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

fleetness and comeliness, the Cwn Annwn; but never had any one been
favoured with more than a passing view of either, till an old farmer
residing at Dyssyrnant, in the adjoining valley of Dyffryn Gwyn, became
at last the lucky captor of one of their milk-white kine. The
acquaintance which the Gwartheg y Llyn, the kine of the lake, had formed
with the farmer's cattle, like the loves of the angels for the daughters
of men, became the means of capture; and the farmer was thereby enabled
to add the mystic cow to his own herd, an event in all cases believed to
be most conducive to the worldly prosperity of him who should make so
fortunate an acquisition. Never was there such a cow, never such calves,
never such milk and butter, or cheese, and the fame of the Fuwch
Gyfeiliorn, the stray cow, was soon spread abroad through that central
part of Wales known as the district of Rhwng y ddwy Afon, from the banks
of the Mawddach to those of the Dofwy, <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) from Aberdiswnwy <span
id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51) to Abercorris. The farmer, from a small
beginning, rapidly became, like job, a man of substance, possessed of
thriving herds of cattle--a very patriarch among the mountains. But,
alas! wanting Job's restraining grace, his wealth made him proud, his
pride made him forget his obligation to the Elfin cow, and fearing she
might soon become too old to be profitable, he fattened her for the
butcher, and then even she did not fail to distinguish herself, for a
more monstrously fat beast was never seen. At last the day of slaughter
came--an eventful day in the annals of a mountain farm--the killing of a
fat cow, and such a monster of obesity! No wonder all the neighbours
were gathered together

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

to see the sight. The old farmer looked upon the preparations in
self-pleased importance--the butcher felt he was about no common feat of
his craft, and, baring his arms, he struck the blow--not now fatal, for
before even a hair had been injured, his arm was paralysed--the knife
dropped from his hand, and the whole company was electrified by a
piercing cry that awakened echo in a dozen hills, and made the welkin
ring again; and lo and behold! the whole assemblage saw a female figure
clad in green, with uplifted arms, standing on one of the craigs
overhanging Llyn Barfog, and heard her calling with a voice loud as
thunder:--

Dere di velen Einion,  
Cyrn Cyveiliorn-braith y Llyn,  
A'r voel Dodin,  
Codwch, dewch adre.

Come yellow Anvil, stray horns,  
Speckled one of the lake,  
And of the hornless Dodin,  
Arise, come home <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52).

And no sooner were these words of power uttered than the original lake
cow and all her progeny, to the third and fourth generations, were in
full flight towards the heights of Llyn Barfog, as if pursued by the
evil one. Self-interest quickly roused the farmer, who followed in
pursuit, till breathless and panting he gained an eminence overlooking
the lake, but with no better success than to behold the green attired
dame leisurely descending mid-lake, accompanied by the fugitive cows and
their calves formed in a circle around her, they tossing their tails,
she waving her hands in scorn as much as to say, "You may catch us, my
friend, if you can," as they disappeared beneath the dark waters of the
lake, leaving only the yellow water-lily to mark the spot where they

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

vanished, and to perpetuate the memory of this strange event. Meanwhile
the farmer looked with rueful countenance upon the spot where the Elfin
herd disappeared, and had ample leisure to deplore the effects of his
greediness, as with them also departed the prosperity which had hitherto
attended him, and he became impoverished to a degree below his original
circumstances; and, in his altered circumstances, few felt pity for one
who in the noontide flow of prosperity had shown himself so far
forgetful of favours received, as to purpose slaying his benefactor.'

Mr. Pughe did a very good thing in saving this legend from oblivion, but
it would be very interesting to know how much of it is still current
among the inhabitants of the retired district around Llyn Barfog, and
how the story would look when stripped of the florid language in which
Mr. Pughe thought proper to clothe it. Lastly, let me add a reference to
the *Iolo Manuscripts*, pp. 85, 475, where a short story is given
concerning a certain Milkwhite Sweet-milk Cow (*y Fuwch Laethwen
Lefrith*) whose milk was so abundant and possessed of such virtues as
almost to rival the Holy Grail. Like the Holy Grail also this cow
wandered everywhere spreading plenty, until she chanced to come to the
Vale of Towy, where the foolish inhabitants wished to kill and eat her:
the result was that she vanished in their hands and has never since been
heard of.

### VIII.

Here I wish to add some further stories connected with Merionethshire
which have come under my notice lately. I give them chiefly on the
authority of Mr. Owen M. Edwards of Lincoln College, who is a native of
Llanuwchllyn, and still spends a considerable part of his

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

time there; and partly on that of Hywel's essay on the folklore of the
county, which was awarded the prize at the National Eisteddfod of
1898 <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53). A story current at
Llanuwchllyn, concerning a midwife who attends on a fairy mother,
resembles the others of the same group: for one of them see p. 63 above.
In the former, however, one misses the ointment, and finds instead of it
that the midwife wag not to touch her eyes with the water with which she
washed the fairy baby. But as might be expected one of her eyes happened
to itch, and she touched it with her fingers straight from the water. It
appears that thenceforth she was able to see the fairies with that eye;
at any rate she is represented some time afterwards recognizing the
father of the fairy baby at a fair at Bala, and inquiring of him kindly
about his family. The fairy asked with which eye she saw him, and when
he had ascertained this, he at once blinded it, so that she never could
see with it afterwards. Hywel also has it that the *Tylwyth Teg*
formerly used to frequent the markets at Bala, and that they used to
swell the noise in the market-place without anybody being able to see
them: this was a sign that prices were going to rise.

The shepherds of Ardudwy are familiar, according to Hywel, with a
variant of the story in which a man married a fairy on condition that he
did not touch her with iron. They lived on the Moelfre and dwelt happily
together for years, until one fine summer day, when the husband was
engaged in shearing his sheep, he put the *gwelle*, 'shears,' in his
wife's hand: she then instantly disappeared. The earlier portions of
this story are unknown to me, but they are not hard to guess.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

Concerning Llyn Irddyn, between the western slopes of the Llawllech,
Hywel has a story the like of which I am not acquainted with: walking
near that lake you shun the shore and keep to the grass in order to
avoid the fairies, for if you take hold of the grass no fairy can touch
you, or dare under any circumstances injure a blade of grass.

Lastly, Hywel speaks of several caves containing treasure, as for
instance a *telyn aur*, or golden harp, hidden away in a cave beneath
Castell Carn Dochan in the parish of Llanuwchllyn. Lewis Morris, in his
*Celtic Remains*, p. 100, calls it Castell Corndochen, and describes it
as seated on the top of a steep rock at the bottom of a deep valley: it
appears to have consisted of a wall surrounding three turrets, and the
mortar seems composed of cockle-shells: see also the *Archæologia
Cambrensis* for 1850, p. 204. Hywel speaks also of a cave beneath
Castell Dinas Brân, near Llangollen, as containing much treasure, which
will only be disclosed to a boy followed by a white dog with *llygaid
arian*, 'silver eyes,' explained to mean light eyes: every such dog is
said to see the wind. So runs this story, but it requires more exegesis
than I can supply. One may compare it at a distance with Myrddin's
arrangement that the treasure buried by him at Dinas Emrys should only
be found by a youth with yellow hair and blue eyes, and with the belief
that the cave treasures of the Snowdon district belong to the *Gwyddyl*
or Goidels, and that Goidels will eventually find them: see chapter
viii.

The next three stories are from Mr. Owen Edwards' *Cymru* for 1897, pp.
188-9, where he has published them from a collection made for a literary
competition or local Eisteddfod by his friend J. H. Roberts, who died in
early manhood. The first is a blurred version of the story of the Lake
Lady and her dowry of cattle, but

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

enough of the story remains to show that, had we got it in its original
form, it would be found to differ somewhat on several points from all
the other versions extant. I summarize the Welsh as follows:--In ages
gone by, as the shepherd of Hafod y Garreg was looking after his sheep
on the shores of the Arennig Lake, he came across a young calf, plump,
sleek, and strong, in the rushes. He could not guess whence the beast
could have come, as no cattle were allowed to approach the lake at that
time of the year. He took it home, however, and it was reared until it
was a bull, remarkable for his fine appearance. In time his offspring
were the only cattle on the farm, and never before had there been such
beasts at Hafod y Garreg. They were the wonder and admiration of the
whole country. But one summer afternoon in June, the shepherd saw a
little fat old man playing on a pipe, and then he heard him call the
cows by their names--

Mulican, Molican, Malen, Mair,  
Dowch adre'r awrhon ar fy ngair.

Mulican, Molican, Malen and Mair,  
Come now home at my word.

He then beheld the whole herd running to the little man and going into
the lake. Nothing more was heard of them, and it was everybody's opinion
that they were the *Tylwyth Teg's* cattle.

The next is a quasi fairy tale, the outcome of which recalls the
adventure of the farmer of Drws y Coed on his return from Beddgelert
Fair, p. 99 above. It is told of a young harpist who was making his way
across country from his home at Yspyty Ifan to the neighbourhood of
Bala, that while crossing the mountain he happened in the mist to lose
his road and fall into the Gors Fawr, 'the big bog.' There he wallowed
for hours, quite unable to extricate himself in spite of all his
efforts. But when he was going to give up in

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

despair, he beheld close to him, reaching him her hand, a little woman
who was wondrous fair beyond all his conception of beauty, and with her
help he got out of the Gors. The damsel gave him a jolly sweet kiss that
flashed electricity through his whole nature: he was at once over head
and ears in love. She led him to the hut of her father and mother: there
he had every welcome, and he spent the night singing and dancing with
Olwen, for that was her name. Now, though the harpist was a mere
stripling, he thought of wedding at once--he was never before in such a
heaven of delight. But next morning he was waked, not by a kiss from
Olwen, but by the Plas Drain shepherd's dog licking his lips: he found
himself sleeping against the wall of a sheepfold (corlan), with his harp
in a clump of rushes at his feet, without any trace to be found of the
family with whom he had spent such a happy night.

The next story recalls Glasynys' Einion Las, as given above: its
peculiarity is the part played by the well introduced. The scene was a
turbary near the river called Mon Mynach, so named from Cwm Tir Mynach,
behind the hills immediately north of Bala:--Ages ago, as a number of
people were cutting turf in a place which was then moorland, and which
is now enclosed ground forming part of a farm called Nant Hir, one of
them happened to wash his face in a well belonging to the fairies. At
dinner-time in the middle of the day they sat down in a circle, while
the youth who had washed his face went to fetch the food, but suddenly
both he and the box of food were lost. They knew not what to do, they
suspected that it was the doing of the fairies; but the wise man (*gwr
hyspys*) came to the neighbourhood and told them, that, if they would
only go to the spot on the night of full moon in June, they would

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

behold him dancing with the fairies. They did as they were told, and
found the moor covered with thousands of little agile creatures who sang
and danced with all their might, and they saw the missing man among
them. They rushed at him, and with a great deal of trouble they got him
out. But oftentimes was Einion missed again, until at the time of full
moon in another June he returned home with a wondrously fair wife, whose
history or pedigree no one knew. Everybody believed her to be one of the
*Tylwyth Teg*.

### IX.

There is a kind of fairy tale of which I think I have hitherto not given
the reader a specimen: a good instance is given in the third volume of
the *Brython*, at p. 459, by a contributor who calls himself Idnerth ab
Gwgan, who, I learn from the Rev. Chancellor Silvan Evans, the editor,
was no other than the Rev. Benjamin Williams, best known to Welsh
antiquaries by his bardic name of Gwynionydd. The preface to the tale is
also interesting, so I am tempted to render the whole into English, as
follows:--

'The fair family were wonderful creatures in the imaginary world: they
encamped, they walked, and they capered a great deal in former ages in
our country, according to what we learn from some of our old people. It
may be supposed that they were very little folks like the children of
*Rhys Ddwfn*; for the old people used to imagine that they were wont to
visit their hearths in great numbers in ages gone by. The girls at the
farm houses used to make the hearths clean after supper, and to place a
cauldron full of water near the fire; and so they thought that the fair
family came there to play at night, bringing sweethearts for the young
women, and

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

leaving pieces of money on the hob for them in the morning. Sometimes
they might be seen as splendid hosts exercising themselves on our hills.
They were very fond of the mountains of Dyfed; travellers between
Lampeter and Cardigan used to see them on the hill of Llanwenog, but by
the time they had reached there the fairies would be far away on the
hills of Llandyssul, and when one had reached the place where one
expected to see the family together in tidy array, they would be seen
very busily engaged on the tops of Crug y Balog; when one went there
they would be on Blaen Pant ar Fi, moving on and on to Bryn Bwa, and,
finally, to some place or other in the lower part of Dyfed. Like the
soldiers of our earthly world, they were possessed of terribly
fascinating music; and in the autumnal season they had their rings,
still named from them, in which they sang and danced. The young man of
Llech y Derwydd <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) was his father's
only son, as well as heir to the farm; so he was very dear to his father
and his mother, indeed he was the light of their eyes. Now, the head
servant and the son were bosom friends: they were like brothers
together, or rather twin brothers. As the son and the servant were such
friends, the farmer's wife used to get exactly the same kind of clothes
prepared for the servant as for her son. The two fell in love with two
handsome young women of very good reputation in the neighbourhood. The
two couples were soon joined in honest wedlock, and great was the
merry-making on the occasion. The servant had a suitable place to live
in on the farm of Llech y Derwydd; but about half a year after the son's
marriage,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

he and his friend went out for sport, when the servant withdrew to a
wild and retired corner to look for game. He returned presently for his
friend, but when he got there he could not see him anywhere: he kept
looking around for some time for him, shouting and whistling, but there
was no sign of his friend. By-and-by, he went home to Llech y Derwydd
expecting to see him, but no one knew anything about him. Great was the
sorrow of his family through the night; and next day the anxiety was
still greater. They went to see the place where his friend had seen him
last: it was hard to tell whether his mother or his wife wept the more
bitterly; but the father was a little better, though he also looked as
if he were half mad with grief. The spot was examined, and, to their
surprise, they saw a fairy ring close by, and the servant recollected
that he had heard the sound of very fascinating music somewhere or other
about the time in question. It was at once agreed that the man had been
unfortunate enough to have got into the ring of the *Tylwyth*, and to
have been carried away by them, nobody knew whither. Weeks and months
passed away, and a son was born to the heir of Llech y Derwydd, but the
young father was not there to see his child, which the old people
thought very hard. However, the little one grew up the very picture of
his father, and great was his influence over his grandfather and
grandmother; in fact he was everything to them. He grew up to be a man,
and he married a good-looking girl in that neighbourhood; but her family
did not enjoy the reputation of being kindhearted people. The old folks
died, and their daughter-in-law also. One windy afternoon in the month
of October, the family of Llech y Derwydd beheld a tall thin old man,
with his beard and hair white as snow, coming towards the house, and
they thought he was

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

a Jew. The servant maids stared at him, and their mistress laughed at
the "old Jew," at the same time that she lifted the children up one
after another to see him. He came to the door and entered boldly enough,
asking about his parents. The mistress answered him in an unusually
surly and contemptuous tone, wondering why the "drunken old Jew had come
there," because it was thought he had been drinking, and that he would
otherwise not have spoken so. The old man cast wondering and anxious
looks around on everything in the house, feeling as he did greatly
surprised; but it was the little children about the floor that drew his
attention most: his looks were full of disappointment and sorrow. He
related the whole of his account, saying that he had been out the day
before and that he was now returning. The mistress of the house told him
that she had heard a tale about her husband's father, that he had been
lost years before her birth while out sporting, whilst her father
maintained that it was not true, but that he had been killed. She became
angry, and quite lost her temper at seeing "the old Jew" not going away.
The old man was roused, saying that he was the owner of the house, and
that he must have his rights. He then went out to see his possessions,
and presently went to the house of the servant, where, to his surprise,
things had greatly changed; after conversing with an aged man, who sat
by the fire, the one began to scrutinize the other more and more. The
aged man by the fire told him what had been the fate of his old friend,
the heir of Llech y Derwydd. They talked deliberately of the events of
their youth, but it all seemed like a dream; in short, the old man in
the corner concluded that his visitor was his old friend, the heir of
Llech y Derwydd, returning from the land of the *Tylwyth Teg* after
spending half a hundred years there.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The other old man, with the snow-white beard,
believed in his history, and much did they talk together and question
one another for many hours. The old man by the fire said that the master
of Llech y Derwydd was away from home that day, and he induced his aged
visitor to eat some food, but, to the horror of all, the eater fell down
dead on the spot <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55). There is no record
that an inquest was held over him, but the tale relates that the cause
of it was, that he ate food after having been so long in the world of
the fair family. His old friend insisted on seeing him buried by the
side of his ancestors; but the rudeness of the mistress of Llech y
Derwydd to her father-in-law brought a curse on the family that clung to
it to distant generations, and until the place had been sold nine
times.'

A tale like this is to be found related of Idwal of Nantclwyd, in *Cymru
Fu*, p. 85. I said 'a tale like this,' but, on reconsidering the matter,
I should think it is the very same tale passed through the hands of
Glasynys or some one of his imitators. Another of this kind will be
found in the *Brython*, ii. 170, and several similar ones also in Wirt
Sikes' book, pp. 65-90, either given at length, or merely referred to.
There is one kind of variant which deserves special notice, as making
the music to which the sojourner in Faery listens for scores of years to
be that of a bird singing on a tree. A story of the sort is located by
Howells, in his *Cambrian Superstitions*, pp. 127-8, at Pant Shon
Shencin, near Pencader, in Cardiganshire, This latter kind of story
leads easily up to another development, namely, to substituting for the
bird's. warble the song and felicity of heaven, and for the simple
shepherd a pious monk. In

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

this form it is located at a place called Llwyn y Nef, or 'Heaven's
Grove,' near Celynnog Fawr, in Carnarvonshire. It is given by Glasynys
in *Cymru Fu*, pp. 183-4, where it was copied from the *Brython*, iii.
111, in which he had previously published it. Several versions of it in
rhyme came down from the eighteenth century, and Silvan Evans has
brought together twenty-six stanzas in point in *St. David's College
Magazine f*or 1881, pp. 191-200, where he has put into a few paragraphs
all that is known about the song of the *Hen Wr o'r Coed*, or the Old
Man of the Wood, in his usually clear and lucid style.

A tale from the other end of the tract of country once occupied by a
sprinkling, perhaps, of Celts among a population of Picts, makes the
man, and not the fairies, supply the music. I owe it to the kindness of
the Rev. Andrew Clark, Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford, who heard it
from the late sexton of the parish of Dollar, in the county of
Clackmannan. The sexton died some twelve years ago, aged seventy: he had
learnt the tale from his father. The following are Mr. Clark's words:--

'Glendevon is a parish and village in the Ochils in County Perth, about
five miles from Dollar as you come up Glen Queich and down by Gloomhill.
Glen Queich is a narrowish glen between two grassy hills--at the top of
the glen is a round hill of no great height, but very neat shape, the
grass of which is always short and trim, and the ferns on the shoulder
of a very marked green. This, as you come up the glen, seems entirely to
block the way. It is called the "Maiden Castle." Only when you come
quite close do you see the path winding round the foot of it. A little
further on is a fine spring bordered with flat stones, in the middle of
a neat, turfy spot, called the "Maiden's Well." This road, till the new
toll-road was made on the other side

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

of the hills, was the thoroughfare between Dollar and Glendevon.'

The following is the legend, as told by the 'Bethrel':--A piper,
carrying his pipes, was coming from Glendevon to Dollar in the grey of
the evening. He crossed the Garchel (a little stream running into the
Queich burn), and looked at the "Maiden Castle," and saw only the grey
hillside and heard only the wind soughing through the bent. He had got
beyond it when he heard a burst of lively music: he turned round, and
instead of the dark knoll saw a great castle, with lights blazing from
the windows, and heard the noise of dancing issuing from the open door.
He went back incautiously, and a procession issuing forth at that
moment, be was caught and taken into a great hall ablaze with lights,
and people dancing on the floor. He had to pipe to them for a day or
two, but he got anxious, because he knew his people would be wondering
why he did not come back in the morning as he had promised. The fairies
seemed to sympathize with his anxiety, and promised to let him go if he
played a favourite tune of his, which they seemed fond of, to their
satisfaction. He played his very best, the dance went fast and furious,
and at its close he was greeted with loud applause. On his release he
found himself alone, in the grey of the evening, beside the dark
hillock, and no sound was heard save the purr of the burn and the
soughing of the wind through the bent. Instead of completing his journey
to Dollar, he walked hastily back to Glendevon to relieve his folk's
anxiety. He entered his father's house and found no kent face there. On
his protesting that he had gone only a day or two before, and waxing
loud in his bewildered talk, a grey old man was roused from a doze
behind the fire; and told how he had heard when a boy from his father
that

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

a piper had gone away to Dollar on a quiet evening, and had never been
heard or seen since, nor any trace of him found. He had been in the
"castle" for a hundred years.'

The term *Plant Rhys Ddwfn* has already been brought before the reader:
it means 'the Children of Rhys Ddwfn,' and *Rhys Ddwfn* means literally
Rhys the Deep, but the adjective in Welsh connotes depth of character in
the sense of shrewdness or cunning. Nay, even the English deep is often
borrowed for use in the same sense, as when one colloquially says *un
dip iawn yw e*, 'he is a very calculating or cunning fellow.' The
following account of Rhys and his progeny is given by Gwynionydd in the
first volume of the *Brython*, p. 130, which deserves being cited at
length:--'There is a tale current in Dyfed, that there is, or rather
that there has been, a country between Cemmes, the northern Hundred of
Pembrokeshire, and Aberdaron in Lleyn. The chief patriarch of the
inhabitants was Rhys Ddwfn, and his descendants used to be called after
him the Children of Rhys Ddwfn. They were, it is said, a handsome race
enough, but remarkably small in size. It is stated that certain herbs of
a strange nature grew in their land, so that they were able to keep
their country from being seen by even the most sharp sighted of
invaders. There is no account that these remarkable herbs grew in any
other part of the world excepting on a small spot, about a square yard
in area, in a certain part of Cemmes. If it chanced that a man stood
alone on it, he beheld the whole of the territory of *Plant Rhys Ddwfn*;
but the moment he moved he would lose sight of it altogether, and it
would have been utterly vain for him to look for his footprints. In
another story, as will be seen presently, the requisite platform was a
turf from St. David's churchyard. The Rhysians had not much land--they

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

lived in towns. So they were wont in former times to come to market to
Cardigan, and to raise the prices of things terribly. They were seen of
no one coming or going, but only seen there in the market. When prices
happened to be high, and the corn all sold, however much there might
have been there in the morning, the poor used to say to one another on
the way home, "Oh! *they* were there to-day," meaning *Plant Rhys
Ddwfn*. So they were dear friends in the estimation of Siôn Phil Hywel,
the farmer; but not so high in the opinion of Dafydd, the labourer. It
is said, however, that they were very honest and resolute men. A certain
Gruffydd ab Einon was wont to sell them more corn than anybody else, and
so he was a great friend of theirs. He was honoured by them beyond all
his contemporaries by being led on a visit to their home. As they were
great traders like the Phœnicians of old, they had treasures from all
countries under the sun. Gruffydd, after feasting his eyes to satiety on
their wonders, was led back by them loaded with presents. But before
taking leave of them, he asked them how they succeeded in keeping
themselves safe from invaders, as one of their number might become
unfaithful, and go beyond the virtue of the herbs that formed their
safety. "Oh!" replied the little old man of shrewd looks, "just as
Ireland has been blessed with a soil on which venomous reptiles cannot
live, so with our land: no traitor can live here. Look at the sand on
the seashore: perfect unity prevails there, and so among us. Rhys, the
father of our race, bade us, even to the most distant descendant, honour
our parents and ancestors; love our own wives without looking at those
of our neighbours; and do our best for our children and grandchildren.
And he said that if we did so, no one of us would ever prove unfaithful
to another, or

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

become what you call a traitor. The latter is a wholly imaginary
character among us; strange pictures are drawn of him with his feet like
those of an ass, with a nest of snakes in his bosom, with a head like
the devil's, with hands somewhat like a man's, while one of them holds a
large knife, and the family lies dead around the figure. Good-bye!" When
Gruffydd looked about him he lost sight of the country of *Plant Rhys*,
and found himself near his home. He became very wealthy after this, and
continued to be a great friend of *Plant Rhys* as long as he lived.
After Gruffydd's death they came to market again, but such was the greed
of the farmers, like Gruffydd before them, for riches, and so
unreasonable were the prices they asked for their corn, that the
Rhysians took offence and came no more to Cardigan to market. The old
people used to think that they now went to Fishguard market, as very
strange people were wont to be seen there.' On the other hand, some
Fishguard people were lately of opinion that it was at Haverfordwest the
fairies did their marketing: I refer to a letter of Mr. Ferrar Fenton's,
in the *Pembroke County Guardian* of October 31, 1896, in which he
mentions a conversation he had with a Fishguard woman as to the
existence of fairies: 'There are fairies,' she asserted, 'for they came
to Ha'rordwest market to buy things, so there *must* be.'

With this should be compared pp. 9-10 of Wirt Sikes' *British Goblins*,
where mention is made of sailors on the coast of Pembrokeshire and
Carmarthenshire, 'who still talk of the green meadows of enchantment
lying in the Irish Channel to the west of Pembrokeshire,' and of men who
had landed on them, or seen them suddenly vanishing. The author then
proceeds to abstract from Howells' Cambrian Superstitions, p. 119, the
following paragraph:--'The fairies inhabiting these

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

islands are said to have regularly attended the markets at Milford Haven
and Laugharne. They made their purchases without speaking, laid down
their money and departed, always leaving the exact sum required, which
they seemed to know without asking the price of anything. Sometimes they
were invisible; but they were often seen by sharp-eyed persons. There
was always one special butcher at Milford Haven upon whom the fairies
bestowed their patronage instead of distributing their favours
indiscriminately. The Milford Haven folk could see the green Fairy
Islands distinctly, lying out a short distance from land; and the
general belief was that they were densely peopled with fairies. It was
also said that the latter went to and fro between the islands and the
shore, through a subterranean gallery under the bottom of the sea.'

Another tale given in the *Brython*, ii. 20, by a writer who gives his
name as B. Davies <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56), will serve to
show, short though it be, that the term *Plant Rhys Ddwfn* was not
confined to those honestly dealing fairies, but was used in a sense
wholly synonymous with that of *Tylwyth Teg*, as understood in other
parts of Wales. The story runs as follows, and should be compared with
the Dyffryn Mymbyr one given above, pp. 100-3:--'One calm hot day, when
the sun of heaven was brilliantly shining, and the hay in the dales was
being busily made by lads and lasses, and by grown-up people of both
sexes, a woman in the neighbourhood of Emlyn placed her one-year-old
infant in the *gader*, or chair, as the cradle is called in these parts,
and out she went to the field for a while, intending to return, when her

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

neighbour, an old woman overtaken by the decrepitude of eighty summers,
should call to her that her darling was crying. It was not long before
she heard the old woman calling to her; she ran hurriedly, and as soon
as she set foot on the kitchen floor she took her little one in her arms
as usual, saying to him, "O my little one! thy mother's delight art
thou! I would not take the world for thee, &c." But to her surprise he
had a very old look about him, and the more the tender-hearted mother
gazed at his face, the stranger it seemed to her, so that at last she
placed him in the cradle and told her trouble and sorrow to her
relatives and acquaintances. And after this one and the other had given
his opinion, it was agreed at last that it was one of *Rhys Ddwfn's*
children that was in the cradle, and not her dearly loved baby. In this
distress there was nothing to do but to fetch a sorcerer, as fast as the
fastest horse could gallop. He said, when he saw the child, that he had
seen his like before, and that it would be a hard job to get rid of him,
though not such a very hard job this time. The shovel was made red hot
in the fire by one of the Cefnarth <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57)
boys, and held before the child's face; and in an instant the short
little old man took to his heels, and neither he nor his like was seen
afterwards from Aber Cuch to Aber Bargoed at any rate. The mother, it is
said, found her darling unscathed the next moment. I remember also
hearing that the strange child was as old as the grandfather of the one
that had been lost.'

As I see no reason to make any profound distinction between lake maidens
and sea maidens, I now give Gwynionydd's account of the mermaid who was
found

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

by a fisherman from Llandydoch or St. Dogmael's <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58), near Cardigan: see the *Brython*, i.
82:--

'One fine afternoon in September, in the beginning of the last century,
a fisherman, whose name was Pergrin <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59),
went to a recess in the rock near Pen Cemmes, where he found a sea
maiden doing her hair, and he took the water lady prisoner to his
boat. . . . We know not what language is used by sea maidens . . . but
this one, this time at any rate, talked, it is said, very good Welsh;
for when she was in despair in Pergrin's custody, weeping copiously, and
with her tresses all dishevelled, she called

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

out: 'Pergrin, if thou wilt let me go, I will give thee three shouts in
the time of thy greatest need.' So, in wonder and fear, he let her go to
walk the streets of the deep, and visit her sweethearts there. Days and
weeks passed without Pergrin seeing her after this; but one hot
afternoon, when the sea was pretty calm, and the fishermen had no
thought of danger, behold his old acquaintance showing her head and
locks, and shouting out in a loud voice: 'Pergrin! Pergrin! Pergrin!
take up thy nets, take up thy nets, take up thy nets!' Pergrin and his
companion instantly obeyed the message, and drew their nets in with
great haste. In they went, past the bar, and by the time they had
reached the Pwll Cam the most terrible storm had overspread the sea,
while he and his companion were safe on land. Twice nine others had gone
out with them, but they were all drowned without having the chance of
obeying the warning of the -water lady.' Perhaps it is not quite
irrelevant to mention here the armorial bearings which Drayton ascribes
to the neighbouring county of Cardigan in the following couplet in his
*Battaile of Agincourt* (London, 1631), p. 23:--

As Cardigan the next to them that went,  
Came with a Mermayd sitting on a Rock.

A writer in the *Brython*, iv. 194, states that the people of Nefyn in
Lleyn claim the story of the fisher and the mermaid as belonging to
them, which proves that a similar legend has been current there: add to
this the fact mentioned in the *Brython*, iii. 133, that a red mermaid
with yellow hair, on a white field, figures in the coat of arms of the
family resident at Glasfryn in the parish of Llangybi, in Eifionyd or
the southern portion of Carnarvonshire; and we have already suggested
that Glasynys' story (pp. 117-25) was made

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

up, to a certain extent, of materials found on the coasts of
Carnarvonshire. A small batch of stories about South Wales mermaids is
given by a writer who calls himself Ab Nadol <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60), in the Brython, iv- 310, as follows:--

"A few rockmen are said to have been working, about eighty years ago, in
a quarry near Porth y Rhaw, when the day was calm and clear, with
nature, as it were, feasting, the flowers shedding sweet scent around,
and the hot sunshine beaming into the jagged rocks. Though an occasional
wave rose to strike the romantic cliffs, the sea was like a placid lake,
with its light coverlet of blue attractive enough to entice one of the
ladies of *Rhys Ddwfn* forth from the town seen by Daniel Huws off
Trefin as he was journeying between Fishguard and St. David's in the
year 1858, to make her way to the top of a stone and to sit on it to
disentangle her flowing silvery hair. Whilst she was cleaning herself,
the rockmen went down, and when they got near her they perceived that,
from her waist upwards, she was like the lasses of Wales, but that, from
her waist downwards, she had the body of a fish. And, when they began to
talk to her, they found she spoke Welsh, though she only uttered the
following few words to them: "Reaping in Pembrokeshire and weeding in
Carmarthenshire." Off she then went to walk in the depth of the sea
towards her home. Another tale is repeated about a mermaid, said to have
been caught by men below the land of Llanwnda, near the spot, if not on
the spot, where the French made their landing afterwards, and three
miles to the west of Fishguard. It then goes on to say that they carried
her to their home, and kept her in a secure place for

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

some time; before long, she begged to be allowed to return to the brine
land, and gave the people of the house three bits of advice; but I only
remember one of them,' he writes, 'and this is it: "Skim the surface of
the pottage before adding sweet milk to it: it will be whiter and
sweeter, and less of it will do." I was told that this family follow the
three advices to this day.' A somewhat similar advice to that about the
pottage is said to have been given by a mermaid, under similar
circumstances, to a Manxman.

After putting the foregoing bits together, I was favoured by Mr.
Benjamin Williams with notes on the tales and on the persons from whom
he heard them: they form the contents of two or three letters, mostly
answers to queries of mine, and the following is the substance of
them:--Mr. Williams is a native of the valley of Troed yr Aur <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61), in the Cardiganshire parish of that name.
He spent a part of his youth at Verwig, in the angle between the
northern bank of the Teifi and Cardigan Bay. He heard of Rhys Ddwfn's
Children first from a distant relative of his father's, a Catherine
Thomas, who came to visit her daughter, who lived not far from his
father's house: that would now be from forty-eight to fifty years ago.
He was very young at the time, and of Rhys. Ddwfn's progeny he formed a
wonderful idea, which was partly due also to the talk of one James
Davies or Siams Mocyn, who was very well up in folklore, and was one of
his father's next-door neighbours. He was an old man, and nephew to the
musician, David

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

Jenkin Morgan. The only spot near Mr. Williams' home, that used to be
frequented by the fairies, was Cefn y Ceirw, 'the Stag's Ridge,' a large
farm, so called from having been kept as a park for their deer by the
Lewises of Aber Nant Bychan. He adds that the late Mr. Philipps, of
Aberglasney, was very fond of talking of things in his native
neighbourhood, and of mentioning the fairies at Cefn y Ceirw. It was
after moving to Verwig that Mr. Williams began to put the tales he heard
on paper: then he came in contact with three brothers, whose names were
John, Owen, and Thomas Evans. They were well-to-do and respectable
bachelors, living together on the large farm of Hafod Ruffydd. Thomas
was a man of very strong common sense, and worth consulting on any
subject: he was a good arithmetician, and a constant reader of the
Baptist periodical, *Seren Gomer*, from its first appearance. He
thoroughly understood the bardic metres, and had a fair knowledge of
music. He was well versed in Scripture, and filled the office of deacon
at the Baptist Chapel. His death took place in the year 1864. Now, the
eldest of the three brothers, the one named John, or Siôn, was then
about seventy-five years of age, and he thoroughly believed in the tales
about the fairies, as will be seen from the following short dialogue:--

Siôn:

Williams bach, ma'n rhaid i bod nhw'i gâl: yr w i'n cofio yn amser Bone
fod marchnad Aberteifi yn llawn o lafir yn y bore--digon yno am fis--ond
cin pen hanner awr r ôdd y cwbwl wedi darfod. Nid ôdd possib i gweld
nhwi: mâ gida nhwi faint a fynnon nhwi o arian.

Williams:

Siwt na fyse dynion yn i gweld nhwi ynte, Siôn?

Siôn: O *mâ gida nhwi ddynion fel ninne yn pryni* 

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

drostyn nhwi; ag y mâ nhwi fel yr hen siówmin yna yn gelli gneid pob
tric.

John: 'My dear Williams, it must be that they exist: I remember Cardigan
market, in the time of Bonaparte, full of corn in the morning--enough
for a month--but in less than half an hour it was all gone. It was
impossible to see them: they have as much money as they like.'

Williams: 'How is it, then, that men did not see them, John?'

John: 'Oh, they have men like us to do the buying for them; and they
can, like those old showmen, do every kind of trick.'

At this kind of display of simplicity on the part of his brother, Thomas
used to smile and say: 'My brother John believes such things as those;'
for he had no belief in them himself. Still it is from his mouth that
Mr. Williams published the tales in the *Brython*, which have been
reproduced here, that of 'Pergrin and the Mermaid,' and all about the
'Heir of Llech y Derwydd,' not to mention the ethical element in the
account of Rhys Ddwfn's country and its people, the product probably of
his mind. Thomas Evans, or as he was really called, Tommos Ifan, was
given rather to grappling with the question of the origin of such
beliefs; so one day he called Mr. Williams out, and led him to a spot
about four hundred yards from Bol y Fron, where the latter then lived:
he pointed to the setting sun, and asked Mr. Williams what he thought of
the glorious sunset before them. 'It is all produced,' he then observed,
'by the reflection of the sun's rays on the mist: one might think,' he
went on to say, 'that there was there a paradise of a country full of
fields, forests, and everything that is desirable.' And before they had
moved away the grand scene had disappeared, when

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

Thomas suggested that the idea of the existence of the country of Rhys
Ddwfn's Children arose from the contemplation of that phenomenon. One
may say that Thomas Evans was probably far ahead of the Welsh historians
who try to extract history from the story of *Cantre'r Gwaelod*, 'the
Bottom Hundred,' beneath the waves of Cardigan Bay; but what was seen
was probably an instance of the mirage to be mentioned presently.
Lastly, besides Mr. Williams' contributions to the *Brython*, and a
small volume of poetry, entitled *Briallen glan Ceri*, some tales of his
were published by Llallawg in *Bygones* some years ago, and he had the
prize at the Cardigan Eisteddfod of 1866 for the best collection in
Welsh of the folklore of Dyfed: his recollection was that it contained
in all thirty-six tales of all kinds; but since the manuscript, as the
property of the Committee of that Eisteddfod, was sold, he could not now
consult it: in fact he is not certain as to who the owner of it may now
be, though he has an idea that it is either the Rev. Rees Williams,
vicar of Whitchurch, near Solva, Pembrokeshire, or R. D. Jenkins, Esq.,
of Cilbronnau, Cardiganshire. Whoever the owner may be, he would
probably be only too glad to have it published, and I mention this
merely to call attention to it. The Eisteddfod is to be commended for
encouraging local research, and sometimes even for burying the results
in obscurity, but not always.

### X.

Before leaving Dyfed I wish to revert to the extract from Mr. Sikes, p.
161 above. He had been helped partly by the article on Gavran, in the
*Cambrian Biography*, by William Owen, better known since as William
Owen Pughe and Dr. Pughe, and partly by a note of Southey's

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

on the following words in his *Madoc* (London, 1815), i, III:--

Where are the sons of Gavran? where his tribe,  
The faithful? following their beloved Chief,  
They the Green Islands of the Ocean sought;  
Nor human tongue hath told, nor human ear,  
Since from the silver shores they went their way,  
Hath heard their fortunes.

The Gavran story, I may premise, is based on one of the Welsh Triads--i.
34, ii. V, iii. 80--and Southey cites the article in the *Cambrian
Biography*; but he goes on to give the following statements without
indicating on what sources he was drawing--the reader has, however, been
made acquainted already with the virtue of a blade of grass, \[04\] by
the brief mention of Llyn Irddyn above, p. 148:--

'Of these Islands, or Green Spots of the Floods, there are some singular
superstitions. They are the abode of the *Tylwyth Teg*, or the fair
family, the souls of the virtuous Druids, who, not having been
Christians, cannot enter the Christian heaven, but enjoy this heaven of
their own. They however discover a love of mischief, neither becoming
happy spirits, nor consistent with their original character; for they
love to visit the earth, and, seizing a man, inquire whether he will
travel above wind, mid wind, or below wind; above wind is a giddy and
terrible passage, below wind is through bush and brake, the middle is a
safe course. But the spell of security is, to catch hold of the grass,
for these Beings have not power to destroy a blade of grass. In their
better moods they come over and carry the Welsh in their boats. He who
visits these Islands imagines on his return that he has been absent only
a few hours, when, in truth, whole centuries have passed away. If you
take a turf from St. David's churchyard, and stand upon it on the sea
shore, you behold these Islands. A

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

man once, who thus obtained sight of them, immediately put to sea to
find them; but they disappeared, and his search was in vain. He
returned, looked at them, again from the enchanted turf, again set sail,
and failed again. The third time he took the turf into his vessel, and
stood upon it till he reached them.'

A correspondent signing himself 'the Antient Mariner,' and writing, in
the *Pembroke County Guardian*, from Newport, Pembrokeshire, Oct. 26,
1896, cites Southey's notes, and adds to them the statement, that some
fifty years ago there was a tradition amongst the inhabitants of Trevine
(Trefin) in his county, that these Islands could be seen from Man Non,
or Eglwys Non, in that neighbourhood. To return to *Madoc*, Southey adds
to the note already quoted a reference to the inhabitants of Arran More,
on the coast of Galway, to the effect that they think that they can on a
clear day see Hy-Breasail, the Enchanted Island supposed to be the
Paradise of the Pagan Irish: compare the Phantom City seen in the same
sea from the coast of Clare. Then he asks a question suggestive of the
explanation, that all this is due to 'that very extraordinary
phenomenon, known in Sicily by the name of Morgaine le Fay's works.' In
connexion with this question of mirage I venture to quote again from the
*Pembroke County Guardian*. Mr. Ferrar Fenton, already mentioned, writes
in the issue of Nov. 1, 1896, giving a report which he had received one
summer morning from Captain John Evans, since deceased. It is to the
effect 'that once when trending up the Channel, and passing Grasholm
Island, in what he had always known as deep water, he was surprised to
see to windward of him a large tract of land covered with a beautiful
green meadow. It was not, however, *above water*, but just a few feet
*below*, say two or three, so that the grass waved and swam about

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

as the ripple flowed over it, in a most delightful way to the eye, so
that as watched it made one feel quite drowsy. You know, he continued, I
have heard old people say there is a floating island off there, that
sometimes rises to the surface, or nearly, and then sinks down again
fathoms deep, so that no one sees it for years, and when nobody expects
it comes up again for a while. How it may be, I do not know, but that is
what they say.'

Lastly, Mr. E. Perkins, of Penysgwarne, near Fishguard, wrote on Nov. 2,
1896, as follows, of a changing view to be had from the top of the Garn,
which means the *Garn Fawr*, one of the most interesting prehistoric
sites in the county, and one I have had the pleasure of visiting more
than once in the company of Henry Owen and Edward Laws, the historians
of Pembrokeshire:--

'May not the fairy islands referred to by Professor Rhys have originated
from mirages? During the glorious weather we enjoyed last summer, I went
up one particularly fine evening to the top of the Garn behind
Penysgwarne to view the sunset. It would have been worth a thousand
miles' travel to go to see such a scene as I saw that evening. It was
about half an hour before sunset--the bay was calm and smooth as the
finest mirror. The rays of the sun made

A golden path across the sea,

and a picture indescribable. As the sun neared the horizon the rays
broadened until the sheen resembled a gigantic golden plate prepared to
hold the brighter sun. No sooner had the sun set than I saw a striking
mirage. To the right I saw a stretch of country similar to a landscape
in this country. A farmhouse and outbuildings were seen, I will not say
quite as distinct as I can see the upper part of St. David's parish from
this Garn, but much more detailed. We could see fences,

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

roads, and gateways leading to the farmyard, but in the haze it looked
more like a panoramic view than a veritable landscape. Similar mirages
may possibly have caused our old to think these were the abode of the
fairies.'

To return to Mr. Sikes, the rest of his account of the Pembrokeshire
fairies and their green islands, of their Milford butcher, and of the
subterranean gallery leading into their home, comes, as already
indicated, for the most part from Howells. But it does not appear on
what authority Southey himself made departed druids of the fairies. One
would be glad to be reassured on this last point, as such a hypothesis
would fit in well enough with what we are told of the sacrosanct
character of the inhabitants of the isles on the coast of Britain in
ancient times. Take, for instance, the brief account given by Plutarch
of one of the isles explored by a certain Demetrius in the service of
the Emperor of Rome: see chapter viii.

### XI.

Mr. Craigfryn Hughes, the author of a Welsh novelette <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) with its scene laid in Glamorgan, having
induced me to take a copy, I read it and found it full of local
colouring. Then I ventured to sound the author on the question of fairy
tales, and the reader will be able to judge how hearty the response has
been. Before reproducing the tale which Mr. Hughes has sent me, I will
briefly put into English his account of himself and his authorities. Mr.
Hughes lives at the Quakers' Yard in the neighbourhood of Pontypridd, in
Glamorganshire. His father was not a believer <span
id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63) in

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

tales about fairies or the like, and he learned all he knows of the
traditions about them in his father's absence, from his grandmother and
other old people. The old lady's name was Rachel Hughes. She was born at
Pandy Pont y Cymmer, near Pontypool, or *Pont ap Hywe*l as Mr. Hughes
analyses the name, in the year 1773, and she had a vivid recollection of
Edmund Jones of the Tranch, of whom more anon, coming from time to time
to preach to the Independents there. She came, however, to live in the
parish of Llanfabon, near the Quakers' Yard, when she was only twelve
years of age; and there she continued to live to the day of her death,
which took place in 1864, so that she was about ninety-one years of age
at the time. Mr. Hughes adds that he remembers many of the old
inhabitants besides his grandmother, who were perfectly familiar with
the story he has put on record; but only two of them were alive when he
wrote to me in 1881, and these were both over ninety years old, with
their minds overtaken by the childishness of age; but it was only a
short time since the death of another, who was, as he says, a walking
library of tales about corpse candles, ghosts, and *Bendith y
Mamau* <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64), or 'The Mothers' Blessing,'
as the fairies are usually called in Glamorgan. Mr. Hughes' father tried
to prevent his children being taught any tales about ghosts, corpse

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

candles, or fairies; but the grandmother found opportunities of telling
them plenty, and Mr. Hughes vividly describes the effect on his mind
when he was a boy, how frightened he used to feel, how he pulled the
clothes over his head in bed, and how he half suffocated himself thereby
under the effects of the fear with which the tales used to fill him.
Then, as to the locality, he makes the following remarks:--'There are
few people who have not heard something or other about the old graveyard
of the Quakers, which was made by Lydia Phil, a lady who lived at a
neighbouring farm house, called Cefn y Fforest. This old graveyard lies
in the eastern corner of the parish of Merthyr Tydfil, on land called
Pantannas, as to the meaning of which there is much controversy. Some
will have it that it is properly Pant yr Aros, or the Hollow of the
Staying, because travellers were sometimes stopped there overnight by
the swelling of the neighbouring river; others treat it as Pant yr
Hanes, the Hollow of the Legend, in allusion to the following story. But
before the graveyard was made, the spot was called Rhyd y Grug, or the
Ford of the Heather, which grows thereabouts in abundance. In front of
the old graveyard towards the south the rivers Taff and Bargoed, which
some would make into Byrgoed or Short-Wood, meet with each other, and
thence rush in one over terrible cliffs of rock, in the recesses of
which lie huge *cerwyni* or cauldron-like pools, called respectively the
Gerwyn Fach, the Gerwyn Fawr, and the Gerwyn Ganol, where many a
drowning has taken place. As one walks up over Tarren y Crynwyr, "the
Quakers' Rift," until Pantannas is reached, and proceeds northwards for
about a mile and a half, one arrives at a farm house called Pen Craig
Daf <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65), "the Top of the

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

Taff Rock." The path between the two houses leads through fertile
fields, in which may be seen, if one has eyes to observe, small rings
which are greener than the rest of the ground. They are, in fact, green
even as compared with the greenness around them--these are the rings in
which Bendith y Mamau used to meet to sing and dance all night. If a man
happened to get inside one of these circles when the fairies were there,
he could not be got out in a hurry, as they would charm him and lead him
into some of their caves, where they would keep him for ages, unawares
to him, listening to their music. The rings vary greatly in size, but in
point of form they are all round or oval. I have heard my grandmother,'
says Mr. Hughes, 'reciting and singing several of the songs which the
fairies sang in these rings. One of them began thus:--

Canu, canu, drwy y nos,  
Dawnsio, dawnsio, ar Waen y Rhos  
Y' ngoleuni'r lleuad dlos:  
                  Hapus. ydym ni!

Pawb ohonom sydd yn llon  
Heb un gofid dan ei fron:  
Canu, dawnsio, ar y ton <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66)--  

                  Dedwydd ydym ni!

Singing, singing, through the night,  
Dancing, dancing with our might,  
Where the moon the moor doth light,  
                  Happy ever we!

One and all of merry mien,  
Without sorrow are we seen,  
Singing, dancing on the green,  
                  Gladsome ever we!

Here follows, in Mr. Hughes' own Welsh, a remarkable story of revenge
exacted by the fairies:--

Yn un o'r canrifoedd a aethant heibio, preswyliai amaethwr yn nhyddyn
Pantannas, a'r amser hwnnw yr 

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

oedd bendith y mamau yn ymwelwyr aml ag amryw gaeau perthynol iddo ef, a
theimlai yntau gryn gasineb yn ei fynwes at yr 'atras fwstrog, leisiog,
a chynllwynig,' fel y galwai hwynt, a mynych yr hiraethai am allu dyfod
o hyd i ryw lwybr er cael eu gwared oddiyno. O'r diwedd hysbyswyd ef gan
hen reibwraig, fod y ffordd i gael eu gwared yn ddigon hawdd, ac ond
iddo ef roddi godro un hwyr a boreu iddi hi, yr hysbysai y fford iddo
gyrraedd yr hyn a fawr ddymunai. Boddlonodd i'w thelerau a derbyniodd
yntau y cyfarwyddyd, yr hyn ydoedd fel y canlyn.- Ei fod i aredig yr
holl gaeau i ba rai yr oedd eu hoff ymgyrchfan, ac ond iddynt hwy
unwaith golli y ton glas, y digient, ac na ddeuent byth mwy i'w boeni
drwy eu hymweliadau a'r lle.

Dilynodd yr amaethwr ei chyfarwyddyd i'r llythyren, a choronwyd ei waith
a llwyddiant. Nid oedd yr un o honynt i'w weled oddeutu y caeau yn awr;
ac yn lle sain cu caniadau soniarus, a glywid bob amser yn dyrchu o Waen
y Rhos, nid oedd dim ond y distawrwydd trylwyraf yn teyrnasu o gylch eu
hen a'u hoff ymgyrchfan.

Hauodd yr amaethwr wenith, &c., yn y caeau, ac yr oedd y gwanwyn
gwyrddlas wedi gwthio y gauaf oddiar ei sedd, ac ymddangosai y maesydd
yn ardderchog yn eu llifrai gwyrddleision a gwanwynol.

Ond un prydnawn, ar ol i'r haul ymgilio i yst felloedd y gorllewin, tra
yr oedd amaethwr Pantannas yn dychwelyd tua ei gartref, cyfarfyddwyd ag
ef gan fod bychan ar ffurf dyn, yn gwisgo hugan goch; a phan ddaeth
gyferbyn ag ef dadweiniodd ei gledd bychan, gan gyfeirio ei flaen at yr
amaethwr, a dywedyd,

Dial a ddaw,  
Y mat gerllaw.

Ceisiodd yr amaethwr chwerthin, ond yr oedd rhywbeth yn edrychiad sarrug
a llym y gwr bychan ag a barodd iddo deimlo yn hynod o annymunol. 

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

Ychydig o nosweithiau yn ddiweddarach, pan oedd y teulu ar ymneillduo
i'w gorphwysleoedd, dychrynwyd hwy yn fawr iawn gan drwst, fel pe byddai
y ty yn syrthio i lawr bendramwnwgl, ac yn union ar ol a'r twrf beidio,
clywent y geiriau bygythiol a ganlyn--a dim yn rhagor--yn cael eu
parablu yn uchel,

Daw dial.

Pan oedd yr yd wedi cael ei fedi ac yn barod i gael ei gywain i'r
ysgubor, yn sydyn ryw noswaith llosgwyd ef fel nad oedd yr un dywysen na
gwelltyn i'w gael yn un man o'r caeau, ac nis gallasai neb fod wedi
gosod yr yd ar dan ond Bendith y Mamau.

Fel ag y mae yn naturiol i ni feddwl teimlodd yr amaethwr yn fawr
oherwydd y tro, ac edifarhaodd yn ei galon ddarfod iddo erioed wrando a
gwneuthur yn ol cyfarwyddyd yr hen reibwraig, ac felly ddwyn arno
ddigofaint a chasineb Bendith y Mamau.

Drannoeth i'r noswaith y llosgwyd yr yd fel yr oedd yn arolygu y difrod
achoswyd gan y tan, wele'r gwr bychan ag ydoedd wedi ei gyfarfod ychydig
o ddiwrnodau yn flaenorol yn ei gyfarfod eilwaith a chyda threm
herfeiddiol pwyntiodd ei gleddyf ato gan ddywedyd,

Nid yw ond dechreu.

Trodd gwyneb yr amaethwr cyn wynned a'r marmor, a safodd gan alw y gwr
bychan yn ol, ond bu y còr yn hynod o wydn ac anewyllysgar i droi ato,
ond ar ol hir erfyn arno trodd yn ei ol gan ofyn yn sarrug beth yr oedd
yr amaethwr yn ei geisio, yr hwn a hysbysodd iddo ei fod yn berffaith
foddlon i adael y caeau lle yr oedd eu hoff ymgyrchfan i dyfu yn don
eilwaith, a rhoddi caniatad iddynt i ddyfod iddynt pryd y dewisent, ond
yn unig iddynt beidio dial eu llid yn mhellach arno ef.

'Na,' oedd yr atebiad penderfynol, 'y mae gair y brenin wedi ei roi y
bydd iddo ymddial arnat hyd eithaf ei allu ac 

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

nid oes dim un gallu ar wyneb y greadigaeth a bair iddo gael ei dynnu yw
ol.'

Dechreuodd yr amaethwr wylo ar hyn, ond yn mhen ychydig hysbysodd y gwr
bychan y byddai iddo ef siarad a'i bennaeth ar y mater, ac y cawsai efe
wybod y canlyniad ond iddo ddyfod i'w gyfarfod ef yn y fan honno amser
machludiad haul drennydd.

Addawodd yr amaethwr ddyfod i'w gyfarfod, a phan ddaeth yr amser
apwyntiedig o amgylch iddo j gyfarfod a'r bychan cafodd ef yno yn ei
aros, ac hysbysodd iddo fod y pennaeth wedi ystyried ei gais yn
ddifrifol, ond gan fod et air bob amser yn anghyfnewidiol y buasai y
dialedd bygythiedig yn rhwym o gymeryd lle ar y teulu, ond ar gyfrif ei
edifeirwch ef na chawsai digwydd yn ei amser ef nac eiddo ei blant.

Llonyddodd hynny gryn lawer ar feddwl terfysglyd yr amaethwr, a
dechreuodd Bendith y Mamau dalu eu hymweliadau a'r lle eilwaith a mynych
y clywid sain eu cerddoriaeth felusber yn codi o'r caeau amgylchynol yn
ystod y nos.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*

Pasiodd canrif heibio heb i'r dialedd bygythiedig gael ei gyflawni, ac
er fod teulu Pantannas yn cael eu hadgofio yn awr ac eilwaith, y buasai
yn sicr o ddigwydd hwyr neu hwyrach, eto wrth hir glywed y waedd,

Daw Dial,

ymgynefinasant a hi nes eu bod yn barod i gredu na fuasai dim yn dyfod
o'r bygythiad byth.

Yr oedd etifedd Pantannas yn caru a merch i dirfeddiannydd cymydogaethol
a breswyliai mewn tyddyn o'r enw Pen Craig Daf. Yr oedd priodas y par
dedwydd i gymeryd lle yn mhen ychydig wythnosau ac ymddangosai rhieni y
cwpl ieuanc yn hynod o foddlon i'r ymuniad teuluol ag oedd ar gymeryd
lle. 

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

Yr oedd yn amser y Nadolig--a thalodd y ddarpar wraig ieuanc ymweliad a
theulu ei darpar wr, ac yr oedd yno wledd o wydd rostiedig yn baratoedig
gogyfer a'r achlysur.

Eisteddai y cwmni oddeutu y tan i adrodd rhyw chwedlau difyrrus er mwyn
pasio yr amser, pryd y cawsant eu dychrynu yn fawr gan lais treiddgar yn
dyrchafu megis o wely yr afon yn gwaeddi

Daeth amser ymdïal.

Aethant oll allan i wrando a glywent y lleferydd eilwaith, ond nid oedd
dim i'w glywed ond brochus drwst y dwfir wrth raiadru dros glogwyni
aruthrol y cerwyni. Ond ni chawsant aros i wrando yn hir iawn cyn iddynt
glywed yr un lleferydd eilwaith yn dyrchafu i fyny yn uwch na swn y dwfr
pan yn bwrlymu dros ysgwyddau y graig, ac yn gwaeddi,

Daeth yr amser.

Nis gallent ddyfalu beth yr oedd yn ei arwyddo, a chymaint ydoedd eu
braw, a'u syndod fel nad allent lefaru yr un gair a'u gilydd. Yn mhen
ennyd dychwelasant i'r ty a chyn iddynt eistedd credent yn ddios fod yr
adeilad yn cael ei ysgwyd idd ei sylfeini gan ryw dwrf y tu allan. Pan
yr oedd yr oll wedi cael eu parlysio gan fraw, wele fenyw fechan yn
gwneuthur ei hymddangosiad ar y bwrdd o'u blaen, yr hwn oedd yn sefyll
yn agos i'r ffenestr.

'Beth yr wyt yn ei geisio yma, y peth bychan hagr?' holai un o'r
gwyddfodolion.

Nid oes gennyf unrhyw neges a thi, y gwr hir dafod,' oedd atebiad y
fenyw fechan. 'Ond yr wyf wedi cael fy anfon yma i adrodd rhyw bethau ag
sydd ar ddigwydd i'r teulu hwn, a theulu arall o'r gymydogaeth ag a
ddichon fod o ddyddordeb iddynt, ond gan i mi dderbyn y fath sarhad
oddiar law y gwr du ag sydd yn eistedd yn y cornel, ni fydd i mi godi y
llen ag oedd yn cuddio y dyfodol allan o'u golwg.' 

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

'Atolwg os oes yn dy feddiant ryw wybodaeth parth dyfodol rhai o honom
ag a fyddai yn ddyddorol i ni gael ei glywed, dwg hi allan,' ebai un
arall o'r gwyddfodolion.

'Na wnaf, ond yn unig hysbysu, fod calon gwyryf fel llong ar y traeth yn
methu cyrraedd y porthlad oherwydd digalondid y pilot.'

A chyda ei bod yn llefaru y gair diweddaf diflannodd o'u gwydd, na
wyddai neb i ba le na pha fodd!

Drwy ystod ei hymweliad hi, peidiodd y waedd a godasai o'r afon, ond yn
fuan ar ol iddi ddiflannu, dechreuodd eilwaith a chyhoeddi

Daeth amser dial,

ac ni pheidiodd am hir amser. Yr oedd y cynulliad wedi cael eu meddiannu
a gormod o fraw i fedru llefaru yr un gair, ac yr oedd llen o bruddder
yn daenedig dros wyneb pob un o honynt. Daeth amser iddynt i ymwahanu,
ac aeth Rhydderch y mab i hebrwng Gwerfyl ei gariadferch tua Phen Craig
Daf, o ba siwrnai ni dychwelodd byth.

Cyn ymadael di fun dywedir iddynt dyngu bythol ffyddlondeb i'w gilydd,
pe heb weled y naill y llall byth ond hynny, ac nad oedd dim a allai
beri iddynt anghofio y eu gilydd.'

Mae yn debygol i'r llanc Rhydderch pan yn dychwelyd gartref gael ei hun
oddifewn i un o gylchoedd Bendith y Mamau, ac yna iddynt ei hud-ddenu i
mewn i un o'u hogofau yn Nharren y Cigfrain, ac yno y bu.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*

Y mae yn llawn bryd i ni droi ein gwynebau yn ol tua Phantannas a Phen
Craig Daf. Yr oedd rhieni y bachgen anffodus yn mron gwallgofi. Nid oedd
ganddynt yr un drychfeddwl i ba le i fyned i chwilio am dano, ac er
chwilio yn mhob man a phob lle methwyd yn glir a dyfod o hyd iddo, na
chael gair o'i hanes. 

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

Ychydig i fyny yn y cwm mewn ogof danddaearol trigfannai hen feudwy
oedrannus, yr hwn hefyd a ystyrrid yn ddewin, o'r enw Gweirydd. Aethant
yn mhen ychydig wythnosau i ofyn iddo ef, a fedrai roddi iddynt ryw
wybodaeth parthed i'w mab colledig--ond i ychydig bwrpas. Ni wnaeth yr
hyn a adrododd hwnnw wrthynt ond dyfnhau y clwyf a rhoi golwg fwy
anobeithiol fyth ar yr amgylchiad. Ar ol iddynt ei hysbysu ynghylch
ymddangosiad y fenyw fechan ynghyd a'r llais wylofus a glywsent yn
dyrchafu o'r afan y nos yr aeth ar goll, hysbysodd efe iddynt mai y farn
fygythiedig ar y teulu gan Fendith y Mamau oedd wedi goddiweddid y
llanc, ac nad oedd o un diben iddynt feddwl cael ei weled byth mwyach!
Ond feallai y gwnelai ei ymddangosiad yn mhen oesau, ond dim yn eu
hamser hwy.

Pasiai yr amser heibio, a chwyddodd yr wythnosau i fisoedd, a'r misoedd
i flynyddoedd, a chasglwyd tad a mam Rhydderch at eu tadau. Yr oedd y
lle o hyd yn parhau yr un, ond y preswylwyr yn newid yn barhaus, ac yr
oedd yr adgofion am ei golledigaeth yn darfod yn gyflym, ond er hynny yr
oedd un yn disgwyl ei ddychweliad yn ol yn barhaus, ac yn gobeithio
megis yn erbyn gobaith am gael ei weled eilwaith. Bob boreu gyda bod
dorau y wawr yn ymagor dros gaerog fynyddoedd y dwyrain gwelid hi bob
tywydd yn rhedeg i ben bryn bychan, a chyda llygaid yn orlawn o ddagrau
hiraethlon syllai i bob cyfeiriad i edrych a ganfyddai ryw argoel fod ei
hanwylyd yn dychwelyd; ond i ddim, pwrpas. Canol dydd gwelid hi eilwaith
yn yr un man, a phan ymgollai yr haul fel pelen eiriasgoch o dân dros y
terfyngylch, yr oedd hi yno.

Edrychai nes yn agos bod yn ddall, ac wylai ei henaid allan o ddydd i
ddydd ar ol anwylddyn ei chalon. O'r diwedd aeth y rhai sydd yn edrych
drwy y ffenestri i omedd eu gwasanaeth iddi, ac yr oedd y pren almon yn
coroni ei 

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

phen a'i flagur gwyryfol, ond parhai hi i edrych, ond nid oedd neb yn
dod. Yn llawn o ddyddiau ac yn aeddfed i'r bedd rhoddwyd terfyn ar ei
holl obeithion a'i disgwyliadau gan angeu, a chludwyd ei gweddillion
marwol i fynwent hen Gapel y Fan.

Pasiai blynyddoedd heibio fel mwg, ac oesau fel cysgodion y boreu, ac
nid oedd neb yn fyw ag oedd yn cofio Rhydderch, ond adroddid ei golliad
disymwyth yn aml. Dylasem fynegu na welwyd yr un o Fendith y Mamau
oddeutu y gymydogaeth wedi ei golliad, a pheidiodd sain eu cerddoriaeth
o'r nos honno allan.

Yr oedd Rhydderch wedi cael ei hud-ddenu i fyned gyda Bendith y
Mamau--ac aethant ag ef i ffwrdd i'w hogof. Ar ol iddo aros yno dros
ychydig o ddiwrnodau fel y tybiai, gofynnodd am ganiatad i ddychwelyd,
yr hyn a rwydd ganiatawyd iddo gan y brenin. Daeth allan o'r ogof, ac yr
oedd yn ganol dydd braf, a'r haul yn llewyrchu odiar fynwes ffurfafen
ddigwmwl. Cerddodd yn mlaen o Darren y Cigfrain hyd nes iddo ddyfod i
olwg Capel y Fan, ond gymaint oedd ei syndod pan y gwelodd nad oedd yr
un capel yno! Pa le yr oedd wedi bod, a pha faint o amser? Gyda
theimladau cymysgedik cyfeiriodd ei gamrau tua Phen Craig Daf,
cartref-le ei anwylyd, ond nid oedd hi yno, ac nid oedd yn adwaen yr un
dyn ag oedd yno chwaith. Ni fedrai gael gair o hanes ei gariad a
chymerodd y rhai a breswylient yno mai gwallgofddyn ydoedd.

Prysurodd eilwaith tua Phantannas, ac yr oedd ei syndod yn fwy fyth yno!
Nid oedd yn adwaen yr un o honynt, ac ni wyddent hwythau ddim am dano
yntau. O'r diwedd daeth gwr y ty i fewn, ac yr oedd hwnnw yn cofio
clywed ei dad cu yn adrodd am lanc ag oedd wedi myned yn ddisymwyth i
goll er ys peth cannoedd o flynyddoedd yn ol, ond na wyddai neb i ba le.
Rywfodd neu gilydd tarawodd gwr y tý ei ffon yn erbyn Rhydderch, pa un a
ddiflannodd 

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

mewn cawod o lwch, ac ni chlywyd air o son beth ddaeth o hono mwyach.

'In one of the centuries gone by, there lived a husbandman on the farm
of Pantannas; and at that time the fairies used to pay frequent visits
to several of the fields which belonged to him. He cherished in his
bosom a considerable hatred for the "noisy, boisterous, and pernicious
tribe," as he called them, and often did he long to be able to discover
some way to rid the place of them. At last he was told by an old witch
that the way to get rid of them was easy enough, and that she would tell
him how to attain what he so greatly wished, if he gave her one
evening's milking <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) on his farm, and
one morning's. He agreed to her conditions, and from her he received
advice, which was to the effect that he was to plough all the fields
where they had their favourite resorts, and that, if they found the
green sward gone, they would take offence, and never return to trouble
him with their visits to the spot.

'The husbandman followed the advice to the letter, and his work was
crowned with success. Not a single one of them was now to be seen about
the fields, and, instead of the sound of their sweet music, which used
to be always heard rising from the Coarse Meadow Land, the most complete
silence now reigned over their favourite resort.

'He sowed his land with wheat and other grain; the verdant spring had
now thrust winter off its throne, and the fields appeared splendid in
their vernal and green livery.

'But one evening, when the sun had retired to the chambers of the west,
and when the farmer of Pantannas

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

was returning home, he was met by a diminutive being in the shape of a
man, with a red coat on. When he had come right up to him, he unsheathed
his little sword, and, directing the point towards the farmer, he
said:--

Vengeance cometh,  
Fast it approacheth.

'The farmer tried to laugh, but there was something in the surly and
stern looks of the little fellow which made him feel exceedingly
uncomfortable.

'A few nights afterwards, as the family were retiring to rest, they were
very greatly frightened by a noise, as though the house was falling to
pieces; and, immediately after the noise, they heard a voice uttering
loudly the threatening words--and nothing more:--

Vengeance cometh.

'When, however, the corn was reaped and ready to be carried to the barn,
it was, all of a sudden, burnt up one night, so that neither an ear nor
a straw of it could be found anywhere in the fields; and now nobody
could have set the corn on fire but the fairies.

'As one may naturally suppose, the farmer felt very much on account of
this event, and he regretted in his heart having done according to the
witch's direction, and having thereby brought upon him the anger and
hatred of the fairies.

'The day after the night of the burning of the corn, as he was surveying
the destruction caused by the fire, behold the little fellow, who had
met him a few days before, met him again, and, with a challenging
glance, he pointed his sword towards him, saying:--

It but beginneth.

The farmer's face turned as white as marble, and he stood calling the
little fellow to come back; but the

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

dwarf proved very unyielding and reluctant to turn to him; but, after
long entreaty, he turned back, asking the farmer, in a surly tone, what
he wanted, when he was told by the latter that he was quite willing to
allow the fields, in which their favourite resorts had been, to grow
again into a green sward, and to let them frequent them as often as they
wished, provided they would no further wreak their anger on him.

'"No," was the determined reply, "the word of the king has been given,
that he will avenge himself on thee to the utmost of his power; and
there is no power on the face of creation that will cause it to be
withdrawn."

'The farmer began to weep at this, and, after a while, the little fellow
said that he would speak to his lord on the matter, and that he would
let him know the result, if he would come there to meet him at the hour
of sunset on the third day after.

'The farmer promised to meet him; and, when the time appointed for
meeting the little man came, he found him awaiting him, and he was told
by him that his lord had seriously considered his request, but that, as
the king's word was ever immutable, the threatened vengeance was to take
effect on the family. On account, however, of his repentance, it would
not be allowed to happen in his time or that of his children.

'That calmed the disturbed mind of the farmer a good deal. The fairies
began again to pay frequent visits to the place, and their melodious
singing was again heard at night in the fields around.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*

A century passed by without seeing the threatened vengeance carried into
effect; and, though the Pantannas, family were reminded now and again
that it was certain

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

sooner or later to come, nevertheless, by long hearing the voice that
said--

Vengeance cometh,

they became so accustomed to it, that they were ready to believe that
nothing would ever come of the threat.

'The heir of Pantannas was paying his addresses to the daughter of a
neighbouring landowner who lived at the farm house called Pen Craig Daf,
and the wedding of the happy pair was to take place in a few weeks, and
the parents on both sides appeared exceedingly content with the union
that was about to take place between tile two families.

'It was Christmas time, and the intended wife paid a visit to the family
of her would-be husband. There they had a feast of roast goose prepared
for the occasion.

'The company sat round the fire to relate amusing tales to pass the
time, when they were greatly frightened by a piercing voice, rising, as
it were, from the bed of the river <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68),
and shrieking:--

The time for revenge is come.

'They all went out to listen if they could hear the voice a second time,
but nothing was to be heard save the angry noise of the water as it
cascaded over the dread cliffs of the kerwyni; they had not long,
however, to wait till they heard again the same voice rising above the
noise of the waters, as they boiled over the shoulders of the rock, and
crying:--

The time is come.

'They could not guess what it meant, and so great was their fright and
astonishment, that no one could utter a word to another. Shortly they
returned to the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

house, when they believed that beyond doubt the building was being
shaken to its foundations by some noise outside. When all were thus
paralysed by fear, behold a little woman made her appearance on the
table, which stood near the window.

'"What dost thou, ugly little thing, want here?' asked one of those
present.

'"I have nothing to do with thee, O man of the meddling tongue," said
the little woman, "but I have been sent here to recount some things that
are about to happen to this family and another family in the
neighbourhood, things that might be of interest to them; but, as I have
received such an insult from the black fellow that sits in the corner,
the veil that hides them from their sight shall not be lifted by me."

'"Pray," said another of those present, "if thou hast in thy possession
any knowledge with regard to the future of any one of us that would
interest us to hear, bring it forth."

'"No, I will but merely tell you that a certain maiden's heart is like a
ship on the coast, unable to reach the harbour because the pilot has
lost heart."

'As soon as she had cried out the last word, she vanished, no one knew
whither or how.

'During her visit, the cry rising from the river had stopped, but soon
afterwards it began again to proclaim:--

The time of vengeance is come;

nor did it cease for a long while. The company had been possessed by too
much terror for one to be able to address another, and a sheet of gloom
had, as it were, been spread over the face of each. The time for parting
came, and Rhydderch the heir went to escort Gwerfyl, his lady-love, home
towards Pen Craig Daf, a journey from which he never returned.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

'Before bidding one another "Good-bye," they are said to have sworn to
each other eternal fidelity, even though they should never see one
another from that moment forth, and that nothing should make the one
forget the other.

'It is thought probable that the young man Rhydderch, on his way back
towards home, got into one of the rings of the fairies, that they
allured him into one of their caves in the Ravens' Rift, and that there
he remained.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*

'It is high time for us now to turn back towards Pantannas and Pen Craig
Daf. The parents of the unlucky youth were almost beside themselves:
they had no idea where to go to look for him, and, though they searched
every spot in the place, they failed completely to find him or any clue
to his history.

'A little higher up the country, there dwelt, in a cave underground, an
aged hermit called Gweirydd, who was regarded also as a sorcerer. They
went a few weeks afterwards to ask him whether he could give them any
information about their lost son; but it was of little avail. What that
man told them did but deepen the wound and give the event a still more
hopeless aspect. When they had told him of the appearance of the little
woman, and the doleful cry heard rising from the river on the night when
their son was lost, he informed them that it was the judgement
threatened to the family by the fairies that had overtaken the youth,
and that it was useless for them to think of ever seeing him again:
possibly he might make his appearance after generations had gone by, but
not in their lifetime.

'Time rolled on, weeks grew into months, and months into years, until
Rhydderch's father and

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

mother were gathered to their ancestors. The place continued the same,
but the inhabitants constantly changed, so that the memory of
Rhydderch's disappearance was fast dying away. Nevertheless there was
one who expected his return all the while, and hoped, as it were against
hope, to see him once more. Every morn, as the gates of the dawn opened
beyond the castellated heights of the east, she might be seen, in all
weathers, hastening to the top of a small hill, and, with eyes full of
the tears of longing, gazing in every direction to see if she could
behold any sign of her beloved's return; but in vain. At noon, she might
be seen on the same spot again; she was also there at the hour when the
sun was wont to hide himself, like a red-hot ball of fire, below the
horizon. She gazed until she was nearly blind, and she wept forth her
soul from day to day for the darling of her heart. At last they that
looked out at the windows began to refuse their service, and the almond
tree commenced to crown her head with its virgin bloom. She continued to
gaze, but he came not. Full of days, and ripe for the grave, death put
an end to all her hopes and all her expectations. Her mortal remains
were buried in the graveyard of the old Chapel of the Fan <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69)

'Years passed away like smoke, and generations like the shadows of the
morning, and there was no longer anybody alive who remembered Rhydderch,
but the tale of his sudden missing was frequently in people's mouths.
And we ought to have said that after the event no one of the fairies was
seen about the neighbourhood, and the sound of their music ceased from
that night.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

'Rhydderch had been allured by them, and they took him away into their
cave. When he had stayed there only a few days, as he thought, he asked
for permission to return, which was readily granted him by the king. He
issued from the cave when it was a fine noon, with the sun beaming from
the bosom of a cloudless firmament. He walked on from the Ravens' Rift
until he came near the site of the Fan Chapel; but what was his
astonishment to find no chapel there! Where, he wondered, had he been,
and how long away? So with mixed feelings he directed his steps towards
Pen Craig Daf, the home of his beloved one, but she was not there nor
any one whom he knew either. He could get no word of the history of his
sweetheart, and those who dwelt in the place took him for a madman.

'He hastened then to Pantannas, where his astonishment was still
greater. He knew nobody there, and nobody knew anything about him. At
last the man of the house came in, and he remembered hearing his
grandfather relating how a youth had suddenly disappeared, nobody knew
whither, some hundreds of years previously. Somehow or other the man of
the house chanced to knock his walking-stick against Rhydderch, when the
latter vanished in a shower of dust. Nothing more was ever heard of
him.'

Before leaving Glamorgan, I may add that Mr. Sikes associates fairy
ladies with Crymlyn Lake, between Briton Ferry and Swansea; but, as
frequently happens with him, he does not deign to tell us whence be got
the legend. 'It is also believed,' he says at p. 35, 'that a large town
lies swallowed up there, and that the *Gwragedd Annwn* have turned the
submerged walls to use as the superstructure of their fairy palaces.
Some claim to have seen the towers of beautiful castles lifting their
battlements beneath the surface of the dark

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

waters, and fairy bells are at times heard ringing from these towers.'
So much by the way: we shall return to Crymlyn in chapter vii.

### XII.

The other day, as I was going to Gwent, I chanced to be in the Golden
Valley in Herefordshire, where the names in the churchyards seem largely
to imply a Welsh population, though the Welsh language has not been
heard there for ages. Among others I noticed Joneses and Williamses in
abundance at Abbey Dore, Evanses and Bevans, Morgans, Prossers and
Prices, not to mention Sayces--that is to say, Welshmen of English
extraction or education--a name which may also be met with in Little
England in Pembrokeshire, and probably on other English-Welsh borders.
Happening to have to wait for a train at the Abbey Dore station, I got
into conversation with the tenants of a cottage hard by, and introduced
the subject of the fairies. The old man knew nothing about them, but his
wife, Elizabeth Williams, had been a servant girl at a place called Pen
Pôch, which she pronounced with the Welsh guttural *ch*: she said that
it is near Llandeilo Cressenny in Monmouthshire. It was about forty
years ago when she served at Pen Pôch, and her mistress' name was Evans,
who was then about fifty years of age. Now Mrs. Evans was in the habit
of impressing on her servant girls' minds, that, unless they made the
house tidy before going to bed, and put everything in its place
overnight, the little people--the fairies, she thinks she called
them--would leave them no rest in bed at night, but would come and
'pinch them like.' If they put everything in its place, and left the
house 'tidy like,' it would be all

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

right, and 'nobody would do anything to them like.' That is all I could
get from her without prompting her, which I did at length by suggesting
to her that the fairies might leave the tidy servants presents, a
shilling 'on the hearth or the hob like.' Yes, she thought there was
something of that sort, and her way of answering me suggested that this
was not the first time she had heard of the shilling. She had never been
lucky enough to have had one herself, nor did she know of anybody else
that I had got it like.'

During a brief but very pleasant sojourn at Llanover in May, 1883, I
made some inquiries about the fairies, and obtained the following
account from William Williams, who now, in his seventieth year, works in
Lady Llanover's garden:--'I know of a family living a little way from
here at -----, or as they would now call it inEnglish -----, whose
ancestors, four generations ago, used to be kind to *Bendith y Mamau*,
and always welcomed their visits by leaving at night a basinful of bread
and milk for them near the fire. It always used to be eaten up before
the family got up in the morning. But one night a naughty servant man
gave them instead of milk a bowlful of urine <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70). They, on finding it out, threw it about
the house and went away disgusted. But the servant watched in the house
the following night. They found him out, and told him that he had made
fools of them, and that in punishment for his crime there would always
be a fool, i. e. an idiot, in his family. As a matter of fact, there was
one among his children afterwards, and there is one in the family now.
They have always been in a bad way ever since, and they never prosper.
The name of the man who originally

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

offended the fairies was -----; and the name of the present fool among
his descendants is -----.' For evident reasons it is not desirable to
publish the names.

Williams spoke also of a sister to his mother, who acted as servant to
his parents. There were, he said, ten stepping stones between his
father's house and the well, and on every one of these stones his aunt
used to find a penny every morning, until she made it known to others,
when, of course, the pennies ceased coming. He did not know why the
fairies gave money to her, unless it was because she was a most tidy
servant.

Another Llanover gardener remembered that the fairies used to change
children, and that a certain woman called Nani Fach in that
neighbourhood was one of their offspring; and he had been told that
there were fairy rings in certain fields not far away in Llanover
parish.

A third gardener, who is sixty-eight years of age, and is likewise in
Lady Llanover's employ, had heard it said that servant girls about his
home were wont to sweep the floor clean at night, and to throw crumbs of
bread about on it before going to bed.

Lastly, Mrs. Gardner of Ty Llchaf Llanover, who is ninety years of age,
remembers having a field close to Capel Newydd near Blaen Mon, in
Llanover Uchaf, pointed out to her as containing fairy rings; and she
recollects hearing, when she was a child, that a man had got into one of
them. He remained away from home, as they always did, she said, a whole
year and a day; but she has forgotten how he was recovered. Then she
went on to say that her father had often got up in the night to see that
his horses were not taken out and ridden about the fields by *Bendith y
Mamau*; for they were wont to ride people's horses late at night round
the four comers of the fields, and thereby they often

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

broke the horses' wind. This, she gave me to understand, was believed in
the parish of Llanover and that part of the country generally. So here
we have an instance probably of confounding fairies with witches.

I have not the means at my command of going at length into the folklore
of Gwent, so I will merely mention where the reader may find a good deal
about it. I have already introduced the name of the credulous old
Christian, Edmund Jones of the Tranch: he published at Trefecca in the
year 1779 a small volume entitled, *A Geographical, Historical, and
Religious Account of the Parish of Aberystruth in the County of
Monmouth, to which are added Memoirs of several Persons of Note who
lived in the said Parish*. In 1813, by which time he seems to have left
this world for another, where he expected to understand all about the
fairies and their mysterious life, a small volume of his was published
at Newport, bearing the title, *A Relation of Apparitions of Spirits in
the County of Monmouth and the Principality of Wales, with other notable
Relations from England, together with Observations about them, and
Instructions from them, designed to confute and to prevent the
Infidelity of denying the Being and Apparition of Spirits, which tends
to Irreligion and Atheism. By the late Rev. Edmund Jones, of the
Tranch.* Naturally those volumes have been laid under contribution by
Mr. Sikes, though the tales about apparitions in them are frequently of
a ghastly nature, and sometimes loathsome: on the whole, they remind me
more than anything else I have ever read of certain Breton tales which
breathe fire and brimstone: all such begin to be now out of fashion in
Protestant countries. I shall at present only quote a passage of quite a
different nature from the earlier volume, p. 72--it is an interesting
one, and it runs thus:--'It was the general opinion in times past, when
these things were very

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

frequent, that the fairies knew whatever was spoken in the air without
the houses, not so much what was spoken in the houses. I suppose they
chiefly knew what was spoken in the air at night. It was also said that
they rather appeared to an uneven number of persons, to one, three,
five, &c.; and oftener to men than to women. Thomas William Edmund, of
Havodavel, an honest pious man, who often saw them, declared that they
appeared with one bigger than the rest going before them in the
company.' With the notion that the fairies heard everything uttered out
of doors may be compared the faculty attributed to the great magician
king, Math ab Mathonwy, of hearing any whisper whatsoever that met the
wind: see the Oxford *Mabinogion*, p. 60, and Guest's *Mabinogion*, iii.
219; see also this book, as to the same faculty belonging to the fairy
people of the Corannians, and the strange precautions taken against them
by the brothers Llûd and Llevelys.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[76:1](cf106.htm#fr_31) These were held, so far
as I can gather from the descriptions usually given of them, exactly as
I have seen a *kermess* or *kirchmesse* celebrated at Heidelberg, or
rather the village over the Neckar opposite that town. It was in 1869,
but I forget what saint it was with whose name the *kermess* was
supposed to be connected: the chief features of it were dancing and beer
drinking. It was by no means unusual for a Welsh *Gwyl Fabsant* to bring
together to a rural neighbourhood far more people than could readily be
accommodated; and in Carnarvonshire a hurriedly improvised bed is to
this day called *gwely g'l'absant*, as it were 'a bed (for the time) of
a saint's festival.' Rightly or wrongly the belief lingers that these
merry gatherings were characterized by no little immorality, which made
the better class of people set their faces against them.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[81:1](cf106.htm#fr_32) Since the editing of
this volume was begun I have heard that it is intended to publish the
Welsh collection which Mr. Jones has made: so I shall only give a
translation of the Edward Llwyd version of the afanc story: see section
v. of this chapter.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[81:2](cf106.htm#fr_33) This word is not in
Welsh dictionaries, but it is Scotch and Manx Gaelic, and is possibly a
remnant of the Goidelic once spoken in Gwynedd.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[84:1](cf106.htm#fr_34) Our charlatans never
leave off trying to make this into *Tryfaen* so as to extract *maen*,
'stone,' from it. They do not trouble themselves to find out whether it
ever was *Tryfaen* or not: in fact they rather like altering everything
as much as they can.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[96:1](cf106.htm#fr_35) *Ystrádllyn*, with the
accent on the penult, is commonly pronounced *Strállyn*, and means 'the
strand of the lake,' and the hollow is named after it *Cwm Strállyn*,
and the lake in it *Llyn Cwm Strállyn*, which literally means 'the Lake
of the Combe of the Strand of the Lake'--all seemingly for the luxury of
forgetting the original name of the lake, which I have never been able
to ascertain.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[102:1](cf106.htm#fr_36) So Mr. Jones puts it: I
have never heard of any other part of the Principality where the
children are usually baptized before they are eight days old.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[106:1](cf106.htm#fr_37) I cannot account for
this spelling, but the ll in Bellis is English ll, not the Welsh ll,
which represents a sound very different from that of l.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[107:1](cf106.htm#fr_38) Where not stated
otherwise, as in this instance, the reader is to regard this chapter as
written in the latter part of the year 1881.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[117:1](cf106.htm#fr_39) See Giraldus'
Itinerarium Kambriæ, i. 8 (pp. 75-8); some discussion of the whole story
will be found in chapter iii of this volume.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[125:1](cf106.htm#fr_40) Dr. Moore explains this
to be cabbages and potatoes, pounded and mixed with butter or lard.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[130:1](cf106.htm#fr_41) It would be interesting
to know what has become of this letter and others of Llwyd's once in the
possession of the canon, for it is not to be supposed that the latter
ever took the trouble to make an accurate copy of them any more than he
did of any other MSS.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[130:2](cf106.htm#fr_42) There is also a *Sarn
yr Afanc*, 'the Afanc's Stepping Stones,' on the Ogwen river in Nant
Ffrancon: see Pennant's Tours in Wales, iii. 101.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[131:1](cf106.htm#fr_43) The oxen should
accordingly have been called *Ychain Pannog*; but the explanation is not
to be taken seriously. These oxen will come under the reader's notice
again, to wit in chapter x.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[135:1](cf106.htm#fr_44) The lines are copied
exactly as given at p. 189 (I. vi. 25-30) of *The Poetical Works of
Lewis Glyn Cothi*, edited for the Cymmrodorion by Gwallter Mechain and
Tegid, and printed at Oxford in the year 1837.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[137:1](cf106.htm#fr_45) This, I should say,
must be a mistake, as it contradicts all the folklore which makes the
rowan an object of dread to the fairies.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[140:1](cf106.htm#fr_46) See *Choice Notes* from
'*Notes and Queries*' (London, 1859), p. 147.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[142:1](cf106.htm#fr_47) It is more likely that
it is a shortening of *Llyn y Barfog*, meaning the Lake of the Bearded
One, *Lacus Barbati* as it were, the Bearded One being somebody like the
hairy monster of another lake mentioned at p. 18 above, or him of the
white beard pictured at p. 127.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[142:2](cf106.htm#fr_48) So far from *afanc*
meaning a crocodile, an *afanc* is represented in the story of Peredur
as a creature that would cast at every comer a poisoned spear from
behind a pillar standing at the mouth of the cave inhabited by it; see
the Oxford *Mabinogion*, p. 224. The corresponding Irish word is
*abhac*, which according to O'Reilly means 'a dwarf, pigmy, manikin; a
sprite.'

<span id="fn_49"></span>[143:1](cf106.htm#fr_49) I should not like to
vouch of the accuracy of Mr. Pughe's rendering of this and the other
Welsh names which he has introduced: that involves difficult questions.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[144:1](cf106.htm#fr_50) The writer meant the
river known as Dyfi or Dovey; but he would seem to have had a water
etymology on the brain.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[144:2](cf106.htm#fr_51) This involves the name
of the river called Disynni, and *Diswnwy* embodies a popular etymology
which is not worth discussing.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[145:1](cf106.htm#fr_52) It would, I think, be a
little nearer the mark as follows:--

Come thou, Einion's Yellow One,  
Stray-horns, the Particoloured Lake Cow,  
And the Hornless Dodin  
Arise, come home.

But one would like to know whether *Dodin* ought not rather to be
written *Dodyn*, to rhyme with Llyn.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[147:1](cf106.htm#fr_53) Hywel's real name is
William Davies, Tal y Bout, Cardiganshire. As adjudicator I became
acquainted with several stories which Mr. Davies has since given me
permission to use, and I have to thank him for clues to several others.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[152:1](cf106.htm#fr_54) Or *Llech y Deri*, as
Mr. Williams tells me in a letter, where he adds that he does not know
the place, but that he took it to be in the Hundred of Cemmes, in
North-west Pembrokeshire. I take *Llech y Derwydd* to be fictitious; but
I have not succeeded in finding any place called by the other name
either.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[155:1](cf106.htm#fr_55) Perhaps the more usual
thing is for the man returning from Faery to fall into dust on the spot:
see later in this chapter the Curse of Pantannas which ends with an
instance in point, and compare Howells, pp. 142; 146.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[161:1](cf106.htm#fr_56) B. Davies, that is,
Benjamin Davies, who gives this tale, was, as I learn from Gwynionydd, a
native of Cenarth. He was a schoolmaster for about twelve years, and
died in October, 1859, at Merthyr, near Carmarthen: he describes him as
a good and intelligent man.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[162:1](cf106.htm#fr_57) This is ordinarily
written Cenarth, the name of a parish on the Teifi, where the three
counties of Cardigan, Pembroke, and Carmarthen meet.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[163:1](cf106.htm#fr_58) The name Llan Dydoch
occurs in the Bruts, A.D. 987 and 1089, and is the one still in use in
Welsh; but the English *St. Dogmael's* shows that it is derived from
that of Dogfael's name when the mutation consonant *f* or *v* was still
written *m*. In Welsh the name of the saint has been worn down to
*Dogwel*, as in St. Dogwell's near Fishguard, and Llanddogwel in
Llanrhuddlad parish in Anglesey: see Reece's *Welsh Saints*, p. 211. It
points back to an early Brythonic form *Doco-maglos*, with *doco* of the
same origin as Latin *dux*, *dŭcis*, 'a leader,' and *maglo-s* = Irish
*māl*, 'a lord or prince.' Dogfael's name assumes in Llan *Dydoch* a
Goidelic form, for Dog-fael would have to become in Irish *Doch-mhāl*,
which, cut down to *Doch* with the honorific prefix *to*, has yielded
*Ty-doch*; but I am not clear why it is not *Ty-ddoch*. Another instance
of a Goidelic form of a name having the local preference in Wales to
this day offers itself in *Cyfelach* and Llan *Gyfelach* in
Glamorganshire. The Welsh was formerly *Cimeliauc* (Reece, p. 274). Here
may also be mentioned St. Cyngar, otherwise called *Docwinnus* (Reece,
p. 183), but the name occurs in the Liber Landavensis in the genitive
both as *Docunn-i* and *Docguinni*, the former of which seems easily
explained as Goidelic for an early form of *Cyngar*, namely
*Cuno-caros*, from which would be formed *To-chun* or *Do-chun*. This is
what seems to underlie the Latin *Docunnus*, while *Docguinni* is
possibly a Goidelic modification of the written *Docunni*, unless some
such a name as *Doco-vindo-s* has been confounded with *Docunnus*. In
one instance the Book of Llan Dâv has instead of *Abbas Docunni* or
*Docguinni*, the shorter designation, *Abbas Dochou* (p. 145), which one
must not unhesitatingly treat as *Dochon*, seeing that *Dochou* would be
in later book Welsh *Dochau*, and in the dialect of the district
*Docha*; and that this occurs in the name of the church of Llandough
near Cardiff, and Llandough near Cowbridge. The connexion of a certain
saint Dochdwy with these churches does not appear at all satisfactorily
established, but more light is required to help one to understand these
and similar church names.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[163:2](cf106.htm#fr_59) This name which may
have come from Little England below Wales, was once not uncommon in
South Cardiganshire, as Mr. William informs me, but it is now mostly
changed as a surname into *Davies* and *Jones*! Compare the similar
fortunes of the name Mason mentioned above.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[165:1](cf106.htm#fr_60) I have not succeeded in
discovering who the writer was, who used this name.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[166:1](cf106.htm#fr_61) This name as it is now
written should mean 'the Gold's Foot,' but in the Demetian dialect *aur*
is pronounced oer, and I learn from the rector, the Rev. Rhys Jones
Lloyd, that the name has sometimes been written *Tref Deyrn*, which I
regard as some etymologises futile attempt to explain it. More
importance is to be attached to the name on the communion cup, dating
1828, and reading, as Mr. Lloyd kindly informs me, *Poculum Eclyseye de
Tre-droyre*. Beneath *Droyre* some personal name possibly lies
concealed.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[173:1](cf106.htm#fr_62) *Y Ferch o Gefn Ydfa*
('The Maid of Cefn Ydfa') by Isaac Craigfryn Hughes, published by
Messrs. Daniel Owen, Howell & Co., Cardiff, 1881.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[173:2](cf106.htm#fr_63) In a letter dated
February 9, 1899, he states, however, that as regards folklore the death
of his father at the age of seventy-six, in the year 1889, had been a
great loss to him; for he adds that he was perfectly familiar <span
id="page_174">p. 174</span> with the traditions of the neighbourhood and
had associated with older men. Among the latter he had been used to talk
with an old man whose father remembered Cromwell passing on his way to
destroy the Iron Works of Pant y Gwaith, where the Cavaliers had had a
cannon cast, which was afterwards used in the engagement at St. Fagan's.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[174:1](cf106.htm#fr_64) This term is sometimes
represented as being *Bendith eu Mamau*, 'their Mother's Blessing,' as
if each fairy were such a delightful offspring as to constitute himself
or herself a blessing to his or her mother; but I have not found
satisfactory evidence to the currency of *Bendith eu Mamau*, or, as it
would be pronounced in Glamorgan, *Béndith ĭ Máma*. On the whole,
therefore, perhaps one may regard the name as pointing back to the
Celtic goddesses known in Gaul in Roman times as the Mothers.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[175:1](cf106.htm#fr_65) On Pen Craig Daf Mr.
Hughes gives the following note:--It was the residence of Dafydd Morgan
or 'Counsellor Morgan,' who, he says, was <span id="page_176">p.
176</span> executed on Kennington Common for taking the side of the
Pretender. He had retreated to Pen y Graig, where his abode was, in
order to conceal himself; but he was discovered and carried away at
night. Here follows a verse from an old ballad about him:--

Dafydd Morgan ffel a ffol,  
Fe aeth yn ol ei hyder:  
Fe neidodd naid at rebel haid  
Pan drodd o blaid Pretender.

Taffy Morgan, sly and daft,  
He did his bent go after:  
He leaped a leap to a rebel swarm,  
To arm for a Pretender.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[176:1](cf106.htm#fr_66) A *tòn* is any green
field that is used for grazing and not meant to be mown, land which has,
as it were, its skin of grassy turf unbroken for years by the plough.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[184:1](cf106.htm#fr_67) On this Mr. Hughes has
a note to the effect that the whole of one milking used to be given in
Glamorgan to workmen for assistance at the harvest or other work, and
that it was not unfrequently enough for the making of two cheeses.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[187:1](cf106.htm#fr_68) Since this was first
printed I have learnt from Mr. Hughes that the first cry issued from the
Black Cauldron in the Taff (*o'r Gerwyn Ddu ar Daf*), which I take to be
a pool in that river.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[190:1](cf106.htm#fr_69) The Fan is the highest
mountain in the parish of Merthyr Tydfil, Mr. Hughes tells me: he adds
that there was on its side once a chapel with a burial ground. Its
history seems to be lost, but human bones have, as he states, been
frequently found there.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[193:1](cf106.htm#fr_70) The above, I am sorry
to say, is not the only instance of this nasty trick associating itself
with Gwent, as will be seen from the story of Bwca'r Trwyn in chapter x.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Fairy Ways and Words](cf107)
