[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cf206) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Additions and Corrections

\[01\] I learn that the plural of *bodach glas* was in Welsh *bodachod
gIension*, a term which Elis o'r Nant remembers his mother applying to a
kind of fairies dressed in blue and fond of leading people astray. She
used to relate how a haymaking party once passed a summer's night at the
cowhouse (*beudy*) of Bryn Bygelyfd (also *Bryn Mygeldd*), and how they
saw in the dead of night a host of these dwarfs (*corynnod*) in blue
dancing and capering about the place. The *beudy* in question is not
very far from Dolwyddelan, on the way to Capel Curig. A different
picture of the *bodach* is given in Jenkins' *Bedd Gelert*, p. 82; and
lastly one may contrast the Highland *Bodach Glas*, not to mention still
another kind, namely the one in Scott's *Waverley*.

\[02\] To *Sarn yr Afanc* add *Llyn yr Afanc*, near Llanddinam (Beauties
of Wales, N. Wales, p. 841), and *Bedd yr Afanc*, 'the Afanc's
Grave,'the name of some sort of a tumulus, I am told, on a knoll near
the Pembrokeshire stream of the Nevern. Mr. J. Thomas, of Bancau Bryn
Berian close by, has communicated to me certain echoes of a story how an
afanc was caught in a pool near the bridge of Bryn Berian, and how it
was taken up to be interred in what is now regarded as its grave. A
complete list of the afanc place-names in the Principality might
possibly prove instructive. As to the word *afanc*,  what seems to have
happened is this: (1) from meaning simply a dwarf it came to be
associated with water dwarfs; (2) the meaning being forgotten, the word
was applied to any water monster; and (3) where *afanc* occurs in
place-names the Hu story has been introduced to explain it, whether it
fitted or not. This I should fancy to be the case with the Bryn Berian
barrow, and it would be satisfactory to know whether it contains the
remains of an ordinary dwarf. Peredur's lake afanc may have been a
dwarf; but whether that was so or not, it is remarkable that the weapon
which the afanc handled was a ffechwaew or flake-spear, that is, a
missile tipped with stone.

\[03\]  With the role of the girl in the afanc story compare that of
Tegau, wife of Caradog Freichfras, on whom a serpent fastens and can
only be allured away to seize on one of Tegau's breasts, of which she
loses the nipple when the beast is cut off. The defect being replaced
with gold, she is ever after known as *Tegau Eur-fron*, or 'Tegau of the
golden Breast' That is a version inferred of a story which is discussed
by M. Gaston Paris in an article, on *Caradoc et le Serpent*, elicited
by a paper published (in the November number of *Modern Language Notes*
for 1898) by Miss C A  Harper, of Bryn Mawr College, U.S.: see the
*Romania*, xxviii. 214-31. One of Miss Harper's parallels, mentioned by
M. Paris at p. 220, comes from Campbell: it is concerning a prince who
receives from his stepmother a magic shirt which converts itself into a
serpent coiled round his neck, and of which he is rid by the help of a
woman acting in much the same way as Tegau. We have an echo of this in
the pedigrees in the Jesus College MS. 2o: see the *Cymmrodor*, viii.
88, where one reads of *G6ga6n keneu menrud* *a vu neidyr vl6ydyn am y
von6gy*l, 'Gwgon the whelp of Menrud (?) who was a year with a snake
round his neck'--his pedigree is also given. In M. Paris' suggested
reconstruction of the story from the different versions, he represents
the maiden who is to induce the serpent to leave the man on whom it has
fastened, as standing in a vessel filled with milk, while the man stands
in a vessel filled with vinegar. The heroine exposes herself to the
reptile, which relinquishes his present victim to seize on one of the
woman's breasts. Now the appropriateness of the milk is explained by the
belief that snakes are inordinately fond of milk, and that belief has, I
presume, a foundation in fact: at any rate I am reminded of its
introduction into the plot of more than one English story, such as
Stanley Weyman's book From the *Memoirs of a Minister of France*
(London, 1893), p. 445, and A. Conan Doyle's *Adventures of Sherlock
Holmes* (London, 1893), pp-  199-209. In Wales, however, it is to a
woman's milk that one's interest attaches: I submit two references which
will explain what I mean. The first of them is to Owen's *Welsh
Folk-Lore*, p. 349, where he says that 'traditions of flying snakes were
once common in all parts of Wales,' and adds as follows:--' The
traditional origin of these imaginary creatures was that they were
snakes, which by having drunk the milk of a woman, and by having eaten
of bread consecrated for the Holy Communion, became transformed into
winged serpents or dragons! The other is to the *Brython* for 1861, p.
190, where one reads in Welsh to the following effect -- 'If a snake
chances to have an opportunity to drink of a woman's milk it is certain
to become a *gwiber*. When a woman happens to be far from her child, and
her breasts are full and beginning to give her pain, she sometimes milks
them on the ground in order to ease them. To this the peasantry in parts
of Cardiganshire have a strong objection, lest a snake should come there
and drink the milk, and so become a *gwiber*.' The word *gwiber* is used
in the Welsh Bible for a viper, but the editor of the *Brython*
explains, that in our folklore it means a huge kind of snake or dragon
that has grown wings and has its body cased in hard scales: for a noted
instance in point he refers the reader to the first number of the
*Brython*, p. 3. It is believed still all over Wales that snakes may,
under favourable circumstances, develop wings: in fact, an Anglesey man
strongly wished, to my knowledge, to offer to the recent Welsh Land
Commission, as evidence of the wild and neglected state of a certain
farm, that the gorse had grown so high and the snakes so thriven in it
that he had actually seen one of the latter flying right across a wide
road which separated two such gorse forests as be described: surprised
and hurt to find that this was not accepted, he inferred that the
Commissioners knew next to nothing about their business.

\[04\]  With ' the spell of security' by catching hold of grass may
perhaps be compared a habit which boys in Cardiganshire have of suddenly
picking up a blade of grass when they want a truce or stoppage in a sort
of game of tig or touchwood. The grass gives the one who avails himself
of it immunity for a time from attack or pursuit, so as to allow him to
begin the game again just where it was left off.

\[05\] *Bodermud* would probably be more correctly written
*Bodermyd*,and analysed possibly into *Bod-Dermyd*, involving the name
which appears in Irish as *Diarmait* and *Dermot*.

 \[06\]. Since this was printed I have been assured by Mr. Thomas
Prichard of Llwydiarth Esgob, in Anglesey, that the *dolur byr* is more
commonly called *clwy' byr*, and that it is the disease known in English
as black quarter.'

\[07\]. I am assured on the part of several literary natives of
Glamorgan that they do not know *dar* for *daear*, 'ground, earth.' Such
negative evidence, though proving the literary form *daear* to prevail
now, is not to be opposed to the positive statement, sent by Mr. Hughes
to me, as to the persistence in his neighbourhood of *dar* and *cldr*
(for *claear*, 'lukewarm '), to which one may add, as unlikely to be
challenged by anybody, the case of *harn* for *haearn*, ' iron.' The
intermediate forms have to be represented as *daer, claer, and haern*,
which explain exactly the *gaem* of the *Book of St. Chad*, for which
modern literary Welsh has *gaeaf*, 'winter': see the preface to the
*Book of Llan Ddv*, p. xIv.

\[08\] It ought to have been pointed out that the fairies, whose food
and drink it is death to share, represent the dead.

\[09\]. For *Conla* read *Comnla* or *Condla*: the later form is
*Colla*. The Condla in question is called *Condla Ruad* in the story,
but the heading to it has Ectra *Condla Chaim*, I the Adventure of C.
the Dear One.'

\[10\] I am now inclined to think that *butch* was produced out of the
northern pronunciation of witch by regarding its *w* as a mutation
consonant and replacing it, as in some other instances, by *b* as the
radical.

\[11\]. With the Manx use of rowan on May-day compare a passage to the
following effect concerning Wales--I translate it from the faulty Welsh
in which it is quoted by one of the competitors for the folklore prize
at the Liverpool Eisteddfod, 1900: he gave no indication. of its
provenance:--Another bad papistic habit which prevails among some Welsh
people is that of placing some of the wood of the rowan tree (*coed
cerddin* or *criafol*) in their corn lands (*llafyrieu*) and their
fields on May-eve (*Nos Glamau*) with the idea that such a custom brings
a blessing on their fields, a proceeding which would better become
atheists and pagans than Christians.

\[12\]. In the comparison with the brownie the fairy nurse in the
Pennant Valley has been overlooked.

\[13\] With the story of Ffynnon Gywer and the other fairy wells, also
with the wells which have been more especially called sacred in this
volume, compare the following paragraph from Martin's *Description of
the Western Islands of Scotland* (London, 1703), pp. 229-30: it is
concerning Gigay, now more commonly written *Gigha*, the name of an
island near the west coast of Kintyre:--'There is a well in the north
end of this isle called Toubir-more, i. e. a great well, because of its
effects, for which it is famous among the islanders; who together with
the inhabitants use it as a Catholicon for diseases. It's covered with
stone and clay, because the natives fancy that the stream that flows
from it might overflow the isle; and it is always opened by a Dirock, i.
c. an inmate, else they think it would not exert its vertues. They
ascribe one very extraordinary effect to it, and 'tis this; that when
any foreign boats are wind-bound here (which often happens) the master
of the boat ordinarily gives the native that lets the water run a piece
of money, and they say that immediately afterwards the wind changes in
favour of those that are thus detain'd by contrary winds. Every stranger
that goes to drink of the water of this well, is accustomed to leave on
its stone cover a piece of money, a needle, pin, or one of the prettiest
vadeated stones they can find.' Last September I visited Gigha and saw a
well there which is supposed to be the one to which Martin refers. It is
very insignificant and known now by a name pronounced *Tobar a viac*,
possibly for an older *Mo-Bheac*: in Scotch Gaelic *Beac*, written
*Beathag*, is equated with the name Sophia. The only tradition now
current about the well is that emptying it used to prove the means of
raising a wind or even of producing great storms, and this appears to
have been told Pennant: see his *Tour in Scotland and Voyage to the
Hebrides*, MDCCLXXII (Chester, 1774), p. 226:-- I Visit the few wonders
of the isle: the first is a little well of a most miraculous quality,
for in old times, if ever the chieftain lay here wind-bound, he had
nothing more to do than cause the well to be cleared, and instantly a
favorable gale arose. But miracles are now ceased.'

\[14\]. A similar rhyme is current in the neighbourhood of Dolgelley, as
Miss Lucy Griffith informs me, as follows:--  
  
Dolgolle dol a gollir,  
Daear a'i llwnc, dw'r 'n 'i lle.

Dolgeltey, a dale to be lost;  
Earth will swallow it, and water take its place.

 \[15\]. With regard to wells killing women visiting them, I may mention
a story, told me the other day by Professor Mahafry after a friend whose
name he gave, concerning the inhabitants of one of the small islands on
the coast of Mayo--I understood him to say off the Mullet. It was this:
all the men and boys, having gone fishing, were prevented by rough
weather from returning as soon as they intended, and the women left
alone suffered greatly from want of water, as not one of them would
venture to go to the well. By-and-by, however, one of them gave birth to
a boy, whereupon another of them carried the baby to the well, and
ventured to draw water.

\[16\]. As to *Clychau Abordyfi* I am now convinced that the *chwch* and
*saith* are entirely due to the published versions, the editors of which
seem to have agreed that they will have as much as possible for their
money, so to say. I find that Mrs. Rhys learnt in her childhood to end
the words with Pump, and that she cannot now be brought to sing the
melody in any other way: I have similar testimony from a musical lady
from the neighbourhood of Wrexham; and, doubtless, more evidence of the
same sort could be got.

\[17\]. For Lywelyn ab Gruffydd read Llywelyn ab Iorwerth.

\[18\] Some additional light on the doggerel dialogue will be found
thrown by the following story, which I find cited in Welsh by one of the
Liverpool Eisteddfod competitors:--There is in the parish of Yspytty
Ifan, in Carnarvonshire, a farm called Trwyn Swch, where eighty years
ago lived a man and his wife, who were both young, and had twins born to
them. Now the mother went one day to milk, leaving the twins alone in
the cradle-the husband was not at home-and who should enter the house
but one of the *Tylwyth Teg*! He took the twins away and left two of his
own breed in the cradle in their stead. Thereupon the mother returned
home and saw what had come to pass; she then in her excitement snatched
the Tyluyth Teg twins and took them to the bridge that crosses the huge
gorge of the river Conwy not very far from the house, and she cast them
into the whirlpool below. By this time the *Tylwyth Teg* had come on the
spot, some trying to save the children, and some making for the woman.
'Seize the old hag!' (*Crap ar yr hen wrach*.!) said one of the chiefs
of the *Tylwyth Teg*. 'Too late!' cried the woman on the edge of the
bank; and many of them ran after her to the house. As they ran three or
four of them lost their pipes in the field. They are pipes ingeniously
made of the blue stone (*carreg las*) of the gully. They measure three
or four inches long, and from time to time several of them have been
found near the cave of Trwyn Swch.- This is the first indication which I
have discovered, that the fairies are addicted to smoking.

\[19\]. A *Rkiw Gyferthwch* (printed *Rywgyverthwch*) occurs in the
Record of Carnanvon, p. 200; but it seems to have been in
Merionethshire, and far enough from Arfon.

\[20\] In the article already cited from the *Romania*, M. Paris finds
Twrch Trwyth in the boar *Tortain* of a French romance: see xxviii 217,
where he mentions a legend concerning the strange pedigree of that
beast. The subject requires to be further studied.

\[21\] A less probable explanation of *Latio* would be to suppose *orti*
understood. This has been suggested to me by Mr. Nicholson's treatment
of the Lanaelhaiarn inscription as *Ali ortus Elmetiaco hic iacet*,
where I should regard *Ah* as standing for an earlier nominative
*Alec-z*, and intended as the Celtic equivalent for *Cephas* or *Peter*:
*Ali* would be the word which is in Med. Irish *ail*, genitive *ailech*,
'a rock or stone.'

\[22\] We have the *Maethwy* of Gilvaethwy possibly still further
reduced to *Aethwy* in *Porth Aethwy*, 'the Village of Menai Bridge,' in
spite of its occurring in the *Record of Carnanvn* P. 77, as
*Potthaytho*.

\[23\] To the reference to the *Cymmrodor*, ix- 170, as to Beli being
calledson of Anna,add the Welsh *Elucidarium*, p. 27, with its *belim
vab anna*, and The Cambro-Btitish Saints, p. 82, where we have *Anna . .
. genuit Beli*..

\[24\]. Two answers to the query as to the Llech Las are now to be found
in the Scottish Antiquary, xv. 41-3.

\[25\]. Caer Gai is called also *Caer Gynyr*, after Cai's father Cynyr,
to wit in a poem by William Lleyn, who died in 1587. This I owe to
Professor J. Morris Jones, who has copied it from a collection of that
poet's works in the possession of Myrdin Fard, fo. 119.

\[26\]. Here it would, perhaps, not be irrelevant to mention *Caer
Dwrgynt*, given s v. *Dwr* in Morris' *Celtic Remains*, as a name of
*Caergybi*, or Holyhead. His authority is given in parenthesis thus:
(Th. Williams, *Catal*.). I should be disposed to think the name based
on some such an earlier form as *Kair D6bgint*, 'the Fortress of the
Danes,' who were called in old Welsh Dub-gint (*Annales Cambriae* A. D.
866, in the *Cymmrodor*, ix. x 65), that is to say '*Gentes Nigrae* or
Black Pagans,' and more simply *Gint* or Gynt, '*Gentes* or Heathens.'

\[27\] The word *banna6c*, whence the later *bannog*, seems to be the
origin of the name *bonoec* given to the famous horn in the *Lai du
Corn*, from which M. Paris in his *Romania* article, xxviii. 229, cites
*Cest cor qui bonoec a non*, 'this horn which is called *bonoec*.' The
Welsh name would have to be *Corn (yr) ych banna6c*, 'the horn of (the)
*bannog ox*,' with or without the article.

\[28\] One of the Liverpool Eistedfod competitors cites W. O. Pughe to
the following effect in Welsh: *Llyn dau Ychain*, 'the Lake of Two
Oxen,' is on Hiraethog Mountain; and near it is the footmark of one of
them in a stone or rock (carreg), where lae rested when seeking his
partner, as the local legend has it. Another cites a still wilder story,
to the effect that there was once a wonderful cow called *Y Fuwch
Fraith*, 'the Particoloured Cow.'   'To that cow there came a witch to
get milk, just after the cow had supplied the whole neighbourhood. So
the witch could not get any milk, and to avenge her disappointment she
made the cow mad. The result was that the cow ran wild over the
mountains, inflicting immense harm on the country; but at last she was
killed by Hu near Hiraethog, in the county of Denbigh.'

\[29\]. With *trwtan, Trwlyn- Tratyn, and Ttit-a-trot* should doubtless
be compared the English use of *trot* as applied contemptuously to a
woman, as when Grumio, in Shakespeare's *Taming of the Shrew*, Act i,
sc. 2, speaks of 1 an old *trot* with ne'er a tooth in her head': the
word was similarly used by Thomas Heywood and others.

\[30\]. I find that Professor Zimmer is of opinion--in fact he is quite
positive-- that *tyngu* and *tynghed* are in no way related: see the
*Gottingische gelehrte Anzeign* for 1900 (No. 5), pp. 371-2.

\[31\]. I am tempted to rank with the man-eating fairies the Atecotti,
who are known to have been cannibals, and whose name seems to mean the
ancient race. Should this prove tenable, one would have to admit that
the little people, or at any rate peoples with an admixture of the blood
of that race, could be trained to fight. Further, one would probably
have to class with them also such non-cannibal tribes as those of the
Fir Bolg and the Galiflin of Irish story. Information about both will be
found in my *Hibbert Lectures*, in reading which, however, the
mythological speculations should be brushed aside. Lastly, I anticipate
that most of the peoples figuring in the oldest class of Irish story
will prove to have belonged either (i) to the dwarf race, or (2) to the
Picts; and that careful reading will multiply the means of
distinguishing between them. Looking comprehensively at the question of
the early races of the British Isles, the reader should weigh again the
concluding words of Professor Haddon's theory.

 

 
