[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rtae09)  [Next](rtae11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027ISA32/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt*, by James Henry
Breasted, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### LECTURE VI

#### THE EMERGENCE OF THE MORAL SENSE—MORAL WORTHINESS AND THE HEREAFTER—SCEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF SUFFERING

<span class="smallcaps">Nowhere</span> in ancient times has the capacity
of a race to control the material world been so fully expressed in
surviving material remains as in the Nile valley. In the abounding
fulness of their energies they built up a fabric of material
civilization, the monuments of which it would seem time can never wholly
sweep away. But the manifold substance of life, interfused of custom and
tradition, of individual traits fashioned among social, economic, and
governmental forces, ever developing in the daily operations and
functions of life—all that made the stage and the setting amid which
necessity for hourly moral decisions arises—all that creates the
attitude of the individual and impels the inner man as he is called upon
to make these decisions—all these constitute an elusive higher
atmosphere of the ancient world which tomb masonry and pyramid
orientation have not transmitted to us. Save in a few scanty references
in the inscriptions of the Pyramid Age, it has vanished forever; for
even the inscriptions, as we have seen, are concerned chiefly with the
material welfare of the departed in the hereafter. What they disclose,
however, is of unique interest, preserving as it does the earliest
chapter in the moral development of man as known to us, a chapter
marking perhaps the most

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

important fundamental step in the evolution of civilization. Moreover,
these materials from the Pyramid Age have never been put together, and
in gathering them together for these lectures I have been not a little
surprised to find them as numerous as they are.

They are, indeed, sufficiently numerous, and so unequivocal as to
demonstrate the existence nearly three thousand years before Christ of a
keen moral discernment, already so far developed that we must conclude
it had begun far back in the fourth millennium B.C. Indeed the Egyptian
of the Pyramid Age had already begun to look back upon a time when sin
and strife did not exist, to "that first body" of "the company of the
just," "born before arose," "strife," "voice," "blasphemy," "conflict,"
or the frightful mutilations inflicted upon each other by Horus and
Set. <span id="fr_561"></span>[1](#fn_561) With this age of innocence,
or at least of righteousness and peace, we must associate also the time
of which they spoke, "before death came forth." <span
id="fr_562"></span>[2](#fn_562) The development of moral discernment had
indeed gone so far in the Pyramid Age that the thought of the age was
dealing with the origin of good and evil, the source of human traits. We
recall that our Memphite philosopher and theologian attributed all these
things to the creative word of his god, "which made that which is loved
and that which is hated," "which gave life to the peaceful and death to
the guilty." <span id="fr_563"></span>[3](#fn_563) Akin to this is the
emergence, in this age, of the earliest abstract term discernible in the
ancient world, the word for "truth, right, righteousness, justice," all
of which are connoted by one word.

Furthermore, in the daily secular life of this remote age, even in
administration, moral ideals already had great

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

influence. In the Feudal Age, a thousand years after the rise of the Old
Kingdom, at the installation of the vizier, that official used to be
referred to the example of an ancient vizier who had already become
proverbial in the Pyramid Age. The cause of his enduring reputation was
that he had decided a case, in which his relatives were involved,
against his own kin, no matter what the merits of the case might be,
lest he should be accused of partial judgment in favor of his own
family. <span id="fr_564"></span>[1](#fn_564) A similar example of
respect for moral ideals in high places is doubtless to be recognized in
the Horus-name of king Userkaf (twenty-eighth century B.C.). He called
himself "Doer-of-Righteousness" (or Justice).

Among the people the most common virtue discernible by us is filial
piety. Over and over again we find the massive tombs of the Pyramid Age
erected by the son for the departed father, as well as a splendid
interment arranged by the son. <span id="fr_565"></span>[2](#fn_565)
Indeed one of the sons of this age even surpasses the example of all
others, for he states in a passage of his tomb inscription: "Now I
caused that I should be buried in the same tomb with this Zau (his
father), in order that I might be with him in the same place; not,
however, because I was not in a position to make a second tomb; but I
did this in order that I might see this Zau every day, in order that I
might be with him in the same place." <span
id="fr_566"></span>[3](#fn_566)

It is especially in the tomb that such claims of moral worthiness are
made. This is not an accident; such claims are made in the tomb in this
age with the logical purpose of securing in the hereafter any benefits
accruing from such virtues. Thus, on the base of a mortuary

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

statue set up in a tomb, the deceased represented by the portrait statue
says: "I had these statues made by the sculptor and he was satisfied
with the pay which I gave him." <span id="fr_567"></span>[1](#fn_567)
The man very evidently wished it known that his mortuary equipment was
honestly gotten. A nomarch of the twenty-seventh century B.C. left the
following record of his upright life: "I gave bread to all the hungry of
the Cerastes-Mountain (his domain); I clothed him who was naked therein.
I filled its shores with large cattle and its ⌈lowlands⌉ with small
cattle. I satisfied the wolves of the mountain and the fowl of the sky
with ⌈flesh⌉ of small cattle. . . . I never oppressed one in possession
of his property so that he complained of me because of it to the god of
my city; (but) I spake and told that which was good. Never was there one
fearing because of one stronger than he, so that he complained because
of it to the god. . . . I was a benefactor to it (his domain) in the
folds of the cattle, in the settlements of the fowlers. . . . I speak no
lie, for I was one beloved of his father, praised of his mother,
excellent in character to his brother, and amiable to \[his
sister\]." <span id="fr_568"></span>[2](#fn_568)

Over and over these men of four thousand five hundred to five thousand
years ago affirm their innocence of evildoing. "Never did I do anything
evil toward any person," <span id="fr_569"></span>[3](#fn_569) says the
chief physician of king Sahure in the middle of the twenty-eighth
century before Christ, while a priest a little later says essentially
the same thing: "Never have I done aught of violence toward any
person." <span id="fr_570"></span>[4](#fn_570) A century later a citizen
of little or no rank places the following address to the living upon the
front

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

of his tomb: "O ye living, who are upon earth, who pass by this tomb . .
. let a mortuary offering of that which ye have come forth for me, for I
was one beloved of the people. Never was I beaten in the presence of any
official since my birth; never did I take the property of any man by
violence; I was a doer of that which pleased all men." <span
id="fr_571"></span>[1](#fn_571) It is evident from such addresses to the
living as this that one motive for these affirmations of estimable
character was the hope of maintaining the goodwill of one's surviving
neighbors, that they might present mortuary offerings of food and drink
at the tomb.

It is equally clear also that such moral worthiness was deemed of value
in the sight of the gods and might influence materially the happiness of
the dead in the hereafter. An ethical ordeal awaited those who had
passed into the shadow world. Both the motives mentioned are found
combined in a single address to the living on the front of the tomb of
the greatest of early African explorers, Harkhuf of Elephantine, who
penetrated the Sudan in the twenty-sixth century B.C. He says: "I was .
. . one (beloved) of his father, praised of his mother, whom all his
brothers loved. I gave bread to the hungry, clothing to the naked, I
ferried him who had no boat. O ye living who are upon earth, \[who shall
pass by this tomb whether\] going down-stream or going up-stream, who
shall say, 'A thousand loaves, a thousand jars of beer for the owner of
this tomb!' I will intercede for their sakes in the Nether World. I am a
worthy and equipped Glorious One, a ritual priest whose mouth knows. As
for any man who shall enter into (this) tomb as his mortuary possession,
I will seize him like a wild fowl; he shall be judged for it by the
Great God. I was one saying good

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

things and repeating what was loved. Never did I say aught evil to a
powerful one against anybody. I desired that it might be well with me in
the Great God's presence. Never did I \[judge two brothers\] in such a
way that a son was deprived of his paternal possession." <span
id="fr_572"></span>[1](#fn_572) Here the threat of judgment is not only
used to deter the lawless who might take possession of the dead man's
tomb, but the thought of that judgment, meaning moral responsibility
beyond the grave, is affirmed to have been the motive of the great
explorer's exemplary life. That motive is thus carried back to the
actual course of his daily, earthly life as when he says: "I desired
that it might be well with me in the Great God's presence." <span
id="fr_573"></span>[2](#fn_573) Throughout his life, then, he looked
forward to standing in that dread presence to answer for the ethical
quality of his conduct. As the earliest evidence of moral responsibility
beyond the tomb, such utterances in the cemeteries of the Pyramid Age,
nearly five thousand years ago, are not a little impressive. In other
lands, for over two thousand years after this, good and bad alike were
consigned to the same realm of the dead, and no distinction whatever was
made between them. It is, as it were, an isolated moral vista down which
we look, penetrating the early gloom as a shaft of sunshine penetrates
the darkness.

It is of great importance to identify these ideas of a moral searching
in the hereafter with one or the other of the two dominant theologies,
that is with Re or Osiris. Unfortunately the god whose judgment is
feared is not mentioned by name, but an epithet, "Great God," is
employed instead. This is expanded in one tomb to "Great

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God, lord of the
sky." <span id="fr_574"></span>[1](#fn_574) It is hardly possible that
any other than Re can be meant. To be sure, the celestializing of Osiris
has in one or two rare instances brought even him the title "lord of the
sky" (see above, [p. 149](rtae09.htm#page_149)), but the unprejudiced
mind on hearing the words "Great God, lord of the sky" would think of no
other than Re, to whom it was and had been for centuries incessantly
applied; and this conclusion is confirmed by all that we find in the
Pyramid Texts, where, as we shall see, Re is over and over again the
lord of the judgment. It is he who is meant when Inti of Deshasheh says:
"But as for all people who shall do evil to this (tomb), who shall do
anything destructive to this (tomb), who shall damage the writing
therein, judgment shall be had with them for it by the Great God, the
lord of judgment in the place where judgment is had." <span
id="fr_575"></span>[2](#fn_575)

We have already followed the elaborate provision for all the
contingencies of the hereafter which we find in the Pyramid Texts, and
we recall how indispensable was the purification of the dead at some
point in his transition from the earthly to the celestial realm. We
stated in reference to that purification that its significance was not
exhausted in purely physical and ceremonial cleansing. That to some
extent it signified moral purification is evident from the fact that
when the dead king in one passage is washed by "the Followers of Horus,"
"they recite the 'Chapter of the Just' on behalf of this king Pepi (whom
they are washing); they recite the 'Chapter of Those Who Have Ascended
to Life and Satisfaction' on behalf of this king Pepi." <span
id="fr_576"></span>[3](#fn_576) The "Followers of Horus" who perform
this ceremony are of course Solar, and thus moral purity in the
hereafter is associated with the Sun-god

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

at the very beginning. This connection between the Sun-god and moral
requirements is clearly recognized in a number of important passages in
the Pyramid Texts. "'Let him come, he is pure,' says the priest of Re
concerning king Mernere. The door-keeper of the sky, he announces him
(Mernere) to these four gods (the four Horuses) who are over the lake of
Keneset. They recite (the chapter), 'How just is king Mernere for his
father Geb!' <span id="fr_577"></span>[1](#fn_577) They recite (the
chapter), 'How just is king Mernere for his father Re!'" <span
id="fr_578"></span>[2](#fn_578)

The king, then, is not exempt from the requirement which the tombs of
his nobles disclose them as so anxious to fulfil, and the god whom he
satisfies, as in the case of his subjects, is Re. "There is no evil
which king Pepi has done. Weighty is this word in thy sight, O
Re." <span id="fr_579"></span>[3](#fn_579) In a typical Solar Utterance,
an appendix to an untouched Solar Utterance preceding it, we find Re's
ferryman thus addressed: "O thou who ferriest over the just who is
without a ship, ferryman of the Field of Rushes, king Merire (Pepi) is
just before the sky and before the earth. King Pepi is just before that
island of the earth to which he has swum and arrived there." <span
id="fr_580"></span>[4](#fn_580) When the righteous king has safely
crossed, he furthermore finds a Solar Horus in charge of the celestial
doors, who presides in

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

what is evidently a building, of uncertain character, to which is
appended the phrase "of righteousness." <span
id="fr_581"></span>[1](#fn_581) Re has two barques of "Truth" or
"Righteousness," <span id="fr_582"></span>[2](#fn_582) and we remember
that the goddess of Truth or Righteousness, a personification of one of
the few abstractions existent in this early age, was a daughter of Re.

Similarly, the Morning Star, a Solar deity, takes due note of the moral
status of the dead Pharaoh. "Thou (O Morning Star) makest this Pepi to
sit down because of his righteousness and to rise up because of his
reverence." <span id="fr_583"></span>[3](#fn_583) Sometimes his
guiltlessness applies to matters not wholly within the moral realm from
our modern point of view. Having become the son of Re, rising and
setting like Re, receiving the food of Horus (son of Re), ministering to
Re and rowing Re across the sky, it is said of the king: "This Pepi
blasphemes not the king, he ⌈defames⌉ not Bastet, he does not make merry
in the sanctuary." <span id="fr_584"></span>[4](#fn_584)

The moral worthiness of the deceased must of course, in accordance with
the Egyptian's keen legal discernment, be determined in legal form and
by legal process. We have seen that the nobles refer to the judgment in
their tombs, and it would seem that even the king was subject to such
judgment. Indeed not even the gods escaped it; for it is stated that
every god who assists the Pharaoh to the sky "shall be justified before
Geb." <span id="fr_585"></span>[5](#fn_585) In the same way the
punishment of a refractory god is "that he shall not ascend to the house
of Horus that is in the sky on that day of the (legal) hearing." <span
id="fr_586"></span>[6](#fn_586) In a series of three Solar Utterances
concerning the two celestial reed floats, <span
id="fr_587"></span>[7](#fn_587)

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

the last one concludes with a refrain three times uttered: "This king
Pepi is justified, this king Pepi is praised, the ka of this king Pepi
is praised." When we note that the second of this coherent series of
three Utterances is anti-Osirian, it is evident that the justification
occurring in this connection is not Osirian but Solar, like the
Utterance in which it is found. This conclusion is confirmed by another
Solar Utterance on the two reed floats which affirms: "This Pepi is
justified, the ka of this Pepi is justified." <span
id="fr_588"></span>[1](#fn_588)

The translated Pharaoh, who is thus declared just, continues to exhibit
the same qualities in the exercise of the celestial sovereignty which he
receives. "He judges justice before Re on that day of the feast,
(called) 'First of the Year.' The sky is in satisfaction, the earth is
in joy, having heard that king Neferkere (Pepi II) has placed justice
\[in the place of injustice\]. They are satisfied who sit with king
Neferkere in his court of justice with the just utterance which came
forth from his mouth." <span id="fr_589"></span>[2](#fn_589) It is
significant that the king exercises this just judgment in the presence
of Re the Sun-god. Similarly in a Solar Utterance we find it affirmed
that "king Unis has set justice therein (in the isle where he is) in the
place of injustice." <span id="fr_590"></span>[3](#fn_590)

There can be no doubt that in the Old Kingdom the sovereignty of Re had
resulted in attributing to him the moral requirements laid upon the dead
in the hereafter, and that in the surviving literature of that age he is
chiefly the righteous god rather than Osiris. Righteousness

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

is a quality which is associated with several gods in the Old Kingdom,
but none of the others approaches the prominence of Re in this
particular. We find the four genii, the sons of Horus, who, as we have
seen, were not improbably Solar in origin, though later Osirianized,
called "these four gods who live in righteousness, leaning upon their
sceptres, guarding the Southland." <span id="fr_591"></span>[1](#fn_591)
These gods are once associated with Letopolis, <span
id="fr_592"></span>[2](#fn_592) and it is perhaps a connected fact that
officiating before Khenti-yerti of Letopolis we find a god called
"Expeller of Deceit," using the word for "deceit" which is correlated
with "Truth or Righteousness" in the Pyramid Texts as its
opposite. <span id="fr_593"></span>[3](#fn_593) These four sons of Horus
are mortuary gods, and one of the old mortuary gods of Memphis, Sokar,
possessed a barque which was called the "Barque of Truth (or
Righteousness)." <span id="fr_594"></span>[4](#fn_594) To this barque or
its presiding divinity the dead king is compared: "The tongue of this
king Pepi is (that of) 'The-Righteous-One (a god)
-Belonging-to-the-Barque-of-Righteousness.'" <span
id="fr_595"></span>[5](#fn_595) The Osirian Horus once receives the
epithet "the justified" in the Pyramid Texts; <span
id="fr_596"></span>[6](#fn_596) and Osiris likewise is, though very
rarely, called "Lord of Truth (or Righteousness)." <span
id="fr_597"></span>[7](#fn_597) In connection with the Osirian
litigation at Heliopolis three statements regarding the legal triumph of
the king are made which, because of the legal character of the victory,
may not be exclusively ethical. The passage says of the king: "He is
justified through that which he has done." <span
id="fr_598"></span>[8](#fn_598) Again, he "comes forth to the truth (or
'righteousness' in the sense of legal victory), that he may take it with
him"; <span id="fr_599"></span>[9](#fn_599) and finally the king "goes
forth on this day that he may

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

bring the truth with him." <span id="fr_600"></span>[1](#fn_600) The
later rapid growth of ethical teaching in the Osiris faith and the
assumption of the rôle of judge by Osiris is not yet discernible in the
Pyramid Age, and the development which made these elements so prominent
in the Middle Kingdom took place in the obscure period after the close
of the Pyramid Age. Contrary to the conclusion generally accepted at
present, it was the Sun-god, therefore, who was the earliest champion of
moral worthiness and the great judge in the hereafter. A thousand years
later Osiris, as the victorious litigant at Heliopolis, as the champion
of the dead who had legally triumphed over all his enemies, emerged as
the great moral judge. In the usurpation of this rôle by Osiris we have
another evidence of the irresistible process which Osirianized Egyptian
religion. To these later conditions from which modern students have
drawn their impressions, the current conclusion regarding the early
moral supremacy of Osiris is due. The greater age of the Solar faith in
this as in other particulars is, however, perfectly clear. <span
id="fr_601"></span>[2](#fn_601)

These early moral aspirations had their limitations. Let us not forget
that we are dealing with an age lying between five thousand and
forty-five hundred years ago. The chief conquests of man in this remote
age had been gained in a struggle with material forces. In this struggle
he had issued a decisive victor, but nevertheless it was

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

amid the tangle of a host of obscuring influences into which we cannot
enter here; it was, as it were, through the dust of an engrossing
conflict that he had caught but faintly the veiled glory of the moral
vision. Let us not imagine, then, that the obligations which this vision
imposed were all-embracing or that it could include all that we discern
in it. The requirements of the great judge in the hereafter were not
incompatible with the grossest sensuality. Not only was sensual pleasure
permitted in the hereafter as depicted by the Pyramid Texts, but
positive provision was made for supplying it. <span
id="fr_602"></span>[1](#fn_602) The king is assured of sensual
gratification in the grossest terms, and we hear it said of him that he
"is the man who takes women from their husbands whither he wills and
when his heart desires." <span id="fr_603"></span>[2](#fn_603)

Nevertheless that was a momentous step which regarded felicity after
death as in any measure dependent upon the ethical quality of the dead
man's earthly life; and it must have been a deep and abiding moral
consciousness which made even the divine Pharaoh, who was above the
mandates of earthly government, amenable to the celestial judge and
subject to moral requirements. This step could not have been taken at
once. It is possible that even in the brief century and a half covered
by the Pyramid Texts we may discern some trace of the progress of
ethical consciousness as it was involving even the king in its imperious
demands. We have already noted above the statement regarding the king,
"This king Pepi is justified." Now, it happens that the Utterance in
which this statement occurs is found in a variant

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

form in the pyramids of Unis and Teti, two kings earlier than Pepi.
Neither of these earlier forms contains this statement of justification,
and within a period of sixty to eighty years the editors deemed it wise
to insert it. <span id="fr_604"></span>[1](#fn_604)

As we have so often said, it is not easy to read the spiritual and
intellectual progress of a race in monuments so largely material as
contrasted with literary documents. It is easy to be misled and to
misinterpret the meagre indications furnished by purely material
monuments. Behind them lies a vast complex of human forces and of human
thinking which for the most part eludes us. Nevertheless it is
impossible to contemplate the colossal tombs of the Fourth Dynasty, so
well known as the Pyramids of Gizeh, and to contrast them with the
comparatively diminutive royal tombs which follow in the next two
dynasties, without, as we have before hinted, discerning more than
exclusively political causes behind this sudden and startling change.
The insertion of the Pyramid Texts themselves during the last century
and a half of the Pyramid Age is an evident resort to less material
forces enlisted on behalf of the departed Pharaoh as he confronted the
shadow world. On the other hand, the Great Pyramids of Gizeh represent,
as we have said before, the struggle of titanic material forces in the
endeavor by purely material means to immortalize the king's physical
body, enveloping it in a vast and impenetrable husk of masonry, there to
preserve forever all that linked the spirit of the king to material
life. The Great Pyramids of Gizeh, while they are to-day the most
imposing surviving witnesses to the earliest emergence of organized man
and the triumph of concerted effort, are

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

likewise the silent but eloquent expression of a supreme endeavor to
achieve immortality by sheer physical force. For merely physical reasons
such a colossal struggle with the forces of decay could not go on
indefinitely; with these reasons political tendencies too made common
cause; but combined with all these we must not fail to see that the mere
insertion of the Pyramid Texts in itself in the royal tombs of the last
century and a half of the Pyramid Age was an abandonment of the titanic
struggle with material forces and an evident resort to less tangible
agencies. The recognition of a judgment and the requirement of moral
worthiness in the hereafter was a still more momentous step in the same
direction. It marked a transition from reliance on agencies external to
the personality of the dead to dependence on inner values. Immortality
began to make its appeal as a thing achieved in a man's own soul. It was
the beginning of a shift of emphasis from objective advantages to
subjective qualities. It meant the ultimate extension of the dominion of
God beyond the limits of the material world, that he might reign in the
invisible kingdom of the heart. It was thus also the first step in the
long process by which the individual personality begins to emerge as
contrasted with the mass of society, a process which we can discern
likewise in the marvellous portrait sculpture of the Pyramid Age. The
vision of the possibilities of individual character had dimly dawned
upon the minds of these men of the early world; their own moral ideals
were passing into the character of their greatest gods, and with this
supreme achievement the development of the five hundred years which we
call the Pyramid Age had reached its close.

When Egypt emerged from the darkness which followed

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

the Pyramid Age, and after a century and a half of preparatory
development reached the culmination of the Feudal Age (Twelfth Dynasty),
about 2000 B.C., the men of this classic period looked back upon a
struggle of their ancestors with death—a struggle whose visible
monuments were distributed along a period of fifteen hundred years. The
first five hundred years of this struggle was still represented by the
tombs of the first two dynasties in Abydos and vicinity, but it was
veiled in mist, and to the men of the Feudal Age its monuments were
mingled with the memorials of the gods who once ruled Egypt. Of the
thousand years which had elapsed since the Pyramid Age began, the first
five hundred was impressively embodied before their eyes in that
sixty-mile rampart of pyramids sweeping along the margin of the western
desert. There they stretched like a line of silent outposts on the
frontiers of death. It was a thousand years since the first of them had
been built, and five hundred years had elapsed since the architects had
rolled up their papyrus drawings of the latest, and the last group of
workmen had gathered up their tools and departed. The priesthoods too,
left without support, had, as we have already seen, long forsaken the
sumptuous temples and monumental approaches that rose on the valley
side. The sixty-mile pyramid cemetery lay in silent desolation, deeply
encumbered with sand half hiding the ruins of massive architecture, of
fallen architraves and prostrate colonnades, a solitary waste where only
the slinking figure of the vanishing jackal suggested the futile
protection of the old mortuary gods of the desert. Even at the present
day no such imposing spectacle as the pyramid cemeteries of Egypt is to
be found anywhere in the ancient world, and we easily recall something

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

of the reverential awe with which they oppressed us when we first looked
upon them. Do we ever realize that this impression was felt by their
descendants only a few centuries after the builders had passed away? and
that they were already ancient to the men of 2000 B.C.? On the minds of
the men of the Feudal Age the Pyramid cemetery made a profound
impression. If already in the Pyramid Age there had been some relaxation
in the conviction that by sheer material force man might make conquest
of immortality, the spectacle of these colossal ruins now quickened such
doubts into open scepticism, a scepticism which ere long found effective
literary expression.

Discernment of moral requirements had involved subjective contemplation.
For the first time in history man began to contemplate himself as well
as his destiny, to "expatiate free o’er all this scene of man." It is a
ripe age which in so doing has passed beyond the unquestioning
acceptance of traditional beliefs as bequeathed by the fathers.
Scepticism means a long experience with inherited beliefs, much
rumination on what has heretofore received unthinking acquiescence, a
conscious recognition of personal power to believe or disbelieve, and
thus a distinct step forward in the development of self-consciousness
and personal initiative. It is only a people of ripe civilization who
develop scepticism. It is never found under primitive conditions. It was
a momentous thousand years of intellectual progress, therefore, of which
these sceptics of the Feudal Age represented the culmination. Their
mental attitude finds expression in a song of mourning, doubtless often
repeated in the cemetery, and as we follow the lines we might conclude
that the author had certainly stood on some elevated point overlooking

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

the pyramid cemetery of the Old Kingdom as he wrote them. We possess two
fragmentary versions of the song, one on papyrus, the other on the walls
of a Theban tomb. <span id="fr_605"></span>[1](#fn_605) But the papyrus
version was also copied from a tomb, for the superscription reads: "Song
which is in the house (tomb-chapel) of king Intef <span
id="fr_606"></span>[2](#fn_606) the justified, which is in front of the
singer with the harp." The song reads:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"How prosperous is this good prince! <span
id="fr_607"></span>[3](#fn_607)  
 It is a goodly destiny, that the bodies diminish,  
 Passing away while others remain,  
 Since the time of the ancestors,  
 The gods who were aforetime,  
 Who rest in their pyramids,  
 Nobles and the glorious departed likewise,  
 Entombed in their pyramids.  
 Those who built their (tomb)-temples,  
 Their place is no more.  
 Behold what is done therein.  
 I have heard the words of Imhotep and Hardedef, <span
id="fr_608"></span>[4](#fn_608)</span>

</div>

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>  (Words) greatly
celebrated as their utterances.  
 Behold the places thereof;  
 Their walls are dismantled,  
 Their places are no more,  
 As if they had never been.

"None cometh from thence  
 That he may tell (us) how they fare;  
 That he may tell (us) of their fortunes,  
 That he may content our heart,  
 Until we (too) depart  
 To the place whither they have gone.

"Encourage thy heart to forget it,  
 Making it pleasant for thee to follow thy desire,  
 While thou livest.  
 Put myrrh upon thy head,  
 And garments on thee of fine linen,  
 Imbued with marvellous luxuries,  
 The genuine things of the gods.

"Increase yet more thy delights,  
 And let \[not\] thy heart languish.  
 Follow thy desire and thy good,  
 Fashion thine affairs on earth  
 After the mandates of thine (own) heart.  
 (Till) that day of lamentation cometh to thee,  
 When the silent-hearted hears not their lamentation,  
 Nor he that is in the tomb attends the mourning.

"Celebrate the glad day,  
 Be not weary therein.  
 Lo, no man taketh his goods with him.  
 Yea, none returneth again that is gone thither."

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such were the
feelings of some of these men of the Feudal Age as they looked out over
the tombs of their ancestors and contemplated the colossal futility of
the vast pyramid

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

cemeteries of the Old Kingdom. Even the names of some of the wise men of
a thousand years before, whose sayings had become proverbial, and who
thus had attained more than a sepulchral immortality in some colossal
tomb, arose in the recollection of the singer. It can hardly be a matter
of chance that Imhotep, the first of the two whom the singer
commemorates, was the earliest architect in stone masonry on a large
scale, the father of architecture in stone. As the architect of king
Zoser of the thirtieth century B.C., he was the builder of the oldest
superstructure of stone masonry still surviving from the ancient world,
the so-called "terraced pyramid" of Sakkara. It was a peculiarly
effective stroke to revert to the tomb of this first great architect,
and to find it in such a state of ruin that the places thereof were "as
if they had never been." Indeed, to this day its place is unknown.
Hardedef, too, the other wise man whom the poem recalls, was a son of
Khufu, and therefore connected with the greatest of the pyramids. The
fact, too, that these two ancient sages had survived only in their wise
sayings was another illustration of the futility of material agencies as
a means of immortality. At the same time the disappearance of such souls
as these to a realm where they could no longer be discerned, whence none
returned to tell of their fate, strikes the sombrest and most wistful
note in all these lines. It is a note of which we seem to hear an echo
in the East three thousand years later in the lines of Omar Khayyam:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Strange, is it not? that of the myriads who  
 Before us passed the door of Darkness through,  
 Not one returns to tell us of the Road  
 Which to discover we must travel too." <span
id="fr_609"></span>[1](#fn_609)</span>

</div>

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Here is bared a
scepticism which doubts all means, material or otherwise, for attaining
felicity or even survival beyond the grave. To such doubts there is no
answer; there is only a means of sweeping them temporarily aside, a
means to be found in sensual gratification which drowns such doubts in
forgetfulness. "Eat, drink, and be merry, for to-morrow we die."

The other version of the song, from the tomb of the "divine father
(priest) of Amon, Neferhotep," at Thebes, is hardly as effective as the
first, and unhappily is very fragmentary. It contains, however, some
valuable lines which should not be overlooked.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"How rests this just prince!  
 The goodly destiny befalls,  
 The bodies pass away  
 Since the time of the god,  
 And generations come into their places.

"Re shows himself at early morn,  
 Atum goes to rest in Manu. <span id="fr_610"></span>[1](#fn_610)  
 Men beget and women conceive,  
 Every nostril breathes the air.  
 Morning comes, they bear numerously,  
 They (the new-born) come to their (appointed) places.

"Celebrate the glad day, O divine father.  
 Put the finest spices together at thy nose,  
 Garlands of lotus flowers at thy shoulder, at thy neck.  
 Thy sister who dwells in thy heart,  
 She sits at thy side.  
 Put song and music before thee,  
 Behind thee all evil things,  
 And remember thou (only) joy.

</div>

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Till comes that day of mooring,  
 At the land that loveth silence,  
   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  
 (Where) the heart is quiet  
 Of the son whom he loves.

"Celebrate the glad day,  
 O Neferhotep, justified, divine father,  
 Excellent and pure of hands.  
 I have heard all that befell Those . . .  
 Their houses are dismantled,  
 The place of them is no more,  
 They are as if they had never been,  
 Since the time of the god, Those lords . . .

"\[Wilt thou plant for thee pleasant trees\] <span
id="fr_611"></span>[1](#fn_611)  
 Upon the shore of thy pool,  
 That thy soul may sit under them,  
 That he may drink their water?  
 Follow thy desire wholly,  
   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  
 Give bread to him who hath no field.  
 So shalt thou gain a good name  
 For the future forever. <span id="fr_612"></span>[2](#fn_612)

"Thou hast seen \[⌈the tombs of the great⌉\]  
 \[⌈Where priests offer, wearing skins of⌉\] the panther;  
 Their libation vessels are on the ground,  
 And their bread of their food-offerings.

</div>

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>  Songstresses
⌈weep⌉ . . .  
 Their mummies are set up before Re,  
 Their people are in lamentation without (ceasing).

". . . comes in her season;  
 Fate numbers his days.  
 Thou hast waked . . .  
   .    .    .    .    ."

</div>

The song continues with reflections on the vanity of riches, as if in
expansion of the single line in the other version referring to the fact
that no man may take his goods with him when he departs. Wealth is
fruitless, for the same fate has overtaken

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Those who had granaries,  
 Besides bread for offerings,  
 And those \[who had none\] likewise."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hence the rich man
is admonished:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Remember thou the day  
 When thou art dragged  
 To the land of . . .  
 \[Follow thy desire\] wholly.  
 There is none that returns again." <span
id="fr_613"></span>[1](#fn_613)</span>

</div>

It is evident that the men of this age were reflecting deeply on the
human state. The singer of this second version finds no hope in the
contemplation of death, but suggests that it is well in any case to
leave an enduring good name behind; not because it necessarily insures
the good man anything in the world to come, but rather that it may abide
in the minds of those who remain behind. Indeed, the obligation to a
moral life imposed by the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Great God" whose
judgment is yet to come, as well as the benefits in the world of the
dead, resulting from the fulfilment of this obligation, play no part in
this sceptic's thought. The gods are largely ignored. The only one
mentioned is the Sun-god, who appears even in connection with the mummy,
where we should have expected the appearance of Osiris. Self-indulgence
and a good name on earth hereafter may be said to summarize the teaching
of these sceptics, who have cast away the teaching of the fathers.

Nevertheless there were those who rejected even these admonitions as but
a superficial solution of the dark problem of life. Suppose that the
good name be innocently and unjustly forfeited, and the opportunities
for self-indulgence cut off by disease and misfortune. It is exactly
this situation which is presented to us in one of the most remarkable
documents surviving from this remote age. We may term it "The Dialogue
of a Misanthrope with his Own Soul," though no ancient title has
survived. The general subject is the despair resulting from the
situation mentioned, a despair which turns to death as the only escape.
It is perhaps hardly necessary to call attention to the remarkable
choice of such a subject in so remote an age, a subject which is
essentially a state of mind, the inner experience of an unjust sufferer.
It is our earliest Book of Job, written some fifteen hundred years
before a similar experience brought forth a similar book among the
Hebrews.

The introduction narrating the circumstances which brought about this
spiritual convulsion is unhappily lost. <span
id="fr_614"></span>[1](#fn_614) The prologue of the book is therefore
lacking, but some

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

of the facts which it must have contained, setting forth the reasons for
the reflections offered by the book, can be drawn from these reflections
themselves. Our unfortunate (we never learn his name) was a man of
gentle spirit who nevertheless was overtaken by blighting misfortunes.
He fell sick only to be forsaken by his friends, and even by his
brothers, who should have cared for him in his illness. No one proved
faithful to him, and in the midst of his distress his neighbors robbed
him. The good that he had done yesterday was not remembered, and
although a wise man, he was repelled when he would have plead his cause.
He was unjustly condemned, and his name, which should have been revered,
became a stench in the nostrils of men.

At this juncture, when in darkness and despair he determines to take his
own life, the document as preserved to us begins. Then, as he stands on
the brink of the grave, his soul shrinks back from the darkness in
horror and refuses to accompany him. In a long dialogue which now sets
in, we discern the unfortunate man discoursing with himself, and
conversing with his soul as with another person. The first reason for
his soul's unwillingness is apprehension lest there should be no tomb in
which to dwell after death. This, at first, seems strange enough in view
of the scepticism with which such material preparation for death was
viewed by just such men as our unfortunate proved himself to be. We soon
discover, however, that this, like another which follows, was but a
literary device intended to offer opportunity for exposing

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

the utter futility of all such preparations. It would seem that the soul
itself had before advised death by fire; but that it had then itself
shrunk back from this terrible end. As there would be no surviving
friend or relative to stand at the bier and carry out the mortuary
ceremonies, the misanthrope then proceeded to adjure his own soul to
undertake this office. The soul, however, now refuses death in any form
and paints the terrors of the tomb. "My soul opened its mouth and
answered what I had said: 'If thou rememberest burial it is mourning, it
is a bringer of tears, saddening a man; it is taking a man from his
house and casting him upon the height (the cemetery plateau). Thou
ascendest not up that thou mayest see the sun. Those who build in red
granite, who erect the ⌈sepulchre⌉ in the pyramid, those beautiful in
this beautiful structure, ⌈who have become like⌉ gods, the
offering-tables thereof are as empty as (those of) these weary ones who
die on the dike without a survivor, (when as he lies half immersed on
the shore) the flood has taken (one) end of him, the heat likewise;
those to whom the fish along the shore speak (as they devour the body).
Hearken to me—lo, it is good for men to hearken—follow the glad day and
forget care.'" <span id="fr_615"></span>[1](#fn_615)

This then is the reply of the soul when the conventional view of death
has been held up before it. The misanthrope has affirmed that he is
fortunate "who is in his pyramid over whose coffin a survivor has
stood," and he has besought his soul to be the one "who shall be my
⌈burier,⌉ who shall make offering, who shall stand at the tomb on the
day of burial, that he may ⌈prepare⌉ the bed in the cemetery." <span
id="fr_616"></span>[2](#fn_616) But like the harper in the two songs we
have read, his soul remembers the dismantled

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

tombs of the great, whose offering-tables are as empty as those of the
wretched serfs dying like flies among the public works, along the vast
irrigation dikes, and who lie there exposed to heat and devouring fish
as they await burial. There is but one solution: to live on in
forgetfulness of sorrow and drown it all in pleasure.

Up to this point the Dialogue, with its philosophy of "Eat, drink, and
be merry, for to-morrow we die," has gone no further than the Song of
the Harper. It now proceeds to a momentous conclusion, going far beyond
that song. It undertakes to demonstrate that life, far from being an
opportunity for pleasure and unbridled indulgence, is more intolerable
than death. The demonstration is contained in four poems which the
unhappy man addresses to his own soul. These constitute the second half
of the document, <span id="fr_617"></span>[1](#fn_617) and are
fortunately much more intelligible than the first half. <span
id="fr_618"></span>[2](#fn_618) The first poem portrays the unjust
abhorrence in which our unfortunate's name is held by the world. Each
three-line strophe begins with the refrain, "My name is abhorred," and
then, to enforce this statement, adduces for comparison some detestible
thing from the daily life of the people, especially the notorious stench
of fish and fowl so common in the life of the Nile-dweller.

THE UNJUST ABHORRENCE OF HIS NAME

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Lo, my name is abhorred,  
 Lo, more than the odor of birds  
 On summer days when the sky is hot.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Lo, my name is abhorred,  
 Lo, more than a fish-receiver  
 On the day of the catch when the sky is hot.

"Lo, my name is abhorred,  
 Lo, more than the odor of fowl  
 On the willow-hill full of geese.

"Lo, my name is abhorred,  
 Lo, more than the odor of fishermen  
 By the shores of the marshes when they have fished.

"Lo, my name is abhorred,  
 Lo, more than the odor of crocodiles,  
 More than sitting under the ⌈bank⌉ full of crocodiles.

"Lo, my name is abhorred,  
 Lo, more than a woman,  
 Against whom a lie is told her husband."

</div>

Two more strophes follow, but they are too obscure to be rendered. They
exhibit the same structure, and evidently were similar in content to the
others. While this poem is but a reiteration of the fact that the
unhappy man's name has become a stench in the nostrils of his fellows,
in the second poem he turns from himself to characterize those who are
responsible for his misery. He looks out over the society of his time
and finds only corruption, dishonesty, injustice, and unfaithfulness
even among his own kin. It is a fearful indictment, and as he utters it
he asks himself in an ever-recurring refrain which opens each strophe,
"To whom do I speak to-day?" His meaning probably is, "What manner of
men are those to whom I speak?" and following each repetition of this
question is a new condemnation.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

THE CORRUPTION OF MEN

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 Brothers are evil,  
 Friends of to-day are ⌈not of love⌉.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 Hearts are thievish,  
 Every man seizes his neighbor's goods.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 The gentle man perishes,  
 The bold-faced goes everywhere.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 He of the peaceful face is wretched,  
 The good is disregarded in every place.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 When a man arouses wrath by his evil conduct,  
 He stirs all men to mirth, (although) his iniquity is wicked.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 Robbery is practised,  
 Every man seizes his neighbor's (goods).

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 The pest is faithful,  
 (But) the brother who comes with it becomes an enemy.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 Yesterday is not remembered,  
 Nor is . . . in this hour.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 Brothers are evil,  
    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 Faces pass away,  
 Every man with face lower than (those of) his brothers.

</div>

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 Hearts are thievish,  
 The man upon whom one leans has no understanding.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 There are no righteous,  
 The land is left to those who do iniquity.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 There is dearth of the faithful,  
    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 There is none here of contented heart;  
 Go with him (the apparently contented) and he is not here.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 I am laden with wretchedness,  
 Without a faithful one.

"To whom do I speak to-day?  
 Evil smites the land,  
 It hath no end."

</div>

The soul of the sufferer had shrunk back from death, and, like the Song
of the Harper, proposed a life of pleasure as a way of escape. Then
moved by the terror of death, and the hopelessness of material
preparations to meet it, the unhappy man recoiled for a moment and
turned to contemplate life. The two poems we have just read depict what
he sees as he thus turns. What follows is the logical rebound from any
faint hope that life may be possible, to the final conviction that death
alone is the release from the misery in which he is involved. This third
poem is a brief hymn in praise of death. It is not an exalted
contemplation of the advantages of death, such as we find fifteen
hundred years later in Plato's story of the death

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

of Socrates; nor is it comparable to the lofty pessimism of the
afflicted Job; but as the earliest utterance of the unjustly afflicted,
as the first cry of the righteous sufferer echoing to us from the early
ages of the world, it is of unique interest and not without its beauty
and its wistful pathos. It is remarkable that it contains no thought of
God; it deals only with glad release from the intolerable suffering of
the past and looks not forward. It is characteristic of the age and the
clime to which the poem belongs, that this glad release should appear in
the form of concrete pictures drawn from the daily life of the
Nile-dweller.

DEATH A GLAD RELEASE

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Death is before me to-day  
 \[Like\] the recovery of a sick man,  
 Like going forth into a garden after sickness.

"Death is before me to-day  
 Like the odor of myrrh,  
 Like sitting under the sail on a windy day.

"Death is before me to-day  
 Like the odor of lotus flowers,  
 Like sitting on the shore of drunkenness.

"Death is before me to-day  
 Like the course of the freshet,  
 Like the return of a man from the war-galley to his house.

"Death is before me to-day  
 Like the clearing of the sky,  
 Like a man ⌈fowling therein toward⌉ that which he knew not.

"Death is before me to-day  
 As a man longs to see his house  
 When he has spent years in captivity."

</div>

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

In spite of the fact that these pictures are drawn from the life of a
distant world, for the most part unfamiliar to us, they do not
altogether fail of their effect. Life as a long sickness from which we
recover at death as the convalescent enters a beautiful garden; death as
the odor of myrrh borne on the fresh Nile wind, while the voyager sits
beneath the bellying sail; death as the return of a war-worn wanderer in
far waters approaching his home, or the glad restoration of the captive
from foreign exile—these are figures of universal appeal in any age or
clime. <span id="fr_619"></span>[1](#fn_619)

Tale forward glance into the ultimate future, which is so noticeably
lacking in the preceding song, is the theme of the fourth poem. Each of
its three strophes begins with the refrain, "He who is yonder," a common
phrase, especially in the plural, "those who are yonder," for "the
dead." "He who is yonder" shall himself be a god and "inflict the
punishment of wickedness on the doer of it," not, as in the life of our
misanthrope, on the innocent. "He who is yonder" embarks with the
Sun-god in his celestial ship, and shall see that the best of offerings
are offered to the temples of the gods, and not (by implication) be
spent in corrupt rewards or diverted by thieving officials. "He who is
yonder" is a respected sage, not repelled as he appeals to the corrupt
officials, but directing to the Sun-god (Re) his appeals for which his
daily presence with the god affords him opportunity.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

Earlier in the struggle with his soul, the sufferer had expressed the
conviction that he should be justified hereafter. <span
id="fr_620"></span>[1](#fn_620) He now returns to this conviction in
this fourth poem, with which the remarkable document closes. It
therefore concludes with a solution likewise found among those discerned
by Job—an appeal to justification hereafter, although Job does not
necessarily make this a reason for seeking death, thus making death the
vestibule to the judgment-hall and therefore to be sought as soon as
possible.

THE HIGH PRIVILEGES OF THE SOJOURNER YONDER

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"He who is yonder  
 Shall seize (the culprit) as a living god,  
 Inflicting punishment of wickedness on the doer of it.

"He who is yonder  
 Shall stand in the celestial barque,  
 Causing that the choicest of the offerings there be given to the
temples.

"He who is yonder  
 Shall be a wise man who has not been repelled,  
 Praying to Re when he speaks."

</div>

Thus longing for the glad release which death affords and confident of
the high privileges he shall enjoy beyond, the soul of the unhappy man
at last yields, he enters the shadow and passes on to be with "those who
are yonder." In spite of the evident crudity of the composition it is
not without some feeling that we watch this unknown go, the earliest
human soul, into the inner chambers of which we are permitted a glimpse
across a lapse of four thousand years.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

It is evident that the men of the Feudal Age took great pleasure in such
literary efforts. This particular Berlin papyrus was copied by a
book-scribe, whose concluding remark is still legible at the end of the
document: "It is finished from beginning to end like that which was
found in writing." <span id="fr_621"></span>[1](#fn_621) He copied it
therefore from an older original, and doubtless many such copies were to
be found on the shelves of the thinking men of the time. The story of
the Misanthrope was one which owed its origin to individual experiences
through which the men of this time were really passing, and they found
profit in perusing it. It is a distinct mark in the long development of
self-consciousness, the slow process which culminated in the emergence
of the individual as a moral force, an individual appealing to
conscience as an ultimate authority at whose mandate he may confront and
arraign society. In this document, then, we discern the emergence of a
new realm, the realm of social forces; for while it is the tragedy of
the individual unjustly afflicted, his very affliction places him in the
inexorable grip of social forces, calling for a crusade of social
righteousness. The dawn of that social crusade and the regeneration
which followed are still to be considered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_561"></span>[166:1](rtae10.htm#fr_561) Pyr. § 1463.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[166:2](rtae10.htm#fr_562) Pyr. § 1466 d.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[166:3](rtae10.htm#fr_563) See above, [p.
45](rtae05.htm#page_45).

<span id="fn_564"></span>[167:1](rtae10.htm#fr_564) <span
class="smallcaps">Sethe</span>, *Untersuchungen*, V, 99.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[167:2](rtae10.htm#fr_565) BAR, I, 382.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[167:3](rtae10.htm#fr_566) BAR, I, 383.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[168:1](rtae10.htm#fr_567) Statue in the
Leipzig University Collection. <span
class="smallcaps">Steindorff</span>, *Zeitschr. für aegypt. Sprache*,
48, 156.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[168:2](rtae10.htm#fr_568) BAR, I, 281.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[168:3](rtae10.htm#fr_569) BAR, I, 240.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[168:4](rtae10.htm#fr_570) BAR, I, 252.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[169:1](rtae10.htm#fr_571) BAR, I, 279.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[170:1](rtae10.htm#fr_572) BAR, I, 328–331. The
threat will also be found, BAR, I, 253 and 338.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[170:2](rtae10.htm#fr_573) This statement is
also found in another Aswan tomb, BAR, I, 357.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[171:1](rtae10.htm#fr_574) BAR, I, 338.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[171:2](rtae10.htm#fr_575) <span
class="smallcaps">Petrie</span>, Deshasheh, pl. vii.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[171:3](rtae10.htm#fr_576) Pyr. § 921.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[172:1](rtae10.htm#fr_577) The Osirian editor
of the only other text of this Utterance (510), that of Pepi, has
inserted Osiris over Geb here, and then incorrectly added "Pepi," making
"Osiris Pepi." The text thus made nonsense, viz., "How just is king Pepi
for Osiris Pepi!" The passage incidentally furnishes one of the best
examples of Osirian editing. That the text had nothing to do with Osiris
in this passage, but concerned solely Geb and Re, is shown by the
following context: "His (the king's) boundaries exist not, his landmarks
are not found; while Geb, with his arm to the sky and his (other) arm to
the earth, announces king Mernere to Re."

<span id="fn_578"></span>[172:2](rtae10.htm#fr_578) Pyr. §§ 1141–2.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[172:3](rtae10.htm#fr_579) Pyr. § 1238.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[172:4](rtae10.htm#fr_580) Pyr. § 1188.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[173:1](rtae10.htm#fr_581) Pyr. § 815.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[173:2](rtae10.htm#fr_582) Pyr. §1785 b.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[173:3](rtae10.htm#fr_583) Pyr. §1219 a.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[173:4](rtae10.htm#fr_584) Pyr. Ut. 467. Does
the blaspheming refer to Re? For Pepi is himself the king!

<span id="fn_585"></span>[173:5](rtae10.htm#fr_585) Pyr. § 1327.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[173:6](rtae10.htm#fr_586) Pyr. § 1027.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[173:7](rtae10.htm#fr_587) Pyr. Ut. 263–5.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[174:1](rtae10.htm#fr_588) Pyr. § 929 a.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[174:2](rtae10.htm#fr_589) Pyr. §§ 1774 a-1776
b.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[174:3](rtae10.htm#fr_590) Pyr. § 265.
"Justice" in both these passages may be translated also "truth" or
"righteousness." As the correlated opposite means "falsehood," it is
perhaps more nearly correct to render "truth" and "falsehood."

<span id="fn_591"></span>[175:1](rtae10.htm#fr_591) Pyr. § 1483.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[175:2](rtae10.htm#fr_592) Pyr. § 2078.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[175:3](rtae10.htm#fr_593) Pyr. § 2086.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[175:4](rtae10.htm#fr_594) Pyr. § 1429 c.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[175:5](rtae10.htm#fr_595) Pyr. § 1306 c.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[175:6](rtae10.htm#fr_596) Pyr. § 2089 a.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[175:7](rtae10.htm#fr_597) Pyr. § 1520 a.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[175:8](rtae10.htm#fr_598) Pyr. § 316.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[175:9](rtae10.htm#fr_599) Pyr. § 319.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[176:1](rtae10.htm#fr_600) Pyr. § 323.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[176:2](rtae10.htm#fr_601) In my *History of
Egypt* I have accepted the conclusion that the Osirian litigation at
Heliopolis is the incident in the career of Osiris which resulted in the
introduction of powerful ethical motives into Egyptian religion. A
further study of the Pyramid Texts and the collection of all the data
they contain on the subject, as presented above, demonstrate in my
judgment the incorrectness of this conclusion as well as the early moral
superiority of the Solar religion.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[177:1](rtae10.htm#fr_602) In Pyr. § 123 the
Pharaoh is supplied with a mistress in the hereafter.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[177:2](rtae10.htm#fr_603) Pyr. § 510.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[178:1](rtae10.htm#fr_604) The Utterances are
263 (Unis), 264 (Teti), and 265–6 (Pepi). Unis, the oldest king, died
about 2625 B.C., and Pepi I about 2570.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[182:1](rtae10.htm#fr_605) They have been
edited by W. M. <span class="smallcaps">Mueller</span> in his
*Liebespoesie*. The first version is found among the love-songs of
Papyrus Harris, 500, in the British Museum, pl. vi, 1. 2, to pl. vii, 1.
3 (part of a duplicate on a fragment of tomb wall in Leyden). See <span
class="smallcaps">Mueller</span>, pls. xii–xv. The other version is in
the tomb of Neferhotep, <span class="smallcaps">Mueller</span>, pl. i.
For the older publications see <span class="smallcaps">Mueller</span>.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[182:2](rtae10.htm#fr_606) This is one of the
Eleventh Dynasty Intefs.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[182:3](rtae10.htm#fr_607) Meaning the dead
king in whose tomb the song was written.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[182:4](rtae10.htm#fr_608) Imhotep was grand
vizier, chief architect, and famous wise man under king Zoser of the
Third Dynasty (thirtieth century B.C.). He was the first great architect
in stone-masonry construction, the father of stone architecture. The
futility of the massive building methods which he introduced is thus
brought out with double effectiveness. He has not escaped the fate of
all the rest in the Old Kingdom cemetery. Hardedef was a royal prince,
son of Khufu of Gizeh, and hence connected with the greatest pyramid. He
lived about a century after Imhotep. Both of them had thus become
proverbial wise men a thousand years after they had passed away.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[184:1](rtae10.htm#fr_609) <span
class="smallcaps">Fitzgerald</span>, *Rubaiyat*, 64.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[185:1](rtae10.htm#fr_610) These two lines
merely recall the ceaseless rising and setting of the sun. Manu is the
mountain of the west.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[186:1](rtae10.htm#fr_611) As <span
class="smallcaps">Mueller</span> has noticed, there was some reference
to the well-known mortuary grove in this lacuna; he refers to <span
class="smallcaps">Maspero</span>, in *Recueil de travaux*, II, pp.
105–7; <span class="smallcaps">Rougé</span>, *Inscr. hierogl.*, CV;
*Mém. Miss. franç.*, V, 300, 330. But I cannot agree with <span
class="smallcaps">Mueller</span> in making it an injunction to equip the
futile tomb with a grove equally futile, and supposing it to be an
insertion by a later orthodox scribe. This can be avoided by making it a
question.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[186:2](rtae10.htm#fr_612) While a tomb and the
grove attached to it are fruitless trouble, moral worthiness, kindness
to the poor, and the resulting good name shall endure.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[187:1](rtae10.htm#fr_613) The upper ends of
the remaining six lines are too fragmentary to yield any certain or
connected sense.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[188:1](rtae10.htm#fr_614) The document is a
papyrus of the Middle Kingdom in Berlin (P. 3024). It was first
published by <span class="smallcaps">Lepsius</span> over fifty years ago
<span id="page_189">p. 189</span> (*Denkmaeler*, VI, Taf., 111–112). Its
content is so difficult that it remained unintelligible until
republished by <span class="smallcaps">Erman</span> in 1896, "*Gespraech
eines Lebensmueden mit seiner Seele*," *Abhandl. der koenigl. Preuss.
Akad., Berlin*, 1896. From <span class="smallcaps">Erman's</span>
treatise the above presentation draws substantially.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[190:1](rtae10.htm#fr_615) Misanthrope, ll.
56–68.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[190:2](rtae10.htm#fr_616) *Ibid.*, ll. 52–55.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[191:1](rtae10.htm#fr_617) Lines 85–147.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[191:2](rtae10.htm#fr_618) In structure these
poems are as follows:

The first has eight three-line strophes.

The second has sixteen three-line strophes.

The third has six three-line strophes.

The fourth has three three-line strophes.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[196:1](rtae10.htm#fr_619) Two of the figures
are obscure: "the course of the freshet" is perhaps a reference to the
dry water-course comparable with life, while its sudden filling by the
waters of the freshet is the welcome refreshing corresponding to death.
"A man fowling therein toward that which he knew not" may perhaps refer
to the approach of the hunter to unfamiliar regions. "Sitting on the
shore of drunkenness" is a picture of sensual pleasure in a
drinking-booth on the dike or highway, here called "the shore."

<span id="fn_620"></span>[197:1](rtae10.htm#fr_620) Lines 23–27.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[198:1](rtae10.htm#fr_621) Lines 154–5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture VII. The Social Forces make their Impression on
Religion—The Rise of Social Reformers—The Earliest Social
Regeneration](rtae11)
