[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rtae00)  [Next](rtae02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027ISA32/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt*, by James Henry
Breasted, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

### PREFACE

<span class="smallcaps">Contrary</span> to the popular and current
impression, the most important body of sacred literature in Egypt is not
the Book of the Dead, but a much older literature which we now call the
"Pyramid Texts." These texts, preserved in the Fifth and Sixth Dynasty
Pyramids at Sakkara, form the oldest body of literature surviving from
the ancient world and disclose to us the earliest chapter in the
intellectual history of man as preserved to modern times. They are to
the study of Egyptian language and civilization what the Vedas have been
in the study of early East Indian and Aryan culture. Discovered in
1880–81, they were published by Maspero in a pioneer edition which will
always remain a great achievement and a landmark in the history of
Egyptology. The fact that progress has been made in the publication of
such epigraphic work is no reflection upon the devoted labors of the
distinguished first editor of the Pyramid Texts. The appearance last
year of the exhaustive standard edition of the hieroglyphic text at the
hands of Sethe after years of study and arrangement marks a new epoch in
the study of earliest Egyptian life and religion. How comparatively
inaccessible the Pyramid Texts have been until the appearance of Sethe's
edition is best illustrated by the fact that no complete analysis or
full account of the Pyramid Texts as a whole has ever appeared in
English, much less an English version of them. The great and complicated
fabric of life which they reflect to us, the religious and intellectual

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

forces which have left their traces in them, the intrusion of the Osiris
faith and the Osirian editing by the hand of the earliest redactor in
literary history—all these and many other fundamental disclosures of
this earliest body of literature have hitherto been inaccessible to the
English reader, and as far as they are new, also to all.

It was therefore with peculiar pleasure that just after the appearance
of Sethe's edition of the Pyramid Texts I received President Francis
Brown's very cordial invitation to deliver the Morse Lectures at Union
Theological Seminary on some subject in Egyptian life and civilization.
While it was obviously desirable at this juncture to choose a subject
which would involve some account of the Pyramid Texts, it was equally
desirable to assign them their proper place in the development of
Egyptian civilization. This latter desideratum led to a rather more
ambitious subject than the time available before the delivery of the
lectures would permit to treat exhaustively, viz., to trace the
development of Egyptian religion in its relation to life and thought,
as, for example, it has been done for the Hebrews by modern critical and
historical study. In the study of Egyptian religion hitherto the effort
has perhaps necessarily been to produce a kind of historical
encyclopedia of the subject. Owing to their vast extent, the mere bulk
of the materials available, this method of study and presentation has
resulted in a very complicated and detailed picture in which the great
drift of the development as the successive forces of civilization
dominated has not been discernible. There has heretofore been little
attempt to correlate with religion the other great categories of life
and civilization which shaped it. I do not mean that these relationships
have not been noticed in certain epochs, especially where they have been
so obvious as

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

hardly to be overlooked, but no systematic effort has yet been made to
trace from beginning to end the leading categories of life, thought, and
civilization as they successively made their mark on religion, or to
follow religion from age to age, disclosing especially how it was shaped
by these influences, and how it in its turn reacted on society.

I should have been very glad if this initial effort at such a
reconstruction might have attempted a more detailed analysis of the
basic documents upon which it rests, and if in several places it might
have been broadened and extended to include more categories. That
surprising group of pamphleteers who made the earliest crusade for
social justice and brought about the earliest social regeneration four
thousand years ago (Lecture VII) should be further studied in detail in
their bearing on the mental and religious attitude of the remarkable age
to which they belonged. I am well aware also of the importance and
desirability of a full treatment of cult and ritual in such a
reconstruction as that here attempted, but I have been obliged to limit
the discussion of this subject chiefly to mortuary ritual and
observances, trusting that I have not overlooked facts of importance for
our purpose discernible in the temple cult. In the space and time at my
disposal for this course of lectures it has not been possible to adduce
all the material which I had, nor to follow down each attractive vista
which frequently opened so temptingly. I have not undertaken the problem
of origins in many directions, like that of sacred animals so prominent
in Egypt. Indeed Re and Osiris are so largely anthropomorphic that, in
dealing as I have chiefly with the Solar and Osirian faiths, it was not
necessary. In the age discussed these two highest gods were altogether
human and highly spiritualized, though the thought of Re displays
occasional

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

relapses, as it were, in the current allusions to the falcon, with which
he was so early associated. Another subject passed by is the concept of
sacrifice, which I have not discussed at all. There is likewise no
systematic discussion of the idea of a god's power, though the material
for such a discussion will be found here. I would have been glad to
devote a lecture to this subject, especially in its relation to magic as
a vague and colossal inexorability to which when invoked even the
highest god must bow. Only Amenhotep IV (Ikhnaton) seems to have
outgrown it, because Oriental magic is so largely demoniac and Amenhotep
IV as a monotheist banished the demons and the host of gods.

It will be seen, then, that no rigid outline of categories has been set
up. I have taken those aspects of Egyptian religion and thought in which
the development and expansion could be most clearly traced, the endeavor
being especially to determine the order and succession of those
influences which determine the course and character of religious
development. It is of course evident that no such influence works at any
time to the exclusion of all the others, but there are epochs when, for
example, the influence of the state on religion and religious thought
first becomes noticeable and a determining force. The same thing is true
of the social forces as distinguished from those of the state
organization. This is not an endeavor, then, to trace each category from
beginning to end, but to establish the order in which the different
influences which created Egyptian religion successively became the
determining forces. Beginning shortly after 3000 B.C. the surviving
documents are, I think, sufficient to disclose these influences in
chronological order as they will be found in the "Epitome of the
Development" which follows this

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

preface. Under these circumstances little effort to correlate the
phenomena adduced with those of other religions has been made. May I
remind the reader of technical attainments also, that the lectures were
designed for a popular audience and were written accordingly?

Although we are still in the beginning of the study of Egyptian
religion, and although I would gladly have carried these researches much
further, I believe that the reconstruction here presented will in the
main stand, and that the inevitable alterations and differences of
opinion resulting from the constant progress in such a field of research
will concern chiefly the details. That the general drift of the
religious development in Egypt is analogous to that of the Hebrews is a
fact of confirmative value not without interest to students of
Comparative Religion and of the Old Testament.

I have been careful to make due acknowledgment in the foot-notes of my
indebtedness to the labors of other scholars. The obligation of all
scholars in this field to the researches of Erman and Maspero is
proverbial, and, as we have said, in his new edition of the Pyramid
Texts Sethe has raised a notable monument to his exhaustive knowledge of
this subject to which every student of civilization is indebted. May I
venture to express the hope that this exposition of religion in the
making, during a period of three thousand years, may serve not only as a
general survey of the development in the higher life of a great people
beginning in the earliest age of man which we can discern at the present
day, but also to emphasize the truth that the process of religion-making
has never ceased and that the same forces which shaped religion in
ancient Egypt are still operative in our own midst and continue to mould
our own religion to-day?

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

The reader should note that half brackets indicate some uncertainty in
the rendering of all words so enclosed; brackets enclose words wholly
restored, and where the half brackets are combined with the brackets the
restoration is uncertain. Parentheses enclose explanatory words not in
the original, and dots indicate intentional omission in the translation
of an original. Quotations from modern authors are so rare in the
volume, and so evident when made, that the reader may regard practically
all passages in quotation marks as renderings from an original document.
All abbreviations will be intelligible except BAR, which designates the
author's Ancient Records of Egypt (five volumes, Chicago, 1905–07), the
Roman indicating the volume, and the Arabic the paragraph.

In conclusion, it is a pleasant duty to express my indebtedness to my
friend and one-time pupil, Dr. Caroline Ransom, of the Metropolitan
Museum, for her kindness in reading the entire page-proof, while for a
similar service, as well as the irksome task of preparing the index, I
am under great obligation to the goodness of Dr. Charles R. Gillett, of
Union Theological Seminary.

<span class="smallcaps">James Henry Breasted</span>.

*The University of Chicago*,  
*     April*, 1912.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epitome of the Development](rtae02)
