[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cor00)  [Next](cor02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Coronis*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1771\], tr. by John Whitehead
\[1914\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Coronis

<span class="margnote"><span id="1.">1.</span></span>

THE CORONIS, OR APPENDIX TO THE TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION These three
things, - the Consummation of the Age, the Coming of the Lord, and the
New Church-have, it is true, been treated of in the last chapter of the
work entitled The True Christian Religion. The reason why a Continuation
follows concerning them, is because no one has hitherto known what the
Consummation of the Age is, why the Second Coming of the Lord must take
place, or that the New Church is about to come; and yet these three
subjects are treated of in both the Prophetic and the Apostolic Word,
and fully in the Apocalypse. That these three subjects are treated of in
the Prophetic Word of the Old Testament, was made evident to me while it
was granted me to lay it open by means of the spiritual sense; and in
like manner that they are treated of in the Prophetic \[part\] of the
New Testament, which is called the Apocalypse: that they are also in the
Evangelic and Apostolic Word, will be plain from the following pages.
Hence it follows, that, without a knowledge of the Consummation of the
Age, the Second Coming of the Lord, and the New Church, the Word is as
it were shut up; nor can anything but knowledges open it: these are like
keys which open the door and introduce. When this takes place with the
Word, then the treasures, which lay concealed therein as at the bottom
of the sea, come into view; for, at the bottom, there are in the Word
nothing else but precious things. In this Appendix or Continuation, I
shall proceed, in like manner as in the work itself, by prefixed
Summaries, which will be confirmed from Scripture and illustrated from
reason.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2.">2.</span></span>

PROPOSITION THE FIRST. I. There have been four churches on this earth
from the day of its creation: the First, which is to be called the
Adamic; the Second, the Noachian; the Third, the Israelitish; and the
Fourth, the Christian. That four churches have existed on this earth
since the creation of the world, manifestly appears in Daniel; first,
from the statue seen by Nebuchadnezzar in a dream, and, afterwards, from
the four beasts rising up out of the sea. Concerning the statue of
Nebuchadnezzar we read as follows: Daniel said, Thou, O king, sawest,
and behold a great statue. And the appearance thereof was excellent,
standing before thee, and the aspect thereof was terrible. The head of
this statue was of good gold; its breast and arms, of silver; its belly
and its thighs, of brass; its legs, of iron; its feet, partly of iron
and partly of clay. Thou sawest until a stone was cut out, which was not
by hands, and smote the statue upon its feet that were of iron and clay,
and brake them in pieces. Then were the iron, the clay, the brass, the
silver, and the gold, broken in pieces together, and became like the
chaff of the summer threshing-floors; so that the wind carried them
away, and no place was found for them: but the stone, which smote the
statue, became a great rock, and filled the whole earth. In these days
shall the God of the heavens raise up a kingdom, which shall not be
destroyed to the ages; and His kingdom shall not be entrusted to another
people: it shall break in pieces and consume all those kingdoms, but it
shall stand to the ages (Dan. 2:31-35, 44). This dream did not signify
four political kingdoms on this earth, but four churches, which should
follow one after another, may be evident from the following
considerations: (1) That such kingdoms, one after another, have not
existed on this earth. (2) That the Divine Word, in its bosom, does not
treat of the kingdoms of the world, but of churches, which constitute
the kingdom of God on the earth. (3) Also, because it is said that the
God of the heavens shall raise up a kingdom which shall not be destroyed
to the ages, and that a stone, cut out, not by hands, became a great
rock, which filled the whole earth. (4) And, because the Lord our
Saviour Jesus Christ, in the Word of both Testaments, is called the
"Stone" and "Rock," it is manifest that His kingdom is meant by the last
words in this passage. (5) Moreover, the state of the church is
described, in innumerable passages of the Word, by "gold," "silver,"
"brass," and "iron;" its spiritual state as to the good of love by
"gold," its spiritual state as to the truth of wisdom by "silver," its
natural state as to the good of charity by "brass," and its natural
state as to the truth of faith by "iron," as may be seen confirmed from
the Word in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 913), and elsewhere. \[2\] For
this reason, the wise in the first ages, who knew the significations of
metals, compared the ages, which were to follow one another from the
first to the last, to those four metals, and called the first age
"golden," the second age "silver," the third age "copper," and the
fourth age "iron;" and they described them thus according to goods and
truths; and because genuine goods and truths are from no other origin
than from the God of heaven, they described them according to the states
of the church with those who lived in those ages; for from these, and
according to these, all the civil states of kingdoms as to justice and
judgment exist, flourish and live. \[3\] That the Lord the Saviour Jesus
Christ is called the "Stone" and "Rock" in the Word of both Testaments,
is plain from the following passages. That He is called a "Stone" from
these: Thus said the Lord Jehovih, Behold I will found in Zion a Stone
of probation, a precious corner of well-established foundation; he who
hath believed will not make haste; then I will set judgment for the
rule, and justice for the plummet (Isa. 28:16, 17). Jehovah will visit
His flock. From Him is the cornerstone (Zech. 10:3, 4). The stone which
the architects rejected is become the head of the corner (Ps. 118:22).
Have ye not read in the Scripture that the Stone which the builders
rejected is become the head of the corner? (Matt. 21:42; Mark 12:10, 11;
Luke 20:17, 18; Isa. 8:14, 15). Ye have come to the Lord, the living
Stone, rejected indeed of men, but chosen of God; ye yourselves also, as
living stones, are built up into a spiritual house;...therefore, it is
said in the Scripture, I lay in Zion a corner-stone, elect, precious,
and he who believeth on Him shall not be ashamed (1 Peter 2:4-6). Ye are
built upon the foundations of the apostles and prophets, whose
corner-stone is Jesus Christ, by whom the whole building, well cemented
together, groweth into a holy temple in the Lord; by whom ye are built
together into a habitation of God in the spirit (Eph. 2:20, 21, 22).
Jesus Christ is the Stone, rejected by the builders, which is become the
head of the corner; and there is no salvation in any other (Acts 4:11,
12). The Lord is called the "Rock," is evident from these passages in
the Word: When Jeshurun became fat, he kicked...and he forsook God who
made him, and despised the Rock of his salvation (Deut. 32:15, 18, 30).
The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spake to me (2 Sam. 23:3).
Let the words of my mouth be well-pleasing, O Jehovah, my Rock and my
Redeemer (Ps. 19:14). And they remembered that God was their Rock, and
the High God their Redeemer (Ps. 78:35). They all drank spiritual drink;
for they drank from the spiritual Rock; the Rock was Christ (1 Cor.
10:4; Exod. 17:6). From these passages, it is now manifestly evident,
that by the "Stone" which smote the statue, and became a great rock and
filled the whole earth, and whose kingdom shall stand to ages of ages,
is meant our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3.">3.</span></span>

The same four churches on this earth are described by four "beasts"
rising up out of the sea, in Daniel, of which it is there written: The
first was seen like a lion, but it had eagle's wings. I beheld until the
wings thereof were plucked out, and it was lifted up from the earth, and
it was erect like a man upon feet, and a man's heart was given to it.
Afterwards, behold another beast, a second, like a bear, and it raised
up itself on one side; three ribs were in its mouth between the teeth:
moreover, they were saying thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh. After
these things, I beheld, and, lo, another, like a leopard, which had upon
the back of it four wings, like birds' wings; the beast had also four
heads; and dominion was given to it. After this, I saw in the night
visions, and behold a fourth beast, terrible and dreadful, and strong
exceedingly, which had great iron teeth; it devoured and brake in
pieces, and trampled the residue with its feet; but it was diverse from
all the beasts that were before it, and it had ten horns. I beheld till
the thrones were cast down and the Ancient of days did sit; and the
judgment was set, and the books were opened; and behold, one like the
Son of man was coming with the clouds of the heavens. And there was
given Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all peoples, nations
and tongues should worship Him: His dominion is a dominion of an age,
which shall not pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not perish
(chap. 7:3-7, 9, 10, 13, 14, seq.). By these beasts, in like manner, are
meant and described those four churches, is manifest from all the
particulars there, which shall be unfolded shall their order in the
following pages: more especially from the last expressions there, that
after those four beasts the Son of man will come, to whom shall be given
dominion, and a kingdom which shall not pass away and perish; who, also,
is meant by "the Stone made into a great Rock, which shall fill the
whole earth," as may be seen above (n. 2, at the end). \[2\] That the
states of the church are likewise described in the Word by beasts, as
well as by metals, is evident from numberless passages, some only of
which I will adduce here; which are as follows: Thou causest the rain of
benevolences to drop; thou wilt confirm thy laboring inheritance; the
beast of thy assembly shall dwell therein (Ps. 68:9, 10). Every wild
beast of the forest is Mine, the beasts in the mountains of thousands; I
know every bird of the mountains, the beasts of My fields are with Me
(Ps. 50:10, 11). Assyria was a cedar in Lebanon, his height was exalted;
all the birds of the heavens made their nests in his boughs, and under
his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth, and in his
shadow dwelt all great nations (Ezek. 31:3, 5, 6, 13; Dan. 4:7-13). In
that day will I make a covenant for them with the beast of the field,
and with the bird of the heavens, and I will betroth Myself unto thee to
eternity (Hos. 2:18, 19). Rejoice and be glad, fear not, ye beasts of My
fields, for the habitations of the desert are become herbaceous (Joel
2:21, 22). Thou, son of man, say to the bird of every wing, and to every
beast of the field, Gather yourselves together to My sacrifice upon the
mountains of Israel: thus I will give My glory among the nations (Ezek.
39:17, 20, 21). The enemy hath reproached Jehovah; give not the soul of
the turtledove unto the beast (Ps. 74:18, 19). Jehovah gathereth the
outcasts of Israel; every beast of My fields, come ye (Isa. 56:8, 9).
The spirit driving Jesus, caused Him to go forth into the wilderness;
and He was with the beasts, and the angels ministered unto Him (Mark
1:12, 13). He was not with beasts, but with devils, with whom He fought
and whom He subdued; besides a thousand other passages, which are in
part adduced in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 567). Moreover, it is known
that the Lord Himself, in the Word, is called a "Lamb" and also a
"Lion;" likewise, that the Holy Spirit was represented as a "dove;" that
the "cherubim," also, by which the Word in the literal sense is
signified, appeared like "four beasts," in Ezekiel and in the
Apocalypse; and that the man of the church who acknowledges the Lord as
his God and Shepherd, is called a "sheep;" and, on the other hand, he
who does not acknowledge Him, , is called a "he-goat" and also a
"dragon;" and that an assembly of the latter is described, in like
manner as in Daniel, by: The beast out of the sea like a leopard, the
feet of which were as it were a bear's, and his mouth as it were a
lion's (Apoc. 13:1, 2). These comparisons originate from the spiritual
world, where all the affections and the thoughts therefrom, of angels
and spirits, are presented at a distance from them as beasts which also
appear in a form in all respects similar to that of the beasts in the
natural world; the affections of the love of good as gentle beasts and
good uses, but the affections of the love of evil as savage beasts and
evil uses. Hence it is that "beasts" are so often named in the Word; and
by them in the spiritual sense are signified affections, inclinations,
perceptions and thoughts. From these things it is manifest what is meant
by "creatures" in the following passages: Jesus commanded the disciples
to go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature (Mark
16:15). If anyone be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things have
passed away, and all things are become new (2 Cor. 5:17). These things
saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the
creature of God (Apoc. 3:14). By "creatures," here, are meant those who
can be created anew, that is, regenerated, and thus become of the Lord's
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4.">4.</span></span>

That there have been four churches on this earth, one before the flood,
which is to be called the Adamic; the second, after the flood, which is
to be called the Noachic; and the third, after this, which was the
Israelitish; also the fourth, which exists at this day, and is called
the Christian, will be demonstrated in the following pages, in the
exposition of each of them separately.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5.">5.</span></span>

II\. There have been four successive states, or periods, of each church,
which in the Word are meant by "morning," "day," "evening," and "night."
That there have been four successive states, or periods, of every one of
these churches above mentioned, will be illustrated in the following
pages, wherein each will be dealt with in its order. They are described
by those alternations of time, because every man who is born in the
church, or in whom the church has commenced, first comes into its light,
such as that is in the dawn and morning; afterwards, he advances into
its day, and, he who loves its truths, even to its mid-day; if he then
stops in the way, and does not advance into the heat of spring and
summer, his day declines towards evening, and at length, like light at
night-time, it grows dark; and then his intelligence in the spiritual
things of the church becomes a cold light, like the light of the days in
winter, when he indeed sees the trees standing near his house, or in his
gardens, but stript of leaves and deprived of fruits, thus like bare
logs. For, the man of the church advances from morning to day, to the
end that he may be reformed and regenerated by means of the light of
reason, which is effected only by a life according to the precepts of
the Lord in the Word. If this does not take place, his light becomes
darkness, and the darkness, thick darkness; that is, the truths of light
with him are turned into falsities, and the falsities into unseen evils.
It is otherwise with the man who suffers himself to be regenerated:
night does not overtake him, for he walks in God, and hence is
continually in the day; into which, also, he fully enters after death,
when he is associated with angels in heaven. This is meant by these
things in the Apocalypse, concerning the New Jerusalem, which is the New
Church, truly Christian: That city shall have no need of the sun and
moon to shine in it; for the glory of God shall lighten it, and the Lamb
is the lamp thereof; and the nations which are saved shall walk in the
light of it and there shall be no night there (21:23-25; Ezek. 32:8;
Amos. 5:20; 8:9). That the successive states of the church are meant by
"morning," "day," "evening," and "night," in the Word, is evident from
the following passages therein: Watch; for ye know not when the Lord of
the house will come, at even, or at midnight, or at cock-crowing, or in
the morning (Mark 13:35; Matt. 25:13). The subject there treated of is
the Consummation of the Age, and the Coming of the Lord at that time:
The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spake to me; he is as the
light of the morning, a morning without clouds (2 Sam. 23:3, 4). I am
the Root and the Offspring of David, the bright and morning Star (Apoc.
22:16). God shall help her, when He shall look to the morning (Ps.
46:5). He is calling to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night?
Watchman, what of the night? The watchman said, The morning cometh, and
also the night (Isa. 21:11, 12). The end is come upon thee, O inhabitant
of the land; the time is come, the day is near. Behold the day, behold,
it is come; the morning hath gone forth (Ezek. 7:5-7, 10). There shall
be a day which shall be known to Jehovah; not day nor night; for about
the time of evening there shall be light (Zech. 14:7). About the time of
evening, behold, terror; before the morning, he is not (Isa. 17:14). In
the evening, weeping will tarry all night, but there will be singing in
the morning (Ps. 30:5). Even to the evening and the morning, two
thousand three hundred; then shall the holy place be justified: the
vision of the evening and morning is truth (Dan. 8:14, 26). Jehovah in
the morning will give His judgement in the light; He will not fail
(Zeph. 3:5). Thus said Jehovah, If ye have made void My covenant of the
day and My covenant of the night, so that there be not day and night in
their season, My covenant also shall be made void with David My servant
(Jer. 33:20, 21, 25). Jesus said, I must work the works of God while it
is day; the night cometh when no one can work (John 9:4). In this night
there shall be two on one bed; one shall be taken, but the other shall
be left (Luke 17:34). In these passages, it treats of the consummation
of the age and the Coming of the Lord. Hence it may be evident what is
meant by "There shall be time no longer" (Apoc. 10:6); namely, that
there would not be morning, day, or evening in the church, but night;
likewise what is meant by "time, times, and half a time" (Apoc. 12:14;
Dan. 12:7); as also what is meant by the "fulness of time" (Eph. 1:10;
Gal. 4:4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6.">6.</span></span>

III\. In each church there have been four successive changes of state;
the first of which was the appearing of the Lord Jehovih and redemption,
and then its morning, or rise: the second was its instruction, and then
its day, or progression: the third was its decline; and then its evening
or vastation: the fourth was its end; and then its night or
consummation. That there have been four successive states of each
church, which in the Word are meant by "morning," "day," "evening," and
"night," has been shown in the preceding article. That every one of the
four churches mentioned above underwent those states, will be fully
established in the following pages, where each will be dealt with in its
order; and then that the appearing of the Lord Jehovih and redemption
was its "morning;" that instruction was its "day" or progression into
light; also, that decline was its "evening" or vastation; and that its
end was its "night" or consummation. In the Word, both in its historical
and its prophetical parts, those four changes of state are everywhere
treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7.">7.</span></span>

The order into which every man was created by God, is, that after
infancy he may become a man. For when he is born, he is only an external
image or form of a man, and at that time less a man than a new-born
beast is a beast; but, so far as he is inwardly perfected in this form,
as to his mind, or his spirit, in wisdom and love, he becomes a man. A
man is like a tree, which first grows up from a seed into a shoot, and
when it increases in height puts forth branches and from these stems,
and clothes itself continually with leaves; and when it comes to
maturity, which takes place in its middle age, puts forth flowers, and
produces fruits; in each one it places seeds, which being cast into the
earth, as into a womb, grow up into similar trees and thus into a
garden. And if you are willing to believe it, that same garden remains
with the man after death; he dwells in it, and is delighted daily with
the sight of it, and with the use of its fruits. It is such a man who is
described in David by these words: He shall be like a tree planted
beside the rivers of waters, which shall bring forth its fruit in its
season, and its leaf shall not fall off (Ps. 1:3 and likewise Rev.
22:1-2). \[2\] But the case is different with the man born in the
church, who, when he has passed through his morning, and advanced into
the first light of day, whereby he has become rational, then stops, and
does not produce fruit: such a one is, or may be, like a tree luxuriant
with leaves, but not bearing fruit, which is uprooted from the garden,
its branches cut off, and the trunk cleft in pieces with axe, or saw,
and the whole then cast little by little into the fire. The light of his
rational becomes like the light of the days of winter, in which the
leaves of the trees first grow yellow, then drop off, and lastly rot.
His rational, also, may be compared with a tree whose leaves are
consumed by worms in early spring; likewise with a crop that is choked
by thorns; and also with vegetation which is laid waste by locusts. The
reason is, that his rational is merely natural, because it takes its
ideas solely from the world through the senses, and not from heaven
through the affections and the perceptions therefrom. And since, on this
account, there is nothing spiritual inwardly in his rational, if he then
speaks of any spiritual thing of the church, his voice is heard by the
angels no otherwise than as the voice of a parrot or a goose; for his
voice is merely animal, because merely natural, and not human because
not spiritual within; for it flows forth from the respiration of the
body only, and not from any respiration of the spirit. Such is the man
who does not, from natural, become spiritual; and no one becomes
spiritual, unless, after he has become rational, he brings forth fruits,
that is, imbues charity by life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8.">8.</span></span>

The four changes of state, which are called "morning," "day," "evening,"
and "night," are in the Word predicated of the church, because the
church consists of men, and a man is a church in particular, and the
assembly of these men is what is called the church. Those in this
assembly or the church, who live according to the order described above
(n. 7), are trees of life, which also are trees of good use; but those
who do not live according to that order are trees of the knowledge of
good and evil, which also are trees of evil use. The latter are those of
whom "evening" and "night," or, what is the same, vastation and
consummation, are predicated; but not the former. These things, however,
will be made evident to the reason in the following pages; but it is
proper, that, at the beginning of this volume, some preliminary
observations should be made, because knowledges must precede before any
one can know that by "morning" is meant the rise of the church, and that
this is preceded by redemption; by "day," the progression of the new
church into light, and its intelligence; by "evening," the decline of
that church from good and truth, which is called vastation; and by
"night," its end and destruction, which is called consummation; and so
on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9.">9.</span></span>

The end of the church, or the consummation of the age, is when there is
not any genuine truth and hence not any genuine good, or when there is
not any good and hence not any truth remaining, but, in their place
falsity and evil therefrom, or evil and falsity therefrom, rule; and
then there is the "fullness \[of time\]" in the church, the members of
which are like persons walking in the night, who, because they do not
see anything that appears in the light of the sun, are in doubt about
all things relating to the church, and in general about God, heaven and
hell, and the life after death; and both those who confirm themselves in
the denial of these things, and those who remain alternately in doubt
and in affirmation, become shunners of the light, and, if they are
priests, they procure to themselves a false light on those subjects,
such as night-owls, cats, and mice have in the darkness of night. This
light is excited with them, as with these wild beasts, through the
activities of their lusts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10.">10.</span></span>

IV\. After its consummation, or end, the Lord Jehovih appears, and
executes a judgment on the men of the former church, and separates the
good from the evil, and elevates the good to Himself into heaven, and
removes the evil from Himself into hell. That about the end of every
church the Lord Jehovih appears to execute a judgment on those who have
lived from its first establishment to its consummation, will be
confirmed in the following pages, where each church will be separately
treated of. Every man indeed is judged after death; but at the end of a
church all are collected together, and a general judgment is executed on
them; and this for the reason that they may be conjoined in heavenly
order, which is effected by the arrangement of the faithful into a new
heaven, and of the unfaithful into a new hell beneath it; of which
arrangement we shall speak more at large in the following article.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11.">11.</span></span>

Judgment, which is the last of every church, is not effected in the
natural world, but in the spiritual world, into which all are gathered
after death; and they are collected into heavens distinctly according to
religion, thus according to faith and love. Judgment is effected in the
spiritual world, for the reason that every man after death is a man; not
a material man, as before, but a substantial man. Every man's mind or
spirit is such a man: the body which he carried about in the world is
only a covering, and as it were the exuviae, which he has laid aside,
and from which his spirit has disengaged itself. Now, since it was man's
mind or spirit that thought in the material body, and then either from
religion or not from religion, and in favor of God or against God, from
truths of faith or from falsities of faith, loved his neighbor or held
him in hatred; and since the material body was only obedience; it
follows that the mind, which is the substantial man and is called the
spirit, is what undergoes judgment, and, according to the thoughts and
acts of its life, is rewarded or punished. From these things it may be
plainly manifest, that judgment, which is the last of every church, is
effected in the spiritual world, but not in the natural world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12.">12.</span></span>

The judgment which is executed upon all of a past church, takes place,
both generally and individually, to the end that the good may be
separated from the evil, and that the good may be raised up into heaven
and the evil cast down into hell. Unless this were done when a church is
consummated, that is, when it is no longer in truths and goods, not
anyone therein could be saved. That he could not be saved is because he
could not be regenerated; and everyone is regenerated by the truths of
faith and the goods of love. To this reason the following is added, that
from the time of the vastation of a church even to its consummation,
hell increases to so great an extent as to stretch under the whole
angelic heaven, through which the regenerating truths and goods descend
from the Lord to the men of the earth. When this is covered over, no
truth of thought from faith nor good of will from charity can penetrate,
except as it were through chinks; yea, what does penetrate is perverted
either in the way before it reaches man, or else by the man himself when
it is in him; that is, the truth is either rejected or falsified, and
the good is either clogged up or adulterated. In a word, a church at its
end is as it were obsessed by satans. Those are called satans who take
pleasure in falsities and are delighted with evils. In order, therefore,
that the total damnation which is then over everyone's head, and menaces
him, may be taken away, it is necessary that hell, which has raised
itself on high, and, as was said, increased even to heaven, should be
removed, not merely depressed, but also dispersed and subjugated, and
then the good separated from the evil, that is, the living from the
dead. This separation, and then the elevation of the good into heaven,
or into the land of the living, and the casting down of the evil into
hell, or into the land of the dead, is what is called the judgment. That
such a judgment was actually executed in the year 1757 on the men of the
present Christian Church, has been published and described, in a special
little work published in London in the year 1758.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13.">13.</span></span>

Who does not see the necessity that the evil should be separated from
the good, lest the latter should be infected with the contagion of
deadly evil, and perish? For evil, inasmuch as it is implanted in human
nature by birth, and is more and more ingenerated in children from
parents when the church is advancing towards consummation, is like the
malignant disease which is called cancer, which spreads round about, and
gradually mortifies the healthy and living parts. What husbandman, or
gardener, when he sees briars, nettles, thorns, and thistles growing,
does not extirpate them before he sows and harrows in his corn and food
crops? What farmer, when he sees his herbage and grass consumed by
worms, or locusts, does not dig a ditch, and separate the green field
from the wasted one, and thus take treasures for the preservation of his
crops and green fields? What shepherd, when he sees wild beasts
multiplying about the pastures of his sheep, does not call together the
neighboring shepherds and the servants, and with weapons, or traps, kill
those wild beasts, or drive them away? \[2\] What king, when he sees
both the towns of his kingdom round about his metropolis taken by
enemies, and the property of his subjects taken possession of by them,
does not assemble the troops and cast out the enemy, and restore the
stolen goods to their owners, and, moreover, add thereto the spoils of
the enemies wealth, and so comfort them?

<span class="margnote"><span id="14.">14.</span></span>

V. After these things the Lord Jehovih founds a new heaven from the good
elevated to Himself, and from the evil removed from Himself a new hell;
and in both He establishes order, so that they may stand under His
auspices, and under obedience to Him, to eternity. It is written in
Isaiah: Jehovah said, Behold I create new heavens and a new earth
(55:17); and elsewhere in the same prophet: As the new heavens and the
new earth, which I am about to make, shall stand before Me (56:22); in
the Apocalypse: I saw a new heaven and a new earth; the former heaven
and the former earth have passed away (21:1); and in Peter: According to
promise, we look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein justice shall
dwell (2 Epist. 3:13). It has not hitherto entered into the mind of
anyone to suppose otherwise, than that by "heaven," in these places, is
meant the visible heaven, that is, the whole firmament, together with
the sun, moon and stars; and that by "earth," there, is meant the
habitable earth, or the globe, and that these will perish at the day of
the Last Judgment; when nevertheless by "heaven" there the angelic
heaven is meant, and by "earth" the church. That by "earth" everywhere
in the prophetic Word is meant the church, has been fully shown in the
Apocalypse Revealed (n. 285). The reason why by "new heavens" and a "new
earth" have been hitherto understood the visible heaven and the
habitable earth, is because men have not known anything of the spiritual
world, consequently not anything of the angelic heaven, nor anything of
the prophetic sense, which carries and stores up nothing but spiritual
things; and the spiritual meaning of "earth" is the church. When,
indeed, the angels, inasmuch as they are spiritual, look down into the
earth, they see nothing at all of it, but only the church with men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="15.">15.</span></span>

When the Lord Jehovih founds a new heaven and a new church, He
introduces order, so that they may stand under His auspices and under
obedience to Him to eternity. This is because the angelic heaven and the
church on the earth together constitute one body, whose soul and life is
the Lord Jehovih, who is the Lord our Saviour. The whole angelic heaven
together with the church also appears before the Lord as one man; and a
man stands under the auspices of, and under obedience to his soul: thus
the entire heaven together with the church, is under the auspices of,
and under obedience to, the Lord; for the Lord is in them and they are
in the Lord (John 14:20; 15:4, 5; 17:23, 26); thus, He is the all in all
there. But the order which the Lord induces on hell is such that all who
are there may he diametrically opposite to all who are in heaven: whence
it is evident that since the Lord rules heaven He also rules hell, and
that He rules the latter by means of the former.

<span class="margnote"><span id="16.">16.</span></span>

Moreover, the arrangement of all in the heavens and of all in the hells
is most perfect. For every heaven that is founded by the Lord after the
consummation of each church is made threefold: it is made highest,
middle, and lowest. Into the highest are elevated those who are in love
to the Lord and in wisdom thence; into the middle those who are in
spiritual love towards the neighbor and in intelligence thence; into the
lowest those who are in spiritual-natural love towards the neighbor,
which is called charity, and thence in the faith of the truths
concerning God, and in a life according to the precepts of the
Decalogue. These three heavens constitute three expanses, one above
another, and they communicate with each other by the Divine influx from
the Lord out of the sun of the spiritual world. In the deep below there
are also three expanses, into which the hells are distinguished, between
which in like manner there is provided a communication by means of an
influx through the heavens from the Lord. By means of these
communications there is effected a close and indissoluble conjunction of
all things in the heavens, and of all things in the hells; but in the
latter it is a conjunction of all the lusts of the love of evil, while
in the heavens it is a conjunction of all the affections of the love of
good. By virtue of that conjunction, heaven is like one Lord sitting
upon a throne girt about with wreaths formed of precious stones of every
kind; but hell is like one devil sitting upon a seat entwined with
vipers, serpents and poisonous worms. From this orderly arrangement,
induced on both, it follows that both stand under the auspices and under
obedience to the Lord to eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="17.">17.</span></span>

It is known, that, in order that anything may be perfect, there must be
a trine in just order, one under another, and a communication between,
and that this trine must constitute a one; no otherwise than as a pillar
is a one, at the top of which is the capital, under this the smooth
shaft, and under this again the pedestal. Such a trine is man: his
highest part is the head, his middle part is the body, and his lowest
the feet and soles. In this, every kingdom is like a man; there must be
a king in it as the head, also administrators and officers as the body,
and yeomanry with servants as feet and soles: in like manner in the
church, there must be a filleted primate, parish priests, and curates
under them. Nor does the world itself subsist without three things
following in order, namely, morning, noon, and evening; as also the
yearly spring, summer, and autumn; spring for the sowing of seeds,
summer for their germination, and autumn for bringing forth fruit: but
night and winter do not contribute to the stability of the world. \[2\]
Now since every perfect thing must be a trine and cohere well together,
in order to be a one, therefore each world, both spiritual and natural,
consists and subsists from three atmospheres or elements; the first of
which immediately encompasses the sun and is called aura; the second is
under this and is called ether; and the third is under them both and is
called air. In the natural world these three atmospheres are natural,
and in themselves passive, because they proceed from a sun which is pure
fire; but the three corresponding to them in the spiritual world are
spiritual, and in themselves active, because they proceed from a sun
which is pure love. \[3\] The angels of the heavens dwell in the regions
of these three atmospheres; the angels of the highest heaven in the
celestial aura, which immediately encompasses the sun where the Lord is;
the angels of the middle heaven in the spiritual ether under the former;
and the angels of the lowest heaven in the spiritual-natural air under
those two. Thus are all the heavens co-established, from the first to
this last which is being organized by the Lord at the present day. From
these things it may be apprehended whence it is that by "three" in the
Word is signified what is complete (see Apocalypse Revealed, n. 505,
875).

<span class="margnote"><span id="18.">18.</span></span>

VI\. From this new heaven the Lord Jehovih derives and produces a new
church on earth, which is effected by a revelation of truths from His
mouth, or from His Word, and by inspiration. It is written: John saw the
holy city, New Jerusalem, descending from God out of heaven, prepared as
a Bride adorned for her Husband (Apoc. 21:2). By "the holy city, New
Jerusalem," is meant the doctrine of the New Church, thus the church as
to doctrine; and, by "Jerusalem descending from God, out of the new
heaven," is meant that the true doctrine of the church is from no other
source. That the doctrine descended, is because a church is a church
from doctrine and according to it; without it, a church is no more a
church than a man is a man without members, viscera and organs, or from
the cutaneous covering alone, which only defines his external shape; nor
any more than a house is a house without bed-chambers, dining rooms, and
furniture within, thus from the walls and arched roof alone. It is
similar with the church without doctrine. That "Jerusalem" signifies the
church as to doctrine, may be seen proved from the Word in the work
itself, The True Christian Religion (n. 782). From these things, it is
manifest that the church on the earth is derived and produced by the
Lord through the angelic heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="19.">19.</span></span>

I will mention some strange things, which yet are not strange in heaven;
they are as follow: (1) That the natural world could not exist except
from the spiritual world; consequently, it could not subsist, inasmuch
as subsistence is perpetual existence. (2) That the church cannot exist
in man, unless its internal be spiritual and its external natural. A
church purely spiritual does not exist, nor a church merely natural. (3)
Consequently, that there cannot be raised up any church, nor anything of
the church with man, without an angelic heaven, through which everything
spiritual is derived and descends from the Lord. (4) Since therefore the
spiritual and the natural thus make one, it follows that the one cannot
exist and subsist without the other; the angelic heaven not without the
church with man, nor the church with him without the angelic heaven;
for, unless the spiritual flow into and terminate in the natural, and
rest therein, it is like a prior without a posterior, thus like an
efficient cause without an effect, and like an active without a passive,
which would be like a bird perpetually flying in the air without any
resting place on the earth. It is also like the mind of a man
perpetually thinking and willing, without any organ of sense and motion
in the body, to which it may descend and produce the ideas of its
thought and bring into operation the efforts of its will. (5) These
things are adduced, to the end that it may be perceived or known, that
as the natural world cannot exist without the spiritual world, nor
conversely the spiritual world without the natural world, so neither can
there be a church on the earth unless there be an angelic heaven through
which it may exist and subsist, nor conversely an angelic heaven unless
there be a church on the earth. (6) The angels know this; on which
account, they bitterly lament when the church on earth is desolated by
falsities and consummated by evils; and then they compare the state of
their life with drowsiness; for then heaven is to them as a seat
withdrawn, and like a body deprived of feet; but when the church on the
earth has been restored by the Lord, they compare the state of their
life to wakefulness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="20.">20.</span></span>

That the Lord derives and produces the New Church on earth through the
New Heaven by means of a revelation of truths from His mouth, or from
His Word, and by inspiration, will be shown in the section on the four
churches in their order, especially on the Israelitish Church, and on
the present Christian Church. It should be known that when hell has
increased, and has passed over the great interstice or gulf fixed
between itself and heaven (Luke 16:26), and has raised up its back even
to the confines of the heavens where the angels are, which came to pass
during the interval of the vastation and consummation of the church, not
any doctrine of the church could be conveyed by the Lord through heaven
to the men of the earth. The reason is that man is then in the midst of
satans; and satans envelop his head with their falsities, and inspire
the delights of evil and the consequent pleasures of falsity, whereby
all the light out of heaven is darkened, and all the agreeableness and
pleasantness of truth is intercepted. \[2\] As long as this state
continues, not any doctrine of truth and good out of heaven can be
infused into man, because it is falsified; but after this tangled veil
of falsities, or covering of the head by satans, has been taken away by
the Lord, which is effected by the Last Judgment (of which above, in
Article IV), then man is led in a freer and more spontaneous spirit to
discard falsities and to receive truths. With those who adapt
themselves, and suffer themselves to be led by the Lord, the doctrine of
the New Heaven, which is the doctrine of truth and good, is afterwards
conveyed down and introduced, like the morning dew falling from heaven
to the earth, which opens the pores of plants, and sweetens their
vegetable juices: and it is like the manna which fell in the mornings,
and was in appearance: Like coriander seed, white, and in taste like a
cake kneaded with honey (Exod. 16:31). It is also like seasonable rain,
which refreshes the newly-ploughed fields and causes germination; and it
is like the fragrance exhaling from fields, gardens, and flowery plains,
which the breast gladly and readily draws in with the air. But, still,
the Lord does not compel, nor does He urge anyone against his will, as
one does with whips a beast of burden; but He draws and afterwards
continually leads him who is willing, in all appearance as though the
willing man did goods and believed truths of himself, when yet it is
from the Lord, who operates every genuine good of life and every genuine
truth of faith in him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="21.">21.</span></span>

VII\. This Divine work taken together is called redemption, without
which no man can be saved, because not regenerated. That the redemption
accomplished by the Lord when He was in the world, was the subjugation
of the hells, the arrangement of the heavens in order, and by these a
preparation for a new spiritual church, may be seen in the work, The
True Christian Religion (n. 115-117; and likewise from n. 118-133). But
inasmuch as this is new, and has lain hidden for ages, like the wreck of
a ship with its valuable wares at the bottom of the sea, and
nevertheless the doctrine of redemption is as it were the treasury of
all the spiritual riches, or the dogmas of the New Church, therefore, in
the last section of this volume, the mystery of redemption shall be
treated of, where the following propositions will be unfolded and
presented in the light: I. Deliverance from enemies is what in the Word
is called redemption. II. Consequently, it is a deliverance from evils
and falsities; which, since they are from hell, are spiritual enemies;
for they kill souls, as natural enemies do bodies III. Hence it becomes
evident that the first of the redemption accomplished by the Lord was
the separation of the evil from the good, and the elevation of the good
to Himself into heaven, and the removal of the evil from Himself into
hell, for thus the good are freed from the evil. This first of
redemption is the Last Judgment (which has been treated of above, n.
10-13). IV. The second of redemption was the coordination of all things
in the heavens, and the subordination of all things in hell, by which
the good were still more distinctly separated and freed from the evil;
and this is the new heaven and the new hell (which has been treated of
above, n. 14-17). V. The third of redemption was a revelation of truths
out of the new heaven, and thereby the raising up and establishment of a
new church on earth; by which means the good were still further
separated and freed from the evil, and are separated and freed for the
future (this third has also been treated of above, n. 18-20). VI. The
final cause of redemption was the possibility that the Lord, from His
Divine omnipotence, might regenerate and thereby save man; for, unless a
man be regenerated, he cannot be saved (John 3:3). VII. The regeneration
of a man, inasmuch as it is a separation and deliverance from evils and
falsities, is a particular redemption by the Lord, existing from His
general redemption. VIII. With those who are being regenerated, evils
are first of all separated from goods, and this is similar to the
judgment: afterwards, goods are collected together into one, and
arranged in a heavenly form, and this is similar to the new heaven; and,
lastly, a new church is implanted and produced thereby, the internal of
which is heaven; and the external from the internal, consequently both
together, with man, are called the church. IX. All are redeemed, since
all who reject the falsities of the former church, and receive the
truths of the New Church, can be regenerated; but still the regenerated
are properly the redeemed. X. The goal of redemption, and the prize of
the redeemed, a spiritual peace. XI. A redemption has also been
accomplished by the Lord at this day, because at this day is His Second
Coming according to prophecy; by which, having been an eye-witness
thereof I have been made certain of the truth of the foregoing arcana.
But these are only summaries, which must be unfolded one by one, and set
forth in both spiritual and natural light, at the end of this volume,
where the mystery of redemption is to be treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="22.">22.</span></span>

Moreover, it will be proved in its own section in the following pages,
that the Lord's passion of the cross was not redemption, but the means
of the inmost union with the Divine of the Father, from which He came
forth, and into which He returned. In the work, The True Christian
Religion (n. 132, 133), to which this volume is an Appendix, I undertook
to demonstrate that the belief that the passion of the cross is
redemption itself, is a fundamental error of the present Christian
Church; and that this error, together with the error concerning three
Divine Persons from eternity, has perverted the whole church to such an
extent, that there is not a vestige of what is spiritual remaining in
it. This will also be further shown in the following pages; also, that
those two falsities and impostures have been comparatively like
impregnated butterflies flying about in the garden, which lay
worm-producing eggs that being hatched out, entirely consume the leaves
of the trees there; and further, that they have been like the quails
from the sea let down upon the camp of the Israelites, owing to which,
while they were eating, a great plague was brought upon the people; and
this for the reason that they loathed and spurned the manna from heaven,
by which, in the highest sense, is meant the Lord (Num. 11:5, 6, 32-35;
and John 6:31, 32, 49-51, 58). And further, those two errors were like
two fragments of soot, or shoemaker's blacking, dropped into generous
wine, and shaken about in the glass, in consequence of which all the
brightness, delightful fragrance, and fine flavor of the wine are
changed into a black appearance, a disagreeable smell, and a nauseous
taste.

<span class="margnote"><span id="23.">23.</span></span>

PROPOSITION THE SECOND. The Adamic, or Most Ancient Church of this
Earth. The world has hitherto believed that by "the creation of heaven
and earth," in the first chapter of Genesis, is meant the creation of
the universe, according to the letter; and by "Adam," the first man of
this earth. The world could not believe otherwise, since the spiritual
or internal sense of the Word has not been disclosed, nor, consequently,
that by "creating heaven and earth" is meant to collect and found an
angelic heaven from those who have departed the life in the world, and
by this means to derive and produce a church on earth (as above, n.
18-20); and that by the names of persons, nations, territories, and
cities, are meant such things as relate to heaven, and at the same time
to the church: in like manner, therefore, by "Adam." That by "Adam," and
by all those things which are related of him and his posterity in the
first chapters of Genesis, are described the successive states of the
Most Ancient Church, which are its rise or morning, its progression into
light or day, its decline or evening, its end or night, and after this
the Last Judgment upon it, and thereafter a new angelic heaven from the
faithful, and a new hell from the unfaithful, according to the series of
the progressions laid down in the preceding proposition, has been
minutely explained, unfolded and demonstrated in the Arcana Coelestia on
Genesis and Exodus, the labor of eight years, published in London; which
word being already in the world, nothing further is necessary than to
re-capitulate therefrom the universals respecting this Most Ancient
Church, which will be cited in the present volume. \[2\] At the outset,
however, some passages shall be adduced from the Word, by which it is
proved, that by "creating" is there signified to produce and form anew,
and properly to regenerate; which is the reason that regeneration is
called a new creation, by which the whole heaven of angels and the whole
church of men, exist, consist and subsist. That "creating" signifies
this, is plainly manifest from these passages in the Word: Create in me
a clean heart, O God; and renew a firm spirit in the midst of me (Ps.
51:10). Thou openest the hand, they are filled with good; Thou sendeth
forth the Spirit, they are created (Ps. 104:28, 30). The people that
shall be created shall praise Jah (Ps. 102:18). Thus said Jehovah, thy
Creator, O Jacob; thy Former, O Israel: Every one that is called by My
Name, him have I created for My glory (Isa. 43:1, 7). That they may see,
know, attend and understand, that the hard of Jehovah hath done this,
and the Holy One of Israel hath created it (Isa. 41:20). In the day that
thou wast created, they were prepared; thou wast perfect in thy ways
from the day that thou wast created, until perversity was found in thee
(Ezek. 28:13, 15). These things are concerning the king of Tyre. Jehovah
that createth the heavens, that spreadeth abroad the earth, that giveth
a soul unto the people upon it (Isa. 42:5; 45:12, 18). Behold I create a
new heaven and a new earth; be ye glad to eternity in that which I
create: behold I am about to create Jerusalem an exultation (Isa. 65:17,
18). As the new heavens and the new earth, which I am about to make,
shall stand before Me (Isa. 66:22). I saw a new heaven and a new earth:
the former heaven and the former earth are passed away (Apoc. 21:1).
According to promise, we look for new heavens and a new earth, in which
justice shall dwell (2 Peter 3:13). From these passages it is now
manifested what is spiritually meant in the first chapter of Genesis, by
the verses: In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth; and
the earth was "waste and empty" \[1, 2\]. The earth called "waste and
empty," signifies that there was no longer any good of life nor any
truth of doctrine with its inhabitants. That "wasteness" and "emptiness"
signify the deprivation of these two essentials of the church, will be
established in proposition IV of this volume, respecting the Israelitish
Church, by a thousand passages from the Word: at present let the
following in Jeremiah serve for some illustration: I saw the land, when,
behold, it was vacant and empty; and I looked towards the heavens, when
their light was not. Thus said Jehovah, The whole land shall be
wasteness; for this shall the land mourn, and the heavens above shall be
made black (4:23, 27, 28).

<span class="margnote"><span id="24.">24.</span></span>

This church, like the rest, shall be treated of in the following order:-
I. Its rise, or morning, which is its first state. II.Its progression
into light, or day, which is its second state. III. Its decline, or
evening, which is its third state, and is called vastation. IV. Its end,
or night, which is its fourth state, and is called consummation. V. The
separation of the evil from the good, which is the Last Judgment upon
all who were of that church. VI. The elevation of the good to God, of
whom a new heaven is formed; and the removal of the evil from God, of
whom is formed a new hell. That the four churches of this earth, of
which we have treated above, have undergone these changes of state, will
be shown in what follows; and lastly, that the church truly Christian,
which succeeds those four at the present day, will never undergo
consummation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25.">25.</span></span>

I. The first state of this Most Ancient Church, or its rise and morning,
is described in the first chapter of Genesis by these words: God said,
Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and God created man in
His own image; in the image of God created He him; male and female
created He them (vers. 26, 27); and also by these in the second chapter:
Jehovah God formed man dust of the earth, and breathed into his nostrils
the soul of lives; and man became a living soul (ver. 7). That its rise,
or morning, is described by his being made, or created, "in the image of
God," is because every man, when he is first born and is an infant,
interiorly is an "image of God;" for the faculty of receiving and of
applying to himself those things which proceed from God, is implanted in
him; and since exteriorly he is also formed "dust of the earth," and
there is thence in him an inclination to lick that dust, like the
serpent (Gen. 3:14), therefore if he remains an external or natural man,
and does not become at the same time internal or spiritual, he shatters
the image of God, and puts on the image of the serpent which seduced
Adam. But, on the other hand, the man who strives and labors to become
an "image of God," subdues the external man in himself, and interiorly
in the natural becomes spiritual, thus spiritual-natural; and this is
effected by a new creation, that is, regeneration by the Lord. Such a
man is an "image of God," because he wills and believes that he lives
from God, and not from himself: on the contrary, man is an image of the
serpent, while he wills and believes that he lives from himself, and not
from God. What is man but an "image of God," when he wills and believes
that he is in the Lord and the Lord in him (John 6:56, 14:20, 15:4, 5,
7, 17:26), and that he can do nothing of himself (John 3:27, 15:5)? What
is a man, but an "image of God," when, by new generation, he becomes a
"son of God" (John 1:12, 13)? Who does not know that the image of the
father is in the son? The rise, or morning, of this church is described
by Jehovah God's "breathing into his nostrils the soul of lives," and by
his thus "becoming a living soul," because by "lives," in the plural,
are meant love and wisdom, and these two are essentially God; for, as
far as a man receives and applies to himself those two essentials of
life, which proceed continually from God, and flow continually into the
souls of men, so far he becomes "a living soul;" for "lives" are the
same as love and wisdom. Hence it is evident, that the rise and morning
of the life of the men of the Most Ancient Church, who taken together
are represented by "Adam," is described by those two shrines of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="26.">26.</span></span>

The "likeness of God," according to which man was made, is his being
able to live, that is, to will, to love, and to intend, as also to
think, to reflect, and to choose, in all appearance as from himself;
consequently, in his being able to receive from God those things which
are of love and those things which are of wisdom, and to reproduce them
in a likeness from himself as God does; for God says: Behold the man was
as one of us, in knowing good and evil (Gen. 3:22); for, without the
faculty of receiving and reproducing those things which proceed into him
from God, in all appearance as from himself, man would be no more a
"living soul" than an oyster in its shell at the bottom of a stream,
which is not in the least able to move itself out of its place. Nor
would he be any more an "image of God" than a jointed statue of a man
capable of motion by means of a handle, and of giving forth sound by
being blown into; yea, the very mind of man, which is the same as his
spirit, would actually be wind, air, or ether, according to the idea of
the church at this day respecting spirit. For without the faculty of
receiving and reproducing the things flowing in from God, altogether as
from himself, he would not have anything of his own, or a proprium,
except an imperceptible one, which is like the proprium of a lifeless
piece of sculpture. But more about the image and likeness of God with
man, may be seen, in a Relation in the preceding work, of which this is
the Appendix (n. 48).

<span class="margnote"><span id="27.">27.</span></span>

II\. The second state of this Most Ancient Church, or its progression
into light and day, is described in the second chapter of Genesis, by
these words: God planted a garden in Eden at the east, and there He put
the man whom He had formed, to till and keep it. And Jehovah made to
spring forth every tree desirable to the sight, and good for food; the
tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. And a river went forth out of Eden to water
the garden, which became into four heads, in the first of which was gold
and the schoham stone. And Jehovah God commanded the man, saying, Of
every tree of the garden, eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, eat not (Gen. 2:8-17). The progression of this church into
light, or day, is described by Adam's being placed in the garden of
Eden, because by a "garden" is signified the church as to its truths and
goods. That "there went forth out of Eden a river, which became into
four heads, in the first of which was gold and the schoham stone,"
signifies that in that church there was the doctrine of good and truth;
for a "river" signifies doctrine, "gold" its good, and "schoham stone"
its truth. That two trees were placed in that garden, the one of life,
and the other of the knowledge of good and evil," was because the "tree
of life" signifies the Lord, in whom and from whom is the life of
heavenly love and wisdom, which in itself is eternal life; and the "tree
of the knowledge of good and evil" signifies man, in whom is the life of
infernal love, and thence insanity in the things of the church, which
life regarded in itself is eternal death. That it was allowed "to eat of
every tree of the garden," except of the "tree of the knowledge of good
and evil," signifies free will in spiritual things; for all things in
the garden signified spiritual things, for without free will in those a
man can in no wise progress into light, that is, into the truths and
goods of the church, and procure for himself life; for if he does not
aim at and strive after this, he procures to himself death. \[2\] That a
"garden" signifies the church as to its truths and goods, is from the
correspondence of a tree with a man for a tree in like manner as a man
is conceived from seed, is put forth from the womb of the earth in like
manner as a man from the womb of his mother; it grows in height in like
manner, and propagates itself in branches as he in members clothes
itself with leaves and adorns itself with blossoms in like manner as a
man does with natural and spiritual truths; and also produces fruits in
like manner as a man does goods of use. Hence it is that in the Word a
man is so often compared to a "tree," and the church to a "garden;" as
in the following passages: Jehovah will set her desert like Eden, and
her solitude like the garden of Jehovah (Isa. 51:3); speaking of Zion,
which signifies the church wherein God is worshiped according to the
Word: Thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of waters,
whose waters shall not lie (Isa. 58:11; Jer. 31:12). Here also it treats
of the church: Thou art full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty; thou wast
in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering (Ezek.
28:12, 13). This is respecting Tyre, by which is signified the church,
as to the knowledges of truth and good: How good are thy habitations, O
Israel; as valleys they are planted, and as gardens beside the river
(Num. 24:5, 6); by "Israel" is signified the spiritual church; but by
"Jacob" the natural church in which is the spiritual. Nor was any tree
in the garden of God equal to him in beauty; so that all the trees of
Eden, in the garden of God, envied him (Ezek. 31:8, 9). It is here
speaking of Egypt and Assyria, by which, where mentioned in a good
sense, the church is signified as to knowledges and perceptions. To him
that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is the
midst of the paradise of God (Apoc. 2:7). \[3\] From the correspondence
of a garden with the church, it comes to pass that everywhere in the
heavens gardens appear producing leaves, flowers and fruits, according
to the states of the church with the angels; and it has been told me
that in some of the gardens there, trees of life are seen in the middle
parts, and trees of the knowledge of good and evil in the boundaries, as
a sign that they are in free-will in spiritual things. The church is
oftentimes described in the Word by a "garden," a "field," and a
"sheepfold;" by a "garden," from the trees, as mentioned above; by a
"field," from its crops, wherewith man is nourished; by a "sheepfold,"
from the sheep, by which are meant the faithful and useful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="28.">28.</span></span>

In the work itself named The True Christian Religion, it has been shown
that the two trees, the one of "life," and the other of the "knowledge
of good and evil," being placed in the garden of Eden, signified that
free-will in spiritual things was given to man (n. 466-469); to which
must be added that without such free-will man would not be man, but only
a figure and effigy; for his thought would be without reflection,
consequently without judgment, and thus in the Divine things which are
of the church, he would have no more power of turning himself, than a
door without a hinge, or, with a hinge, fastened with a steel bolt; and
his will would be without decision, consequently no more active with
respect to justice or injustice, than the stone upon a tomb under which
lies a dead body. That man's life after death, together with the
immortality of his soul, is owing to the gift of that free-will, and
that this is the "likeness of God," has been proved in the work itself,
as also above. \[2\] Yea, man, that is, his mind, without that would be
like a sponge which imbibes water in great abundance but is not able to
discharge it, in consequence of which both would decompose, the water
into corruption, and the sponge into slime. In the same manner the
church with him would not be a church, and thus a temple wherein the
worship of God is performed: it would be like the den of some wild beast
under the root of a lofty tree which rocks itself to and from over its
head, except only that it would be able to take something therefrom, and
apply itself to some other use besides lying in tranquillity under it.
Moreover without free will in spiritual things, man would be more blind
in all and each of the things of the church, than a bird of night in the
light of day, but more sharp-sighted \[in respect to falsities\] than
that bird in the darkness of night: for he would shut his eyelids, and
contract their sight against the truths of faith; but he would raise his
eyelids, open his eyes, and dilate their sight like the eagle, to the
falsities of faith. Free-will in spiritual things, is from this, that
man walks and lives his life in the midst between heaven and hell; and
that heaven operates in him from above, but hell from beneath; and that
the option is given to a man of turning himself either to higher things
or to lower things, thus, either to the Lord or to the Devil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="29.">29.</span></span>

III\. The third state of the church, which is its decline and evening,
and is called vastation, is described in the third chapter of Genesis by
these words: The serpent became more subtle than any wild animal of the
field, which Jehovah God had made. He said to the woman, Yea, wherefore
hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And when
the woman said unto the serpent, Of the fruit of the tree we may eat;
only of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst, God hath said, Ye
shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die the serpent
said, Ye shall not die for God doth know that in the day wherein ye
shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as God,
knowing good and evil. The woman therefore saw that the tree was good
for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and to be desired to
give understanding; therefore she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat
and she gave to her husband with her, and he did eat (vers. 1-6). The
decline from light to the shade of evening, that is, the falling away
from wisdom and integrity, consequently, the state of vastation of this
church, is described by these words, because man was made a "likeness of
God" (by which is signified, in the entire appearance that he thinks
those things which are of wisdom, and wills those things that are of
love, from himself, as God does, see above, n. 26), he believed the
serpent's words, that if he should eat of that tree he would become as
God, and thus also be God in knowing good and evil. By this "tree" is
signified the natural man separated from the spiritual, which, when left
to itself, does not believe otherwise. \[2\] Every man has a natural
mind and a spiritual mind, distinct from each other like two stories of
one house connected by stairs; in the upper story of which dwell the
master and mistress with their children, but in the lower the
men-servants and maid-servants, with other helpers. The spiritual mind
in man from birth even to early childhood is closed, but after that
first age it is opened step by step; for there is given to every man
from birth the faculty, and afterwards the power, of procuring for
himself steps by which he may ascend and speak with the master and
mistress, and afterwards descend and execute their commands. This power
is given him through the endowment of free will in spiritual things.
Nevertheless no one can ascend to the upper story, by which is meant the
spiritual mind, unless he eat of the trees of life in the garden of God.
For by eating of these a man is enlightened and made whole, and
conceives faith; and through the nourishment of their fruits he acquires
the conviction that all good is from the Lord, who is the tree of life,
and not the smallest portion from man; and yet by abiding together and
operating together, hence by the Lord's being in him and he in the Lord,
he must do good of himself, but still be in the belief and confidence
that it is not from himself but from the Lord. \[3\] If a man believe
otherwise, he does what appears like good, in which there is evil
inwardly, because there is merit; and this is eating of the trees of the
knowledge of good and evil, among which dwells the serpent, in the
dreadful persuasion that he is as God, or else that there is no God, but
that Nature is what is called God, and that he is composed of the
elements thereof. Furthermore, those eat of the trees of the knowledge
of good and evil who love themselves and the world above all things; but
those eat of the trees of life who love God above all things and the
neighbor as themselves. Those also eat of the trees of the knowledge of
good and evil who hatch out canons for the church from their own
intelligence, and afterwards confirm them by the Word; but on the other
hand those who procure for themselves canons for the church by means of
the Word, and afterwards confirm them by intelligence, eat of the trees
of life. Those also who teach truths from the Word and live wickedly eat
of the trees of the knowledge of good and evil; but those eat of the
trees of life who live well and teach from the Word. Universally
speaking, all eat of the trees of the knowledge of good and evil who
deny the Divinity of the Lord and the holiness of the Word, inasmuch as
the Lord is the Tree of Life and the Word, from whom the church is a
"garden in Eden at the east."

<span class="margnote"><span id="30.">30.</span></span>

The spiritual man is an erect man, who with his head looks to heaven
above him and about him, and treads the earth with the soles of his
feet. But the natural man separated from the spiritual is either like a
man bent downwards, who nods with his head, and continually looks at the
earth, and then at the steps of his own feet; or, he is like an inverted
man, who walks on the palms of his hands, and lifts up his feet towards
heaven, and by shakings and clappings of these performs worship. The
spiritual man is like a rich man, who has a palace in which are dining
rooms, bed chambers, and banquet halls, the walls of which are
continuous windows of crystalline glass, through which he sees the
gardens, fields, flocks, and herds which also belong to him, and with
the sight and use of which he is daily delighted. But the natural man,
separated from the spiritual is also like a rich man, who has a palace
containing chambers, the walls of which are continuous planks of rotten
wood, which sheds around a fatuous light, wherein appear images of pride
from the love of self and the world, like molten images of gold, in the
middle, and of silver at the sides, before which he bends the knee like
an idolater. Again, the spiritual man, in himself, is actually like a
dove as to gentleness, like an eagle as to the sight of his mind, like a
flying bird of paradise as to progression in spiritual things, and like
a peacock as to adornment from spiritual things. But on the contrary the
natural man separated from the spiritual is like a hawk pursuing a dove,
like a dragon devouring the eyes of an eagle, like a fiery flying
serpent at the side of a bird of paradise, and like a horned owl beside
a peacock. These comparisons are made that they may be as optical
glasses whereby the reader may more closely contemplate what the
spiritual man is in itself, and the natural man in itself. But the case
is altogether different, when the spiritual man by its spiritual light
and spiritual heat is inwardly in the natural; then both constitute one,
just like effort in motion, and will (which is living effort) in action,
and like appetite in taste, and like the sight of the mind in the sight
of the eye, and still more evidently like the perception of a thing in
cognition, and the thought of it in speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="31.">31.</span></span>

IV\. The fourth state of this church, which was its end or night and is
called consummation, is also described by these words, in the third
chapter of Genesis: Jehovah God called unto the man, and said unto him,
Where art thou? And he said, I heard Thy voice in the garden, therefore
I was afraid. Then Jehovah said, Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I
commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat of it? And the man said, The
woman whom thou hast given with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did
eat. And Jehovah God said unto the woman, Wherefore hast thou done this?
And the woman said, The serpent deceived me, and I did eat. Then Jehovah
God cursed the serpent, and afterwards the woman, and after her the man.
After which, Jehovah God sent the man forth from the garden of Eden to
till the earth from whence he was taken (Gen. 3:9-23). From the literal
or historical sense of the description of Adam's life, it is manifest
that he was cursed because he believed the serpent that he should be as
God; and he who believes this, at length does not acknowledge God. And
as the natural man separated from the spiritual is in such a belief in
heart, however differently he may talk with his mouth, therefore after
he from spiritual became natural, this latter was cursed and it was
cursed as to its sensual, its voluntary, and its intellectual; for its
sensual is signified by the "serpent," its voluntary by the "woman," and
its intellectual by the "man"; these three were cursed, because the one
follows the other. (In Arcana Coelestia, every single expression, and
every meaning of the expressions, are laid open by the spiritual sense,
which has been revealed to me by the Lord; which explanation, being
published, may be consulted.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="32.">32.</span></span>

After this curse, the fourth state of this church, which was its state
of night in spiritual things, and is called consummation, is described
by the expulsion of the man from the garden "to till the ground from
whence he was taken," by which is meant that the innocence, integrity,
and wisdom in which he was while he was spiritual were lost;
consequently that he was cast down from heaven, that is, dissociated
from the angels, just as we read of the "dragon": The great dragon was
cast down, the old serpent, which is called the Devil and Satan, was
cast down out of heaven, where he fought with Michael and his angels, to
the earth; and his angels were cast down with him (Rev. 12:9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="33.">33.</span></span>

What person of sound mind is there who cannot see, that, by those things
which are related of Adam are not meant any states of the first formed
man, but states of the church? As, for example, that God placed two
trees in the midst of the garden, from the eating of one of which man
had eternal life, and from the other of which he had eternal death; and
that He made the latter "good for food, pleasant to the eyes, and to be
desired for giving understanding" (Gen. 3:6), thus as if it were to
fascinate their souls; also, that He admitted the serpent, and permitted
it to speak deceitful words to the woman in the presence of her husband
who was the image and likeness of God, and suffered them to be ensnared
by its flatteries and craft; as also why He did not provide, because He
foresaw that they, and the whole human race from them, should not fall
into the damnation of his curse; for we read in the orthodox books of
Christians: That, in consequence of this original sin, "in place of the
lost image of God, there is in man a most inward, most wicked, most
profound, inscrutable, ineffable corruption of his whole nature, and of
all his powers," and that it is the root of all actual evils (Formula
Concordiae, p. 640); and that God the Father averted that universal
damnation from His face, and sent His Son into the world, who might take
it on Himself, and thus appease Him; besides many other things which are
inconsistent with God in the sight of everyone. \[2\] Who, from the
particulars above-mentioned, understood in their historical sense, would
not with reason conclude, to use comparisons, that it would be like a
person who gives his dependent a most fruitful field, and in it digs a
pit, which he covers over with boards that fall inwards at the touch of
a hand or foot; and, in the midst, places upon a stand a harlot clothed
in purple and scarlet, holding in her hand a golden cup (like her in
Revelation, 17:4), who, by her blandishments allures the man to herself,
and so brings it to pass that he falls into the pit and is drowned?
Would it not, indeed, be like one who gives a present to his friend of a
luxuriant field of grain, and in the midst thereof conceals snares, and
sends out a siren who, with the allurement of song and of a sweet voice,
entices him to that place, and causes him to be entangled in the snare,
from which he is unable to extricate his foot? Yea, to use a further
comparison, it would be like a person who should introduce a noble guest
into his house in which there are two dining rooms, and tables in each
of them, at one of which are seated angels, and at the other evil
spirits, on which latter table are cups of sweet but poisoned wine, and
dishes on which are preparations of food containing aconite; and who
should permit the evil spirits there to represent the revels of Bacchus,
and the antics of buffoons, and entice them to those goblets and
banquets. \[3\] But, my friend, the things related of Adam, of the
garden of God, and of the two trees therein, appear under quite a
different aspect when spiritually comprehended, that is, unfolded by the
spiritual sense; then it is clearly seen that, by "Adam," as a type, is
meant the most ancient church; and the successive states of that church
are described by the vicissitudes of his life. For a church in the
beginning is like a man created anew, who has a natural and a spiritual
mind, and by degrees from spiritual becomes natural, and at length
sensual, who believes nothing but what the senses of the body dictate.
And such a man appears in heaven like a person sitting on a beast which
turns its head back, and with its teeth bites, tears, and mangles the
man sitting upon it. But the truly spiritual man appears in heaven also
like a person sitting on a beast, but on a gentle one, which he governs
with a gentle rein and also with a nod.

<span class="margnote"><span id="34.">34.</span></span>

V. The fifth state of this church was the separation of the good from
the evil, which was the Last Judgment on all who were of that church.
This state is described by the "flood," in which all the wicked who
remained perished; and by "Noah and his sons," "Noah and his sons," by
whom are meant all the good that were saved. The end of the Most Ancient
Church, represented by "Adam," is described in the sixth chapter of
Genesis by these words: When Jehovah saw that the wickedness of man was
multiplied in the world, and moreover every imagination of his heart
only evil every day, it repented Jehovah that He had made man on the
earth. Therefore Jehovah said, I will blot out man whom I have created
from upon the faces of the earth; only Noah found grace in the eyes of
Jehovah (Gen. 6:5-8). But the Last Judgment upon them is described by
"the flood." It is described by a "flood" for the reason that "waters"
in the Word signify truths, and in the opposite sense falsities. Truths
are signified by the waters of a fountain, the waters of a river, the
waters of rain, and by the waters of the washings in time past, and the
waters of baptism at this day. That correspondence arises from the
circumstance that truths purify man's soul from uncleanness as waters do
his body; hence they are called "living waters." But in the opposite
sense, by "waters" are signified falsities; but by impure waters, such
as those of marshes, malodorous cisterns, urine, and sewage, in general
by all hurtful and death-producing waters, therefore also by waters from
an inundation of which man dies, consequently by the Noahian flood.
\[2\] That falsities in a mass are described by "inundations," may he
evident from the following passages: Jehovah <span
id="fr_0"></span>[34-1](#fn_0) is causing to come up upon them the
waters of the river (Euphrates) strong and many it shall pass through
Judah, it shall inundate, it shall pass through, it shall reach even to
the neck (Isa. 8:7, 8). By the "waters of the river Euphrates," are
signified reasonings from falsities, because by Assyria, whose river it
was, reasoning is signified. The spirit of Jehovah, like an inundating
stream, shall divide in two even to the neck, to sift the nations with
the sieve of vanity (Isa. 30:28, 30). By "an inundating river" here in
like manner is signified reasoning from falsities. Behold waters are
rising up out of the north, which are like an inundating stream, and
shall inundate the land and the fullness thereof (Jer. 47:2). Here the
Philistines are treated of, by whom are meant those who are not in
charity, and hence not in truths; the falsities of these are signified
by "the waters coming up from the north," and the devastation of the
church in consequence thereof, by "an inundating stream that shall
inundate the land and the fullness thereof;" "the land" is the church,
and its " fullness" all things of it. Say unto those who daub what is
unfit, There shall be an inundating rain, in which hail-stones shall
fall upon you (Ezek. 13:11, 13). The "daubing of what is unfit" is the
confirmation of falsity, and "hail-stones" are falsities. In an
overrunning inundation He shall make a consummation of the place
thereof, and thick darkness shall pursue His enemies (Nah. 1:8). By "the
inundation" which shall consummate, is signified the falsification of
truth, and by "thick darkness," truths themselves in the night. Ye have
said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell have we made a
vision when the scourge of inundation shall pass through, it shall not
come unto us we have made a lie our trust, and in falsity we will hide
(Isa. 28:15). Here "inundation" manifestly stands for destruction by
falsities; for it is said that they placed confidence in "a lie," and
that they would hide in "falsity." After sixty-two weeks shall Messiah
be cut off, but not for Himself; then the people of the Prince that
shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary, so that the end
thereof shall be with an inundation even to desolations (Dan. 9:26).
\[3\] These things are concerning the Christian Church that was to come,
in which the worship of the Lord would perish; which is meant by
"Messiah shall be cut off, but not for Himself": that it would perish by
falsifications, is meant by "the end thereof shall be with an inundation
even to desolations;" "desolation" is that falsification. Hence it is
that after the Lord spoke of "the abomination of desolation foretold by
Daniel the prophet," and of the "consummation of the age" thereby, He
said, that: His coming would be as in the days when the flood came, and
took them all away (Matt. 24:15, 39). The drowning of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians in the sea Suph (Exod. 14), means in the spiritual sense
destruction by falsities, has been demonstrated in the Arcana Coelestia,
in the explanation of that chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="35.">35.</span></span>

Since the churches in the Christian world, both the Roman Catholic
Church and those separated from it, which are named after their leaders,
Luther, Melancthon, and Calvin, derive all sin from Adam and his
transgression, it is permissible to subjoin here something about the
sources whence sins are inherited; for these sources are as many as
there are fathers and mothers in the world. That inclinations,
aptitudes, and propensities to evils are derived from these, is manifest
in light from the testimonies of experience, and also from the assent of
reason. Who does not know, from the collective suffrages of experience,
that there is a general likeness of minds, and hence of manners and
countenances, from parents in the children and children's children, even
to a certain posterity? Who cannot thence infer that original sins are
from them? The notion suggested to everyone, when he looks at the
countenances and manners of brothers and relatives in families, causes
him to know and acknowledge this. \[2\] What reason, then, is there for
deducing the origin of all evils from Adam and his seed? Is there not
equal reason for deducing it from parents? Does not the seed of these
similarly propagate itself? To deduce from Adam's seed alone the
allurements from which and according to which the spiritual forms of the
minds of all men in the universe exist, would be like deriving birds of
every wing from one egg, also beasts of every nature from one seed, and
trees of every kind of fruit from one root. Is there not an infinite
variety of men? one like a sheep, another like a wolf? one like a kid,
another like a panther? one like a tamed carriage horse before a
carriage, another like an untamable wild ass before it? one like a
playful calf, another like a voracious tiger? and so on. Whence has each
his peculiar disposition but from his father and his mother? Why then
from Adam? by whom nevertheless is described in a representative type
the first church of this earth, as has been already shown? Would not
this be like deriving from one stock deeply hidden in the earth a
plantation of trees of every kind and use, and from a single plant
shrubs of every degree of value? Would that not also be like deriving
light from the darkness of the ages and of histories, and like
unravelling the thread of a knot that cannot he untied? Why not rather
from Noah, "who walked with God" (Gen. 6:9), and "whom God blessed"
(Gen. 9:1), and from whom alone, surviving with his three children, "the
whole earth was overspread"? (Gen. 9:19.) Would not the hereditary
qualities of the generations from Adam be extirpated, as if drowned by a
flood? \[3\] But, my friend, I will open the true source of sins. Every
evil is conceived of the Devil as a father, and is born of atheistical
faith as a mother; and on the other hand, every good is conceived of the
Lord as a father, and is born of saving faith in Him as a mother. The
generations of all goods in their infinite varieties among men are from
no other origin than from the marriage of the Lord and the church; and,
on the contrary, the generations of all evils among them in their
varieties, are from no other origin than from the interaction of the
Devil with a profane congregation. Who does not know, or may not know,
that a man must be regenerated by the Lord, that is, created anew, and
that so far as this is effected so far he is in goods? Hence this
follows: that so far as a man is unwilling to be generated anew or
created anew, so far he takes up and retains the evils implanted in him
from his parents. This is what lies concealed in the first precept of
the Decalogue: I am a zealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the sons, upon the third and upon the fourth generation of them
that hold Me in hatred, and doing mercy unto thousands who love Me and
do My commandments (Exod. 20:5, 6; Deut. 5:9, 10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="36.">36.</span></span>

VI\. The sixth state of the men of this church, which was the elevation
of the faithful to God after the Last Judgment, from whom a new heaven
was formed, and the removal of the unfaithful from God from whom a new
hell was formed. In the preceding propositions (from n. 10-13 and from
n. 14-17), it was explained that after consummation, a Last Judgment was
executed upon all who were of the four churches above named, and after
this a new heaven and a new hell formed from them, and thus that there
have been in this earth four judgments upon its inhabitants, and four
heavens and hells formed from them; and it has been granted me to know,
that both those heavens and those hells are so entirely separated from
each other, that one can by no means pass out of his own into that of
another. All these heavens have been described in the work on Conjugial
Love; and, as the spiritual origin of love truly conjugial is from no
other source than the marriage of the Lord and the church, thus from
love of the Lord towards the church and of the church to the Lord (as
was shown in that work from n. 116-131); and, as the most ancient people
were in both these loves so long as they retained in themselves the
image of God, therefore, I will transcribe from that work the following
things respecting that heaven, to which I was at the time then granted
admission; which are as follow:

<span class="margnote"><span id="37.">37.</span></span>

"Once when I was meditating on conjugial love, the desire seized my mind
of knowing what that love had been with those who lived in the Golden
Age, and what it was afterwards in the succeeding ones called Silver,
Copper and Iron. And, as I knew that all who lived well in those ages
are in the heavens, I prayed to the Lord that it might be permitted me
to converse with them and be instructed. "And, lo! an angel stood by me,
and said, \`I am sent by the Lord to be your guide and companion; and
first I will lead and accompany you to those who lived in the first era
or Age, which is called the Golden.' (The Golden Age is the same as the
age of the Most Ancient Church, which is meant by \`the head of good
gold,' on the statue seen by Nebuchadnezzar in a dream (Dan. 2:32), of
which we have spoken before.) The angel said, \`The way to them is
difficult; it lies through a dense forest, which no one can traverse
unless a guide be given him by the Lord.' \[2\] "I was in the spirit,
and girded myself for the way; and we turned our faces to the east; and
in going along, I saw a mountain, whose summit towered beyond the region
of the clouds. We crossed a great desert, and reached a forest crowded
with various kinds of trees, and dark by reason of the density of them,
of which the angel informed me beforehand. But that forest was
intersected by many narrow paths. The angel said that these were so many
windings of error, and that unless the eyes were opened by the Lord, and
the olive trees girt about with vine tendrils seen, and the steps
directed from olive tree to olive tree, the traveler would stray into
Tartarus. This forest is of such a nature, to the end that the approach
may be guarded; for no other nation but a primeval one dwells on that
mountain. \[3\] "After we entered the forest, our eyes were opened, and
we saw here and there olive trees entwined with vines, from which hung
bunches of grapes of a dark blue color, and the olive trees were
arranged in perpetual circles; wherefore, we circled around and around
according as they came into view; and at length we saw a grove of lofty
cedars, and some eagles on their branches. When he saw these, the angel
said, \`Now we are on the mountain, not far from its summit.' "And we
went on, and lo! Behind the grove was a circular plain, where male and
female lambs were feeding, which were forms representative of the state
of innocence and peace of those on the mountain. "We passed through this
grove, and lo! There were seen many thousands of tabernacles to the
front and on each side, in every direction, as far as the eye could
reach. And the angel said, \`Now we are in the camp where dwell the
armies of the Lord Jehovih, for so they call themselves and their
habitations. These most ancient people, while they were in the world,
dwelt in tabernacles; for which reason they also dwell in them now.' But
I said, \`Let us bend our way to the south, where the wiser of them
dwell, that we may meet someone with whom we may enter into
conversation.' \[4\] "On the way, I saw at a distance three boys and
three girls sitting at the door of their tabernacle; but as we drew
near, they were seen as men and women of a medium height. And the angel
said, \`All the inhabitants of this mountain appear at a distance like
infants, because they are in the state of innocence, and infancy is the
appearance of innocence.' "On seeing us, these men ran towards us, and
said, \`Whence are you, and how have you come hither? Your faces are not
of the faces of those belonging to this mountain.' "But the angel
replied, and told the means by which we obtained access through the
wood, and the reason of our coming. "On hearing this, one of the three
men invited and introduced us into his tabernacle. The man was clothed
in a mantle of a hyacinthine color, and a tunic of white wool; and his
wife was dressed in a crimson robe, and under it, had a tunic about the
breast of fine embroidered linen. \[5\] "But, since there was in my
thought the desire of knowing about the marriages of the most ancient
people, I looked at the husband and the wife by turns, and observed as
it were a unity of their souls in their faces; and I said, \`You two are
one.' "And the man answered, \`We are one; her life is in me, and mine
in her. We are two bodies, but one soul. There is between us a union
like that of the two tents in the breast, which are called the heart and
the lungs; she is the substance of my heart, and I am her lungs; but
because by heart we here mean love, and by lungs wisdom (we understand
the latter by the former on account of their correspondence) she is the
love of my wisdom, and I am the wisdom of her love. Hence, as you said,
there is the appearance of the unity of souls in our faces. Hence, it is
as impossible to us here to look upon the wife of a companion in lust,
as it is to look at the light of our heaven from the shade of Tartarus.'
"And the angel said to me, \`You hear now the speech of these angels,
that it is the speech of wisdom, because they speak from causes.' this
conversation, I saw a great light on a hill among the tabernacles, and I
asked, 'Whence is that light?' "He said, 'From the sanctuary of our
tabernacle of worship.' "And I enquired whether it was allowed to
approach; and he said that it was allowed. Then I drew near, and saw the
tabernacle without and within, exactly according to the description like
the Tabernacle which was built for the sons of Israel in the desert, the
form of which was shown to Moses on Mount Sinai (Exod. 25:40; 26:30). I
also asked, \`What is there within its sanctuary, whence there is so
great a light?' "And he answered, \`There is a tablet, on which is
written, The covenant between the Lord Jehovih and Heaven.'" He said no
more. "Then I also questioned them about the Lord Jehovih, whom they
worship; and I said, \`Is He not God the Father, the Creator of the
universe?' "And they replied, \`He is; but we by the Lord Jehovih,
understand Jehovah in His Human; for we are not able to look upon
Jehovah in His inmost Divinity, except through His Human.' And then they
explained what they meant, and also what at this day they mean, by: The
seed of the woman trampling the serpent's head (Gen. 3:15); namely, that
the Lord Jehovih would come into the world, and redeem and save all who
believed in Him, and who hereafter should believe. "When we had finished
this conversation, the man ran to his tabernacle, and returned with a
pomegranate, in which was an abundance of golden seeds, which he
presented to me, and I brought it away: this was a sign that we had been
with those who lived in the Golden Age." \[See the work on Conjugial
Love, n. 75.\] For an account of the heavens of the remaining churches,
which succeeded the Most Ancient in their order, see in the same work on
Conjugial Love (n. 76-82).

<span class="margnote"><span id="38.">38.</span></span>

The hell of those who were from the Most Ancient Church, is more
atrocious than all other hells. It consists of those who in the world
believed themselves to be as God, according to the deceitful utterance
of the serpent (Gen. 3:5); and those are deeper in that hell who, from
the fantasy that God had transfused His Divinity into men, persuaded
themselves that they altogether were gods, and so that there was no
longer a God in the universe. In consequence of that direful persuasion,
a stinking smoke is exhaled from that hell, which infects the adjacent
places with so baleful a contagion, that when anyone approaches, he is
at first seized with such a mad delirium, that presently, after some
convulsive struggles, he seems to himself to be in the agonies of death.
I saw a certain one, in the vicinity of that place, lying as it were
dead; but, on being removed thence, he revived. That hell lies in the
middle region at the south, surrounded with ramparts, and on which stand
some who shout out in a loud stentorian voice, "Approach no nearer." I
have heard from the angels who are in the heaven above that hell, that
the evil demons there appear like serpents twisted into inextricable
folds, which is a consequence of their vain devices and incantations, by
which they deluded the simple into admitting that they are gods, and
that there is no God beside them. The ancients, who wove all things into
fables, meant these by the "giants," who besieged the camp of the gods,
and whom Jupiter cast down by his thunderbolts and thrust under the
fiery mountain Etna, and who were called "Cyclopses." They also called
the hells of these, "Tartarus," and the "pools of Acheron;" and the
deeps there, "Styx," and those who dwelt there, "Lernaean Hydras," and
so forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="39.">39.</span></span>

PROPOSITION THE THIRD. The Noachian, or Ancient Church of the earth.
Since every church is three-fold, inmost or celestial, middle or
spiritual, and external or natural, therefore Noah had three sons; and
by "Shem" is signified the inmost or celestial church, by "Japheth" the
middle or spiritual church, and by "Ham" the external or natural church.
But there is not room to describe here in whom the first church is, and
in whom the second and third, as also what their quality is in
themselves, or in relation to one another: for there are highest,
middle, and lowest heavens, to which those three degrees of the church
correspond. Moreover, this Noachian, or Ancient Church, was diffused
throughout Asia, especially into Syria, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Chaldea,
the land of Canaan and the parts adjacent, Philistia, Egypt, Tyre,
Sidon, Nineveh, and also into Arabia and Ethiopia, and in course of time
into Great Tartary, and thence downward as far as to the Black Sea, and
thence again into all the countries of Africa. That the nations in every
part of the earth have been in worship from some religion is known; and
religion cannot exist except by some revelation, and by the propagation
thereof from nation to nation; as may be seen in the preceding work, The
True Christian Religion (n. 273-276); where, also, it was shown, that,
prior to the Israelitish Word, there was a Word, which in process of
time was lost, but from the Divine Providence of the Lord is still
preserved in Great Tartary, from which is their Divine worship, even to
the present day (see also n. 264-266, and n. 279, of the said work).

<span class="margnote"><span id="40.">40.</span></span>

Who can deny that the universe was created for the sake of the human
race, in order that from it an angelic heaven might be formed, wherein
God might dwell in the dominion of His glory? To promote and accomplish
this end, what mediate cause is there but religion? And what else is
religion than walking with God? Religion also is like a seed producing
just and true desires, and judgments and acts therefrom, in spiritual
things, and by means of these in moral things, and by means of both the
latter and the former in civil things. In order, therefore, that it may
be known what is the quality of the man who has religion, and what of
him who has not religion, it shall be stated. The man who has religion,
in spiritual things, is like a pelican nourishing its young with its own
blood; but the man who has not religion, in those things is like a
vulture in a state of starvation devouring its own offspring. The man
who has religion, in moral things, is like a turtledove in the nest with
its mate, sitting on its eggs or young; but the man who has not
religion, in these things is like a rapacious hawk in the coop of a
dove-cot. The man who has religion, in political things, is like a swan
flying with a bunch of grapes in its mouth; but he who has not religion,
in these matters is like a basilisk with a poisonous herb in its mouth.
The man who has religion, in judiciary matters is like a tribune riding
on a spirited horse; but the man who has not religion, in those things
is like a serpent in the desert of Arabia biting its tail in its mouth,
and hurling itself, in that hoop, upon a horse to coil itself about the
rider. The man who has religion, in all other civil affairs, is like a
prince, the son of a king, who exhibits the marks of charity and the
graces of truth; but the man who has not religion, is like the
three-headed dog Cerberus at the entrance of the court of Pluto, foaming
forth aconite from its triple mouth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="41.">41.</span></span>

The successive states of this church, which are its rise or morning,
progression into light or day, vastation or evening, and consummation or
night, it is not permitted to follow up with a description in the same
manner as we before described the states of the Most Ancient Church,
because the states of that church cannot be so collected from our Word;
for the posterity of Noah, through his three sons, is recorded only in a
summary, in one or two pages; and moreover that church was spread
through many kingdoms, and in each kingdom it varied, and hence that
church underwent and ran through the states named in a different manner.
\[2\] The first and second state thereof in the regions round about the
Jordan and about Egypt, was like the "garden of Jehovah," is evident
from these passages: The plain of Jordan was like the garden of Jehovah,
like the land of Egypt, where thou comest unto Zoar (Gen. 13:10). And
likewise Tyre from these: Thou prince of Tyre, full of wisdom, and
perfect in beauty. Thou hast been in the garden of God; every precious
stone was thy covering. Thou wast perfect in thy ways, from the day that
thou wast created, until perversity was found in thee (Ezek. 28:12-15).
That Assyria was like a "cedar in Lebanon," from these: Behold, Assyria
is a cedar in Lebanon, beautiful in branch, exalted in height; all the
birds of the heavens built their nests in his branches, and under his
branches did every beast of the field bring forth its young, and in his
shadow dwelt all great nations; no tree in the garden of God was equal
to him in beauty, and all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of
God, envied him (Ezek. 31:3-9). That wisdom flourished in Arabia,
appears from the queen of Sheba's journey to Solomon (1 Kings 10:1-13);
also from the three wise men who came to the newborn Jesus, a star going
before them (Matt. 2:1-12). \[3\] The third and fourth states of that
church, which were its vastation and consummation, are described here
and there in the Word, both in its historic and prophetic parts. The
consummation of the nations round about the Jordan, or round about the
land of Canaan, is described by the destruction of Sodom, Gomorrah,
Admah, and Zeboim (Gen. 14 and 19); the consummation of the church of
the nations within the Jordan, or in the land of Canaan, is described in
Joshua and in the book of Judges by the expulsion of some and the
extermination of others. The consummation of that church in Egypt is
described by the drowning of Pharaoh and the Egyptians in the sea Suph
(Exod. 14). And so on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="42.">42.</span></span>

It is certain that this Ancient Church was a representative church,
which in visible and natural types and signs, figured forth the
invisible and spiritual things of the church which was yet to come, when
Jehovah Himself would manifest Himself in a natural human form, and by
this means procure for Himself entrance to men, and for men access to
Himself, and thus should divest Himself of types, and institute a church
with precepts which should lead all who believe in Him as Man, and keep
His commandments, by a short way to heaven, the dwelling place of his
Divinity. But, because this Ancient Church, typical of that which was to
come, turned the representative correspondences into magic and idolatry,
and thus into things infernal, Jehovah raised up the Israelitish church,
in which He restored the primitive types, which were heavenly; such
types were all the tabernacles, feasts, sacrifices, priesthoods, the
garments of Aaron and his sons, the anointings, and, moreover, the
statutes in a long series which were promulgated through Moses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="43.">43.</span></span>

I will in a few words touch upon the manner in which the representative
church with them was turned into an idolatrous one. All the spiritual
things which are of heaven and the church were presented before them in
visible and tangible forms, as was mentioned just above. Those forms
were taken from the subjects of the three kingdoms of nature, animal,
vegetable, and mineral, by which were represented such things as are of
the heavenly kingdom. They placed these typical forms in their
sanctuaries, in the inner chambers of their houses, and in the
marketplaces and streets, arranging them according to their
significations. But a later age, after the science of correspondences
was lost, and consequently the knowledge of the signification of those
things had perished, began to look upon and acknowledge those objects as
so many deities and holy things; and then they bowed the knee to some,
some they kissed, and some they adorned and decorated with wax tapers,
boxes of perfumes and ribbons, just as infants do their dolls, and as
papists do their images; yea, of some they made household gods, of some
guardian demigods, and of some pythons; some, moreover, they carried in
miniature form in their hands, some they hugged in their bosoms,
stroked, and whispered petitions in their ears; and so on. Thus were
heavenly types turned into infernal types, and the Divine things of
heaven and the church into idols. On account of this transformation and
disfigurement of heavenly things, a new representative church was raised
up with the sons of Israel, in which real representations, as was stated
above, were instituted; and they were prohibited from celebrating Divine
worship by any others, as is evident from these words in the first
Commandment of the Decalogue: Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven
image, nor any figure that is in the heavens above, or that is in the
earth beneath, or that is in the waters under the earth. Thou shalt not
bow down thyself unto them, nor worship them (Exod. 20:4, 5; Deut. 5:8,
9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="44.">44.</span></span>

It has been said, that from the people of every Church, at its end, is
formed a new heaven and a new hell; and, since I have adduced a relation
in the preceding article respecting the heaven and hell formed from
those who were of the Most Ancient Church, it seems well also to do so
respecting these; for access has been granted me to them, inasmuch as I
have been allowed to go about and examine the spiritual world, to the
end that the New Church truly Christian may not be in thick darkness
concerning heaven and hell, and concerning their lot after death
according to the actions of their life. These things are likewise in the
work on Conjugial Love (n. 76). Concerning the heaven from these: \[2\]
"An angel came to me and said, \`Do you desire me to accompany you to
the peoples who lived in the Silver Era, or Age, that we may hear from
them respecting the manners and life of their times?' He also added that
they may not be approached, except under the auspices of the Lord. "I
was in the spirit and accompanied my leader, and came first to a hill on
the confines of the east with the south; and when we were on its slope,
he showed me a great stretch of country, and we saw at a distance an
eminence like a mountain, between which and the hill on which we stood
was a valley, and beyond this a plain, and from this plain a
gently-rising acclivity. "We descended the hill to cross the valley, and
saw here and there at the sides pieces of wood and stone carved into
figures of men, and of various beasts, birds and fishes. And I asked the
angel, \`What are these? Are they not idols?' "And he replied, \`Not at
all: they are representative forms of various moral virtues and
spiritual truths. The people of that age had the science of
correspondences and as a beast, bird and fish correspond to some
quality, therefore, each carved figure represents and signifies some
particular of virtue, or truth, and many together represent the virtue
or truth itself in a certain general extended form these are what in
Egypt were called hieroglyphics.' \[3\] "We proceeded through the
valley, and when we entered the plain, lo! we saw horses and chariots
the horses were variously caparisoned and harnessed, and the chariots of
different forms; some carved out like eagles, some like unicorns, and
some like whales: we also saw some carts at the extremity, and stables
round about at the sides. But, when we approached, both horses and
chariots disappeared, and instead of them we saw men in pairs, walking,
conversing and reasoning. And the angel said to me, \`The semblances of
horses, chariots, and stables, seen at a distance, are appearances of
the rational intelligence of the men of that age; for a horse from
correspondence signifies the understanding of truth; a chariot its
doctrine; and stables places of instruction. You are aware that all
things in this world appear according to correspondences.' \[4\] "But we
passed these things, and ascended by the acclivity. At length we saw a
city, which we entered; and in walking through it, we noticed its
houses, from the streets and public places. In the midst of it were
palaces built of marble, having steps of alabaster in front, and at the
sides of the steps pillars of jasper. We saw also temples, made of
precious stone of a sapphire and azure color. And the angel said to me,
\`Their houses are of stones because stones signify natural verities,
and precious stones spiritual verities; and all those who lived in the
silver age, had intelligence from spiritual verities, and thence from
natural; for silver has a like signification.' \[5\] "While exploring
the city we saw here and there consorts, both husbands and wives. We
expected that we should be invited somewhere; and, while this was in our
mind \[animus\], we were called back by two into their house, which we
entered; and the angel, speaking with them for me, explained the reason
of our coming into this heaven, that it was \`for the sake of
instruction concerning the manners of the ancients, of whom you are.'
"They replied, \`We were from the peoples in Asia, and the study of our
age was the study of truths, through which we had intelligence. This
study was the study of our soul and mind. But the study of the senses of
our bodies was the representations of truths in natural forms; and the
science of correspondences conjoined the sensuals of our bodies with the
perceptions of our minds, thus natural and corporeal things with
spiritual and celestial, and procured for us communication with the
angels of heaven.' \[6\] "On hearing this, the angel asked them to give
some account of marriages with them. And the husband said, \`There is a
correspondence between spiritual marriage, which is that of good and
truth, and natural marriage, which is that of a man with his wife; and
as we have studied correspondences, we have seen that the church, with
its truths and goods, can by no means exist with any others than those
who live in truly conjugial love; for the marriage of good and truth is
the church with man. Therefore all we who are in this heaven, say that
the husband is truth, and the wife the good of his truth; and that good
cannot love any other truth than that which is its own, nor truth love
in return any other good than that which is its own. If any other were
loved, internal or spiritual marriage, which constitutes the Church
would perish, and marriage would become only external or natural, to
which idolatry and not the church corresponds.' \[7\] "When he had said
these things we were introduced into an ante-chamber, where there were
several designs on the walls, and little images as it were molten of
silver; and I asked, what these were. They said, \`They are pictures and
forms representative of the many qualities, properties, and delights of
spiritual things;' as were also the cherubim and palm-trees on the walls
of the temple at Jerusalem. \[8\] "After this, there appeared at a
distance a chariot drawn by white ponies; on seeing which the angel
said,' That chariot is a sign for us to depart.' Then, as we were going
down the steps, our host gave us a bunch of white grapes adhering to the
vine leaves; and lo! the leaves in our hands became silver, and we
brought them away for a sign that we had spoken with the people of the
Silver Age."

<span class="margnote"><span id="45.">45.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELL FROM THOSE PEOPLES. The hells of the men of the
Noachian, or Ancient Church, consist for the most part of magicians, who
have huts and places of entertainment scattered up and down in the
desert. They wander about there with rods in their hands, which are of
various forms, and some of them stained with magical juices. By these,
as in former times, they practise their arts, which are effected by the
abuse of correspondences, by fantasies, by persuasive assurances by
which there was produced a miraculous faith, and miracles were formerly
performed; also by exorcisms, fascinations, enchantments, and sorceries,
and several other magical spells, by which they present illusory
appearances as real. The greatest delight of their heart is to utter
prophecies and prognostications, and to act as pythons. From these
especially have arisen the various fanaticisms in the Christian world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="46.">46.</span></span>

PROPOSITION THE FOURTH. The Israelitish and Jewish Church. In order that
the states of this church may be thoroughly laid open and distinctly
exhibited, it is of importance that we survey them in the following
order: I. The first state of this church was the appearing of the Lord
Jehovih, and the calling and covenanting, and then its rise and morning.
II. The second state of this church was instruction, and at length
introduction into the land of Canaan, and then its progression into
light and day. III. The third state of this church was the turning aside
from true representative into idolatrous worship and then its vastation
or evening. IV. The fourth state of this church was the profanation of
sanctities, and then its consummation or night. V. Before this state and
after it, a promise was made of the coming of the Lord Jehovih into the
world, and respecting a new church in which justice and judgment should
reign. VI. The fifth state of this church was the separation of the good
from the evil, and then the judgment upon those who were from it; but
this was in the spiritual world. VII. Something respecting the heaven
and the hell from that nation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="47.">47.</span></span>

I. The first state of this church was the appearance of the Lord
Jehovih, and the calling and covenanting, and then was its rise or
morning. We are taught from the Word, that the Lord Jehovih has appeared
at the beginning of each of the four churches of this earth. This is
because God is the All in all of the church and its religion; and the
acknowledgment of God in it, is like the soul in the body, which
vivifies both its interiors and its exteriors; and it is like the
prolific element in seed, which, abiding inmostly in all the sap drawn
from the earth by the root, accompanies it from the first germination
even to the fruit, in which it also is, and it disposes the vegetative
process so that it proceeds in its own order. For this reason, the man
of the church, without the acknowledgment of God, is in the eyes of the
angels a brute like the wild beasts of the forest, or like a bird of
night, or like a monster of the sea; yea, without the acknowledgment of
God, he is like a tree the branches of which are cut off, and the trunk
cut in pieces, and the whole piled up together in a heap reserved for
the fire; for the Lord says: Without Me ye can do nothing; if anyone
abide not in Me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and they
gather him, and cast him into the fire, and he is burned (John 15:5-6).
Without the acknowledgment of God, man, inwardly, as to his rational
things, is like the ruins of a burned city; he is also like food when
its nutritiveness is boiled out it becomes refuse. And so forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="48.">48.</span></span>

But it would be impossible for a man to acknowledge God and anything
belonging to Him, unless God had manifested Himself in a personal human
form; for nature, which belongs to the world, surrounds him, and he does
not see, feel, or breathe anything but what is from it and is in contact
with the organs of his body. From this his mind conceives and adopts a
rational which lies in the midst of the bosom of nature, like an embryo
in the womb; nor does it see anything, until it is brought forth, and
receives sight. Therefore, how can a man in this state by any method
look through nature, and acknowledge anything that is above her, as
everything Divine, celestial, and spiritual is, and hence everything
religious, which in themselves are above natural things? Wherefore, it
is an absolute necessity that God should manifest Himself, and thereby
cause Himself to be acknowledged, and after acknowledgment should
inspire man with His Divine influence, and by this, received in the
heart, lead him at length even to Himself in heaven; all which cannot
possibly be effected except by instruction. Must not also an emperor,
and a king, first cause himself to be acknowledged and crowned, before
he enters on his government? And before he is crowned, is he not
provided with the insignia of dominion, robed, and anointed? and must he
not covenant the people to himself by sworn compacts, agreed to by both
sides, whereby the people become the king's, and the king the people's?
Must not a bridegroom first cause himself to be seen, before he proposes
betrothal, and afterwards marriage? Must not a father present himself
before his infant, and embrace and kiss him, before the infant can say,
"Abba, father"? and so in other cases. Still more must the Lord Jehovih,
who is "King of kings and Lord of lords" (Apoc. 17:14), the Bridegroom
and Husband of the church (Apoc. 21:9), and consequently the Father of
all her offspring. By the "Lord Jehovih" is meant the Lord our Saviour
and Redeemer: He is called the "Lord Jehovih" in Daniel, and everywhere
in the Prophets.

<span class="margnote"><span id="49.">49.</span></span>

It was stated above, that the first state with the sons of Israel, was
the appearing of the Lord Jehovih, calling and covenanting; and we learn
from the Word, that these three things took place, first with Abraham,
secondly with Moses, and thirdly with the entire people. The appearing
of the Lord Jehovih before Abraham is thus described in Genesis: Jehovah
appeared unto Abraham in the plains of Mamre; he was sitting at the door
of his tent, and when he lifted up his eyes and saw, behold, three men
stood by him, and as soon as he saw them, he ran to meet them from the
door of the tent, and bowed himself to the earth, and said, O Lord, if I
have found grace in Thine eyes, pass not away, I pray, from Thy servant
(18:1-3, seq.). It was the Lord our Savior who appeared in His Divine
Trinity, which the three angels represented; for the Lord said: Abraham
exulted that he should see My day, and he saw and rejoiced. Verily,
verily I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am (John 8:56, 58). There
is in the Lord the Divine Trinity; and the Divine Unity was represented
in the Divine Trinity by the "three men," who were also called "angels"
(Gen. 18:2; 19:1). But in His Divine Unity He was called "Lord" (18:3;
19:18); and also "Jehovah," very frequently (18:13, 14, 17, 19, 20, 22,
26, 33). The appearing of the Lord Jehovih before Moses is thus
described in Exodus: The Angel of Jehovah appeared to Moses at the
mountain of Horeb, in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bramble.
Therefore Moses said, I will turn aside and see this great vision, why
the bramble is not burnt. And Jehovah saw that he went aside, therefore
God called unto him out of the midst of the bramble, and said, Moses,
Moses. And moreover Moses said to God, What is thy name? God said, I AM
WHO I AM. Thus shalt thou say unto the sons of Israel, I AM hath sent me
unto you (Exod. 3:1, 2-4, 14 seq.). The appearing of the Lord Jehovih
before the whole people is thus also described in Exodus: Jehovah said
to Moses, Say unto the sons of Israel, that they be ready against the
third day; for on the third day Jehovih will come down in the eyes of
all the people upon Mount Sinai. And it came to pass on the third day,
that there were voices, and lightning, and thick clouds upon the mount,
and the voice of a trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people who
were in the camp trembled. All Mount Sinai smoked, because He descended
upon it in fire, and promulgated the law before the people (Exod.
19:9-24 and 20:1-18). The Lord also appeared to Joshua as "Prince of the
army of Jehovah," before whom Joshua fell on his face upon the earth,
and called him his "Lord" (Josh. 5:13, 14). The calling of the sons of
Israel to the land of Canaan, thus to the church, was also done three
times; once to Abram, that he should go forth thence out of his
fatherland, and afterwards the promise that his seed should inherit that
land (Gen. 12:1-7). The call was also made through Moses (Exod. 3:16,
17); and again through Joshua (Josh. 1:3, seq., and 11).

<span class="margnote"><span id="50.">50.</span></span>

A covenant also was entered into several times; first with Abram
(respecting which, Gen. 17:1-14); then with the people (Exod. 24:7, 8);
and once again (Josh. 24:24, 25). From these things it is now evident,
that the first state of this church was the appearing of the Lord
Jehovih and the calling and covenanting, and then its rise or morning.
That by the "Lord Jehovih," everywhere in the Word, is meant Jehovah in
His Human, who is the Lord our Redeemer and Saviour, will be seen in
what follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[34-1](cor01.htm#fr_0) Dr. Worcester has
"dominus," which agrees with the Hebrew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51-100](cor02)
