[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw06)  [Next](omw08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LATIN

It is important to separate the Greek and Latin mythologies: Iuppiter,
though akin to, is not the same as Zeus; Iuno is not the same as Hera.
Minerva is not the same as Athena, Neptune is not the same as Poseidon.
"The Romans worshipped not gods, not *dei*," writes Miss Jane Harrison,
"but powers, *numina*":

These numina were only dim images of activities. They had no attributes,
no life histories; in a word, no mythology. We must always remember that
mythology, the making of images, is only one and, perhaps, not the
greatest factor in religion. Because the Romans were not *ikonists*, it
does not follow that they were a people less religious than the Greeks.
The contrary is probably true. A vague something is more awe-inspiring
than a known something. <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)

Mars the Death-dealer was the central object of Italian worship,
according to Mommsen, in that epoch when the Italian stock dwelt by
itself in the Peninsula. He was the champion of the burgesses, hurling
the spear, protecting the flock, and overthrowing the foe. Mommsen goes
on to say:

To Mars was dedicated the first month not only in the Roman calendar of
the months, which in no other instance takes notice of the gods, but
also probably in all the other Latin and Sabellian calendars. Among the
Roman proper names, which in like manner contain no allusion to any
other god, Marcus, Mamercus, and Mamurius appear in prevailing use from
very early times; with Mars and his sacred woodpecker was connected the
oldest Italian prophecy; the wolf, the animal sacred to Mars, was the
badge of the Roman burgesses, and such sacred national legends as the
Roman imagination was able to produce referred exclusively to the god
Mars and to his duplicate, Quirinus. . . . While abstraction, which lies
at the foundation of every religion, elsewhere endeavoured to rise to
wider and more enlarged conceptions and to penetrate ever more and more
deeply into the essence of things, the forms of Roman faith remained at,
or sank to, a singularly low level of conception and insight. . . . In
the religion of Rome there was hardly anything secret except the names
of the gods of the city, the Penates; the real character, moreover, even
of these gods was manifest to everyone. . . . Of all the worships of
Rome, that which, perhaps, had the deepest hold was the worship of the

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

tutelary spirits that presided in and over the household and
storechamber: these were, in public worship, Vesta and the Penates, in
family worship the gods of the forest and field, the Silvani, and
especially the gods of the household in its strict sense, the Lases or
Lares, to whom the share of the family meal was regularly assigned. . .
. Respecting the world of spirits, little can be said. The departed
souls of mortal men, the "good" (*manes*), continued to exist as shades
haunting the spot where the body reposed (*dii inferi*), and received
meat and drink from the survivors. But they dwelt in the depths beneath,
and there was no bride that led from the lower world either to men
ruling on earth or upward to the gods above. The hero-worship of the
Greeks was wholly foreign to the Romans. . . . Numa, the oldest and most
venerable name in Roman tradition, never received the honours of a god
in Rome as Theseus did in Athens. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13)

The stories of Romulus and of Numa are taken from Plutarch's Lives and
Livy's History where the personages are treated as historical
characters. The story of Pomona and Vertumnus is taken from Ovid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xv:13](omw07.htm#fr_12) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xvi:14](omw07.htm#fr_13) The History of Rome,
Book I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Graeco-Roman](omw08)
