[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw00)  [Next](omw02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### THE SIGNIFICANCE OF MYTHOLOGY

Not until late centuries did reflective minds see in mythology any of
the significance that we have come to see in it. The Italian philosopher
of the seventeenth century, Vico, knew that the heroes of
myth--Hercules, whose arms could rend the mountains, Lycurgus and
Romulus, law-givers, who in a man's lifetime accomplished the long work
of centuries--were creations of the collective mind. When man craved for
men-like gods he had his way, Vico showed us, by combining in an
individual, by incarnating in a single hero, the ideas of a whole cycle
of centuries. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Then came Goethe who
maintained that "the earlier centuries had their ideas in intuitions of
the fancy, but ours bring them into notions. Then the great views of
life were brought into shapes, into gods; to-day they are brought into
notions." <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) In our day, one who loved
and studied the mythologies of diverse peoples, wrote:

There are two nouns in the Greek language which have a long and
interesting history behind them; these are *mythos* and *logos*.
Originally they had the same power in ordinary speech; for in Homer's
time they were used indifferently, sometimes one being taken, and
sometimes the other, with the same meaning that *Word* has in our
language. . . . *Logos* grew to mean the inward constitution as well as
the outward form of thought, and consequently became the expression of
exact thought--which is exact because it corresponds to universal and
unchanging principles---and reached its highest exaltation in becoming
not only the reason in man, but the reason in the universe--the Divine
Logos, the Son of God, God Himself. . . . *Mythos* meant, in the widest
sense, anything uttered by the mouth of man--a word, an account of
something, a story understood by the narrator. . . . In Attic Greek,
*Mythos* signified a prehistoric story of the Greeks. The application of
the word *Myth* among scholars is plain enough up to a certain point;
for from being a myth of Greece only, it is now used to mean a myth of
any tribe of people on earth. . . . The reason is of ancient date why
myths have come, in vulgar estimation, to be synonymous with lies;
though true myths--and there are

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

many such--are the most comprehensive and splendid statements of truth
known to man. A myth, even when it contains a universal principle,
expresses it in special form, using with its peculiar personages the
language and accessories of a particular people, time, and place;
persons to whom this particular people, with the connected accidents of
time and place, are familiar and dear, receive the highest enjoyment
from the myth, and the truth goes with it as the soul with the
body. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

From these sayings of Vico's, of Goethe's, of Jeremiah Curtin's, we
learn something of the inner significance of mythology. Then we may turn
to a specialist who can show us how to distinguish myths from fables and
from incidents in romance and epic narrative. "I maintain," writes
Bronislaw Malinowski, "that there exists:

"A special class of stories, regarded as sacred, embodied in rituals,
morals, and social organization, and which form an integral and active
part of primitive culture. These stories live not by idle interest, not
as fictitious or even as true narrative, but are to the natives a
statement of a primeval, greater, and more relevant reality, by which
the present life, fates, and activities of mankind are determined, the
knowledge of which supplies man with the motive for ritual and moral
actions, as well as indications of how to perform them." <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

This statement gives us a definition: mythology is made up of stories
regarded as sacred that form an integral and active part of a culture.
The stories in this collection will be such, or they will have the marks
of having been at one time such. . . . However, the sacred stories of
only a few of the tribes of mankind can be of interest to us who read
books. An Australian, African, or South American group may have a sacred
story about the world being made by a beetle, and it may form an
integral and active part of their culture. But we should not know how to
tell such a story. "The primitive forms of civilization, so gross and so
barbaric, lay forgotten, or but little regarded, or misunderstood, until
that new phase of the European spirit, which was known as romanticism or
restoration, 'sympathized' with them--that is to say, recognized them as
its own proper present interest." <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) So
Benedetto Croce writes, and I use his sentence to indicate the limits of
our reach with regard to stories from the mythologies of the world;

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

they shall be stories in which there is matter that can be "sympathized"
with--recognized as being of proper present interest--by readers of
to-day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vii:1](omw01.htm#fr_0) Michelet's Introduction
to *La Scienza Nuova*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[vii:2](omw01.htm#fr_1) Letter to Reimer.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[viii:3](omw01.htm#fr_2) Jeremiah Curtin: Myths
and Folklore of Ireland. Boston, Little, Brown & Co.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[viii:4](omw01.htm#fr_3) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[viii:5](omw01.htm#fr_4) On History.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Egyptian Mythology](omw02)
