[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw11)  [Next](omw13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### INDIAN

India's is the most heavily *mythologized* of civilizations; the
mythology revealed in its literature is threefold. There is, first of
all, that of Aryan India which has connections with the mythologies of
Persia, Greece, and Italy: because we know it through the Vedic Hymns
(shaped between 1200 and 800 B.C.), we name it the Vedic mythology. Then
comes a mythology which nominally arises out of the Vedas but which is
quite different in idea and outlook: this is the Brāhmanical, the living
mythology of India, revealed to us in the enormous epics which were
shaped about the fourth century B.C., the Rāmāyana and the Mahābhārata.
Buddhism, a movement which originally aimed at simplifying the
Brāhmanical system, added new entities to the country's mythology: out
of it came a mythology connected with beings who incarnate from period
to period in order to redeem mankind: the stories of these incarnations
and of the efforts of the Buddhas-to-be to attain enlightenment are its
subjects; connected with it are cycles of animal-stories which tell of
the incarnations of Buddha in animal forms. Unlike Persia, unlike
Europe, India never

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

had her mythology displaced by movements such as Zoroastrianism or
Christianity.

India, in respect to her mythology, is like a watershed: there systems
which take us to look in opposite directions are close to each other. We
have Dyaus Pitar, the Sky Father, who is the same as Zeus and Iuppiter;
with him we have Indra, the Storm God, Agni, the Fire God, and the
Celestial Twin Horsemen, who are similar to the divinities in European
mythology; we have also Yama who assembles the dead, the Yima of old
Persia mythology who becomes the Jamshīd of mytho-romance: we are
destined to meet this divinity in the Far East where he has become the
god of the dead, Emma, in Buddhist Japan. This, the Vedic, was the
mythology of a simple-minded, agricultural, cattle-raising people. Then
comes the Brāhmanical, which arises out of philosophical ideas: time and
space are conceived of in dimensions that are frightening to one of
European culture; there are unnumbered worlds, unnumbered periods of
creation; the gods are immortal, but they are destined to be absorbed in
the absorption of the universe at the end of a cosmic cycle. The
Brāhmanical mythology as presented in the epics is a very rich one. Four
stories in this collection are taken from it: the Churning of the Ocean
and the Birth of the Ganges from the Rāmāyana, Savītiī and the God of
the Dead and Damayantī's Choice from the Mahābhārata. The story of
Gotama's Attainment is out of Buddhist mythology, and is one of the
scriptural stories of the Buddha who, historically, was Prince
Siddhāratha who lived in the fifth century B.C. In the early Vedas the
story-material is meagre: these Indian hymns are voluminous as compared
with the Homeric Hymns, but none of them give us, as most of the Homeric
Hymns do, a consecutive story. The Heavenly Nymph and her Mortal Husband
is told from the only extended statement in the hymns. The story is also
told in later literature. But in the later version the atmosphere has
been changed. In the Vedas the Apsarases are nymphs who have something
austere about them; in later literature they are types of
voluptuousness. An attempt has been made to get the atmosphere of the
early Aryan world in the retelling of the story, and to reveal the
simple forms of the Vedic gods. It is of interest to note that these
gods, the devas, become in Persia, after the Zoroastrian movement,

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

the daēvas who are demons. Later, these fallen daēvas become the divs,
or demonic beings, of the Arabian story-tellers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chinese](omw13)
