[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw12)  [Next](omw14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHINESE

There is not in China, as there is in India and there was in Greece, any
dramatization of divine activities--at least, not in literature; there
is no Chinese Hesiod, nor Homer, nor Vālmīki. The Chinese people seem to
have had no curiosity about their origin which could be thought of as
the origin of mankind; the philosophers have concerned themselves with
ethics and politics, and the poets with human relations and the
influences of nature. According to Confucius's disciples, the subjects
on which the master declined to speak were "extraordinary things, feats
of strength, disorder and spiritual beings." This attitude, transmitted
to the literate classes, did away with interest in mythology.
Undoubtedly, Chinese popular traditions contain a variety of stories
about personages who might be regarded as mythical. But such stories are
so prosaic and fantastic, so literal and ingenious, that we have no way
of retelling them with becoming seriousness. To literate Chinese the
universe has been created and is sustained by impersonal forces; that
which makes a mythology--personification of supernatural powers and
their identifications with some of the interests of mankind-is not
conceived of by them.

The story of the creation by P’an Ku is a popular one, deriving from
Taoism: Chinese scholars maintain that it was introduced from some
outside country. The Celestial Weaver Maid and the Herdsman is a stellar
myth, and has to do with the stars Aquilia and Vega. The personages in
the story are honoured by women who practise the crafts of needlework
and embroidery. The story is popular in Japan as well as China.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Japanese](omw14)
