[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw27)  [Next](omw29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span id="img_05300"></span>

[![Adam and Eve](tn/05300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05300.jpg)  
Adam and Eve  

# JEWISH POST-CHRISTIAN PERIOD

## THE ANGELS AND THE CREATION AND FALL OF MAN: THE CONFOUNDING OF THE ANGEL OF DEATH

### THE ANGELS AND THE CREATION AND FALL OF MAN

When the Holy One, the Almighty (blessed be His name!) would create the
world, the twenty-two that are the letters of the alphabet came from His
crown and held themselves before His eyes. Each supplicated to have
itself made the beginning letter of the creative word. Many were the
beginning letters of the various sacred names. But out of the
twenty-two, the Most High chose to create the world through BETH: it is
the beginning letter in the word BARACH, which signifies to bless.

On the first day the Most High created the heavens and the earth, the
light and the darkness, the duration of the day and the duration of the
night. From underneath His throne He took a stone and flung it upon
chaos: that stone made the centre of the earth, and all that was made
was made around it. On the second day God created the angels. On the
third day He created the plants, including the plants that are chief of
them all, the cedars of Lebanon. But lest these cedars, tallest of
trees, should exalt themselves unduly, He created on the same day the
iron that would fell the trees; also He created Paradise where the first
man was to have his abode, and where the souls of the just were to dwell
throughout eternity. On the fourth day He created the sun, Moon, and
stars. On the fifth day He created the fishes, including the fish that
is chief of all of them; namely, Leviathan, and the birds, including the
bird that is chief of all of them; namely, Ziz. On the sixth day He
created the animals, including the animal that is chief of all of them;
namely, Behemoth.

On the sixth day He created man. But the Most Holy One took

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

counsel with His angels before He created him. And some of the angels
said, "What is man that thou art mindful of him?" He stretched forth His
finger, and all the angels who said this were consumed with fire--all
except their leaders, Michael and Gabriel. Then the Most Holy One
commanded Gabriel to fetch dust from the four corners of the earth that
man might be made from it. Gabriel went to do as he was commanded. But
the earth refused to let the servant of the Lord gather dust from her
surface. "I am destined to be cursed by man," the earth said, "and to
have my first fair state made unfair through him. If the Almighty One
does not take from me the dust for the making of man, no one shall ever
be let do it." When God heard the earth say this He stretched forth His
hand and He took dust from the four corners of the earth, and He
fashioned man out of the dust.

When He would join the body He had formed out of the dust with the soul
He had made on the first day, the angelic host who knew the power that
man was about to receive from God murmured against his making. And the
chief of those who murmured was that angel who was amongst the highest
in the angelic host, whose wings were twelve where the others' wings
were six, the angel whose name was Samael. Samael said, "Thou didst
create us from the splendour of the Shekinah, and now thou dost plan to
set above us the creature whom thou hast fashioned out of the dust of
the ground." Man would have perished through the fire which Samael would
have put upon him if it had not been for the protecting hand that God
held over him. The Almighty cast Samael and his host out of heaven, and
from that time that angelic prince is known as Satan, and he is the
adversary of man.

God named the man whom he had created Adam, and He placed him in the
Paradise which He had created on the third day. Another had been created
with Adam out of the dust of the earth. This was the woman Lillith.
Lillith lived with Adam in Paradise. But she exalted herself over him,
knowing that he and she had been made out of the same dust of the earth.
And Lillith was able to pronounce the Ineffable Name, and pronouncing it
she caused herself to vanish from the sight of Adam. Thereafter she made
herself a demoness.

Then Adam was cast into a deep sleep; a rib was taken from his side, and
out of this rib God formed a woman to be Adam's wife, and this woman was
Eve. Adam was given the east and the north of Paradise

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

with the guardianship of the male animals, and Eve was given the west
and south with the guardianship of the female animals. A tree grew in
the centre of Paradise: the man and the woman were forbidden to eat of
the fruit of this tree.

Samael, who was now Satan, the fallen angel, came riding upon the back
of a serpent. The animals saw Samael and the serpent, and they were
affrighted by the sight. And Samael, in Eve's hearing, chanted seraphic
songs, and she, thinking they were songs in praise of God, listened to
him. The serpent ascended the tree and injected the poison of evil
inclination into the fruit. He bent the branch on which it grew down to
the ground. And Eve, after Samael had spoken to her, took the fruit and
ate of it. She summoned Adam and persuaded him to eat of the fruit also.
Thereupon the cuirass which was bound across each of them, and which was
made of the letters of the Ineffable Name, fell from them, and they had
to cover their lower limbs with leaves which the trees had cast off when
Eve ate of the forbidden fruit.

Then the Most Holy One put Adam and Eve from Paradise and appointed the
Cherubim who are called the Ever-turning Swords of Flame to guard
against their return to it. The earth felt the curse of the fall of man.
Thenceforward she had to be watered by rain from above; her fruits were
subject to failure; she had to bring forth creatures that were noxious
to her; also she had to have herself formed into mountains and valleys,
and to know that one day she will wax old like a garment. The angels in
heaven grieved over the fall of man; the sun grieved also. Only the moon
laughed on account of it, and for that God was wroth, and He obscured
her radiance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Confounding of the Angel of Death](omw29)
