[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw20)  [Next](omw22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span id="img_00300"></span>

[![Osiris and Isis](tn/00300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00300.jpg)  
Osiris and Isis  

# EGYPTIAN

### OSIRIS AND ISIS: RÊ, HIS GOING-DOWN AND UPRISING

### OSIRIS AND ISIS

When Osiris reigned death was not in the land. Arms were not in men's
hands; there were not any wars. From end to end of the land music
sounded; men and women spoke so sweetly and out of such depth of feeling
that all they said was oratory and poetry.

Osiris taught men and women wisdom and he taught them all the arts. He
it was who first planted the vine; he it was who showed men how and when
to sow grain, how to plant and tend the fruit-trees; he caused them to
rejoice in the flowers also. Osiris made laws for men so that they were
able to live together in harmony; he gave them knowledge of the Gods,
and he showed them how the Gods might be honoured.

And this was what he taught them concerning the Gods: In the beginning
was the formless abyss, Nuu. From Nuu came Rê, the Sun. Rê was the first
and he was the most divine of all beings. Rê created all forms. From his
thought came Shu and Tefênet, the Upper and the Lower. Air. From Shu and
Tefênet came Qêb and Nut, the Earth and the Sky. The Earth and the Sky
had been separated, the one from the other, but once they had been
joined together. From the eye of Rê, made out of the essence that is in
that eye, came the first man and the first woman.

And from Qêb, the Father, and Nut, the Mother, Osiris was born. When he
was born a voice came into the world, crying, "Behold, the Lord of all
things is born!"

And with Osiris was born Isis, his sister. Afterwards was born Thout,
the Wise One. Then there was born Nephthys. And, last, there was born
Sêth. And Sêth tore a hole in his mother's side--Sêth the Violent One.
Now Osiris and Isis loved each other as husband and wife, and together
they reigned over the land. Thout was with them, and he taught men the
arts of writing and of reckoning. Nephthys went with Sêth and was his
wife, and Sêth's abode was in the desert.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

Sêth, in his desert, was angered against Osiris, for everywhere green
things that Sêth hated were growing over the land--vine, and grain, and
the flowers. Many times Sêth tried to destroy his brother Osiris, but
always his plots were baffled by the watchful care of Isis. One day he
took the measurement of Osiris's body--he took the measurement from his
shadow--and he made a chest that was the exact size of Osiris.

Soon, at the time before the season of drought, Sêth gave a banquet, and
to that banquet he invited all the children of Earth and the Sky. To
that banquet came Thout, the Wise One, and Nephthys, the wife of Sêth,
and Sêth himself, and Isis, and Osiris. And where they sat at banquet
they could see the chest that Sêth had made--the chest made of fragrant
and diversified woods. All admired that chest. Then Sêth, as though he
would have them enter into a game, told all of them that he would give
the chest to the one whose body fitted most closely in it. The children
of Qêb and Nut went and laid themselves in the chest that Sêth had made:
Sêth went and laid himself in it, Nephthys went and laid herself in it,
Thout went and laid himself in it, Isis went and laid herself in it. All
were short; none, laid in the chest, but left a space above his or her
head.

Then Osiris took the crown off his head and laid himself in the chest.
His form filled it in its length and its breadth. Isis and Nephthys and
Thout stood above where he lay, looking down upon Osiris, so resplendent
of face, so perfect of limb, and congratulating him upon coming into
possession of die splendid chest that Sêth had made. Sêth was not beside
the chest then. He shouted, and his attendants to the number of
seventy-two came into the banquetting hall. They placed the heavy cover
upon the chest; they hammered nails into it; they soldered it all over
with melted lead. Nor could Isis, nor Thout, nor Nephthys break through
the circle that Sêth's attendants made around the chest. And they,
having nailed the cover down, and having soldered it, took up the sealed
chest, and, with Sêth going before them, they ran with it out of the
hall.

Isis and Nephthys and Thout ran after those who bore the chest. But the
night was dark, and these three children of Qêb and Nut were separated,
one from the other, and from Sêth and his crew. And these came to where
the river was, and they flung the sealed chest into the

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

river. Isis, and Thout, and Nephthys, following the tracks that Sêth and
his crew had made, came to the river-bank when it was daylight, but by
that time the current of the river had. brought the chest out into the
sea.

Isis followed along the bank of the river, lamenting for Osiris. She
came to the sea, and she crossed over it, but she did not know where to
go to seek for the body of Osiris. She wandered through the world, and
where she went bands of children went with her, and they helped her in
her search.

The chest that held the body of Osiris had drifted in the sea. A flood
had cast it upon the land. It had lain in a thicket of young trees. A
tree, growing, had lifted it up. The branches of the tree wrapped
themselves around it; the bark of the tree spread itself around it; at
last the tree grew there, covering the chest with its bark.

The land in which this happened was Byblos. The king and queen of the
city, Melquart and Astarte, heard of the wonderful tree, the branches
and bark of which gave forth a fragrance. The king had the tree cut
down; its branches were trimmed off, and the tree was set up as a column
in the king's house. And then Isis, coming to Byblos, was told of the
wonderful tree that grew by the sea. She was told of it by a band of
children who came to her. She came to the place: she found that the tree
had been cut down and that its trunk was now set up as a column in the
king's house.

She knew from what she heard about the wonderful fragrance that was in
the trunk and branches of the tree that the chest she was seeking was
within it. She stayed beside where the tree had been. Many who came to
that place saw the queenly figure that, day and night, stood near where
the wonderful tree had been. But none who came near was spoken to by
her. Then the queen, having heard about the stranger who stood there,
came to her. When she came near, Isis put her hand upon her head, and
thereupon a fragrance went from Isis and filled the body of the queen.

The queen would have this majestical stranger go with her to her house.
Isis went. She nursed the queen's child in the hall in which stood the
column that had closed in it the chest which she sought.

She nourished the queen's child by placing her finger in its mouth. At
night she would strip wood from the column that had grown as a

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

tree, and throw the wood upon the fire. And in this fire she would lay
the queen's child. The fire did not injure it at all; it burned softly
around the child. Then Isis, in the form of a swallow, would fly around
the column, lamenting.

One night the queen came into the hall where her child was being nursed.
She saw no nurse there; she saw her child lying in the fire. She
snatched the child up, crying out. Then Isis spoke to the queen from the
column on which, in the form of a swallow, she perched. She told the
queen that the child would have gained immortality had it been suffered
to lie for a night and another night longer within the fire made from
the wood of the column. Now it would be long-lived, but not immortal.
And she revealed her own divinity to the queen, and claimed the column
that had been made from the wonderful tree.

The king had the column taken down; it was split open, and the chest
which Isis had sought for so long and with so many lamentations was
within it. Isis wrapped the chest in linen, and it was carried for her
out of the king's house. And then a ship was given to her, and on that
ship, Isis, never stirring from beside the chest, sailed back to Egypt.

And coming into Egypt she opened the chest, and took the body of her
lord and husband out of it. She breathed into his mouth, and, with the
motion of her wings (for Isis, being divine, could assume wings), she
brought life back to Osiris. And there, away from men and from all the
children of Qêb and Nut, Osiris and Isis lived together.

But one night Sêth, as he was hunting gazelles by moonlight, came upon
Osiris and Isis sleeping. Fiercely he fell upon his brother; he tore his
body into fourteen pieces. Then, taking the pieces that were the body of
Osiris, he scattered them over the land.

Death had come into the land from the time Osiris had been closed in the
chest through the cunning of Sêth; war was in the land; men always had
arms in their hands. No longer did music sound, no longer did men and
women talk sweetly and out of the depths of their feelings. Less and
less did grain, and fruit-trees, and the vine flourish. The green places
everywhere were giving way to the desert. Sêth was triumphant; Thout and
Nephthys cowered before him.

And all the beauty and all the abundance that had come from Rê would be
destroyed if the pieces that had been the body of Osiris were

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

not brought together once more. So Isis sought for them, and Nephthys,
her sister, helped her in her seeking. Isis, in a boat that was made of
reeds, floated over the marshes, seeking for the pieces. One, and then
another, and then another was found. At last she had all the pieces of
his torn body. She laid them together on a floating island, and reformed
them. And as the body of Osiris was formed once more, the wars that men
were waging died down; peace came; grain, and the vine, and the
fruit-trees grew once more.

And a voice came to Isis and told her that Osiris lived again, but that
he lived in the Underworld where he was now the Judge of the Dead, and
that through the justice that he meted out, men and women had life
immortal. And a child of Osiris was born to Isis: Horus he was named.
Nephthys and the wise Thout guarded him on the floating island where he
was born. Horus grew up, and he strove against the evil power of Sêth.
In battle he overcame him, and in bonds he brought the evil Sêth, the
destroyer of his father, before Isis, his mother. Isis would not have
Sêth slain: still he lives, but now he is of the lesser Gods, and his
power for evil is not so great as it was in the time before Horus grew
to be the avenger of his father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rê, His Going-Down and Uprising](omw22)
