[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw23)  [Next](omw25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GILGAMISH

Into the Temple where his mother dwelt Gilgamish went, and when she saw
by the look upon his face that he was bent upon going on some strange
journey or upon doing some terrifying deed, his mother cried out to
Shamash, the Sun God, asking him why he had given her son a heart that
could never keep still. And Gilgamish, hearing her cry, said to her,
"Peace, O woman! I am Gilgamish, and it must be that I shall see
everything, learn everything, understand everything." Then his mother
said to him, "These longings are yours, O Gilgamish, because not all of
you is mortal. Two-thirds of your flesh is as the flesh of the Gods and
only one-third is as the flesh of men. And because of the

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[paragraph continues\] God's flesh that is on you, you must be always
daring, always rest. less. But yet, O my son, you have not immortal
life. You must die because a part of you is man. Yea, Gilgamish, even
you must die, and go down into the House of Dust."

And Gilgamish, hearing his mother say this, groaned loudly, terribly;
the tears flowed down his cheeks; no word that was said to him might
content him. He groaned, he wept, even although in the courts of the
Temple he heard the women sing:

Who is splendid among men,  
Who is glorious among heroes?

\[paragraph continues\] And answer back, one to the other:

Gilgamish is splendid among men,  
Gilgamish is glorious among heroes.

\[paragraph continues\] In a while he rose up and he said, "O Ninsunna,
O my mother, what is it to die?"

Then Ninsunna, his mother, made answer, and said, "It is to go into the
abode out of which none ever returns: it is to go into the dark abyss of
the dread Goddess, Irkalla. They who dwell there are without light; the
beings that are there eat of the dust and feed on the mud." So his
mother said, and Gilgamish, the great king, groaned aloud, and the tears
flowed down his face.

 

Gilgamish dwelt in Erech, and was king over the people there. The works
that he did in Erech were mighty, surpassing the works of men. He built
walls round the city that were an hundred cubits in thickness and in
height over a hundred cubits. He built towers that were higher than any
that men had builded before. He built great ships that went upon the
great sea. All these things he did because Gilgamish had a restless
heart. But the people of Erech groaned because of the labours he laid
upon them; they groaned and sent up prayers to the Gods.

The Gods harkened to the prayers of the people of Erech; they said in
the Council of the Gods, "Behold, Gilgamish lays upon the people labours
that crush them. The life goes out of them, and they no longer can offer
sacrifice to the Gods. He lays these labours upon them because he alone
is mighty in the world. But if we make one who

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

is mightier than he, Gilgamish will be abashed when he sees that one,
and no longer will he think that he is lord of all; then will he not
engage in labours that give his people no rest."

The Gods called upon the Goddess Aruru. And Aruru considered in her
heart how she would make one who was mightier than Gilgamish. Thereafter
she washed her hands and she took clay and mixed her spittle into it.
And Aruru made a being, a living male creature that was in the likeness
of the God Anu. His body was covered all over with hair so that he
appeared to be clothed in leaves. The Gods named him Enkidu, and they
gave him the wild places of the earth for his portion.

And Enkidu, mighty in stature, invincible in strength, lived in these
wild places. Gilgamish passed through the land he dwelt in, but saw him
not. Gilgamish passed through the land to make war upon Khumbaba who
dwelt in the country where the forests of cedars are. Those who went
with him were struck with awe when they saw the cedars in their height
and in their closeness of growth together; they were worn out because of
their journey and the fear that possessed them, and they prayed to the
Gods to deliver them from under the hand of a king who had a heart that
was so restless. They came upon Khumbaba whose voice was like the roar
of a storm, whose breath was like a gale of wind. They fought the armies
of Khumbaba, these soldiers of Gilgamish, and Gilgamish himself fought
Khumbaba and with his own hand slew him. And then Gilgamish and his army
passed through the country where Enkidu maintained himself, but they saw
not Enkidu. And Enkidu, mighty in stature, invincible in strength, drank
the water that the wild cattle drank and ate the herbs that the gazelles
lived on; he was a friend to the wild beasts and he knew not the faces
of men.

Now when Gilgamish returned to Erech, his city, after having overthrown
Khumbaba, he heard the women in his palace sing:

Who is splendid among men,  
Who is glorious among heroes?

\[paragraph continues\] And he heard the women answer back, one to the
other:

Gilgamish is splendid among men,  
Gilgamish is glorious among heroes.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But he remembered what had been told him about
the House of Dust and the Abyss of the Goddess Irkala; he groaned, and
the tears coursed down his face.

Below the forest of cedars dwelt a hunter, a young man who dug pits and
laid nets for the wild beasts that were upon the mountains. One day,
expecting to find many wild beasts in his pits and his nets, he went to
them, but behold! the pits he had digged were filled up and the nets he
had laid were torn; also the prey had been taken out of the nets and the
pits. Then the young man, the hunter, went up the mountain, and coming
nigh a pit he had made he watched, for he saw something at the pit. He
saw the shoulders and the head of a man. And he watched the man come out
of the pit, and he had upon his shoulders a gazelle that had fallen into
it. And behold! the man went to where a company of gazelles stood
waiting, and they were not fearful of the man. He laid down the gazelle
he carried, and the gazelle joined the company of gazelles. Then the man
went back and filled up the pit with earth, and went with great strides
towards the forest. The young man, the hunter, saw that he was all naked
and covered with hair; and that the hair on his head was long and like a
woman's. The hunter was affrighted, and he went from the place. He came
upon others of the pits he had digged, and they were all filled up;
there was no creature near any of them, nor was there one under any of
the nets he had laid.

Then was the hunter made anxious. He said within himself, "What shall
become of me? I till no land, and I know of no way of living save by my
nets and my pits! But if the creatures that have been snared are taken
out of my pits and from under my nets, what shall I do to find food for
myself and my parents?" He wept as he spoke thus to himself, and,
carrying no beast, he went back to the hut where his father was.

His father heard what the young man said and considered it. "This is one
who is friendly to the beasts and knows not the faces of men," he said.
"What he has done he will do again and yet again, and there will be no
prey left for us in the pits or under the nets. Therefore, we must have
him led away from this place. Often have you brought beasts to the
Temple in Erech to be sacrificed there to Anu and Ishtar and the rest of
the Gods. Go to that city and into the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

place of the mighty Gilgamish, and have those in the Temple give you a
woman of the Temple to go with you. And when the one who has not seen
the faces of men sees the face of the woman of the Temple, and sees her
take off her veil, he will be amazed; he will go to the woman of the
Temple, and she will speak with him and will draw him from this place."

The young man, the hunter, did as his father instructed him: he went
into Erech, the city that Gilgamish ruled over, and he went within the
Temple. He spoke to Ninsunna, the mother of Gilgamish. And having heard
what he had to tell, the mother of Gilgamish brought to him a woman of
the Temple; she put the woman's hand in the hunter's hand, and the young
man brought the woman out of that place and into the mountainous region
where he had looked upon Enkidu.

 

It was then that Ishtar the Goddess stood before Gilgamish in her
terrible beauty. She said unto him, "Thou, O Gilgamish, shalt be my man;
I shall be thy woman. Thou shalt come into my house, and those who sit
upon the thrones shall kiss thy feet. Gifts from the mountain and the
lowland shall be laid before thee. I shall make to be harnessed for thee
a chariot of lapis-lazuli and gold; the wheels of it shall be gold and
the horns upon it shall be precious stones. Thou shalt harness to it
mighty horses; they shall prance proudly; there shall be no horses like
unto the horses that shall be under thy yoke. All these things shall be
for thee when, with perfume of cedar upon thee, thou shalt come into my
house."

Gilgamish made answer to the Goddess; in wrath he spoke to Ishtar, the
Beautiful One, the Terrible One, answering her: "Thy lovers have
perished. Thy love is like to a door that letteth in the storm. Thy love
is like a fortress that falls upon and crushes the warriors within it.
The lover of thy youth, Tammuz, even he, was destroyed; destroyed are
all the men whom thou hadst to do with. The creatures who come under
thine influence rejoice, but they rejoice for a while only: the wing of
the bird is broken through thee; the lion is destroyed; the horse is
driven to death. Thou sayst thou lovest me, Ishtar. Loved by thee I
should fare as they have fared."

When Ishtar heard the words that Gilgamish spoke she was filled With
wrath. She left the place where he was. She meditated evil against

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

him. In a while she made a fire-breathing bull and sent it down into
Erech to destroy Gilgamish and Gilgamish's people.

The young man, the hunter, went back into the mountain regions where he
had digged pits before and spread his nets. He brought the woman of the
Temple with him. He made her to sit nigh the place where the wild beasts
came to drink; he bade her draw to her the wild man if he should come to
drink with the beasts.

Then the hunter went away. The Temple woman sat by the pool, plaiting
the tresses of her hair. One by one the beasts came to drink, but
finding there the scent of a human creature they went away.

At last Enkidu, the wild man, came down to the pool. He did not have the
power of scent that the beasts had. He went into the drinking-place and
he filled his palms with water, and he raised them up to his mouth, and
he drank. The Temple woman saw him there in his great stature, with the
hair on his head long and flowing as if it were a woman's, and the hair
on his skin making him look as if he were dressed in leaves. She called
out; she spoke, and Enkidu heard her voice.

He saw her; she held her arms out to him; she took off her veil. Then
Enkidu was astonished. He went towards her, and she took his hand, and
she led him away. He came under the spell of the Temple woman's beauty;
he would not leave her, but stayed where she stayed at the edge of the
forest. On the sixth day he rose up and went away from where she stayed.
His heart had become hungry to look upon the wild beasts whose friend he
had been. He went towards where the companies of gazelles were. The
gazelles fled from him. He went to where the wild cattle grazed, and the
wild cattle fled as soon as he came near to them. He went to where the
panthers were, and the panthers bounded away when he came near to them.
Then Enkidu was sore in his heart. He cried out, "Why do my friends, the
beasts, forsake me?" He did not know that the beasts had wind of another
human creature in the wind that was from him. Wherever he went the
beasts fled from him. Then Enkidu was made ashamed; his knees gave way
under him; he swooned away from shame.

When he rose up again he went back to where the Temple woman stayed, and
the beasts still fled before him. The Temple woman waited

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

for him; she smiled upon him; she held out her arms to him, and spoke
flattering words to him. He stayed with her and she spoke to him of
Erech, and of the Temple, and of Gilgamish the Mighty. At last she led
him with her to Erech, Gilgamish's city.

It was then that Gilgamish had his struggle with the fire-breathing bull
that Ishtar, in her anger, had sent against him and his people.
Multitudes of the inhabitants of the city had been destroyed by the
bull. Gilgamish--even he--was not able to prevail against the Bull of
Heaven. He lodged an arrow in the neck of the bull. Still it came on
against him, and Gilgamish had to flee from before it.

And the bull came upon the way along which Enkidu was coming with the
woman of the Temple. He laid his hands against the front of the bull,
and held it. Then Gilgamish came and delivered mighty blows between its
horns and its neck, and when the bull would have trampled upon him,
Enkidu, with his mighty strength, pulled it backwards. Gilgamish with
Enkidu attacked the bull again. Long they fought against the fury of the
fire-breathing bull, but at length the two of them slew Ishtar's mighty
creature.

The Goddess appeared upon the battlements and cursed them for having
destroyed the Bull of Heaven. And Enkidu, fearless before Gods and
before men, tore the flesh from the side of the bull and threw it at the
feet of Ishtar. The Goddess and all the women of the Temple made
lamentations over the portion of the bull that had been flung up to
them.

But Gilgamish called together the people of the city. He showed them the
creature that had been slain. They looked, and they marvelled at the
size of the horns, for they were horns that could hold six measures of
oil. Gilgamish took the horns of the Bull of Heaven to the Temple of the
God Lugalbanda, and he hung them before the seat of the God. He made
friends with Enkidu. And he and Enkidu went down to the river Euphrates,
and there they washed, and they came back and they stood in the
market-place. All men marvelled at the stature and power of these two,
Gilgamish and Enkidu. Gilgamish took Enkidu to his palace; he gave him
the raiment of a king to put on; he gave him a chair, and he had him sit
on his left side; he gave him food fit for the Gods to eat, and wine fit
for a king to drink. These two mighty men became friends, and they loved
each other exceedingly.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

Together Gilgamish and Enkidu hunted; together they made war; the lion
and the panther of the desert fell to their bows and spears. And at last
the people of Erech had rest from their labours, for no longer did
Gilgamish make them weary raising great buildings, and they had peace,
for no longer did he bring them to make war upon the people of far
lands.

A time came when Enkidu longed for the life of the forest. Thither he
went. And Gilgamish, when he knew that his friend has gone from Erech,
put on coarse attire; he arrayed himself in the skin of a lion, and he
pursued Enkidu. And Enkidu was glad because of this, for he knew that
his friend, the noble Gilgamish, would not forsake him. Together they
lived in the forest; they hunted together and they became more and more
dear to each other.

Later Enkidu had a dream that terrified him. He dreamt that there were
thunderings in the heavens and quakings in the earth. He dreamt that a
being came before him and gripped him in talons that were the talons of
an eagle, and carried him down into a dread abyss. There Enkidu saw
creatures that had been kings when they were upon the earth; he saw
shadowy beings offering sacrifices to the Gods. He saw in the House of
Dust priests and magicians and prophets dwelling. He saw there
Bêlit-sêri who writes down the deeds done upon the earth.

Enkidu was terrified; he knew not the meaning of the dream that had come
to him. To Ninsunna he went, and he told her his dream. She wept when
she heard him tell it. But she would not tell him the meaning that it
had.

Thereafter Enkidu lay down on the well-decked bed that Gilgamish, his
friend, had given him. He groaned upon his bed. Gilgamish came to
comfort him, but Enkidu, although he had joy of Gilgamish's coming,
could not banish from his heart the thing that had been shown him in his
dream. For ten days he lay upon his bed with Gilgamish beside him. In
two days more his sickness became more grievous. Then Enkidu lay silent,
and Ninsunna said to her son, "Now is Enkidu dead."

 

Long gazed Gilgamish upon Enkidu, his friend in the palace, his
companion in the hunt upon the mountains and in the forest, his brave
ally in his fight against the Bull of Heaven. Long gazed Gilgamish upon
his friend lying there. Then Gilgamish said:

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

"What kind of sleep is this that is upon thee?  
"Thou starest out blankly and hearest me not.  
"Shall this sleep be upon Gilgamish also? Shall I lie down and be as
Enkidu?  
"Sorrow hath entered into my soul.  
"Because of the fear of death that hath come upon me my heart is
restless; I shall go; I shall wander through the lands."

 

Then Gilgamish touched the breast of his friend, and he found that the
heart in his breast was still. Tenderly, as though leaving it over a
bride, Gilgamish laid the covering over Enkidu. He turned away; he
roared in his grief as a lion or as a lioness robbed of her young. And
when his roarings had ceased, his mother said to him, "What dost thou
desire, my son, and what is it that will quiet the grief and the
restless. ness that are in thine heart?"

Gilgamish said to her, "My desire is to escape death which hath taken
hold of Enkidu, my friend."

His mother said, "Only one hath escaped death; the one is Uta-Napishtim
the Remote, thine ancestor."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Uta-Napishtim and of the Deluge that Destroyed All
that was on the Earth](omw25)
