[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw30)  [Next](omw32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PROMETHEUS

The Gods upon Olympos more than once made a race of men. The first was
the Golden Race. Very close to the Gods was the Golden Race; the men of
that race lived justly, although there were no laws to compel them. In
the time of the Golden Race the Earth knew only one season; that season
was everlasting spring. The men and women of the Golden Race lived
through a span of life that was far beyond that of the men and women of
our day, and when they died it was though sleep had become everlasting
with them. They had all good things, and they had them without labour,
for the Earth without any forcing bestowed fruits and crops upon them.
They had peace all through their lives, and after they had passed away
their spirits remained above the Earth, inspiring the men of the race
who came after them to do great and gracious things and to act justly
and kindly to one another.

After the Golden Race had passed away, the Gods made for the Earth a
second race--the Silver Race. Less noble in spirit and in body was the
Silver Race, and the seasons that visited them were less gracious. In
the time of the Silver Race the Gods made the seasons--summer and
spring, autumn and winter. The men of the Silver Race knew parching
heat; they knew the bitter winds of winter, and snow, and rain, and
hail. It was the men of the Silver Race who first built houses for
shelter. They lived through a span of life that was longer than our
span, but it was not long enough to give them wisdom. Children were
brought up at their mothers' sides for a hundred years, playing at
childish things. And when they came to years beyond a hundred they
quarrelled with one another, and wronged one another; moreover, they did
not know enough to give reverence to the immortal Gods. Then, by the
will of Zeus, the Silver Race passed away as the Golden Race had

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

passed away. Their spirits stay in the Underworld, and they are called
by men the blessed spirits of the Underworld.

And then there was made the Third Race--the Race of Bronze. They were a
race great of stature, terrible and strong. Their armour was of bronze,
their swords were of bronze, their implements were of bronze, and of
bronze, too, they made their houses. No great span of life was theirs,
for with the weapons that they took in their terrible hands they slew
one another. And so they passed away; they went down under the Earth and
they left no name that men might know them by.

Then the Gods created a fourth race our own--a Race of Iron. We have not
the justice that was amongst the men of the Golden Race; we have not the
simpleness that was amongst the men of the Silver Race; we have not the
stature nor the great strength that the men of the Bronze Race
possessed. We are of iron that we may endure. It is our doom that we
must never cease from labour and that we must very quickly grow old.

But miserable as we are to-day, there was a time when the lot of men was
more miserable. With poor implements they had to labour on hard ground.
There was less justice and kindliness in those days than there is now.

Once it came into the mind of Zeus to destroy this fourth race and to
leave the Earth to the nymphs and the satyrs. He would destroy it by a
great flood. But Prometheus, the Titan who had given aid to
Zeus--Prometheus who was named the Forethinker--would not consent to the
race of men being destroyed utterly, and he considered a way of saving
some of them. To a man and a woman, Deukalion and Pyrrha, just and
gentle people, he brought word of the plan of Zeus, and he showed them
how to make a ship that would bear them through what was about to be
sent upon the Earth.

Then Zeus shut up in their caves all the winds except the wind that
brings rain and clouds. He bade this wind, the South Wind, sweep over
the Earth, flooding it with rain. He called upon Poseidon and bade him
let the sea pour in on the land. And Poseidon commanded the rivers to
put forth all their strength, and sweep dykes away, and overflow their
banks.

The clouds and the sea and the rivers poured upon the Earth. The flood
rose higher and higher, and in places where pretty lambs had

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

gambolled the ugly sea-calves now played; men in their boats drew fishes
out of the tops of elm-trees, and the water-nymphs were amazed to come
on men's cities under the waves.

Soon even the men and women who had boats were overwhelmed by the rise
of the water--all perished then except Deukalion and Pyrrha, his wife;
them the waves had not overwhelmed--they were in a ship that Prometheus
had shown them how to build. The flood went down at last, and Deukalion
and Pyrrha climbed up to a high and a dry ground. Zeus saw that two of
the race of men had been left alive. But he saw that these two were just
and kindly and had a right reverence for the Gods. He spared them, and
he saw their children again peopling the Earth.

Prometheus, who had saved them, looked upon the men and women of the
Earth with compassion. Their labour was hard, and they wrought, much to
gain little. They were chilled at night in their houses, and the winds
that blew in the daytime made the old men and women bend double like a
wheel. Prometheus thought to himself that if men and women had the
element that only the Gods knew of--the element of fire--they could make
for themselves implements for labour, and they could build houses that
would keep out the chilling winds, and they could warm themselves at the
blaze.

But the Gods had not willed that men should have fire, and to go against
the will of the Gods would be impious. Prometheus went against the will
of the Gods. He stole fire from the altar of Zeus, and he hid it in a
hollow fennel stalk, and he brought it to men.

Men, possessing fire, were then able to hammer iron into tools; they
were able to cut down forests with axes, and sow grain where the forests
had been. They were able to make houses that the storms could not
overthrow, and they were able to warm themselves at the hearth-fires.
They had rest from their labour at times. They built cities; they became
beings who no longer had their heads and backs bent, but were able to
raise their faces even to the Gods.

Zeus spared the men who had now the sacred element of fire. But
Prometheus he did not spare. He knew that Prometheus had stolen the fire
even from his own altar. And he thought on how he might punish the great
Titan for his impiety.

He brought up from the Underworld, from Tartaros, the Giants

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kottos, Briareos, and Gyes. He commanded them to
lay hands on Prometheus and to fasten him with fetters to the highest,
blackest crag upon Caucasus. And Kottos, Briareos, and Gyes seized upon
the Titan, and carried him to Caucasus, and fettered him with fetters of
bronze to the highest, blackest crag--with fetters of bronze that may
not be broken. They left the Titan stretched there, fettered, under the
sky, with the cold winds blowing upon him and with the sun streaming
down upon him. And, that his punishment might exceed all other
punishments, Zeus sent a vulture to prey upon him--a vulture that tears
at his liver each day.

And yet Prometheus does not cry out that he has repented of what he has
done for man; although the winds blow upon him, and the sun streams upon
him, and the vulture tears at his liver, Prometheus will not cry out his
repentance to Heaven. And Zeus may not utterly destroy him. For
Prometheus the Forethinker knows a secret that Zeus would fain have him
disclose. He knows that, as Zeus overthrew his father and made himself
the ruler in his stead, so, too, another will overthrow Zeus. One day
Zeus will have to have the fetters broken from around the limbs of his
victim, and will have to bring from the rock and the vulture, and even
into the Council of the Olympians, the unyielding Titan, Prometheus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pandora](omw32)
