[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw42)  [Next](omw44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### POMONA AND VERTUMNUS

Once, when the kings of the Silvian House reigned over the Latin people,
there lived a nymph whose name was Pomona. She never went near the
springs, or lakes, or rivers, nor near the wild woods; she cared only
for places where grew trees that were laden with fruits. She was no
huntress; the only implement that she ever held in her hands was a
pruning-hook or a spade.

She would loosen the earth round the roots of some of her trees; she
would cut away growth that was too luxurious; sometimes she would make a
cut in a tree and would graft into it a twig from another tree, and she
would rejoice to see one tree bearing two kinds of fruit. Sometimes she
would train a vine to grow along an elm-tree. But all day she worked
where fruits grew, leading water to flow by the roots, or destroying
insects that came upon the leaves of her trees.

In the spring-time she would see Flora, her sister-nymph, in the fields,
giving color and fragrance to the flowers, giving sweetness to the honey
in the combs, giving grace to the boys and girls who came about her. To
Pomona Flora would give all that she had to give. But Pomona would never
go to her or call Flora to come to her amongst her trees. And sometimes
she would see Venus, the great lady who

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

had so many worshippers, but she would not leave her trees to go to
where Venus had her shrine.

Pomona grew up supple and robust; she grew sound and handsome as an
apple upon one of her trees. She gave herself no adornments; all she
ever wore was a brown dress; all she ever put upon her head was a wreath
of leaves to keep the sun from burning her face.

Silvanus and Picus were the first of the demi-gods to see that Pomona
was becoming more and more good-looking as the seasons went on. She was
shy, they knew; but each thought what a fine sweetheart she would make,
if he could get her to walk or talk with him. And each knew that she had
lots to give a fine garden and fruits of every kind--apples and pears,
grapes and cherries. Silvanus was the first to go see her: he went in
his hunter's dress, with a spear in his hand, and the game he had just
killed in a bag at his side. Pomona would not come near him. Then he
chased her so that she had to slip from him behind tree after tree. She
wearied him out and he went away. But he came to her at another season:
this time he did not come from the hunting; he came from lands that he
had cleared and that he had sheep grazing on. He came to her as a
shepherd, and he sought to woo her mildly, but she would neither speak
to him nor let him come near where she was.

Picus came the very day that Silvanus came as a shepherd--Picus the son
of old Saturnus who was god of the grain-sown field. Picus was handsome;
Picus wore a scarlet cloak; Picus could talk well to any woman. But when
he came near her Pomona dashed water in his face from her stream. Then
Picus saw Silvanus and thinking that he was Pomona's favoured suitor,
began to abuse him. Silvanus caught hold of him, and beat him, and tore
his scarlet cloak from his shoulders. Pomona fled from both of them, and
after that she would let none of the male divinities come near where she
was. She built a wall round where her trees grew; she would not go
outside the gate, and she was very careful to let no one who might turn
out to be a lover come within it.

Young Vertumnus saw her through the gate; he saw Pomona and he loved her
more ardently than either Silvanus or Picus had loved her--Silvanus who
was much older than he looked, and Picus who was always in love with
some girl. He came to her gate, but she would

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

not let him come in. Back he came in the garb of a reaper, carrying a
basket of barley-ears as an offering to her. She bade him go away.
Another time he came as a mower, with grass binding his brow. She left
him outside the gate, nor would she speak to him at all. And then he
came as a ploughman, big and burly, holding in his hand a goad which
Pomona might think that he had just used to drive the oxen in the
furrows. She left him before the gate, and although he shook it with his
hands, he could not force it open. And then, that she might think of him
as one who had an interest in trees and fruit and be kind to him on that
account, he came bearing a ladder upon his shoulder as if he were ready
to mount to where the apples were growing and gather them. But Pomona
knew him for one of the male divinities, albeit for one of the youngest
of them, and she would not let him come to where she tended her trees.

One day Pomona saw outside her gate a bent and weary-looking old woman.
She had on a head-dress that fell across her eyes, and she leaned upon a
stick. Pomona, the kindliest of the nymphs, asked her to sit in the
shade of one of her trees and rest herself and eat some of her fruit.
The old woman came within. "How beautifully your garden is kept!" she
said. "I have never been where trees grew so well, or where the fruits
looked so bright and so refreshing. Do you live here all alone, my
dear?" She ate the fruit that was given her and she looked at Pomona as
she stood there in her brown dress and with the leaves about her head.
"I have heard of you, my dear," she said. "Everything I heard about you
made me think you were beautiful, but you are more beautiful than I
thought." And saying this she kissed Pomona.

And as she went from tree to tree the old woman kept calling to her.
Pomona came back and stood under an elm-tree near where the old woman
sat. The elm-tree supported vines which were covered with bunches of
grapes. "Look," said the old woman. "If that elm-tree stood unmated to
the vine it would have no value except for its timber. And the vine that
grows there! If there was no elm-tree for it to grow upon it would
straggle along the ground, flat and unflourishing! So you see what good
comes of mating two beings--the vine and the elm-tree. But you, my dear,
refuse to be mated, refuse to be wedded, refuse even to know one who
might be a sweetheart for

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

you! Listen! Consent to having an old woman like me make a match for
you!"

Pomona was so surprised to have someone talk to her in this strain that
she sank down on the grass beside the old woman. "Be wise and choose
Vertumnus! I know the lad well--I know him as well as I know myself! He
is a lad who does not wander idly through the world. He has wide spaces
to live in, and he dwells near at hand! He is not like the others who
came to woo you--Picus, for instance, who went and fell in love with
Canens, and who went on until he had an enchantress fall in love with
him, and who, because he would not respond to her, has since been turned
into a woodpecker. I'll say nothing about Silvanus! He has been in love
with nearly all of the nymphs! Vertumnus is not like either of these
divinities. You will be his first love, dear Pomona, and his last. And
besides, he is interested in all that you are interested in--he deals in
fruits, too! He was made to be yours, and you were made to be his, and I
am here to tell you that!"

Even as these words were said the head-dress fell off the head of the
one who spoke to Pomona. Bright and ardent were the eyes that she saw
then. Pomona stood up and would have run away; but hands held her hands,
gently, firmly. "You are Vertumnus," she said. She saw a face before
her--a youth's face; the stick that the pretended old woman had leaned
on fell away; the cloak fell off the figure. Pomona saw a youth who was
tall and fine as one of her own trees. And until the evening star came
they stayed amongst the trees, and when they parted Pomona had promised
to wed her Vertumnus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cupid and Psyche. Part I](omw44)
