[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw40)  [Next](omw42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMA THE LAW-GIVER

One who was born on the day on which the building of the city was begun
was chosen to be king after Romulus. Numa was his name. At the time when
the Romans and the Sabines took him to be king over them Numa had no
mortal wife--a Goddess was his companion. By a spring of clear water she
would meet him and converse with him, instructing him in all affairs
that lay between mortals and the immortal Gods. Egeria she was named.

And by a clear spring of water she would meet him and converse with him
after he had become king in Rome. Now at that time a plague ravaged all
Italy; the Roman people were made despondent by all the deaths they saw
around them; their city, so lately built, would not last, they thought,
for the folk in it would dwindle away through this plague. Then a sign
was given to Numa. A brazen shield fell from Heaven. It was revealed to
the king that as long as this shield was amongst them the fortunes of
the Roman people would be prosperous. He had eleven other shields made,
each in the likeness of the one that had fallen from Heaven: when the
twelve shields were left together no one, not Numa himself, could tell
one from the other. No single enemy, then, could slip in and take away
the shield on which the fortunes of Rome depended. And the Romans,
knowing that amongst them was a token of prosperity and that that token
was secure, ceased to be despondent. Soon the plague left the land.

"Thou shalt not make libation of wine made from an unpruned vine. Thou
shalt not make sacrifice without grain." These were two of the
commandments that Numa, instructed by Egeria, gave to the people. And by
these commandments he showed the Romans that they were to be
cultivators, subduing the earth, and growing grain and pruning their
vines. He gave the people arts and crafts; he formed companies of
musicians, goldsmiths, metal-workers, carpenters, dyers, shoemakers,

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

and potters; he appointed courts and councils for these companies, and
he showed to each of them the particular religious ceremony it was to
observe.

Then he built temples. First of all he built a temple for the Goddess of
the sacred fire--Vesta she was named. Her temple was circular, and the
everlasting fire within it was tended by virgins; as long as they in
purity tended Vesta's fire the fortunes of Rome might not sink down. And
after he had built the Temple of Vesta he built the Temple of Ianus. As
the God Ianus has two faces so this temple has two gates: they stand
open in time of war and are closed in time of peace. Very seldom in
later times were the gates of the Temple of Ianus shut, but in Numa's
time the gates were never seen open--no, not for a single day: for the
space of over two score years the gates were unopened. Wars were not
waged in those days. And not only were the people of Rome made quiet by
Numa's influence, but the people of the neighbouring states and cities
were made quiet too; they had peace; their lives were employed in the
tilling of the soil, in the rearing of their children, and in the
worship of the Gods. Of these days it was said:

Over the iron shields the spiders hang their webs.

\[paragraph continues\] And:

Rust eats the pointed spear and two-edged sword.  
No more is heard the trumpet's brazen roar;  
Sweet sleep is banished from our eyes no more.

Numa then arranged the months of the year. He put January, which is the
month of the God of Peace, Ianus, first; he put March, which is the
month of the War God, third; between, he put February, which is the
month of purification: in February the Romans make offerings to their
dead, and the festival of Lupercalia, a festival of purification, is
held in February.

Iuppiter, the great God of the sky and of thunder, was brought down to
earth by Numa. "If you would bespell the lighting and thunder so that
they will do no harm, you must bespell them with heads," Iuppiter said,
repeating an ancient doom. "With heads of onions," Numa answered. "Of
men," Iuppiter said. "Hair of men's heads," Numa said. "With
living------" "With living pilchards," said Numa.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Iuppiter, without giving him an answer, withdrew
from the earth. But to this day the Romans, to charm away the thunder
and lightning of Iuppiter, sacrifice, not the heads of men, but onions,
and the hair of men's heads, and living pilchards.

And so Numa made even the Gods milder in their dealings with men. Egeria
it was who instructed him how to bring Iuppiter, the God of the sky and
of thunder and lightning, down to earth so that he might be spoken to.
Two very lowly Gods had to be captured by him first. Now there were two
demi-gods who loved to play tricks on human beings, but who were very
simple themselves and easily tricked: Picus and Faunus they were named;
they frequented shady places and came beside clear springs. Into the
spring that is on the mountain named Aventine, Numa poured a mixture of
honey and wine. Picus and Faunus came to that spring: they bent to drink
of the water there and they tasted of the wine and honey that was in the
spring. They were delighted with what they tasted, and they lay by the
water and drank, and played with each other and drank again. They drank
till they became drunken and heavy; they fell into a sleep. Then Numa
came upon them and took hold of them. The demi-gods changed themselves
into all manner of shapes: Numa thought he had in his grasp a weasel and
a bird, a shrub and a bunch of leaves. Still he held to them. He thought
he had in his grasp a fish and a wolf-cub, a toad and a lizard. Still he
held to them. At last Picus and Faunus came back to their own shapes and
changed no more. Then Numa forced them to tell what they, the lowliest
of the Gods, knew--how to bring Iuppiter down to the earth. They told
him, and he let the odd-looking demi-gods run back into the shades. And
thereafter he was able to speak with Iuppiter.

Once Numa invited the elders of the Romans to a feast in his house. They
came; they found a house that was bare and a table and benches that were
of the plainest kind. They knew that their king lived in this simple way
and they honoured him for it. They sat at the table: there were wooden
dishes on it, and the food that was set before them was bread and fruit
and milk and wine. They ate with the king. Then, as they sat there, they
came to know that another had come amongst them. They saw no one, but a
great lustre came upon all that was in the room. The wooden dishes
became changed into vessels of gold

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

and silver; the simple food that they were eating took on the richest
and most appetizing flavours. Those who were with Numa knew that Egeria
had come amongst them.

They listened to a wondrous conversation between their king and the
Goddess who was wont to instruct him. Not all of what they heard was
clear to them. But they knew that Numa was soon to pass from amongst
them.

And so it came to be. Numa died soon after that feast had been held. His
body, by his own command, was not burned. Two coffins of stone were made
ready: in one the King was laid; in the other were put the books he had
written and the books he had consulted. The people knew that it was
right to put these away; they knew that Numa, through his labours for
them, through the training he had given them, had made all that was
written in the books a part of their mind and their spirit. Then did
they know how wise was the king who had ruled over them since the time
that Romulus had departed from amongst them--Romulus who had made their
state by means of war. This king had made the Muses known to them. He
had taught them to reverence above all the Muse who is named Tacita, the
Silent--the Roman Muse. Now he would bring them no more the counsel
given him by the Goddess whom he sought beside the clear spring. Under
the hill Ianiculum two coffins of stone were laid; one held Numa and the
other held his sacred books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sibyl](omw42)
