[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw57)  [Next](omw59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MIMIR

Oithin went to Mimir to get a draught from the Well of Wisdom--the well
that Mimir guarded. He knew well what price Mimir would ask for a
draught from his well--he would ask for Oithin's right eye. It was a
terrible price; very troubled was All-Father when the price that Mimir
would ask was revealed to him.

To be without the sight of his right eye! For all time to be with. out
the sight of his right eye! Almost Oithin would have turned back to
Asgarth, giving up his quest for wisdom.

But when he turned to the south he saw towards Muspellsheim: there stood
Surt with the Flaming Sword, a terrible figure, who would one day join
with the Giants in their war against the Gods. He turned to the north
and he saw that place of darkness and dread, Niflheim. Oithin knew that
the world was between Surt, who would destroy it with fire, and
Niflheim, out of which would come that which would gather the world back
to Darkness and Nothingness. He, the eldest of the Gods, would have to
win the wisdom that would help to save the world.

And so, facing loss and pain, Oithin All-Father turned and went towards
Mimir's Well. It was under the root of Yggdrasil that grew in Jotunheim.
There sat Mimir, the Guardian of the Well of Wisdom,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

his deep eyes bent upon the deep water. Mimir, who had drunk every day
from the Well of Wisdom, knew who it was that stood before him.

"Hail, Oithin, eldest of the Gods," he said.

Then Oithin made reverence to Mimir, the wisest of the world's beings.
"I would drink from your well, Mimir," he said.

"'There is a price to be paid. All who have come here to drink have
shrunk from paying that price. Will you, eldest of the Gods, pay it?"

"I will not shrink from the price that has to be paid, Mimir," said
Oithin All-Father.

"Then drink," said Mimir. He took the horn that was by the root of
Yggdrasil; he filled it up, and he gave it to Oithin to drink from.

Oithin took the horn in both his hands and drank and drank from it. And
as he drank all the future became clear to him. He saw all the sorrows
and troubles that would fall upon men and Gods. But he saw, too, why the
sorrows and troubles had to fall, and he saw how they might be borne so
that Gods and men, by being noble in the days of sorrow and trouble,
would leave in the world a force that one day, a day that was far off
indeed, would destroy the evil that brought terror and sorrow and
despair into the world.

Then, when he had drunk out of the great horn that Mimir had given him,
Oithin put his hand to his face and plucked out his right eye. Terrible
was the pain that he suffered. But he made no groan nor moan. He bowed
his head and put his cloak before his face. Mimir took the eye and let
it sink deep, deep into the water of the Well of Wisdom. The Eye of
Oithin shone up through the water, a sign to all who came to that place
of the price that the eldest of the Gods had paid for his wisdom. Mimir
took water in the vessel that is that Eye. He watered the root of
Yggdrasil from that vessel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Baldr](omw59)
