[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw64)  [Next](omw66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE BIRTH OF THE GANGES

There came a sage whose name was Bhagīratha: he stayed in a forest of
Himalaya practising terrible austerities. For a thousand years he
remained with arms upraised, with four fires burning around, and with
the sun blazing upon him. At last Brahma had compassion upon him. The
Lord of All came to that sage and told him he could ask a boon as a
reward for his austerities.

Then the sage said, "The boon I ask is that King Sagara's sixty thousand
sons win to Indra's heaven. Their ashes lie far down in the earth. And
until a water which is not the water of earth flows over the ashes and
purifies them they cannot win to heaven." The Lord of All was pleased
with what the sage asked, and the boon was granted.

And so Brahma promised that Gangā would descend upon earth. Now Gangā
was the daughter of Himalaya, the Lord of Snow, and she had held herself
back from leaving the heaven-world. She would leave at Brahma's command,
but her downward rush would be so terrible that the earth would be
dashed to pieces by it. Only one

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

thing could save the earth from that tremendous stroke: if the head of
Shiva received her stream the fall of Gangā upon earth would be broken.

For a year the sage worshipped Shiva. Then he was taken into Shiva's
heaven and he saw the God with his four faces. Once Brahma had created a
nymph out of all that is loveliest in the world, and he had sent her to
Shiva so that her beauty might distract him from his eternal meditation.
As she walked around where he stayed a face appeared at each side of the
God: the faces looking east and west and north are beautiful and
pleasant to behold, but the face looking south is terrible. With the
face looking east Shiva rules the world; with the face looking west he
delights all beings; with the face looking north he rejoices in the
company of his wife Umā. But the face looking south is his face of
destruction.

Shiva, moved by the prayers of the great ascetic, agreed to take the
fall of Gangā upon his head. He went forth with his trident, and
standing upon a high peak he bade the daughter of Himalaya descend upon
the world. She was made angry by his imperious call. "I shall descend,
and I will sweep Shiva away," she said. And so, in a mighty fall, Gangā
came down from the heaven-world.

But Shiva, knowing what Gangā would have done, smiled to himself. He
would shame her for her arrogance. He made her streams wander through
the locks and clusters of his hair. For seasons and seasons Ganga
wandered through them as through the forests of Himalaya, and she was
made ashamed by her powerlessness to reach the earth.

Then the sage, not seeing the river come down, prayed to Shiva once
more, and once more went through awful austerities. Shiva, for the sake
of Bhagīratha, allowed Gangā to make her way through the locks and
clusters of his hair and come down upon the earth.

In seven streams she descended. The Gods came in their golden chariots
to watch that descent upon earth, and the flashing of their chariots
made it seem as if a thousand suns were in the sky. Fish of all kind and
colours, dolphins of every shape and hue, flashed in the river. And
sages and saints came and purified themselves in the water, for the
stream that had wandered upon Shiva's head made even the wicked pure.
The Gladdener, the Purifier, the Lotus-clad, the Fair

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

eyed, were the names that were given to four of her seven streams. Three
flowed to the east, three flowed to the west. The middle stream, the
fullest, the clearest, flowed to where Bhagīratha waited in his chariot.
He drove on, and where he drove, there did the bright, full, clear river
flow.

On and on it flowed, following the chariot of the sage: now it was a
sweeping current, and now it went on as though it was hardly able to
bear on its wave the feather of the swan, and now full and calmly it
flowed along. At last it came to the wide sea. There it sank down, and
as it sank into the middle of the world the sage prayed that it would
purify the ashes of King Sagara's sixty thousand sons.

In an age before, King Sagara and his sixty thousand sons had been on
the earth. The king would have himself proclaimed a world-ruler, and
that this might be done a steed was loosed and set to range the
distances. All the land the steed ranged over would be proclaimed the
king's domain, and when the steed returned it would be sacrificed to the
Gods. But Sagara's steed was stolen and led down into the very middle of
the earth. The king commanded his sixty thousand sons to find the steed
and bring it back for the sacrifice.

They made their way down to the very middle of the earth. They went
beyond where the Elephant of the East, the Elephant of the West, the
Elephant of the South, and the great white Elephant of the North stand,
bearing up the earth. These immortal ones they worshipped, and they
passed on. At last they came to where Kapila, at the very centre of all
things, sustains the world. There the steed was grazing. King Sagara's
sixty thousand sons went to seize it, and as they did they attacked
Kapila with trees and boulders, crying out that he was the robber of
their father's steed.

As they came near he turned a flame upon them, and the sixty thousand
sank down in heaps of ashes. Kapila went on with his meditation and
thought no more upon the destruction he had brought upon King Sagara's
sons. The king then sent his princely grandson to find die steed. He
came down to the very middle of the earth. He passed the immortal
elephants; he found the steed grazing near Kapila and he saw the heaps
of ashes that were there. Then the bird Garuda that was flying there
told him of what had befallen the sons of King

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sagara, and told him, too, that they could win
to Indra's heaven only when Gangā was brought down and made flow over
their ashes.

The prince led the steed back to Sagara. He became king after his
grandfather, and when his duties as king had been fulfilled he went into
a forest of Himālaya and engaged in sacrifices to bring Gangā down from
the heaven-world. After him his son engaged in sacrifices. Then his
son's son, the sage Bhagīratha, engaged in austerities that had never
before been known, and these austerities won Brahmā's compassion, and
so, with the mighty aid of Shiva, Gangā was brought down upon the earth.

There where Kapila ponders, sustaining the world, Ganga flowed. The
river went over the heaps of ashes that were the sons of King Sagara.
They were purified, and the sixty thousand, rejoicing, went into the
heaven of great Indra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sāvitrī and the Lord of the Dead](omw66)
