[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omw84)  [Next](omw86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE AZTECA

Many times since the Azteca came into the valley had the years been tied
into bundles, each bundle being fifty-two years. And many times at the
Tying of the Years had the fires been quenched and a new fire lighted on
the breast of a sacrificed man. Many times had that festival come round
that is called the Knot of the Years, and many times had the king and
the priests consulted about the portents that chow themselves when the
fires are quenched and a new fire lighted.

Montezuma the Conqueror was king at that Tying of the Years. And the
portent that showed itself was in a pair of great sandals that were
found upon the floor of the Temple of Huizilopochtli, the War God of the
Azteca. Montezuma the Conqueror said, "This is a sign from
Huizilopochtli; it signifies that he will never leave the Azteca." And
he said to the priests, "Bear these sandals to Coatlicue, the mother of
our god. She dwells in Aztlan the White Place. Out of Aztlan the Azteca
went in the old days, guided by Huizilopochtli. They made themselves
possessors of the valley; they conquered the tribes of the valley and
the uplands; they built the great city Tenochtitlan. Go, tell Coatlicue
all this. And say that by my arms they have now subdued the people
farthest away, and have taken captives for the sacrifices from them.
Huizilopochtli will never leave a people who have proved themselves such
conquerors. Go; bear these sandals in all reverence to the

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

mother of Huizilopochtli; they will be a sign to her that her son will
not return to Aztlan the White Place."

So the priests of Huizilopochtli searched in their books and found out
the ways that led back to Aztlan the White Place. It was a mountain that
waters surrounded. The waters were filled with fish; flocks of ducks
swam around; birds delighted those who dwelt there with the sight of
their green and yellow plumage and enchanted them with their songs. And
there, in the caverns of the mountain, the Azteca had dwelt for
unnumbered generations. All the good things they had had been brought
from there--the maize, the beans, the fruits. For on the waters there
were barges, and on the barges grew all nourishing things. And when the
men and women of the Azteca went out of the caverns that were filled
with precious stones they would go in canoes amongst the floating
gardens, and watch the ducks swimming, the cormorants diving, the herons
flying overhead; they would gather the bright flowers of the gardens and
listen to the enchanting songs of the birds.

But Huizilopochtli roused up many to depart from that place; they left
the mountain and their floating gardens, taking with them, however, many
of the plants that grew in the gardens. They went upon the land. The
herbs of the ground pricked them; the stones bruised their feet. Plains
that were filled with thorns spread out before them. Jaguars lay in wait
for them, and sprang upon stragglers and tore their flesh. But aroused
by Huizilopochtli and guided by him the Azteca went on. They went
through deserts where famine wasted them. Then they reached the Place of
the Seven Caves where they rested and were at ease for a while. Then
they came to where there was a tree broken by lightning, and there some
stayed. Others went on, Huizilopochtli still guiding them. And at last
they came to the Lake Tezcuco. They beheld a high rock with a cactus
growing on it. Upon the cactus was an eagle. Up he rose; he flew towards
the rising sun, and in his talons he held a serpent. The omen was good;
the Azteca halted their march there. Many battles did they fight there;
they subdued the tribes that dwelt in the valley, and they built
Tenochtitlan, the greatest of cities.

And now the priests of Huizilopochtli, the ambassadors of Montezuma the
Conqueror, travelled the ways back to Aztlan the White Place. In Tollan,
which is the navel of the world, they found four magicians who guided
them across the deserts. Then they beheld a

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

mountain that rose out of the midst of waters. The priests went towards
it, leaving the magicians behind them. The smell of flowers came to them
on the airs of night; in the morning they heard the songs of birds. On
they went, and they saw the gardens upon the water; they saw the flocks
of ducks swimming around, and the cormorants diving from the juttings of
the mountain, and the herons fishing or flying overhead. They saw the
birds of green and yellow plumage flying from garden to garden, and they
heard them singing from the branches of fruitful trees.

The people who were there spoke to them in a language that the priests
knew, and asked them why they had come across deserts to them. The
priests said that they had come back to the ancestral place. They
brought to Coatlicue, they said, the sandals of her son Huizilopochtli.

But when the priests mentioned the name of Montezuma the Conqueror and
mentioned the names of his lords, the people of the waters said that
those who had gone from them in the old days had borne no such names.
They named the lords who were with the Azteca when they went from Aztlan
the White Place. Then the ambassadors of Montezuma said, "We know not
these lords; we have never seen them; they are long since dead." Then
the people of the waters were surprised, and they said, "We who knew
them are living yet."

The priest of Coatlicue came to bring them into the presence of the
Goddess. She lived on a peak of the mountain. As they went upward the
feet of the men from Tenochtitlan sank in the ground, for the mountain
became like a heap of loosened sand. "What makes you so heavy?" their
guide asked them. He was an ancient, but he went lightly upon the
ground. "What do you eat?" he asked them. "We eat flesh, and we drink
pulque," the ambassadors of Montezuma answered him. "It is the meat and
drink you have consumed that prevent your reaching the place where your
fathers dwelt. Here we eat but fruits, and roots, and grain; we drink
only water, and so there is no clog upon us when we walk." As he said
this a swift wind came and brought him and brought the ambassadors up to
the peak of the mountain and into the cavern where Coatlicue dwelt.

They saw her; her dress was of serpents, and they were terrified of her.
When she looked upon the sandals they laid before her she

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

lamented, saying, "When Huizilopochtli went from Aztlan he said to me,
his mother, 'When my time is accomplished I shall return to your lap;
until that time I shall know nought save weariness. Therefore, give me
two pairs of sandals, one for going forth, and one for returning.' And
now, you say, he will not return to this lap of mine." Then the Goddess
put on a garment of mourning, and the ambassadors went from the cavern
where she dwelt.

They did not think that they stayed long in Aztlan the White Place. But
when they returned to Tenochtitlan they found that the years were again
being tied into a bundle, that the fires of the land were quenched, and
that a new fire was being lighted on the breast of a sacrificed man. A
king who was called the Second Montezuma ruled over the Azteca. Many and
dread portents showed themselves at that Tying of the Years. A fisherman
caught a strange bird: a shining stone was in the head of that bird, and
when that stone was brought to him, the Second Montezuma looked into it
and he saw wars being waged against the Azteca in which strange and more
death-dealing weapons than he had ever known were being used. And at the
time of the quenching of the fires his sister had died; she had been
buried, but now she was seen seated at a fountain in a garden of the
palace. Montezuma and his lords went before her. She told them that she
had been brought to the Eastern Sea. She had seen great ships upon the
sea, and in the ships were fair-faced and bearded men who carried more
death-dealing weapons than any that had ever been seen in the land of
the Azteca. And after that a pillar of fire appeared in the east, and it
seemed too cast fire upon the whole land. Rejoicings were heard amongst
the captives, and lamentations were heard amongst the old men: it was
thought that the pillar of fire in the east presaged the destruction of
the Empire of the Azteca.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paíyatuma and the Maidens of the Corn](omw86)
