[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei06)  [Next](ei08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FLORA.

The native traditions agree in the statement that the discoverers of the
island found it destitute of trees and all vegetation except grasses and
a creeping vine bearing a dehiscent fruit to which the name Moki-oo-ne

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

was given. Hotu-Matua and his followers are believed to have brought
with them potatoes, yams, bananas, sugar-cane, and the seed of various
plants, including the paper-mulberry and toromiro trees. The newly
discovered species of legume, together with fish and turtle, enabled the
first settlers to exist while the first crop was being planted and
cultivated.

Nothing could be more contradictory than the description which the
different voyagers have given of Easter Island. Roggeveen states that it
was destitute of trees, but the land was found to be exceptionally
fertile, producing bananas, potatoes, and sugar-cane of extraordinary
thickness, and concludes by saying that the island, by virtue of its
productive soil and salubrious climate, could be made an earthly
paradise by careful cultivation. Behrens speaks of trees on the island,
but to his romantic eyes the clusters of banana and paper-mulberries
were magnified into forests. Captain Cook expresses great disappointment
in the expectation that he had formed of this island as a place of
refreshment. The only articles of importance obtained were potatoes and
yams, and these were only sufficient to serve for a few meals; while the
fowls, bananas, and sugar-cane were in such inconsiderable quantities
that they were deemed hardly worth mentioning. George Foster writes:

The island is so very barren that the whole number of plants growing
upon it does not exceed twenty species, of which the far greater part is
cultivated, though the space which the platforms occupy is
inconsiderable compared with what lies waste. The soil is altogether
stony and parched by the sun, and the water is so scarce that the
inhabitants drink it out of wells which have a strong admixture of
brine, and some of our people really saw them drink of the sea water
when they were thirsty.

Mr. Foster devoted considerable attention to the investigation of
indigenous plants, and his report embraces all of the most important
varieties. He found the paper-mulberry carefully cultivated for the
purpose of making cloth. The stems were from 2 to 4 feet high, and they
were planted in rows among the rocks where the rains had washed a little
soil together. The *Thespesia populnea* Carr. (*Hibiscus populneus*
Linn.), was cultivated in the same manner, and likewise a *Mimosa*,
which is referred to as the only shrub that affords the natives sticks
for their clubs and pattoo-pattoos, and wood sufficient to patch up a
canoe. Wild celery and a few other small plants were identified as the
same species is that which he had found growing in abundance on the
shores of New Zealand. He also discovered a variety of night-shade,
which the Tahitians use as a vulnerary remedy (*Solanum nigrum*), and
speculates as to whether it was used here for the same purpose.

La Pérouse, impressed with a desire to relieve to some extent the
destitute condition in which he found the islanders and of contributing
to their welfare, had ground prepared in which he sowed various kinds of
pulse. Peaches, plums, and cherries were planted, also pips of oranges
and lemons. The natives were instructed

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

as fully as possible in the care and attention the new plants would
require, and made to understand the value of this addition to their
resources. Not a trace can be found of the things planted by this
generous Frenchman, but whether they were suffered to die out through
the ignorance or indolence of the natives may never be known.

We found the lapse of a century had made but little improvement in the
resources of the islanders. Trees have, been planted around the house of
Mr. Brander, at the southwest end of the island, but, with the exception
of the fig, acacia, and paper-mulberry, they do not appear to thrive. At
various places throughout this land we found small clumps of
*Edwardsia*, *Broussonetia*, and *Hibiscus*, but all were dead, having
been stripped of their bark by the flocks of sheep, which roam at will
over the island. None of these trees were over 10 feet high, and the
largest trunk we found would measure about 5 inches in diameter.

The natives are not altogether ignorant of husbandry, though they
practice it spasmodically and at a great expense of time and labor,
differing in no respect from the customs of their forefathers hundreds
of years ago. In the cultivation of yams, potatoes, and taro, the young
plants are protected from the fierce heat of the sun by a mulching of
dried grass gathered from the uncultivated ground. Bananas are grown in
holes a foot or more deep and with sloping sides, designed to catch and
bold the rain-water as long as possible about the roots of the plant.
Sugar cane is grown in protected spots, and attains the height of about
10 feet. During our peregrinations this succulent plant was extensively
used in lieu of something to drink, and proved exceedingly valuable in
preventing a parched condition of the throat. The natives have no
knowledge of the art of extracting the juice of the cane for the purpose
of making sugar.

The sweet potatoes are large and remarkably good. The natives eat them
both raw and cooked. Experiments have been made recently with imported
white potatoes, but they have been tried in various situations and at
different seasons without success. After the first growth they appear
like new potatoes, and when planted again they are invariably soft and
sweet, and are much less palatable than the indigenous variety. We saw
tobacco plants growing in secluded spots, but were unable to determine
by whom or when they were introduced. The natives maintain that the seed
was included among that which was brought to the island by the first
settlers. Tomato plants were also found growing wild, and on several
occasions proved a valuable addition to our limited fare.

A wild gourd is common, and constituted the only water-jar and domestic
utensil known to the natives. Suitable clay abounds, but the potter's
art seems never to have been known on the island. There are two
varieties of indigenous hemp.

We saw no flowering plants that are indigenous to the soil. Vervain,

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

Verbena officinalis and a few others grow in great profusion, but they
grew from cuttings obtained from a French vessel of war.

Ferns of many varieties are common, and grow in profusion in the craters
of the volcanoes. Except in a few exposed places, the slopes of the
bills and the valleys are covered with a perennial grass. It strongly
resembles the Jamaica grass (*Paspalum*) and grows in bunches or tufts,
which in the dry season become so slippery as to make the walking both
difficult and dangerous. This natural growth supplies ample pasturage
for the numerous cattle and sheep owned by Messrs. Salmon and Brander.

To avoid the depredations of the sheep that wander over the island
without restraint, the natives are compelled to protect their cultivated
patches by stone walls. The volcanic stones furnish the only available
material for these barriers, and are thrown loosely together to a height
of 5 or 6 feet, and inclose gardens from a few feet square to several
acres. The deeply rooted prejudice existing in the native mind against
physical exertion that might be avoided, has developed a happy expedient
to save labor and at the same time to escape the ravages of the animals
lately imported by the foreign residents. Ruins of houses, cairns,
platforms, and tombs are thickly scattered over the island; many of the
standing walls are sufficiently well preserved and others require but
little repair. Within these, ancient foundation walls are raised their
limited crops of fruit and vegetables; the only disadvantage being the
contracted area available for each plot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mammals](ei08.md)
