[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei07)  [Next](ei09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MAMMALS.

There are no quadrupeds peculiar to the island except several varieties
of rodents. The ancient traditions claim that a goat-like animal was
found here by the first colonists, with wide-spreading horns and giving
six young at a birth. It is difficult to imagine the foundation for this
fancy. We found no representation of such an animal either in the mural
paintings or outlined on the sculptured rocks, and diligent search of
the débris of the caves failed to disclose any of the bones or traces of
mammals.

La Pérouse found the islanders without domestic animals, and left with
them two ewes, a she-goat, and a sow, with the male of each species.
Their native names indicate the recent addition to the language. In the
caves and among the ruins we saw many rats of great size. The
examination of the tombs disclosed the fact that the bones had been
frequently gnawed by these rodents, and their nests were sometimes found
inside the crania.

There are on the island a few cats as wild is though they had never seen
the face of man, though they are descended from feline pets landed by
some passing vessel. They have grown to in immense size, and upon
several occasions when encountered in the dark recesses of a cave

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

or tomb presented a formidable appearance. Messrs. Salmon & Brander have
a herd of 600 cattle, and a flock of sheep numbering 18,000. The cattle
are from Chilian stock, are small, averaging only about 400 pounds, and
possess no dairy qualities; the cows giving barely enough milk to rear
their calves. The sheep were also imported from Chili. The wool is
coarse and scant, the average being only about 2 pounds per animal. The
export of last year in wool was 16 tons, and was [shipped](errata.htm#0)
to Europe via Tahiti. An effort will be made next year to improve the
breed of sheep by introducing blooded rains from Australia. A few tough
little horses have been introduced from the island breed of Tahiti, but
it is doubtful whether this will ever become an important industry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Birds](ei09)
