[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei10)  [Next](ei12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### REPTILES AND INSECTS.

Small lizards are frequently seen among the rocks; the natives claim
that a large variety is not uncommon, but we saw nothing of it. No
snakes exist, but there are centipedes whose bite is said to be
extremely painful, though not attended with serious consequences.
Several varieties of butterflies were observed. Myriads of flies infest
every part of the island. Vliegen Island was the name given to Riroa, in
the Pamotu group, or Low Archipelago, by Schouten in 1616, but we were
tormented here by hundreds where we saw tens on the
[Atoll](errata.htm#2.md). From the earliest dawn of day to the close of the
short twilight, hordes of flies annoyed us; it made no difference
whether we skirted the cliff's to windward, climbed the breeze-swept
hills, or burrowed in the musty caves and tombs, swarms of flies met
its, prepared to dispute every foot of the ground. Whatever may have
been the parent stock of the Polynesians, we came to the unanimous
conclusion that we had [discovered](errata.htm#3.md) here the lineal
descendants of the flies that composed the Egyptian plague, and can
testify that they have not degenerated in the lapse of time.

Fleas occasioned us more annoyance than the flies, because this
industrious little insect was untiring in its attentions by day and
night. They were found in numbers in all the camping places, and we
seemed to get a fresh supply every time a halt was called.

There are, fifteen or twenty mangy dogs of a mongrel breed on the island
whose hides were literally alive with jumping insects. They had long ago
given up all hope of relief, and made no ineffectual efforts in that
direction, but they plainly expressed in their mute way the conviction
that life in this flea-bitten state was not worth the living.

It was said that there were no mosquitoes on the island until cisterns
were built by Messrs. Salmon and Brander to catch the rain-water. We saw
none elsewhere.

Cockroaches about 2 inches long, with antennæ to correspond, infest
every dwelling on the island, from the humble thatched hut to the
comparatively comfortable residences of the foreigners. They partook of
our food at meal-times with a freedom which showed that the presence of
the stranger caused no restraint; while at night they made themselves
familiar with our garments in whatever time could be spared from their
gastronomic researches.

A, peculiar variety of snapping beetle made its appearance every evening
just before sundown, appearing suddenly and vanishing with daylight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nets and Ropes](ei12.md)
