[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei13)  [Next](ei15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PERSONAL APPEARANCE OF THE NATIVES.

In describing the personal appearance of the islanders (Plate XIV) the
early writers give us a pleasing variety to choose from. Behrens
solemnly states that a boat came off to the ship steered by a single
man, a giant 12 feet high, etc. He afterwards observes, "with truth, I
might say that these savages are all of more than gigantic size. The men
are tall and broad in proportion, averaging 12 feet in height.
Surprising as it may appear, the tallest men on board of our ship could
pass between the legs of these children of Goliath without bending the
head. The women can not compare (Fig. 3) in stature with the men, as
they are

 

<span id="img_fig003"></span> ![](img/fig003.jpg)  
Fig. 3. NATIVE WOMEN.

 

commonly not above 10 feet high." Roggeveen does not commit himself to a
measurement, but states, "the people are well proportioned of limb
having large and strong muscles, and are great in stature. They have
snow-white teeth, which are uncommonly strong; indeed, even among the
aged and gray we were surprised to see them crack large hard nuts whose
shells were thicker than those of our peach seeds." La Pérouse
contradicts the account as to their enormous height and praises the
beauty of the women, who, he says, resemble Europeans in color and
features. M. Rollin states that the females were more liberally endowed
with grace and beauty than any which were afterwards

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

met with. The natives are not of large stature; a few of the men are
tall, but they are of spare build, stand erect with straight carriage,
and appear taller than they really are.

Great care was taken to measure accurately the human remains found in
the oldest tombs excavated on the island. These proved the ancient
islanders to have been of medium size, and the largest skeleton found
measured a little short of 6 feet. The men are strong, active, and
capable of standing great fatigue--a fact demonstrated to our
satisfaction during the exploration of the island. The women are shorter
and of smaller bone than the men, as is usually the case throughout
Polynesia.

Mendana states that the islanders are nearly white and have red hair.
They resemble the Marquesans more than any other Polynesians, and
considerable variety prevails in their complexions. The children are not
much darker than Europeans, but the skin assumes a brown line as they
grow up and are exposed to the sun and trade-winds. The parts of the
body that are covered retain the light color, and the females, who are
usually protected from the sun, are much fairer than the men. Bronze
complexions are believed to indicate strength, and a dark skin is
considered a mark of beauty. The eyes are dark-brown, bright, and fall,
with black brows and lashes not very heavy. The countenance is usually
open, modest, and pleasing. The facial angle is slightly receding, the
nose aquiline and well, proportioned; the prominent chin with thin lips
gives somewhat the appearance of resolution to the countenance.

The native character and disposition has naturally improved as com.
pared with the accounts given by the early navigators. They were then
savages wearing no clothes, but with bodies painted in bright colors.
The women are said to have been the most bold and licentious in
Polynesia, if the reports are correctly stated, but we found them modest
and retiring and of higher moral character than any of the islanders.
The repulsive habit of piercing the lobe of the ear and distending the
hole until it could contain bone, or wooden ornaments of great size is
no longer practiced, but there are still on the island person s with
earlobes so long that they hang pendent upon the shoulder. In
disposition the natives are cheerful and contented. Our guides were
continually joking with each other, and we saw no quarreling or
fighting. They are said to be brave and fearless of danger, but
revengeful and savage when aroused. They are fond of dress and
ornaments. Very little tappa cloth is now worn, the people being pretty
well equipped with more comfortable garments, obtained from the vessels
that have called at the island. (Plate XV). Straw hats are neatly
braided by the women and worn by both sexes. The women wear the hair in
long plaits down the back, the men cut the hair short and never discolor
it with time as is the custom in many of the islands of Polynesia. The
hair is coarse, black, and straight, sometimes wavy, but never in the
kinky stage. The beard is thin and sparse. Gray hair is common among
those beyond middle life and baldness is very rare.

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

Kava is not grown upon the island and the drink made from the kava-root,
common throughout the South Sea, is not known to these people. The
diminution of the inhabitants can not be ascribed to the introduction of
intoxicating drinks, or indeed any of the factors usually advanced in
such cases. The decadence was no doubt accelerated by the introduction
of the small-pox, and by the deportation of large numbers, but it is
earnestly hoped that the small remnant of the people will increase and
multiply under the comforts and protection acquired front contact with
civilization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Brutal Treatment of Natives by Early Voyagers](ei15.md)
