[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei14)  [Next](ei16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BRUTAL TREATMENT OF NATIVES BY EARLY VOYAGERS.

The brutal treatment that the islanders received from the hands of their
early visitors was not calculated to impress them favorably. Usually the
strangers were met upon their arrival by a crowd of noisy, restless,
impetuous people, as curious as children and as peaceable and friendly
with all their boisterousness. The greatest fault they committed was
theft, and in return numbers were shot down and innocent persons
murdered. Roggeveen plainly states that his boats approached the island
well armed and in great fear of the natives. The men were formed in line
of battle as they disembarked, and before all were landed, Some one in
the rear fired a shot, and immediately a fusilade began by these
cowardly ruffians upon the unfortunate islanders, ten or twelve of whom
were killed outright and as many were wounded. The admiral quietly
shifts the responsibility for this outrage upon the shoulders of the
second mate of the *Thienhoven*, who offers as an excuse that some of
the natives were observed to take up stones and make threatening
gestures. As soon as the astonishment and terror of the inhabitants had
subsided, they sued for mercy, and everything they possessed in the way
of fruits and vegetables, poultry, etc., was procured and laid as a
peace offering at the feet of the Dutchman. Captain Cook afterwards
received the most friendly reception possible from the same people, but
he observed their great dread of fire-arms, the deadly effects of which
were [thoroughly](errata.htm#4.md) understood. The landing party conducted
a brisk trade, and were highly amused to witness the small thefts
committed upon one another in order to obtain articles for barter, yet
Lieutenant Edgecomb did not hesitate to immediately shoot with his
musket a poor unfortunate who picked up a little bag of botanical
specimens.

Captain Beechey was received with friendly demonstrations and his boats,
sent on shore for supplies, obtained bananas, yams, potatoes,
sugar-cane, nets, etc., in trade, and some were thrown into the boats,
leaving the strangers to make what return they chose. His journal dwells
at great length upon the thieving propensity of the natives. His boats
were surrounded by native swimmers, who trade off with small articles
that came within reach of them, and among them were women who were not
the actual plunderers, but who procured the opportunity for others by
engrossing the attention of the seamen.

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

To reach the landing-place the boats had to pass a small isolated rock
upon which many persons had congregated, and who sang a song of welcome,
accompanied by gestures showing that the visit was acceptable. On shore
the party was surrounded by a crowd clamorous to obtain something from
the strangers, the few presents offered were accepted, and then
everything that came handy appropriated in the most open manner. This
led to a scuffle, in which sticks and stones were freely used, resulting
in a fight in which the native chief was shot and killed. The punishment
of the natives, according to European ideas, was both cruel, and
unnecessary. La Pérouse judged the same crimes more leniently, and did
not feel justified in committing murder to avenge petty thefts. The
outrages perpetrated upon the defenseless people by Captain Rugg, of the
*Friend*, and other freebooters, including the Peruvian slavers, require
no comment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thieving](ei16.md)
