[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei21)  [Next](ei23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE NATIVE DANCE.

Just as the traditions are cherished and repeated from father to son,
the native dances are remembered and held in esteem, although never
publicly practiced. Mr. Salmon secured the services of the "star
performers" and we were fortunately enabled to witness the peculiarities
of the native dance at his house at Viahu, on the eve of our departure
from the island. The music was furnished by three persons seated upon
the floor, who accompanied their discordant voices by thumps upon a
tom-tom improvised from old cracker-boxes, and the dance was performed
by an old woman and a young girl, the latter possessing some claim to
symmetry of figure. The dancers wore a single loose garment, short
enough to expose the bare ankles and sun-browned feet. Over the head and
shoulders was thrown a white cloak, composed of a few yards of cotton
cloth, which was sometimes spread open and occasionally made to hide the
whole figure as they went through the various evolutions of the dance.
This mantle was, not managed with any particular skill or grace and
seemed to be identified with one particular

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

dance, after which it was discarded for the small dancing-paddle or
wand. The weird songs related the achievements and exploits of their
ancestors in war, fishing, and love and the gestures of the dancers were
upon this occasion perfectly proper and modest. Some of the movements
were suggestive of a rude relationship to the dances performed by the
geisha girls of Japan in their odori, and consisted of movements and
attitudes calculated to display the elegance and grace of the
performers. The peculiar feature of the native dancing is the absence of
violent motion; there is no jumping or elaborate pirouettes, no
extravagant contortions, and nothing that might be called a precision of
step. The lower limbs play a part of secondary importance to the arms
and the dancers indulge in no dizzy gyrations. The feet and hands are
kept moving in unison with the slow, monotonous music, while the dancers
endeavor to act out the words of the song by pantomime. These islanders,
like their sisters throughout Polynesia, have their hula-hula, or dances
that partake of passion and abandon, and portray the old story of
coquetry, jealousy, and ultimate surrender of the maiden. Soft swaying
movements, a gentle turning away, timid glances, and startled gestures,
gradually giving place to more rapturous passion, speak plainly enough
the theme of the song, though the movements are less graceful and
elegant than those which characterize the nautch dances of India. Among
the diversified dances, some are performed by men and others by women,
but the sexes rarely if ever dance together. Wands are usually held in
each hand, but occasionally one and sometimes both are discarded.
Feather hats and other ornaments are worn in portraying characters and
some of the dances are said to be of obscene tendencies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Religion](ei23.md)
