[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei23)  [Next](ei25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SUPERSTITIONS.

The islanders were superstitions to an extent that was extraordinary,
and they were constantly tinder the influence of dread from demons or
supernatural beings. Fish-hooks were made of bones of deceased
fishermen, which were thought to exert a mysterious influence over the
denizens of the deep. Fishermen were always provided with the stone god
that was supposed to be emblematic of the spirit having cognizance of
the fish. Rocks in certain localities were believed to be under spirit
taboo, and persons who walked over them were punished with sore feet.
The leaves of several harmless plants were regarded as prophylactic
against disease. Stones were buried beneath the doorways of houses to
guard against evil influences. The native priests were simply wizards
and sorcerers who professed to have influence with evil spirits
sufficient to secure by incantations their co-operation in the
destruction of an enemy, or by occult means gain their aid and good-will
for the protection of property, crops, etc. The system of taboo
corresponds with the same thing practiced throughout the islands of the
South Sea, and included a prohibition in regard to persons as well as
property. The symbol of the taboo on crops properly consisted of a small
pile of stone placed in the form of a pyramid, or piled one on top of
the other. The natives have a way of divining the future by means of a
flower, common enough in more civilized countries but not observed
before in Polynesia. "Ae" and "Aita" are repeated as the petals are
thrown away, and the signification appears to be equivalent to the
"yes," and "no" of Goethe's Marguerite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sacrificial Stones](ei25)
