[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei28)  [Next](ei30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GOVERNMENT.

The ancient government of Easter Island was an arbitrary monarchy. The
supreme authority was vested in a king and was hereditary in his family.
The person of the king was held sacred. Clan tights and internecine
struggles were common, but the royal person and family were unmolested.
The king reigned over the entire island and was not disturbed by the
defeat or the victory of any of the clans. The island was divided into
districts having distinct names and governed by chiefs, all of whom
acknowledged the supremacy of the king. The title of chief was also
hereditary, and descended from father to son, but the king reserved the
right to remove or put to death any of them and of naming a successor
from the people of the clan.

There was no confederation, each clan being independent of all the rest,
except as the powerful are naturally dominant over the weak. The chiefs
wore peculiar feather hats to denote their rank, and they presided at
feasts and councils in the absence of the king. Other grades of rank
were recognized, such as that required by feats of valor, public

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

service rendered, such as image making, etc., but this privileged class
had no authority vested in them over their fellows. Personal security
and the rights of private property were little regarded, and disputes
were settled by king or chief without regard to law or justice. There
was no code of the laws, the people avenged their own injuries, and
persons who incurred the displeasure of the ruler were marked as victims
for sacrifice. It does not appear that any great homage was paid the
king, and no tax was exacted of the people. Long-continued custom was
accepted as law, and defined the few duties and privileges of the
private citizen.

Maurata, the last of a long line of kings, together with all of the
principal chiefs of the islands was kidnapped by the Peruvians and died
in slavery. Since that time there has been no recognized authority among
the natives; every man is his own master, and looks out for his own
interests.

In 1863-164 the natives were converted to Christianity by Frère Eugène,
a Jesuit missionary. A Frenchman called Dutrou-Bornier had settled upon
the island and started an extensive farm, and a conflict of authority
sprang up between the two foreigners, which led to bitter feuds between
the natives. Dutrou-Bornier lived with a common woman, who had been the
wife of a chief, and he succeeded in having her proclaimed queen of the
island, under the name of Korato. A system of espionage and intrigue was
instituted by Queen Korato, guided by the Frenchman's instructions,
which resulted in an open rebellion against the ecclesiastical
authority. The missionary was finally compelled to leave the island, and
be removed to Gambier Archipelago with about three hundred of his
followers, giving Dutrou-Bornier and Queen Korato a clear field. The
Frenchman was killed in August, 1876, by being thrown from his horse
while drunk, and Queen Korato and her two children survived him only a
few years. Mr. Salmon found upon his arrival that none of the natives
had assumed authority over his fellows, and in due course that gentleman
became to all intents and purposes the king of the island, ruling the
people with kindness and wisdom and thus securing their unbounded
respect and esteem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Burial of the Dead](ei30.md)
