[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei31)  [Next](ei33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WEAPONS AND WAR

The native weapons in offensive and defensive operations were limited to
obsidian-pointed spears, short clubs, and the throwing-stones, but these
were handled with remarkable shill and dexterity. The history of the
simple weapons in the hands of people who became preeminent in their use
has been repeated in all ages and countries, and is fully exemplified in
these islanders; though their primitive spear,

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

lacking the metal-piercing medium, could never aspire to the fame of the
gladiator's trident, the Homeric javelin, the Roman pilum, the Turkish
jereed, the Landsknecht's halberd, the Polish lance, the Zulu assagai,
or even the knobkerry of the Amazulu. The formidable weapon of the
ancient Parthian, still wielded by the dexterous Turcoman, was not known
to these islanders. Arrows might have been improvised, but there was no
wood in their possession suitable for the manufacture of bows.

Unlike the Fijians and other Polynesians to the westward, who did great
execution with their long war clubs, these natives used in fighting only
the patoopatoo, or the meré, like that of the Maori, except that they
were invariably made of wood. They possessed a long club, a little
expanded and flattened at one end, and the other carved into a head with
a double face with eyes made of obsidian and bone; but this was carried
as a batôn of office before the chiefs and used only for that purpose.

Stones were thrown with great precision and accuracy from the hand, and
the use of a sling, such as made David more than a match for the
gigantic Philistine, have been unknown. Slings were common among the
Incas and other races of South America from the earliest times, but no
traces of such an appliance could be found on Easter Island, either in
the tombs or mentioned by the ancient traditions.

A want of practice has probably made the natives of to-day less
proficient in stone-throwing than their forefathers, but if the stories
may be believed, the time was when their truculent address could only
have been surpassed by Runjeet Singh's Akalis in flinging the chuckkra.

Several of the ancient traditions speak of a net being used in fighting,
and men were especially trained in its use, but whether they resembled
the old Roman *retiarius* can not be discovered, the custom having long
since died out. It is unknown to the natives of to-day.

Two kinds of spears were used, one about 6 feet long for throwing and
the other a shorter one; a heavier stabbing pike was only fit for use at
close-quarters. In its original form the spear was essentially a
missile, and the traditions speak of the adoption of the thrusting
weapon in the desperate engagements that resulted in the extermination
of the "long-eared race." The shafts were made of *pourou Hibiscus* sp.
and *tu Dracæna terminalis*, and the various forms of obsidian points
were secured by a lashing made from the indigenous hemp. The javelins
were thrown underhanded with the little finger foremost, but they did
not have that peculiar vibratory motion that distinguished the Zulu
assagai.

Nothing was known of a retrieving weapon, such as the boomerang of the
Australians, or even the throwing-sticks of the Eskimo tribes on the
coast of Alaska.

There was no class of professional fighters or soldiers; every
able-bodied man was supposed to be a warrior and compelled to do duty in
time of war. Fighting men were not trained or drilled, except that

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

throwing stones and darting the spear were favorite amusements and
always a prominent feature of all feasts. The clans were always led to
battle by the chief, but there was no particular formation. Every man
acted in accordance with his individual fancy, or as occasion demanded,
relying upon skill and strength alone. No shields were used and no
particular efforts were made to parry the weapons of the enemy.

In view of the fact that the islanders all acknowledged the authority of
one king, their wars were surprisingly numerous, barbarous, and
unrelenting. The traditions are filled with accounts of sanguinary
conflicts originating from trivial causes and continued through
generations, until one party or the other were entirely exterminated.
The slaughter on the field of battle was never very great, but in the
event of a general defeat, the vanquished party was pursued by the
victors to the hiding places, their habitations destroyed, females
captured, children and infirm persons brutally murdered. The defenseless
unfortunates who fell victims to their merciless captors, accepted their
fate, whether it was slavery, torture, or butchery, with remarkable
fortitude, seldom if ever making any show of resistance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exploration of the Island](ei33.md)
