[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei32)  [Next](ei34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXPLORATION OF THE ISLAND.

The *Mohican* came to anchor in the roadstead of Hanga Roa (Plate XVI)
on the morning of Saturday, December 18, 1886. The individual's most
interested in the exploration of the island went on shore without delay,
and the work was pushed forward as rigorously as possible until the hour
appointed for the sailing of the ship for Valparaiso on the evening of
the last day of the year.

Messrs. Salmon and Brander boarded the ship upon her arrival and
extended the hospitalities of Easter Island, placing their limited
resources entirely at our command with a heartiness that won our
immediate esteem, and which ripened into sincere friendship before our
departure. These gentlemen are closely connected with the royal family
of Tahiti, and we had been intrusted with letters and various articles
from relatives and friends who desired to embrace the opportunity for
communication offered by the *Mohican*.

Upon landing at Hanga Roa we found nearly all of the natives on the
island congregated to receive their unknown visitors. The men inspected
us closely and were profuse in friendly demonstrations, while their
wives and daughters gazed curiously from a little distance, and the
children's manner plainly showed the enjoyment of an occasion of
infrequent occurrence in their quiet lives. Surrounded by this crowd we
walked about a mile to the house of Mr. Brander, where the baggage,
tools, and impedimenta in general were deposited. During the afternoon a
reconnaissance was made to the crater of Rana Kao and the ancient
stone-houses in the vicinity, and in the evening we crossed the island
in a light wagon with Mr. Salmon to his residence at Vaihu.

That gentleman has, during his long residence on the island, accumulated

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

a valuable collection of curios and relies of the former inhabitants.
Nearly all of our first night on shore was devoted to the purchase and
cataloguing of specimens from Mr. Salmon's collection, all of which will
be referred to and described elsewhere. Duplicates were obtained of all
articles furnished Lieut. Commander Geisler, of the *Hyane*, for the
museum at Berlin, and of those collected by the *Topaze* for the British
Museum, together with original tablets and other relics of great
interest and value that had escaped the attention of former collectors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Reconnaisance to Rana Kao](ei34.md)
