[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei33)  [Next](ei35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RECONNAISANCE TO RANA KAO.

Sunday, December 19.--Made an early start from Vaihu and rode to the
central elevations called Mount Teraai, Mount Punapau, and Mount Tuatapu
and inspected the quarries from whence the rod tufa was obtained which
formed the crowns or head-dresses that ornamented all the huge images.
Following the road to the southwest we made the ascent of Rana Kao. The
crater is nearly circular and about a mile in diameter (Plate XVII),
with steep jagged sides, or walls, except on the south, where the
lava-flow escaped to the sea. A lake fills the bottom of what was once
the volcanic caldron; the water is of great depth and the surface
covered with a coat of peat, so dense and strong that cattle range over
it, finding food at irregular intervals. The surface of the lake is
about 700 feet from the top, but the cattle have made a path by which
the decent can be made with safety.

Skirting the edge of the crater to the southward the ridge becomes
narrower, falling precipitously a thousand feet, to the sea on one side,
and descending abruptly into the crater on the other until it terminates
in an elongated wall of rock rising to a sharp, jagged edge impassable
to either man or beast. Just where this elevated edge contracts rapidly
towards the south are located the ancient stone-houses of Orongo. (Plate
XVIII). These burrow-like dwellings were built with little regard to
streets, avenues, etc., but were regulated by the contour of the land.
Piles of débris in one or two spots marked the destroying hand of former
investigators, but the large majority of the houses were intact, and in
some instances the openings had been sealed up with stone, making it
difficult to outline the original entrances. These dwellings were
constructed without windows or other openings except a door-way so low
and narrow that an entrance could only be effected by crawling upon the
hand and knees, while in many cases it was necessary to creep
serpent-like through the contracted confines. Many interiors were
inspected by the light of candles provided for the purpose and houses
marked for thorough investigation on the morrow.

While, tracing and sketching the sculptured rocks in the vicinity of
Orongo, the declining sun hastened the departure for Vaihu, where the
hours after our evening meal were devoted to making notes of the native
traditions as translated by Mr. Salmon, until that good-natured gentle

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

man could be kept awake no longer. It had been proposed that we should
occupy one of the ancient stone houses for the night, in order to be
near the scene of operations planned for the next day, but they were
damp and ill-smelling and the work accomplished on the traditions more
than repaid the time lost in recrossing the island.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ancient Stone House At Orongo](ei35)
