[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei37)  [Next](ei39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EMPLOYMENT OF NATIVES.

The investigations in the vicinity of Orongo having been finished, a
contract was made with Mr. Brander for removing from the excavations and
transporting to the landing-place the frescoed slabs, inscribed door.
posts, and objects collected, and the evening was devoted to the native
traditions until exhausted nature demanded a few hours rest. With a view
of propitiating the natives and securing their good-will and cooperation
in prosecuting the work with the utmost dispatch, a number of men were
employed to assist in the excavations made at Orongo, but the experiment
proved a failure. They constituted themselves an appreciative audience,
and could not be induced to work. They evinced a lively interest in all
that was going on, and performed astounding gastronomic feats at
meal-time. We concluded to dispense with their services after a
demonstration of their dexterity in causing the disappearance of every
small object that remained unprotected for a moment. Several of the
head-men, afterwards employed as guides to accompany the expedition
around the island and stimulated with the hope of bountiful

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

rewards, performed valuable service in the way of locating waterholes,
identifying localities, naming objects of interest, etc.

December 21.--Preparations were made for in early start on the
expedition already planned. The native contingent was dispatched about
daylight with camp equipage and instructions to form Camp Mohican at a
spot where it was reported good water could be found in abundance. We
were somewhat handicapped for the march by the fatigue of the last few
days, added to the want of rest. The hospitality of the Brander
establishment had been cordially extended, but such a large and varied
assortment of insects and noxious animals had possession of the
premises, that we preferred the open air, though there were several
passing showers during the night. A working party from the ship,
consisting of nine men, including a boatswain's mate and quartermaster,
landed at an early hour, each man equipped with knapsack, canteen,
shovel and pick. The expedition took the road passing through the
villages of Mataveri and Hanga Roa to the coast, followed by almost
every man, woman, and child on the island. The interest displayed by the
natives in our movements gradually died out after a few hours of hard
walking, and towards noon the last party returned to their homes,
leaving us a clear field.

Following the coast-line to the northwest, every part of the ground was
carefully examined, platforms measured and plotted, excavations made,
and objects of interest collected and catalogued.

Near Anahoirangaroa point, on some ledges of hard volcanic rock we found
numerous depressions that evidently were made at the cost of great
labor. Some are elliptical in shape, others perfectly circular,
averaging about 3 feet in diameter and 2 feet deep. The majority are
above high-water line and others just awash when the tide is full. No
explanation could be obtained in regard to these holes, and it was
concluded that they were originally intended as live-boxes for the
preservation of fish.

The natives have a superstition to the effect that any one who walks
over these rocks will be afflicted with sore feet, and we received many
solemn warnings in regard to it. If there is any foundation for it at
all it is probably due to a succulent vine that grows here, coming in
contact with the wounds caused by the sharp rocks. A short distance
farther on stands a round tower 12 feet in diameter and 20 feet high
(Fig. 9), said to have been erected as a lookout station from whence the
movements of turtles could be watched. We found here, as well as under
every other pile of stones of ally description on the island, tombs and
receptacles for the dead, all filled with human remains in various
stages or decay, from freshly interred bodies to the bones that crumbled
into dust upon exposure to the air. The entire island seems to be one
vast necropolis, and the platforms along the sea-coast appear to have
been the favorite burial places in all ages. Natural caves were utilized
as places of deposit for the dead.

Considerable time was devoted to the examination of the platforms,

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

and in numerous instances interesting catacombs and tombs were
discovered, containing remains of great antiquity. In this connection a
peculiar trait in the native character was developed. Towards evening
one. of the native guides returned to pilot the working party to the
place selected for the camp, just at the time a particularly old tomb
had been uncovered and the crania were being removed from their former
resting place. This the unsophisticated native took in at a glance, and
with the announcement that we were desecrating the burial place of his
forefathers, he set up a howl of despair, and became prostrated with
grief at the sight of a skull which he claimed to recognize as that of
his great-grandfather. Notwithstanding the absurdity of the statement.
the anguish displayed induced as to return the bones to their ancient
resting place. The afflicted youth quickly dried his eyes, and intimated
that for a suitable reward he would be willing to dispose of the remains
of his ancestors, and he thought that a consideration of about $2 would
assuage his grief. That settled it. The skulls were gathered into the
collection, and the sorrowing native left to mourn the loss both of the
money and of the bones of his forefathers.

 

<span id="img_fig009"></span> ![](img/fig009.jpg)  
OBSERVATION TOWER ON BLUFF NEAR ANHOIRANGAROA POINT.

 

Many of the stone bases upon which the images stood still remain in
their original position upon the platforms. Generally they are irregular
in shape, a few have been squared, and on platform No. 5 we

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

found one of octagon shape that stood the test of measurement very well.
Between platforms 4 and 5 the land falls away gently to the sea, and
this slope is paved regularly with small round bowlders, having every
appearance of having been constructed as a way for hauling out boats.
The coast in this vicinity is perfectly rock-bound, but a narrow channel
extends from the paved way out to sea. Boats might land here at any
time. With the wind southeast, or in any direction except west, the
landing would be perfectly smooth. The place is admirably adapted to the
landing of heavy weights, but, as far as known, the images were never
transported by sea, nor did the islander possess boats sufficiently
large to float them, or material from which they could be constructed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cave and Tomb Near Ahuakapu Point](ei39.md)
