[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei42)  [Next](ei44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE POIKE PLAINS.

The Poike Plains are extensive tracts of fine red volcanic sand and dust
with occasional patches of hummock-grass struggling for existence in
this barren waste. Manga Tea-tea (White Mountains), so called from the
grayish appearance of the rocks, furnished the stone implements of the
natives. The material was chipped as nearly as possible into the desired
shape and then ground down to a point or edge by friction upon a hard
surface with sand and water. At Anakena and other points convenient to
the sand beach we found grinding-stones, together with unfinished and
broken implements.

The traditions assert that the island was in former ages densely
populated, and the legends are supported by the gigantic works of the
image and platform builders and the ruins of various sorts scattered
about. While the accounts are probably greatly exaggerated in regard to
the number of inhabitants at one time, there is every reason to believe
that the people were numerous enough to severely tax for their support
the limited area of ground available for cultivation. The Incas of Peru
usually, selected for burial-places the rocky and steep slopes of the
hills or the low sandy plains, where cultivation was impossible, and
presuming that a similar economy might have been practiced here, much
time was devoted to a thorough examination of the sand-wastes at the
eastern extremity of the island. Excavations were made at the expense of
great labor in several places where the indications were most promising,
but with barren results. Digging to a depth of 9 feet in a depression
near Cape Anataavanui we found several flat stones of large size, such
as were used for facing the platforms, but the loose, shifting nature of
the sand made it impossible with our small force to thoroughly
investigate them. The trade-winds freely sweep these elevated plains,
blowing the sand about, and creating ridges that may be leveled again by
stronger currents at some other season. Hills and depressions simply
represent the force and direction of the wind at the time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tongariki](ei44)
