[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei45)  [Next](ei47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SKULLS SHOWING PECULIAR MARKS.

One of our guides produced from a hiding place three ancient skulls,
described elsewhere, upon the top of which these same mystical figures
had been cut. They were not shown until a reward had been promised, and
the guide claimed to have obtained them in their present condition from
the King's platform.

On the outside of the crater of Rana Roraka, near the top and looking
towards the southwest, we found a workshop containing fifteen small
images. These had been overlooked in our former trips to this place.

Scattered over the plain, extending towards Vaihu are a large number of
images, all lying face downward. The indications are that they were
being removed to their respective platforms when the work was suddenly
arrested. These heavy weights were evidently moved by main strength, but
why they were dragged over the ground face downward instead of upon
their backs, thus protecting their features. is a mystery yet unsolved.
One statue in a group of three is that of a female; the face and breast
is covered with lichen, which at a short distance gives it the
appearance of being whitewashed.

December 29.--We continued the work of exploration from Vaihu around the
southwest points of the island. Excavations were made wherever the
indications were good, but the results did not differ from those already
described. Mount Orito was visited, from whence the obsidian was
obtained for spear-heads, and also the quarries that produce the red
pigment from which the natives make a red paint by rubbing it down with
the juice of the sugar-cane. The remainder of the stay on Easter Island
was devoted to the collection of traditions, translations of tablets,
and similar matters of interest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Platforms and Images](ei47)
