[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei46)  [Next](ei48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

### PLATFORMS AND IMAGES.

In order to form an estimate of the magnitude of the work performed by
the image-makers, every one on the island was carefully counted, and the
list shows a total of five hundred and fifty-five images (Plate XXV and
XXVI). Of this number forty are standing inside of the crater and nearly
as many more on the outside of Rana Roraka (Plate XXVII), at the foot of
the slope where they were placed as finished and ready for removal to
the different platforms for which they were designed; some finished
statues lie scattered over the plains (Plate XXVIII) as though they were
being dragged toward a particular locality but were suddenly abandoned.
The large majority of the images, however, are lying near the platforms
all around the coast, all more or less mutilated and some reduced to a
mere shapeless fragment. Not one stands in its original position upon a
platform. The largest image is in one of the workshops in an unfinished
state and measures 70 feet in length; the smallest was found in one of
the caves and is a little short of 3 feet in length. One of the largest
images that has been in position lies near the platform which it
ornamented, near Ovahe; it is 32 feet long and weighs 50 tons.

Images representing females were found. One at Anakena is called
"Viri-viri Moai-a-Taka" and is apparently as perfect as the day it was
finished; another, on the plain west of Rana Roraka is called "Moai
Putu," and is in a fair state of preservation. The natives have names
for every one of the images. The designation of images and platforms as
obtained from the guides during the exploration was afterwards checked
off in company with other individuals without confusion in the record.
The coarse gray trachytic lava of which the images were made, is found
only in the vicinity of Rana Roraka and was selected because the
conglomerate character of the material made it easily worked with the
rude stone implements that constituted the only tools possessed by the
natives. The disintegration of the material when exposed to the action
of the elements is about equivalent to that of sandstone under similar
conditions, and admits of an estimate in regard to the probable age. The
traditions in regard to the images are numerous, but relate principally
to impossible occurrences, such as being endowed with power to walk
about in the darkness, assisting certain clans by subtle means in
contests, and delivering oracular judgments. The legends state that a
son of King Mahuta Ariiki, named Tro Kaiho, designed the first image,
but it is difficult to arrive at an estimation of the period. The
journals of the early navigators throw but little light upon the
subject. The workshops must have been in operation at the time of
Captain Cook's visit, but unfortunately his exploration of the island
was not directed towards the crater of Rana Roraka.

Although the images range in size from the colossus of 70 feet down to
the pigmy of 3 feet, they are clearly all of the same type and general

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

characteristics. The head is long, the eyes close under the heavy brows,
the nose long, low-bridged, and expanded at the nostrils, the upper lip
short and the lips pouting. The aspect is, slightly upwards, and the
expression is firm and profoundly solemn. Careful investigation failed
to detect the slightest evidence that the sockets had ever been fitted
with artificial eyes, made of bone and obsidian, such as are placed in
the wooden images.

The head was in all cases cut flat on top to accommodate the red tufa
crowns with. which they were ornamented, but the images standing, on the
outside of the crater had flatter heads and bodies than those found
around the coast. The images represent the human body only from the head
to the hips, where it is cut squarely off to afford a good polygon of
support when standing. The artists seem to have exhausted their talents
in executing the features, very little work being done below the
shoulders, and the arms being merely cut in low relief. The ears are
only rectangular projections, but the lobes are represented longer in
the older statues than in those of more recent date.

The images were designed as effigies of distinguished persons and
intended as monuments to perpetuate their memory. They were never
regarded as idols, and were not venerated or worshiped in any manner.
The natives had their tutelary genii, gods, and goddesses, but they were
represented by small wooden or stone idols, which bore no relation to
the images that ornamented the burial platforms. The image-makers were a
privileged class, and the profession descended from father to son. Some
of the natives still claim a descent from the image-makers, and refer to
their ancestors with as much pride as to the royal family. One of our
guides never missed an opportunity of stating that one of his
forefathers was Unrautahui, the distinguished image-maker.

The work of carving the image into shape and detaching it from the rock
of which it was a part, did not consume a great deal of time, but the
chief difficulty was in the absence of mechanical contrivances, to
launch it safely down the slope of the mountain and, transport it to a
distant point. It was lowered to the plain by a system of chocks and
wedges, and the rest was a dead drag accomplished by main strength. A
roadway was constructed, over which the images were dragged by means of
ropes made of indigenous hemp, and sea-weed and grass made excellent
lubricants. The platforms were all built with sloping terraces in the
rear, and up this incline a temporary road-way was constructed of a
suitable height, upon which the statue could be rolled until the base
was over its proper resting-place. The earth was then dug away to allow
the image to settle down into position, the ropes being used to steady
it in the mean time. It was a work of great magnitude, but we can
clearly see how it was accomplished with a large force of able bodied
men.

The crowns, or head ornaments, were made of red vesicular tufa, quarried
in the Teraai Hills, where many finished specimens are still standing.

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These truncated
cones, nearly cylindrical in shape, were easily transported. The
material is readily quarried and fashioned, being light, only about 1.4
times heavier than water, while the average density of the image-stone
is about 2.1.

The largest crown measured was 12½ feet in diameter, but of those that
had actually been placed in position the average weight would not be
more than 3 tons. The crowns were placed in position upon 'he heads of
the standing images by building a road-way upon which they could be
rolled to the proper spot. The clearing away of the incline was the
final act. The earth which formed the surface was utilized as
garden-patches, and the stones which formed the foundation of the
roadway were disposed of in building the wing-extensions of the
platform. The platforms differ greatly in dimensions, but the general
plan and characteristics are invariably the same. Many of them are in a
fair state of preservation, except that the images have been thrown down
and the terraces in the rear obliterated or strewn with rubbish, while
others have been reduced to a state of complete ruin. The platforms are
usually located near the beach, and on the high bluff some of them are
quite Dear the edge, overlooking the sea. The general plan consists of a
front elevation composed of blocks of stone fairly well squared and
neatly fitted together without cement, a parallel wall forming the
inside boundary, built of uncut stone, inclosing small chambers or tombs
placed at irregular intervals. Loose bowlders fill the spaces between
the tombs and form the horizontal plane of the platform, into which are
let the rectangular stones which constituted the base upon which the
images stood. The façade stones are large and heavy, and in some cases
the smooth surface presented could not well be attributed to the rude
implements at the command of the builders, and must have been produced
by friction or grinding. Long wings composed of uncut stone extend from
the platform proper, built up to the summit at the line of junction and
sloping away to the surface of the ground at the ends. In the rear of
the platform a few steps descend to a gently sloping terrace, which
terminates in a low wall and is bounded by a squarely built wall raised
above the ground so as to join the top of the platform. Human remains
fill the inner chambers, and bones lie scattered about among the loose
bowlders of the platform and its extensions. The ruined condition of
these solid specimens of architecture, with the overthrown images and
immense deposit of loose bowlders on the surface of the ground, are
strongly suggestive of earthquakes and volcanic eruption. The images in
all stages of incompletion in the workshops, and abandoned *en route* to
the coast in various directions, indicate, that the work was suddenly
arrested, and not gradually brought to an end; but the traditions are
silent upon the subject, and no record has been handed down of the
disturbance of any of the volcanoes on the island.

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

Platform No. 1.--Known to the natives as "Hanga Roa". Only the base
remains, measuring 59 feet long by 7 feet wide. This pile was demolished
to obtain material for the construction of a house for one of the
Catholic missionaries formerly stationed on the island.

Platform No. 2.--Called "Ana Koiroraroa"; 160 feet long by 12½ feet wide
and 10 feet high. The facing-stones on the front line remain intact, but
the body of the platform is a mere mass of loose stones, probably torn
up by the natives in recent years for the purpose of depositing their
dead in these ancient structures. The three statues that formerly
adorned this pile are lying immediately in the rear, and show from their
positions that they had faced inboard, with their backs to the sea.
These images are much weather-worn and defaced: one is entire; another
has the head lying close by, probably broken off in the fall; and the
third is minus the head and with the neck showing saw-marks. We
afterwards found out that a French vessel of war visited the island a
few years ago and the head of this image was cut off by them and taken
to Europe.

Platform No. 3 (See Fig. 17).--Called "Hanga Varevare"; 50 feet long and
8 feet wide. This has the appearance of all unfinished pile and is
merely a burial place covered with loose rocks and without the usual
smoothly faced stones in front. We found the catacombs or tombs
underneath this platform had been robbed of the most ancient skulls, and
concluded that the Frenchmen had taken everything of interest away.

 

<span id="img_fig017"></span> ![](img/fig017.jpg)  
FIG. 17.  
HANGA VAREVARE.

 

Platform No. 4.--Called "Tahai"; 160 feet long, 7½ feet wide, and 7 feet
high. In a bad state of preservation, but the facing-stones on the front
are sufficiently plain, while the rest of the pile is a mass of loose

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

stones. Five large flat stones at regular intervals along the platform,
show where the images once stood. The statues have fallen downward on
the inshore side, and are much broken and dilapidated. The one on the
north end is of gigantic size, and much larger than the others. The red
tufa crown that adorned this image lies near it, and measures 7 feet 9
inches wide; 5 feet 9 inches in ellipse; and 4 feet 9 inches high, and
the top is ornamented by sculptured lines that have the appearance of
geometrical figures, but are too much obliterated to decipher.

Platform No. 5.-- Called by the same name as the last, only a few yards
distant, is shaped like a right angle, and it is possible that these two
platforms may have been originally designed for one of huge proportions.
The stones of which it is composed have been thrown about in such
disorder that the original design can not be followed, but the flat base
stones indicate where the images once stood. At one end of this platform
a statue 14 feet high and 9 feet across the hips, lies face downward on
the inboard side, and at the other end, one measuring 15 feet long and 6
feet wide, lies face downward toward the sea, being one of the few
images on the island found in that position, admitting the possibility
of having faced outboard.

Platform No. 6.--Called "Anotai"; 120 feet long, 17½ feet wide, and 7½
feet high. In a bad state of preservation, though the faced stones on
the front may be traced. The remains of one image lies on the inboard
side, but minus the head. A large cavity in the center of the back of
this image attracted attention, but could not be explained. The red tufa
crown belonging to this statue lies half-buried in the earth, about 100
feet distant. Under the center of this platform were, obtained some
interesting relies, and the tombs bore evidence of great antiquity.

Platform No. 7.--Called "Ahuakapu"; 101 feet long, 9 feet wide, and 8
feet high. In a bad state of preservation. Three images lying on the
front side with the appearance of having been pulled over backwards, and
one upon the inshore side down upon its face. All four statues are in
good condition, except that the heads have been broken off at the neck
by the fall. One of these detached beads measured 5 feet 3 inches in
length by 3 feet 2 inches from ear to ear. The four pedestal stones are
still in place on the platform and average 4 feet long and 3 feet 8
inches wide, and are composed of hard volcanic rock, roughly squared.

Platform No. 8.--Called "Anaoraka"; 95 feet long and 8 feet wide and 7
feet high. Remarkable for the large stones that support the sea face,
the largest of which measures 6 feet 9 inches high and 4 feet 7 inches
wide. Four images have fallen upon their faces upon the inboard side.
Only a pedestal stone remains in position, which is 5 feet 2 inches
square by 2 feet 2 inches thick. (Fig. 18).

Platform No. 9--Called "Kihikihiraumea"; 186 feet long, 8 feet 10 inches
wide, and 7 feet 5 inches thick. The central section of this structure
contains stones so remarkably well cut and fitted together that it

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

merits the accompanying sketch. Four images were found, which had been
thrown down on their faces on the inboard side. These are in a fair
state of preservation. From this ruin we obtained skulls, obsidian
spear-heads, and stone tools.

 

<span id="img_fig018"></span> ![](img/fig018.jpg)  
FIG. 18.  
SHOWING GENERAL PLAN OF CONSTRUCTION OF PLATFORM. ALSO PLAN OF HOUSE
CONSTRUCTION WITH DETAILS.

 

Platform No. 10.--Called "Ahutepeu". Is in such a state of dilapidation
that it was impossible to obtain accurate measurements. Portions of an
image are here, but it looks as though others might have been rolled
over the edge of the cliff, which is only a few feet distant and about
450 feet high, and against the base of which the sea dashes incessantly.

Platform No. 11.--Called "Hananakou". Central sections 48 feet long, 12
feet wide, and 9 feet high; total length, with wings, 248 feet. This is
an exceedingly fine platform, and contains some remarkably large stones.
In the face of the main structure are huge blocks of igneous rock that
appear to have once been fashioned into faces and figures, but now so
destroyed by the action of the elements and perhaps by the hand of the
iconoclast that the features can only be dimly traced. Hard work with

 

<span id="img_pl029"></span> ![](img/pl029.jpg)  
"OHAU" PLATFORM, NO. 12, SHOWING PECULIARLY FITTED STONES. CENTER STONE
WEIGHS 6 TONS; CIRCULAR PEDESTAL STONE, 5½ FEET IN DIAMETER

 

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

our entire force disclosed beneath this platform well constructed
catacombs and tombs, containing human remains so old that they crumbled
into dust upon exposure to the air. The removal of one of the facing
stones revealed a lot of skulls with remarkably broad, heavy underjaws.
These were generally too brittle to be handled, and a peculiar feature
about the find was the fact that these heads had been entombed together,
and the surroundings excluded the idea of any other portions of the
bodies having been interred with them. Only one image is in sight, and
the proximity of the platform to the edge of the bluff suggests the
possibility that other statues may have been thrown into the sea. From
the size and character of the work on the structure it is not reasonable
to suppose that it was designed to support the one insignificant statue
that lies near it.

Platform No. 12.--Called "Ohau". Central section 18 feet long, 9 feet
wide, and 6 feet high. One image thrown down upon its face on the
inboard side, 8 feet 4 inches long; extreme, width of body 5 feet;
length of head 4 feet; and width from ear to ear, 3 feet 3 inches. Good
state of preservation. (Plate XXIX).

Platform No. 13.--Called "Ahukinokino". In such a state of ruin that
measurements were not obtainable. Situated close to the edge of the high
cliff.

Platform No. 14.--Called "Ahutoretore". Has been so completely destroyed
that nothing can be determined about its original size and importance.
Excavations in this vicinity produced nothing but a few stray spear
heads of obsidian.

Platform No. 15.--Called "Hangatariri"; 103 feet long 11 feet wide; and
6 feet high. In very bad condition, but some of the large cut
facing-stones are in position. Four images lie face downward on the
island side, and two more have fallen on their backs toward the sea. A
few yards back of this structure is a tomb 50 feet long and 6 feet wide,
built of stones taken from the platform and those peculiarly cut stones
that form the foundations of the image-builders' houses. At one end is a
hard stone slab that appears to have been covered with hieroglyphics,
but they are too nearly obliterated to be accurately traced. After a
thorough investigation we concluded that it was of comparatively recent
date and had no distinctive features of its own. On the plain, a few
hundred yards distant, is an image of gigantic proportions lying upon
its face with the head toward the sea. The indications are that it was
designed for this platform and was being moved into position when from
some sudden emergency it had to be abandoned. The ground underneath the
statue has been dug out by later generations in such a manner that the
body of the image forms the roof of the cave. The base of the statue
shows traces of rudely sculptured figures, nearly obliterated. In this
vicinity are several large caves. with the narrow entrances completely
blocked up with loose stones, which were not investigated for the want
of time.

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

Platform No. 16.--Called "Haugaoteo"; 70 feet long and 12 feet wide. Has
the appearance of having been in process of construction. when the work
was suddenly suspended.

Platform No. 17.--Called "Tumuheipara"; 40 feet long, 8 feet wide, and 8
feet high. This structure also appears to have been abandoned before
completion. The chances are that several days could have been spent upon
the extensive plain, back of these images, to great advantage and it is
regretted that the limited time at our disposal did not allow a more
thorough investigation.

Platform No. 18.--Called "Haahuroa". Central section 40 feet long, 12
feet wide, and 7 feet high, with wings 145 feet in length. One image
lying on the inboard side measures 7 feet 5 inches long and 3 feet 5
inches wide; length of head to shoulders 3 feet 4 inches, and width from
ear to ear 3 feet 5 inches. The fragments of two other images lie in
front of the platform. The huge facing-stones of this structure have
been thrown about as though by some great convulsion of nature, and some
of them bear evidences of having been ornamented with sculptured
figures.

Platform No. 19.--Called "Akane". Seems to have been abandoned while in
the process of construction. A few faced stones intended for the front
of the central section are lying about, but were never placed in
position.

Platform No. 20.--Called "Ahuroa". Is a mere mass of loose rocks, said
to have been destroyed in the tribal wars, but it has the appearance of
having never been completed.

Platform No. 21.--Called "Vaiavangarenga". In the same condition as the
last. No images.

Platform No. 22.--Called "Maiki". Same as the last; merely a pile of
loose stones covering human remains. These platforms may have been
robbed to supply the material for the construction of the numerous
houses and cairns, the ruins of which cover the hills in this vicinity.

Platform No. 23.--Called "Tauka". Central section 38 feet long, feet
wide, and 12 feet high, the extreme length with wings 120 feet. In very
bad condition. One small image lies face-upward toward the sea, much
broken. Facing and other suitable stones have been removed from this
platform for the construction of tombs and houses. Near at hand is one
of those peculiar ways, made by paving the sloping bank with regular
lines of smooth, round bowlders, as though intended for hauling up heavy
boats or weights.

Platform No. 24.--Called "Punamuta". In its incipient stage, and
important only from the fact that it shows the manner of laying the
foundation of the work.

Platform No. 25.--Called "Koteva", This has been an important structure
and was built in the shape of a right angle 60 feet long, 11 feet wide,
and 20 feet, high. Portions of the walls have been thrown down, and no
images could be found.

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

Platform No. 26.--Called "Tetonga". Similar in shape and structure to
the last, but of smaller size. From these piles we obtained relics in
the shape of obsidian spear-heads, stone implements and skulls.

Platform No. 27.--Called "Hanghaogio"; 150 feet long, 8 feet wide, and
10 feet high. Three small images have been thrown down and much broken.

Platform No. 28.--Called "Huarero". Very similar to the last, but
located on the hill-side, about three-quarters of a mile back of the
bay. The facing-stones show traces of carving, but so nearly obliterated
that only these figures could be made out: <span id="img_50500"></span>
![](img/50500.jpg), and they seemed to be often repeated. The fragments
of two images lie behind the platform.

Platform No. 29.--Called "Anakena"; 75 feet long, 8 feet wide, and 10
feet high. An image lies upon its face upon the inboard side, 13 feet
long and 9 feet across the hips; length of head, to shoulders, 5 feet.
and width, from ear to ear, 6 feet 6 inches. This image is in the best
state of preservation of any found about the platforms of the island.
The traditions state that it was the last statue finished and set up in
place. Our guides maintained that this is the statue of a female, and
that it was only thrown down about twenty-four years ago. Its size, and
proximity to the perfectly smooth landing place at Anakena Bay, would
insure its easy removal to a vessel. From the sand beach at Anakena Bay
we passed over hills composed of volcanic cinder as light as coke, but
very hard. Beyond this are numerous ruins of houses, each with a small
stone building connected that was evidently designed for fowls. The
largest of these was about 8 feet square, and the only opening was a
small hole for the chickens to pass through.

Platform No. 30.--Called "Ahutrature". Central section 30 feet long, 10
feet wide, and 6 feet high. Extreme length 80 feet. In ruins, with no
images.

Platform No. 31.--Called "Anateka"; 30 feet long, 12 feet wide, and feet
high. Extreme length 100 feet. In a very bad condition. Small fragments
are in that remain of two images and two crowns.

Platform No. 32.--Called 14 "Ahupuapuatetea". Merely a shapeless mass of
uncut stones remain to indicate the site of the structure.

Platform No. 33.--Called "Ahangakihikihi"; 20 feet long, 10 feet wide,
and 9 feet high. In ruins. One small image lies on the inboard side, in
a bad condition.

Platform No. 34.--Called "Punahoa". Although in ruins, this has
evidently been a structure of some importance; 175 feet long, 8 feet
wide, with the central section projecting 6 feet forward of the main
line. The facing-stones are from 6 feet to 9 feet in length by 5 feet
and 1 foot in thickness. An image lies upon its face on the inboard
side, and measures 32 feet long, 10 feet 3 inches wide; length of head,
to shoulders, 12 feet and 6 inches. Near this platform we found a
peculiar stone nearly buried in the earth. After much digging it proved
to be

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

nearly spherical in shape and about 8 feet 4 inches in circumference.

The natives called "Petakula", and we could only make out that was a
grinding stone of some sort.

Platform No. 35.--Called "Paupau"; 150 feet long, 10 feet wide, and 8
feet high, with a small platform in front of it. The building of this
elaborate structure must have furnished employment for a large number of
people. The foundation stones are of hard rock of immense size, all
smoothly faced. Four images have been thrown down, two on each side, and
all much broken.

Platform No. 36.--"Hangakouri". Central section 70 feet long, 7 feet and
8 feet high. Extreme length 300 feet. 1n a state of absolute ruin and no
images.

Platform No. 37.--Called "Hangahohoonu". Completely in ruin s and with
one image in a bad condition. Between these last two platforms is a
paved way leading to a small channel through the rocks that affords a
safe and convenient landing for small boats.

Platform No. 38--Called "Mari". Central section 80 feet long, 12 feet
wide, and 7 feet high. Extreme length 300 feet, situated very close to
edge of the bluff.

Platform No. 39--Called "Ahurai". Very large; but, like the last, in a
state of ruin.

Platform No. 40--Called "Tehahitunukiolaira". Of great size; but, like
the last, in a state of absolute ruin; covering human remains.

Platform No. 41--Called "Naruaanga". Small and inferior; also in ruins
and no images.

Platform No. 42--Called "Hangaopuna"; 100 feet long and 10 feet wide.
Has two layers of roughly cut stones in the front face, and appears to
have been left in an unfinished state.

Platform No. 43--Called "Tumatuma"; 25 feet long, 7 feet wide, and 7
feet high. Poorly constructed, and contains nothing of interest but one
small image.

Platform No. 44--Called "Tokaie". Larger than the last, but in a bad
condition. A much battered head lies just behind the pile, but the rest
of the image can not be found.

Platform No. 45.--Called "Vaimangeo"; 50 feet long, 8 feet wide, and 15
feet high. Extreme length, including wings, 150 feet. In a state of
ruin, and has one large image thrown down on the inboard side.

Platform No. 46.--Called "Moukuhoi"; 20 feet long, 7 feet wide, and 5
feet. Extreme length, including wings, 60 feet. Situated very close to
the edge of the bluff, and looks as if the destroyers of the structure
may have tossed the most of it into the sea.

Platform No. 47.--Called "Moukuroa". In all respects a duplicate of the
last one.

Platform No. 48.--Called "Moluariki"; 20 feet long, 7 feet wide, and 5
feet high. Extreme length, including wings 260 feet. This. has been a
large and imposing structure. The central section, upon which the image

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

stood projects beyond the line of the platform, and was higher. In the
rear, and extending the entire length of the pile, is a broad terrace,
neatly paved with smooth round bowlders. The fragments of three images
lie upon the terrace.

Platform No. 49.--Called "Oneonepuhea". Central section is about 45 feet
long by 6 feet high. This is a crescent shaped structure, and the only
one of the kind that we saw on the island. It is situated on the extreme
edge of the cliff, which at this point has a straight away fall of over
500 feet to the sea, which dashes against its wall-like base. There is
no image in sight, but a large pedestal stone, inclined at a sharp angle
towards the sea, shows where one has stood and suggests what became of
it.

Platform No. 50.--Called "Ahatakaure". Located on Poike cliff, facing
westward; is small and unimportant and in a state of complete ruin. On
the east slope of the mountain we found an image, the head of which had
been broken off, but it lies near by. There is no platform here and no
indications that one was intended to be built in the vicinity; so we
concluded that the statue was being moved to some distant locality when
it was broken and abandoned.

Platform No. 51.--Called "Hangaiti"; 30 feet long and 8 feet wide and 5
feet high. In a bad condition and one small image broken.

Platform No. 52.--Called "Tongariki"; 150 feet long, 9 feet wide, and 8
feet high (Plates XXX-XXXIV). Extreme length, including original wings,
540 feet, This is the largest platform on the island, and was ornamented
with fifteen gigantic statues. These have been thrown down upon their
faces on the inshore side, and the most of these are broken, the one, on
the south end being fractured across the middle of the body, leaving the
lower section still standing. The red tufa crowns are lying a short
distance away and are also much broken. The hard stones of which the
sea-front of this platform is constructed are of immense size, faced and
neatly joined together. One of the foundation-stones in the center of
this wall is of red tufa and represents a human head.

Our investigations were commenced at this point by throwing down the
facing-stones and working straight backwards through the platform. The
labor was great, and occupied the most of our force for nearly two days,
but the catacombs and tombs underlying the structure were thoroughly
examined. Under the central section are small, narrow passages forming a
part of the original design, having been built up while the platform was
in process of construction, and containing human remains. The oldest of
these tombs appear to have been sealed up before the structure was
completed, and the probability is that they were not intended to be
opened, from the fact that there is nothing to indicate their exact
locality. The pedestal-stones, all of which are still in place, show
that the images were put up at equal distances and with a view to
symmetry, and without regard to the position of the tombs; though

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

it is pretty well established that they were intended as effigies of
chiefs or distinguished persons. The terrace behind the platform was
also used as a burial-place, and contained remains of an ancient date.
Succeeding generations have utilized the same places for the same
purposes, but there are passages under the platform that have never been
opened since the structure was built. The entire plain back of Tongariki
Bay is one vast cemetery, containing the decaying remains of thousands
of people. Every pile of stones, cave or ruined platform, house or
cairn, has been used as a tomb. The christianized natives of to-day
still regard this as a favorite burial-place. They have neither the
ambition nor the industry to construct tombs for themselves, but are
content to place their dead in receptacles filled with the remains of
their ancestors. The recess-angles between the bodies of the fallen
images, and the platforms upon which the base rests, are filled with
remains of a recent date.

Platform No. 53.--Called "One-tea". Completely in ruins. Three images
much broken. Foundation proper about 100 feet long.

Platform No. 54.--Called "Opaarionga". Small and unimportant. Central
section 20 feet long, 6 feet wide, and 7 feet high. Remains of one small
image.

Platform No. 55.--Called "Hangatufata"; 125 feet long, 8 feet wide, and
7 feet high. Five images thrown down, broken and in bad condition.

Platform No. 56.--Called "Onemakihi". Central section 40 feet long, 7
feet wide, and 7 feet high. Extreme length, including wings, 100 feet.
One image much mutilated.

Platform No. 57.--Called "Punakape". Central section 40 feet long, 6
feet wide, and 6 feet high. Extreme length 80 feet. In ruins, and no
images.

Platform No. 58.--Called "Moaitutahi". Central section 150 feet long, 7
feet wide, and 7 feet high. Extreme length 250 feet. Only two images
remain. but appearances indicate that others have been destroyed. Upon
terraces sloping towards the sea from the front are numerous remains of
image-builders' houses. From the back of the structure a nicely paved
way, 10 feet wide, extends inland for a distance of 200 yards.

Platform No. 59.--Called "Hanga-mahihiku". A mere mass of ruins, and
almost devoid of shape. No images.

Platform No. 60.--Called "Ahuakoi". Central section 75 feet long, 7 feet
wide, and 6 feet high. Extreme length, 160 feet. In a bad condition, and
no images.

Platform No. 61.--Called "Hanga-tutaki". A mere mass of ruins covering
human remains.

Platform No. 62.--Called "Ahupoepoe". In same condition as the last and
without images.

Platform No. 63.--Called "Vaimoai". Central section 40 feet long, 6 feet
wide, and 8 feet high. Extreme length, 90 feet. In bad condition, and no
images.

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

Platform No. 64.--Called "Kai". Same dimensions and general appearance
as the last, but has one broken image.

Platform No. 65.--Called "Ruruoa". Central section 150 feet long, feet
wide, and 6 feet high. Extreme length, including wings, 24-5 feet. Two
large images, each 33 feet in length by 5 wide. Length of head, to
shoulders, 10 feet, and width, from ear to ear, 4 feet. The stones on
the front wall of the structure are neatly squared and smoothly faced.

Platform No. 66.--Called "Mahatua". Central section 30 feet long, feet
wide, and 6 feet high. Extreme length, 100 feet. Two images, much
defaced, lie on the inboard side on their faces. Between this platform
and the last there is a nicely graded and paved road, with gentle slope
from the cliff to the water-edge.

Platform No. 67.--Called "Ahukirirera". Has been pretty well demolished.
No images.

Platform No. 68.--Called "Tehangakiri". Central section 40 feet long, 7
feet wide, and 7 feet high. Extreme length, 250 feet. Here are seven
images, three large ones and four small sized, all in a damaged
condition.

Platform No. 69.--Called "Kirikiriroa". Has been pretty thoroughly
demolished, and has the fragments of one image.

Platform No. 70.--Called "Onepuhea". A duplicate of the last one in all
respects.

Platform No. 71.--Called "Hanga-tetera"; 60 feet long, 6 feet wide, and
7 feet high, and has no wings. The main stones of sea-face average in
size 5½ feet long and 1½ feet wide. No images.

Platform No. 72.--Called "Hanga-rea". Has been completely demolished and
the fragments of two images lie among the ruins.

Platform No. 73.--Called "Oteu". Has a small foundation and seems to
have been abandoned in an unfinished condition.

Platform No. 74.--Called "Tahureue". Has been destroyed, and the
fragments of two images lie in the ruins.

Platform No. 75.--Called "Oroi". Central section 40 feet long, 6 feet
wide, and 6 feet high. Extreme length, 140 feet. In a bad condition and
no images.

Platform No. 76.--Called "Ahukinokino". Somewhat smaller than the last,
but destitute of all interest.

Platform No. 77.--Called "Papaturei". A duplicate of the last, and in a
demolished condition.

Platform No. 78.--Called "Tutuira". A mere mass of ruins, and with no
images.

Platform No. 79.--Called "Ue". Central section 30 feet long, 6 feet
wide, 6 feet high. Extreme length, 120 feet. Two images in a bad
condition.

Platform No. 80.--Called "Akahanga" (Plate XXXV). Two hundred and fifty
feet long, 10 feet wide, and 7 feet high, with no wings.

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thirteen colossal
images that once ornamented this remarkable structure have been thrown
down and more or less damaged. Their red tufa crowns, also considerably
broken, lie near at hand. On the inland facing-wall there is a ground
tier of gray volcanic stone finely dressed, and on this is a tier of
tufa stones 4½ feet long, 2½ feet high, and 8 inches thick each and
these are covered with hieroglyphics.

This is known as the King's platform, and is regarded as one of the most
important on the island, on account of the finished work on the
structure as well as the numerous sculptures (Fig. 19). The tradition

 

<span id="img_fig019"></span> ![](img/fig019.jpg)  
FIG. 19  
SCULPTURED ROCK: PLATFORM.

 

asserts that this was the burial place of Hotu-Matua, the first king,
and a long line of his descendants. Our excavations in the vicinity
produced nothing of interest beyond a few ancient skulls with lower jaws
of extraordinary size and width. From the foundation of image-builders
houses we obtained fine stone, implements and carving tools.

Platform No. 81.--Called "Harerora". Small and unimportant. One image,
much broken.

Platform No. 82.--Called "Motupope". Central section 252 feet long, 10
feet wide, and 7 feet high. Extreme length, 375 feet. Six images in
rather bad condition. This structure is important from the fact that the
statues have short ears, the only ones of the kind we found on the
island. The sketches will show that on all the platforms, as well the
images, in the workshops as those left in an unfinished state were all
carved with long ears. Why there was in exception made to the general
rule in the images that adorned this structure, could not be determined.

Platform No. 83.--Called "Anaonero". Consisting of foundation stones
only, showing that the work was abandoned shortly after being commenced.

Platform No. 84.--Called "Ruareva". A mere, mass of ruins.

Platform No. 85.--Called "Hoekoe". Has been completely demolished and
shows fragments of two large images.

Platform No. 86.--Called "Pakaea". Central section 45 feet long, 8 feet
wide, and 7 feet high, with wings extending 250 feet on either side. One
image, in a bad condition.

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

Platform No. 87.--Called "Manumea". A mere mass of ruins.

Platform No. 88.--Called "Hanga-tee". Same condition as the last.

Platform No. 89.--Called "Kope-iti". only the foundation-stones in
place; probably never finished.

Platform No. 90.--Called "Runga-vae". Same condition as last.

Platform No. 91.--Called "Kote-one" In same unfinished state.

Platform No. 92.--Called "Renga-havini". A mere mass of ruins.

Platform No. 93.--Called "Kote-ara-ara". In a complete state of ruin.

Platform No. 94.--Called "Puepau". In same condition as the last.

Platform No. 95.--Called "Kivaau". A shapeless ruin.

Platform No. 96.--Called "Taroe". Central section 200 feet long, 8 feet
wide, and 6½ feet high. Extreme length, 350 feet. Eleven images, all
mutilated.

Platform No. 97.--Called "Ariki-iki". A shapeless ruin.

Platform No. 98.--Called "Kone-iti". Same condition as the last.

Platform No. 99.--Called "Koturara". In a very bad condition, with one
broken image.

Platform No. 100.--Called "Moturea". In a state of absolute ruin.

Platform No. 101.--Called "Hanga-paukura". Shows that it was originally
well built, and has six images lying behind it.

Platform No. l02.--In a very bad condition, and the name could not be
ascertained.

Platform No. 101.--Called "Mataakira". A shapeless mass of ruins.

Platform No. 104.--Called "Anokahi". Similar to the last.

Platform No. 105.--Called "Hanga-hahue". In a bad condition, but has
been an extensive structure with long wings. Four images.

Platform No. 106.--Called "Tehuteaheru". A mass of ruins.

Platform No. 107.--Called "Ahumeamea". Small and irregular construction.
One image much damaged.

Platform No. 108.--Called "Ahumata-iti". This structure has been pretty
thoroughly demolished and shows the fragments of one image.

Platform No. 109.--Called "Tahiri". The dimensions of this structure are
not great, but it is remarkable on account of the finished workmanship.
The sea front is built of immense blocks of hard heavy volcanic rock,
smoothly faced and neatly joined together. In places, small stones have
been mortised into the larger ones. It is surprising that such results
could be produced by the rude stone implements that are known to have,
been the only tools at the command of the natives. Finished surfaces
might be the result of grinding with sand and water, but the joints and
fittings could only be accomplished by long and patient labor. Some of
the facing-stones were estimated at a weight of upwards of 5 tons. Under
the impression that the superior character of the work indicated a
platform of more than usual importance, it was thoroughly investigated
at the expense of great labor and time. A section of the front wall was
thrown down and the stones removed

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

until an opening was made clear through the structure. No results having
been obtained except a knowledge of how the pile was constructed from
the foundation up, additional efforts were directed towards the two
ends. To our great disappointment, we had nothing to show for the great
labor expended upon this platform. The only human remains about the
place are those of recent date, in shallow tombs on the rear side of the
pile. There is a tradition to the effect that this was the last platform
built on the island and was intended for the colossal image (70 feet)
lying in the workshops on the west side of the crater of Rana Roraka.
The legend asserts that when the work upon the platform and images had
arrived at a certain stage, a great feast was held in honor of the event
by the powerful tribe of Vinapu. The wife of the chief was of the
Tongariki clan and during the ceremonies this "lady" was slighted in the
division of "long pig," but whether intentionally or otherwise does not
appear. Cannibalism was practiced on the island down to the advent of
the first missionaries, and was always an important feature of the
ancient feasts. The bodies were roasted in ovens made of hot stones
covered with earth, after the manner practiced all through Polynesia,
and certain portions were awarded to prominent individuals. Upon this
particular occasion the rib-roast, "tenderloin" steak, or whatever the
favorite morsel was which belonged to the aforesaid female by reason of
her rank, was given to another, The insulted individual immediately
sought the protection of her own clan, who arose *en masse* to vindicate
the Tongariki honor. Long and bloody wars followed. Image-builders and
platform-makers were drawn into the conflict from all parts of the
island and, in a spirit of revenge, platforms were destroyed and images
thrown down whenever opportunity offered. This is believed to have been
the origin of the trouble which has laid waste the extraordinary works
of this island.

 

<span id="img_fig020"></span> ![](img/fig020.jpg)  
FIG. 20. PLATFORM 110. "VINAPU."

 

Platform No. 110.--Called "Vinapu" (Fig. 20). A large structure with six
mutilated images, and of the same general character and appearance as
those already described. immediately behind this platform a wall of
earth incloses a piece of ground about 225 feet in

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

diameter and circular in shape. This is believed to have been the
theater of the native ceremonies, and perhaps the spot where the feast,
were held. We made excavations in the center and around the sides, but
without a "find".

Platform No. 111.--Called "Ahutupai." Has been pretty thoroughly
demolished. Six images in a bad condition lie on the top of the pile.

Platform No. 112.-Called "Ahurikiriki." Situated on the extreme
southwestern end of the island, and remarkable from its position on the
face of a perpendicular cliff nearly 1,000 feet high and midway between
the sea and the top. Sixteen small images are lying on this platform and
many of them seem to be in excellent condition. We could find no way of
reaching the narrow ledge upon which this platform stands. No road leads
down from the top; it can not be approached from either side, and from
below it is a straight up and down wall against which the sea dashes
continually. It is hardly probable that the images were lowered from the
top by ropes, and the natural conclusion is, that a roadway once
existed, which has been undermined by the waves and has fallen into the
sea.

Platform No. 113.--Called "Kaokaoe." This was originally a large
structure, but has been completely demolished by Mr. Brander to obtain
material for the construction of stone-fences about his place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Language](ei48.md)
