[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei47)  [Next](ei49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LANGUAGE

The principal feature of interest, connected with Easter Island, is the
written language by which the ancient traditions and legends were
perpetuated. The existence of the incised tablets was not known until
the missionaries settled upon the island. Numerous specimens were found
in the possession of the natives, but no especial attention appears to
have been directed towards them. Several persons, belonging to vessels
that were wrecked at Easter Island, report having seen these tablets,
but they were so highly prized by the natives, that they could not be
induced to part with them. The three hundred islanders who emigrated to
Tahiti had in their possession a number of these tablets; they created
some attention on account of the remarkable skill with which the figures
were executed, but they were highly prized by the owners and no effort
was made to secure them because their real value was not discovered. The
Chilian corvette *O'Higgins* visited Easter Island in January, 1870, and
Captain Gana secured three tablets, two of which are on deposit in the
national museum at Santiago de Chili and the third was sent to France,
but does not appeared to have reached its destination. Paper impressions
and casts were taken from the Chilian tablets for the various museums of
Europe. Those sent to the English Ethnological Society created some
interest after a time, but others sent to Berlin were regarded as stamps
for marking native cloth ("Mittheilungen, July, 1871). Seven of these
tablets are now in the possession of Tepano Jansser, bishop of Axieri,
all in excellent state of preservation.

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

While the Mohican was at Tahiti, the bishop kindly permitted us to
examine these tablets and take photographs of them. These tablets were
obtained from the missionaries who had been stationed on Easter Island,
and they ranged in size from 5½ inches in length by 4 inches broad, to
5½ feet in length and 7 inches wide. Diligent search was made for
specimens of these tablets during our visit to Easter Island. At first
the natives denied having any, but Mr. Salmon knew of the existence of
two, and these were finally purchased after a great deal of trouble and
at considerable expense. The tablets obtained are in a fair state of
preservation. The large one is a piece of drift-wood that from its
peculiar shape is supposed to have been used as a portion of a canoe.
The other is made of the toromiro wood indigenous to the island. In
explanation of the disappearance of these tablets, the natives stated
that the missionaries had ordered all that could be found to be burned,
with a view to destroying the ancient records, and getting rid of
everything that would have a tendency to attach them to their
heathenism, and prevent their thorough conversion to Christianity. The
loss to the science of philology by this destruction of valuable relies
is too great to be estimated. The native traditions in regard to the
incised tablets simply assert that Hotu-Matua, the first king, possessed
the knowledge of this written language, and brought with him to the
island sixty-seven tablets containing allegories, traditions,
genealogical tables, and proverbs relating to the land from which he had
migrated. A knowledge of the written characters was confined to the
royal family, the chiefs of the six districts into which the island was
divided, sons of those, chiefs, and certain priests or teachers, but the
people were assembled at Anekena Bay once each year to hear all of the
tablets read. The feast of the tablets was regarded as their most
important fête day, and not even war was allowed to interfere with it.

The combination of circumstances that caused the sudden arrest of
image-making, and resulted in the abandonment of all such work on the
island, never to be again revived, may have had its effect upon the art
of writing. The tablets that have been found in the best stage of
preservation would correspond very nearly with the age of the unfinished
images in the workshops. The ability to read the characters may have
continued until 1864, when the Peruvian slavers captured a large number
of the inhabitants, and among those kidnapped, were all of the officials
and persons in authority. After this outrage, the traditions, etc.,
embraced by the tablets, seem to have been repeated on particular
occasions, but the value of the characters was not understood and was
lost to the natives. A man called Ure Vaeiko, one of the patriarchs of
the island, professes to have been under instructions in the art of
hieroglyphic reading at the time of the Peruvian visit, and claims to
understand most of the characters. Negotiations were opened with him for
a translation of the two tablets purchased; but he declined to furnish
any information, on the ground that it had been forbidden by the
priests. Presents of money and

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

valuables were sent him from time to time, but he invariably replied to
all overtures that he was now old and feeble and had but a short time to
live, and declined most positively to ruin his chances for salvation by
doing what his Christian instructors had forbidden. Finally the old
fellow, to avoid temptation, took to the hills with the determination to
remain in hiding until after the departure of the *Mohican*. It was a
matter of the utmost importance that the subject should be thoroughly
investigated before leaving the island, and unscrupulous strategy was
the only resource after fair means had failed. Just before sundown one
evening, shortly before the day appointed for our sailing, heavy clouds
rolled up from the southwest and indications pointed to bad weather. In
a heavy down-pour of rain we crossed the island from Vinapu to Mateveri
with Mr. Salmon, and found, as had been expected, that old Ure Vaeiko
had sought the shelter of his own home on this rough night. He was
asleep when we entered and took charge of the establishment. When he
found escape impossible he became sullen, and refused to look at or
touch a tablet. As a compromise it was proposed that he should relate
some of the ancient traditions. This was readily acceded to, because the
opportunity of relating the legends to an interested audience did not
often occur, and the positive pleasure to be derived from such an
occasion could not be neglected. During the recital certain stimulants
that had been provided for such an emergency were produced, and though
not pressed upon our ancient friend, were kept prominently before him
until, as the night grew old and the narrator weary, he was included as
the "cup that cheers" made its occasional rounds. A judicious indulgence
in present comforts dispelled all fears in regard to the future state,
and at an auspicious moment the photographs of the tablets owned by the
bishop were produced for inspection. Old Ure Vaeiko had never seen a
photograph before, and was surprised to find how faithfully they
reproduced the tablets which he had known in his young days. A tablet
would have met with opposition, but no objection could be urged against
a photograph, especially something possessed by the good bishop, whom he
had been instructed to reverence. The photographs were recognized
immediately, and the appropriate legend related with fluency and without
hesitation from beginning to end. The story of all the tablets of which
we had a knowledge was finally obtained, the words of the native being
written down by Mr. Salmon as they were uttered, and afterwards
translated into English.

A casual glance it the Easter Island tablets is sufficient to note the
fact that they differ materially from other kyriologic writings. The
pictorial symbols are engraved in regular lines on depressed channels,
separated by slight ridges intended to protect the hieroglyphics from
injury by rubbing. In some cases the characters are smaller, and the
tablets contain a greater number of lines, but in all cases the
hieroglyphics are incised and cover both sides as well as the beveled
edge and hollows of the board upon which they are engraved. The symbols

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

on each line are alternately reversed; those on the first stand upright,
and those on file next line are upside down, and so on by regular
alternation.

This unique plan makes it necessary for the reader to turn the tablet,
and change its position at the end of every line; by this means the
characters will be found to follow in regular procession. The reading
should commence at the lower left-hand corner, on the particular side
that will bring the figures erect, and followed as the characters face
in the procession, turning the tablet at the end of each line, as
indicated. Arriving at the top of the first face, the reading is
continued over the edge to the nearest line, at the top of the other
side, and the descent continues in the same manner until the end is
reached. The Boustrophedon method is supposed to have been adopted in
order to avoid the possibility of missing a line of hieroglyphics.

Ure Vaeiko's fluent interpretation of the tablet was not interrupted,
though it became evident that he was not actually reading the
characters. It was noticed that the shifting of position did not accord
with the number of symbols on the lines, and afterwards when the
photograph of another tablet was substituted, the same story was
continued without the change being discovered. The old fellow was quite
discomposed when charged with fraud at the close of an all-night
session, and at first maintained that the characters were all
understood, but he could not give the signification of hieroglyphics
copied indiscriminately from tablets already marked. He explained at
great length that the actual value and significance of the symbols had
been forgotten, but the tablets were recognized by unmistakable features
and the interpretation of them was beyond question; just as a person
might recognize a book in a foreign language and be perfectly sure of
the contents without being able to actually read it.

Beyond doubt certain legends are ascribed to particular tablets, all of
which are named, and a reference to those names will recall the
appropriate story from those who do not profess to understand the
hieroglyphics. An old man called Kaitae, who claims relationship to the
last king, Maurata, afterwards recognized several of the tablets from
the photographs and related the same story exactly as that given
previously by Ure Vaeiko.

The writing is composed of pictorial symbols carrying their
signification in the image they represent. The execution would be a
creditable production with the assistance of the best etching tools, and
is a truly wonderful result of patience and industry to be accomplished
by means of obsidian points. The minute size of the hieroglyphics made
it impossible to convey anything more than the general appearance of the
objects delineated, but the figures may be recognized by their form in
the outline drawing after the manner of some of the Egyptian
hieroglyphics. The study of the tablets is chiefly difficult on account
of the way in which actual objects are conventionally treated, and in
order to

<span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

preserve symmetry and effect, men, canoes, fish, etc., are represented
of the same size throughout the lilies.

A careful study of the hieroglyphics of Easter Island is being made,
with the hope that valuable information may be obtained in regard to the
early history a ad origin of the people. Results of an extremely
interesting nature are barely outlined at present and not in shape to be
presented. herewith. It is not considered expedient to attempt an
explanation of the symbols until the subject can be treated
exhaustively. As an example of the ideographic character of the signs,
the tablet containing the genealogical tables shows a frequent
repetition of the symbol of the great spirit Meke-Meke in connection
with that of the female vulva. The signification is the birth of a
person. The position of the figures shows whether the child was the
result of marriage, or intrigue, and the following figures indicate the
date of the birth, the seasons and the approximate time. An important
feature, in connection with the tablets, is the fact that forms have
been discovered which have no types on Easter Island, and which may lead
to an identification of the locality from whence the first settlers
migrated. The hieroglyphics include, besides the representation of
actual objects, figures used by the chiefs, and each clan had its
distinctive mark. Samples are given in different treaties made with the
islanders of the sign-manual of some of the chiefs. (See Plates
XXXVI-XLIX.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of the Easter Island Tablet, Apai](ei49.md)
