[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei59)  [Next](ei61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### POLYNESIAN ARCHÆOLOGY.

The most ancient monuments of Polynesia are the lithic and megalithic
remains, coincident in style and character with the Druidical circles of
Europe, and the exact counterpart of those of Stonehenge and Carnac in
Brittany. These earlier efforts of the human art are invariably the
remains of temples, places of worship, or of edifices dedicated in some
way to the religion and superstitions of extinct generations, whose
graves cover every island and reef. The most numerous, and perhaps the
most ancient structures, are quadrangular in shape, and are composed of
loose lava stones, forming a wall of great firmness and strength. These
temples frequently exceed 100 feet in length, with a

<span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

proportionate width, and were designed to be roofless. They contain
remains of altars composed of the same materials as the wall of the main
inclosure, generally located at one end, and in shape resembling
parallelograms. In many cases, these edifices are in as perfect a state
of preservation as when countless numbers of human victims were
immolated upon their altars, though time has obliterated all traces of
everything perishable.

In the search for prehistoric remains, the diversified character of the
many islands that dot the South Sea should be borne in mind. Coral
groups and atolls, these wonderful formations produced by the ceaseless
work of zoöphytic animals, being of comparatively recent creation, were
perhaps merely tide-water reefs, when the islands of purely volcanic
character were peopled by lawless and turbulent tribes, constantly
engaged in warfare and in making depredations upon each other. Even
where there is sufficient evidence of antiquity to warrant the search,
the absence of monuments upon the low-lying islands of coral formation,
may be accounted for by the lack of suitable material for their
construction, or to the destroying hurricanes that occasionally sweep
across this part of the Pacific, which are accompanied by a furious sea
that breaks completely over the narrow atolls, carrying death and
devastation to all things animate and inanimate.

The height of the atolls, in many cases, does not exceed 5 or 6 feet
above the normal level of the sea surrounding them, and instances are
unfortunately abundant, of islands that have been transformed in a few
hours, from a scene of tropical luxuriance and with a contented people
surrounded by nature's most bountiful gifts, to one of titter barrenness
and desolation. The largest and most important islands of Polynesia are
of volcanic character, and bear evidences of having been inhabited from
a remote period. Here may be duplicated the Teocallis of Palenque,
Copan, and Uxmal. In some islands these ancient monuments were searched
out with great difficulty, having been so completely overgrown with
dense tropical vegetation that their existence was not suspected by the
indifferent people of to-day.

While the islanders never advanced to a high civilization, and their
best efforts consist in cromlechs, dolmens, and elevated platforms or
truncated pyramids, their handiwork is still preserved, and points with
abundant interest to the history of a rude and early age.

The primitive Polynesians, like their contemporaries, the Incas of Peru,
may be judged in regard to their condition and history, by the
monuments, they have left, for with the exception of Easter Island,
there is no trace of their having possessed a written language. Tribes
flourished, were conquered and passed out of existence, without leaving
a trace behind them except perhaps, a shadowy tradition. The natives in
this genial climate have always dwelt in rude structures of thatch and
cane, which after a few years of abandonment would decay and leave no
sign behind, unless it be a few broken implements lying about. Among

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

them, traditions have always been preserved with care, and it is
wonderful to find how the history of a people call be followed in this
way for hundreds of years. The Samoans claim a complete chronicle dating
through twenty-two generations of the reigning family of Malietoa, and
extending over a period of eight hundred years, while the Tongans can
chronicle a fairly accurate history of their priesthood through twelve
centuries. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_2)

The priests have usually been the custodians of the national traditions,
and there is sufficient evidence to show that every precaution was taken
to have them handed down front one generation to another, pure and
unchanged, for oral record was their only means of committing to
posterity the deeds of their ancestors.

To be intrusted with the traditions, constituted of itself an office of
high dignity, and the holder was afforded the protection of a taboo of
the most rigorous character.

Family records were perpetuated with the national history, but as might
be expected, there was a tendency to embellish them when extended back
beyond a reasonable limit, with mythological personages and improbable
occurrences. Still the extraordinary power of these keepers to preserve
unimpaired for centuries, events and facts or even the geneaology of
important families, would astonish those who are familiar only with
written history, and whose memories depend upon artificial aids. Except
in a few cases, the traditions of the natives do not extend back far
enough to throw much light upon the ancient monuments found upon the
islands. This is due in a measure to the fact, that in only isolated
localities have the people lived unmolested for any great length of
time. The tribes were continually at war with one an other. From love of
conquest, and jealousy, no tribe was safe from the depredations of its
neighbor, although living upon terms of supposed friendship. The love of
war induced frequent expeditions planned for the destruction of the
tribes of adjacent islands, while occasionally a combination was made
for more extensive operations against the unsuspecting natives of a
different group. The visitors usually put to death the fighting men of
the conquered tribes and absorbed the others. The traditions of both
parties were preserved separately for a time, but they naturally tended
to merge together, and in this state, a combination of the glories of
both tribes were handed down never to be unraveled to their succeeding
generations. The monuments of antiquity scattered throughout Polynesia,
with the exception of Easter Island, increase in importance as we
advance to the westward, commencing with the circles of uncut stones,
and advancing by regular steps until we arrive at the more elaborate
sculptures. This fact indicates the decline that

<span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

took place in the social and mental culture of the people as they
ramified eastward through the various islands, of the Pacific.
Detachments arriving at the different groups separated into distinct
communities as accident or fancy directed; here they became segregated,
and rapidly degenerated in knowledge and in the arts.

Starting with the Sandwich Islands, we find that the Hawaiian
prehistoric remains are confined to the most primitive forms of
structures, such as the remains of the pagan temple at Waikiki, and the
enormous heiau at Punepa near Iole, both of which axe, notable types of
walled inclosures, and also the catacombs of Waimea, which do not
greatly differ from some of the places of sepulture in other islands.

Farther to the South and West, the Marquesas, and Society groups show
nothing beyond the primitive works of people who have passed away ages
ago, leaving no other signs of their having, existed.

The island of Rapa-titi, in mid Pacific and just outside the tropics,
contains evidences of a numerous population at some remote period. The
island is remarkably mountainous, though quite small, with pinnacles
rising to the height of 2,000 feet, and precipitous cliffs jutting into
the sea. Massive forts command all the principal valleys; they are
constructed of stone; built in terraces; and furnished with towers for
observation and rallying points. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_3)

In the Friendly Islands are found some interesting relies of antiquity.
Near the ancient metropolis of Moa, on the island of Tongatabu, and
about 12 miles from Nukualofa, the present capital of the group, are the
graves of the Tui-Tongas.

These embrace nineteen truncated pyramids, measuring about 100 feet
square on the base lines, and rising in three terraces to a height of 25
feet. The stones used in their construction are of coral concrete, and
many of the huge blocks are 18 feet long by 5½ feet high and 3 feet
thick, and weigh fully 20 tons each.

The labor of building these tombs was enormous, and when it is
considered that the great blocks were cut from the coral reef about 3
miles distant, and transported to the spot by savages who were ignorant
of the laws of mechanics, and who were without appliances, we can not
fail to be lost in wonder at the magnitude of the work accomplished.
These pyramids are of various ages, extending over a period of twelve
hundred and fifty years. They are overgrown by a dense forest of fao and
banyan trees, of immense size and great age, the roots of which have
dislodged and thrown down some of the largest stones. The Tui-Tongas
were high-priests and their genealogy has been carefully preserved.

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The priesthood was
hereditary, descending from father to son. Under the laws of Tonga the
high-priests could marry only the daughters of the king. Their sons
became priests, and the daughters occupied a position analogous to that
of the Vestal Virgins and were not permitted to marry. This long line is
now extinct, the last of the Tui-Tongas having been laid with his
fathers in 1863.

About 6 miles beyond these tombs, on the eastern shore, stands an
ancient cromlech, or more properly speaking a dolmen. This interesting
monument is composed of three blocks of coral concrete. The two uprights
are 14 feet high, 8 feet wide and nearly 4 feet thick, and weigh over 15
tons each, while the cross-piece is somewhat smaller and weighs about 10
tons. The native tradition is that these larger masses of stone were cut
from the coral reef about 2 miles distant. and that the vertex was
brought by one of their large canoes front Wallis Island. While it is
possible for this legend to be founded upon fact, there is room for
strong doubt, since the same formation exists upon both islands; but the
difficulty of handling a stone of that size and weight, and of carrying
it a distance of 600 miles by sea, would hardly be warranted when it
could be quarried on their own shores. Viewed, however, as a trophy, and
the cromlech as a sort of triumphal arch to commemorate a victory, (for
the Tongans were perhaps the most successful of the ocean rovers of the
Pacific) the legend of the stone seems entitled to greater credence than
the neglected pile would at first warrant. The traditions do not go back
far enough to tell us by whom this cromlech was erected, but simply
assert its erection by one of the early kings on the advent of his
dynasty, a fact which the disintegration of the stone, due to age, would
seem to corroborate. The Samoans formerly erected stone pillars to the
memory of their chiefs, but the most interesting relic of former ages,
in this group, is the ruins of a heathen temple located in the mountains
near the center of the island of Opolu. Secreted in an almost
inaccessible gully, this temple was built in the form of in ellipse,
measuring 57 feet one way by 39 feet the other. The roof was evidently
thatched with pandanus leaves, as is the custom to the present day, but
three large columns of basaltic rock formed the center supports, while
the caves rested upon the pillars of the same stone placed at interval
of 3 feet apart around the ellipse. Many of these stones are still
standing, but the site has been almost obscured by a dense tropical
growth.

Within a few feet of the old temple is an ancient tomb covered with a
large block of stone and marked by an upright basaltic column. Samoan
legends do not give much information about this ruin, but the Tongan
traditions told that the temple was built by them, after they had
conquered the Samoans, and that the tomb is that of one of the
Tui-Tongas who accompanied the successful expedition, and who died and
was buried alongside of the temple. This conquest took place it least
eight hundred years ago, for it was about this time that Malietoa I. was

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

made king, for his bravery and success in freeing his country from the
Tongan yoke.

Plans were made to open this tomb, but for the lack of time could not be
carried out, and the observations on this interesting relic were
confined to one hasty visit.

Continuing still farther to the westward, to the island of Tinian, one
of the Ladrones, are found two ranges of stone columns, over a dozen in
number, and somewhat similar in size and shape to those of the cromlech
at Tongatabu; but the curious feature of this ruin is that each column
is surmounted by a large semi-globe, flat surface upward, weighing 4
tons, Freycinet supposes them to be supports of wooden ceilings to
houses, that long ago have fallen into rain, but other authorities
assert that they are sepulchral urns. The natives call them "the houses
of the ancients."

Upon the adjacent islands are numerous remains of a similar character,
but in most cases the columns are smaller.

In the island of Ponape, Caroline group, are found remains of a higher
grade of stone work and which are a puzzle to ethnologists. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_4) Upon the bank of a creek that empties into
Metalanien harbor is an inclosure with massive walls built of basaltic
prisms 300 feet long and 35 feet high. There is a gateway opening upon
the creek composed of enormous basaltic columns laid flat, inside of
which is a court inclosed by walls 30 feet high. There are terraces
against the wall inside, also built of basaltic prisms 8 feet high and
12 feet wide. The inclosure is nearly square and is divided into three
parts by low walls running north and south.

In the center of each court is a closed chamber 14 feet square,
ornamented with basaltic columns and roofed with the same stone. On the
central ridge of the opposite side of the island, 10 miles distant, are
a large number of very fine basaltic columns, and this must have been
the quarry for the structure just described, for the configuration of
the land is such that roads would have been impracticable, and the only
deduction is that the material must have been taken down to the coast
and thence by water to the location on the creek.

This is reported to have been the home of the buccaneers, but it is
impossible that they could have put up works of such magnitude. There
are other ruins on the island, and also some mounds of considerable
size, 12 feet high and a quarter of a mile long. On Kusai, and other
islands of the group are found ruins, but those of Ponape are by far the
most remarkable.

Though not properly in the province of the work, a short description by
Mr. Wallace of some of the architectural wonders of Java is inserted. He
estimates the date of their construction at live hundred years ago when
the island was under the sway of the Hindoos.

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

The road to Wonosalem led through a magnificent forest, in the depths of
which we passed a fine ruin of what appeared to have been a royal tomb
or mausoleum. It is formed entirely of stone, and elaborately carved.
Near the base is a course of boldly projecting blocks, sculptured in
high relief, with a series of scenes which are probably incidents in the
life of the defunct. These are all beautifully executed, some of the
figures of animals in particular being easily recognizable and very
accurate. The general design, as far as the ruined state of the upper
part will permit of its being seen, is very good, the effect being given
by an immense number and variety of projecting or retreating courses of
squared stones in place of mouldings. The size of the structure is about
30 feet square by 20 feet high, and as the traveler comes suddenly upon
it on a small elevation by the road side, overshadowed by gigantic
trees, overrun with plants and creepers, and closely backed by the
gloomy forest, he is struck by the solemnity and picturesque beauty of
the scene, and is led to ponder on the strange law of progress, which
looks so like retrogression, and which in so many distant parts of the
world has exterminated or driven out a highly artistic and constructive
race, to make room for one which, as far as we can judge is very far its
interior. The number and beauty of the architectural remains in Java
have never been popularly illustrated or described, and it will
therefore take most people by surprise to learn that they far surpass
those of Central America, perchance those of India. To give some idea of
these ruins, perhaps to excite wealthy amateurs to explore them
thoroughly, and to obtain by photography on accurate record of these
beautiful sculptures before it is too late, I will enumerate the most
important as briefly described in Sir Stanforns Raffle's History of
Java.

Near the center of Java, between the native capitals of Djoko-Kerta and
Sura-Kerta, is the village of Brambanam, not far from which are
abundance of ruins, the most important being the temples of Loro-Jongran
and Chandi-Sewa. At Loro-Jongran there were separate buildings, six
large, and fourteen small temples. They are now a mass of ruins, but the
largest temple was supposed to have been 90 feet high. They were all
constructed of solid stone, everywhere decorated with carvings and
bas-reliefs, and adorned with numbers of statues, many of which remain
entire. At Chandi-Sewa, or the "thousand temples," are many fine
colossal figures. Captain Baker, who surveyed these ruins, said that he
had never in his life seen such stupendous and finished specimens of
human labor, and the science and taste of ages long since forgotten,
crowded together in so small a compass as in this spot. They cover a
span of nearly 600 feet square, and consist of an outer row of
eighty-four temples; a second row of seventy-six; a third row of
sixty-four, a fourth of forty-four; and a fifth forming an inner
parallelogram of twenty-eight; in all two hundred

<span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

and ninety-six small temples disposed in five regular parallelograms. In
the center is a large cruciform temple surrounded by forty flights of
steps, richly ornamented with sculpture and containing many apartments.

The tropical vegetation has ruined most of the smaller temples, but some
remain tolerably perfect, from which the effects of the whole may be
imagined. About half a mile off is another temple, called Chandi Kali
Bening, 72 feet square and 60 feet high, in fine preservation, and
covered with sculptures of Hindu mythology surpassing any that exists in
India. Other ruins of palaces, halls and temples, with abundance of
sculptured deities, are found in the same neighborhood.

About 80 miles eastward, in the province of Kedu, is the great temple of
Borobods. It is built upon a small hill, and consists of a central dome
and seven ranges of terraced wall, covering the slope of the hill,
forming open galleries, each below the other, and communicating by steps
and gateways. The central dome is 50 feet in diameter; around it is a
triple circle of seventy-two towers; and the whole building is 620 feet
square and about 100 feet high. In the terraced walls are niches
containing cross-legged figures larger than life, to the number of about
four hundred; both sides of the terraced walls are covered with
bas-reliefs crowded with figures carved in hard stone, which must
therefore occupy an extent of nearly 3 miles in length.

The amount of human labor and skill expended upon the great pyramids of
Egypt, sink into insignificance when compared with that required to
complete this sculptured hill temple in the interior of Java.

About 40 miles southwest of Samarang, on a mountain called Junong Prau,
an extensive plateau is covered with ruins. To reach the temples, four
flights of stone steps were made up to the mountain from opposite
directions, each flight containing more than a thousand steps. Traces of
nearly four hundred temples have been found here and many (perhaps all)
were decorated with rich and delicate sculptures. The whole country
between this and Brambanam, a distance of 60 miles, abounds with ruins,
so that fine sculptured figures may be seen lying in ditches, or built
into the walls of inclosures.

In the eastern part of Java, at Kediri, and in Melang, there are equally
abundant traces of antiquity, but the buildings themselves have been
mostly destroyed; sculptured figures, however, abound, and the ruins of
forts, palaces, baths, aqueducts, and temples can be everywhere traced.

The ruins of the ancient city of Majapahit cover miles of ground with
paved roads, walls, tombs, and gateways, while sculptures of Hindu gods
and goddesses of hard trachytic rock are found in the forests or *in
situ* in temples. Some of the buildings are of brick of curious
construction; the bricks are burned and built together without cement,
and yet adhere incomprehensibly.

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[540:1](ei60.htm#fr_3) These genealogies,
although widely known and generally admitted to be true, have received
the special investigation of some of the missionaries. The Rev. Shirley
Baker, now premier of Tonga, assures us that there is no reason to doubt
them, and that on the other hand there are many reasons for accepting
them as absolute truth.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[541:1](ei60.htm#fr_4) In 1867, the French
purchased the sovereignty of this little island for a gallon of rum and
some old clothes, thus cutting out a prospective American Steam-ship
Company that had fixed upon it for a coal depot. Coal is found herein
small quantities, and this fact has been adduced in support of the
theory of a submerged continent in the Pacific, a fallacy evident to the
geologist. Although there are several bays, a landing may be made at any
point owing to the remarkable smoothness of the sea. The people bear a
close resemblance to the New Zealanders.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[543:1](ei60.htm#fr_5) From Wallace's
"Australia".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Language--Vocabulary](ei61)
