[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sum306)  [Next](sum308) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF THE VIRTUES WHICH ARE CONNECTED WITH PRUDENCE (FOUR ARTICLES)

In due sequence, we must consider the virtues that are connected with
prudence, and which are its quasi-potential parts. Under this head there
are four points of inquiry:

\(1\) Whether , is a virtue?

\(2\) Whether it is a special virtue, distinct from prudence?

\(3\) Whether is a special virtue?

\(4\) Whether is a special virtue?

\[\*These three Greek words may be rendered as the faculties of
deliberating well , of judging well according to common law , and of
judging well according to general law , respectively.\]

#### Whether (deliberating well) is a virtue?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that (deliberating well) is not a virtue.
For, according to Augustine (De Lib. Arb. ii, 18,19) "no man makes evil
use of virtue." Now some make evil use of (deliberating well) or good
counsel, either through devising crafty counsels in order to achieve
evil ends, or through committing sin in order that they may achieve good
ends, as those who rob that they may give alms. Therefore (deliberating
well) is not a virtue.

**Objection 2:** Further, virtue is a perfection, according to Phys.
vii. But (deliberating well) is concerned with counsel, which implies
doubt and research, and these are marks of imperfection. Therefore
(deliberating well) is not a virtue.

**Objection 3:** Further, virtues are connected with one another, as
stated above (FS, Q\[65\]). Now (deliberating well) is not connected
with the other virtues, since many sinners take good-counsel, and many
godly men are slow in taking counsel. Therefore (deliberating well) is
not a virtue.

**On the contrary,** According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 9)
(deliberating well) "is a right counselling." Now the perfection of
virtue consists in right reason. Therefore (deliberating well) is a
virtue.

**I answer that,** As stated above (Q\[47\], A\[4\]) the nature of a
human virtue consists in making a human act good. Now among the acts of
man, it is proper to him to take counsel, since this denotes a research
of the reason about the actions he has to perform and whereof human life
consists, for the speculative life is above man, as stated in Ethic. x.
But (deliberating well) signifies goodness of counsel, for it is derived
from the , good, and , counsel, being "a good counsel" or rather "a
disposition to take good counsel." Hence it is evident that
(deliberating well) is a human virtue.

**Reply to Objection 1:** There is no good counsel either in
deliberating for an evil end, or in discovering evil means for attaining
a good end, even as in speculative matters, there is no good reasoning
either in coming to a false conclusion, or in coming to a true
conclusion from false premisses through employing an unsuitable middle
term. Hence both the aforesaid processes are contrary to (deliberating
well), as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. vi, 9).

**Reply to Objection 2:** Although virtue is essentially a perfection,
it does not follow that whatever is the matter of a virtue implies
perfection. For man needs to be perfected by virtues in all his parts,
and this not only as regards the acts of reason, of which counsel is
one, but also as regards the passions of the sensitive appetite, which
are still more imperfect.

It may also be replied that human virtue is a perfection according to
the mode of man, who is unable by simple insight to comprehend with
certainty the truth of things, especially in matters of action which are
contingent.

**Reply to Objection 3:** In no sinner as such is (deliberating well) to
be found: since all sin is contrary to taking good counsel. For good
counsel requires not only the discovery or devising of fit means for the
end, but also other circumstances. Such are suitable time, so that one
be neither too slow nor too quick in taking counsel, and the mode of
taking counsel, so that one be firm in the counsel taken, and other like
due circumstances, which sinners fail to observe when they sin. On the
other hand, every virtuous man takes good counsel in those things which
are directed to the end of virtue, although perhaps he does not take
good counsel in other particular matters, for instance in matters of
trade, or warfare, or the like.

#### Whether (deliberating well) is a special virtue, distinct from prudence?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that (deliberating well) is not a
distinct virtue from prudence. For, according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
vi, 5), the "prudent man is, seemingly, one who takes good counsel." Now
this belongs to (deliberating well) as stated above. Therefore
(deliberating well) is not distinct from prudence.

**Objection 2:** Further, human acts to which human virtues are
directed, are specified chiefly by their end, as stated above (FS,
Q\[1\], A\[3\]; FS, Q\[18\], AA\[4\],6). Now (deliberating well) and
prudence are directed to the same end, as stated in Ethic. vi, 9, not
indeed to some particular end, but to the common end of all life.
Therefore (deliberating well) is not a distinct virtue from prudence.

**Objection 3:** Further, in speculative sciences, research and decision
belong to the same science. Therefore in like manner these belong to the
same virtue in practical matters. Now research belongs to (deliberating
well), while decision belongs to prudence. There (deliberating well) is
not a distinct virtue from prudence.

**On the contrary,** Prudence is preceptive, according to Ethic. vi, 10.
But this does not apply to (deliberating well). Therefore (deliberating
well) is a distinct virtue from prudence.

**I answer that,** As stated above (A\[1\]), virtue is properly directed
to an act which it renders good; and consequently virtues must differ
according to different acts, especially when there is a different kind
of goodness in the acts. For, if various acts contained the same kind of
goodness, they would belong to the same virtue: thus the goodness of
love, desire and joy depends on the same, wherefore all these belong to
the same virtue of charity.

Now acts of the reason that are ordained to action are diverse, nor have
they the same kind of goodness: since it is owing to different causes
that a man acquires good counsel, good judgment, or good command,
inasmuch as these are sometimes separated from one another. Consequently
(deliberating well) which makes man take good counsel must needs be a
distinct virtue from prudence, which makes man command well. And since
counsel is directed to command as to that which is principal, so
(deliberating well) is directed to prudence as to a principal virtue,
without which it would be no virtue at all, even as neither are the
moral virtues without prudence, nor the other virtues without charity.

**Reply to Objection 1:** It belongs to prudence to take good counsel by
commanding it, to (deliberating well) by eliciting it.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Different acts are directed in different
degrees to the one end which is "a good life in general" \[\*Ethic. vi,
5\]: for counsel comes first, judgment follows, and command comes last.
The last named has an immediate relation to the last end: whereas the
other two acts are related thereto remotely. Nevertheless these have
certain proximate ends of their own, the end of counsel being the
discovery of what has to be done, and the end of judgment, certainty.
Hence this proves not that (deliberating well) is not a distinct virtue
from prudence, but that it is subordinate thereto, as a secondary to a
principal virtue.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Even in speculative matters the rational
science of dialectics, which is directed to research and discovery, is
distinct from demonstrative science, which decides the truth.

#### Whether (judging well according to common law) is a virtue?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that is not a virtue. Virtues are not in
us by nature, according to Ethic. ii, 1. But (judging well according to
common law) is natural to some, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. vi,
11). Therefore (judging well according to common law) is not a virtue.

**Objection 2:** Further, as stated in the same book (10), (judging well
according to common law) is nothing but "a faculty of judging." But
judgment without command can be even in the wicked. Since then virtue is
only in the good, it seems that (judging well according to common law)
is not a virtue.

**Objection 3:** Further, there is never a defective command, unless
there be a defective judgment, at least in a particular matter of
action; for it is in this that every wicked man errs. If therefore
(judging well according to common law) be reckoned a virtue directed to
good judgment, it seems that there is no need for any other virtue
directed to good command: and consequently prudence would be
superfluous, which is not reasonable. Therefore (judging well according
to common law) is not a virtue.

**On the contrary,** Judgment is more perfect than counsel. But , or
good counsel, is a virtue. Much more, therefore, is (judging well
according to common law) a virtue, as being good judgment.

**I answer that,** (judging well according to common law) signifies a
right judgment, not indeed about speculative matters, but about
particular practical matters, about which also is prudence. Hence in
Greek some, in respect of (judging well according to common law) are
said to be , i.e. "persons of sense," or , i.e. "men of good sense,"
just as on the other hand, those who lack this virtue are called , i.e.
"senseless."

Now, different acts which cannot be ascribed to the same cause, must
correspond to different virtues. And it is evident that goodness of
counsel and goodness of judgment are not reducible to the same cause,
for many can take good counsel, without having good sense so as to judge
well. Even so, in speculative matters some are good at research, through
their reason being quick at arguing from one thing to another (which
seems to be due to a disposition of their power of imagination, which
has a facility in forming phantasms), and yet such persons sometimes
lack good judgment (and this is due to a defect in the intellect arising
chiefly from a defective disposition of the common sense which fails to
judge aright). Hence there is need, besides (deliberating well), for
another virtue, which judges well, and this is called (judging well
according to common law).

**Reply to Objection 1:** Right judgment consists in the cognitive power
apprehending a thing just as it is in reality, and this is due to the
right disposition of the apprehensive power. Thus if a mirror be well
disposed the forms of bodies are reflected in it just as they are,
whereas if it be ill disposed, the images therein appear distorted and
misshapen. Now that the cognitive power be well disposed to receive
things just as they are in reality, is radically due to nature, but, as
to its consummation, is due to practice or to a gift of grace, and this
in two ways. First directly, on the part of the cognitive power itself,
for instance, because it is imbued, not with distorted, but with true
and correct ideas: this belongs to (judging well according to common
law) which in this respect is a special virtue. Secondly indirectly,
through the good disposition of the appetitive power, the result being
that one judges well of the objects of appetite: and thus a good
judgment of virtue results from the habits of moral virtue; but this
judgment is about the ends, whereas (judging well according to common
law) is rather about the means.

**Reply to Objection 2:** In wicked men there may be right judgment of a
universal principle, but their judgment is always corrupt in the
particular matter of action, as stated above (Q\[47\], A\[13\]).

**Reply to Objection 3:** Sometimes after judging aright we delay to
execute or execute negligently or inordinately. Hence after the virtue
which judges aright there is a further need of a final and principal
virtue, which commands aright, and this is prudence.

#### Whether (judging well according to general law) is a special virtue?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that (judging well according to general
law) is not a special virtue distinct from (judging well according to
common law). For a man is said, in respect of (judging well according to
common law), to have good judgment. Now no man can be said to have good
judgment, unless he judge aright in all things. Therefore (judging well
according to common law) extends to all matters of judgment, and
consequently there is no other virtue of good judgment called (judging
well according to general law).

**Objection 2:** Further, judgment is midway between counsel and
precept. Now there is only one virtue of good counsel, viz.
(deliberating well) and only one virtue of good command, viz. prudence.
Therefore there is only one virtue of good judgment, viz. (judging well
according to common law).

**Objection 3:** Further, rare occurrences wherein there is need to
depart from the common law, seem for the most part to happen by chance,
and with such things reason is not concerned, as stated in Phys. ii, 5.
Now all the intellectual virtues depend on right reason. Therefore there
is no intellectual virtue about such matters.

**On the contrary,** The Philosopher concludes (Ethic. vi, 11) that
(judging well according to general law) is a special virtue.

I answer that cognitive habits differ according to higher and lower
principles: thus in speculative matters wisdom considers higher
principles than science does, and consequently is distinguished from it;
and so must it be also in practical matters. Now it is evident that what
is beside the order of a lower principle or cause, is sometimes
reducible to the order of a higher principle; thus monstrous births of
animals are beside the order of the active seminal force, and yet they
come under the order of a higher principle, namely, of a heavenly body,
or higher still, of Divine Providence. Hence by considering the active
seminal force one could not pronounce a sure judgment on such
monstrosities, and yet this is possible if we consider Divine
Providence.

Now it happens sometimes that something has to be done which is not
covered by the common rules of actions, for instance in the case of the
enemy of one's country, when it would be wrong to give him back his
deposit, or in other similar cases. Hence it is necessary to judge of
such matters according to higher principles than the common laws,
according to which (judging according to common law) judges: and
corresponding to such higher principles it is necessary to have a higher
virtue of judgment, which is called (judging according to general law),
and which denotes a certain discrimination in judgment.

**Reply to Objection 1:** (judging well according to common law) judges
rightly about all actions that are covered by the common rules: but
certain things have to be judged beside these common rules, as stated
above.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Judgment about a thing should be formed from
the proper principles thereof, whereas research is made by employing
also common principles. Wherefore also in speculative matters,
dialectics which aims at research proceeds from common principles; while
demonstration which tends to judgment, proceeds from proper principles.
Hence (deliberating well) to which the research of counsel belongs is
one for all, but not so (judging well according to common law) whose act
is judicial. Command considers in all matters the one aspect of good,
wherefore prudence also is only one.

**Reply to Objection 3:** It belongs to Divine Providence alone to
consider all things that may happen beside the common course. On the
other hand, among men, he who is most discerning can judge a greater
number of such things by his reason: this belongs to (judging well
according to general law), which denotes a certain discrimination in
judgment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 52 - OF THE GIFT OF COUNSEL (FOUR ARTICLES)](sum308)
