[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sum494)  [Next](sum496) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF (CHRIST'S) MIRACLES CONSIDERED SPECIFICALLY (FOUR ARTICLES)

We have now to consider each kind of miracle:

\(1\) The miracles which He worked in spiritual substances;

\(2\) The miracles which He worked in heavenly bodies;

\(3\) The miracles which He worked in man;

\(4\) The miracles which He worked in irrational creatures.

#### Whether those miracles were fitting which Christ worked in spiritual substances?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that those miracles were unfitting which
Christ worked in spiritual substances. For among spiritual substances
the holy angels are above the demons; for, as Augustine says (De Trin.
iii): "The treacherous and sinful rational spirit of life is ruled by
the rational, pious, and just spirit of life." But we read of no
miracles worked by Christ in the good angels. Therefore neither should
He have worked miracles in the demons.

**Objection 2:** Further, Christ's miracles were ordained to make known
His Godhead. But Christ's Godhead was not to be made known to the
demons: since this would have hindered the mystery of His Passion,
according to <span id="TP_Q44_A1-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor.
2:8](../../../bib/vul/co1002.htm#008): "If they had known it, they would
never have crucified the Lord of glory." Therefore He should not have
worked miracles in the demons.

**Objection 3:** Further, Christ's miracles were ordained to the glory
of God: hence it is written (<span id="TP_Q44_A1-p4.1"></span>[Mat.
9:8](../../../bib/vul/mat009.htm#008)) that "the multitudes seeing" that
the man sick of the palsy had been healed by Christ, "feared, and
glorified God that gave such power to men." But the demons have no part
in glorifying God; since "praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner"
(<span id="TP_Q44_A1-p4.2"></span>[Ecclus.
15:9](../../../bib/vul/sir015.htm#009)). For which reason also "He
suffered them not to speak" (<span id="TP_Q44_A1-p4.3"></span>[Mk.
1:34](../../../bib/vul/mar001.htm#034); <span
id="TP_Q44_A1-p4.4"></span> [Lk. 4:41](../../../bib/vul/luk004.htm#041))
those things which reflected glory on Him. Therefore it seems that it
was unfitting for Him to work miracles in the demons.

**Objection 4:** Further, Christ's miracles are ordained to the
salvation of mankind. But sometimes the casting out of demons from men
was detrimental to man, in some cases to the body: thus it is related
(<span id="TP_Q44_A1-p5.1"></span>[Mark
9:24](../../../bib/vul/mar009.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/vul/mar009.htm#025)) that a demon at Christ's command,
"crying out and greatly tearing" the man, "went out of him; and he
became as dead, so that many said: He is dead"; sometimes also to
things: as when He sent the demons, at their own request, into the
swine, which they cast headlong into the sea; wherefore the inhabitants
of those parts "besought Him that He would depart from their coasts"
(<span id="TP_Q44_A1-p5.2"></span>[Mat.
8:31-34](../../../bib/vul/mat008.htm#031)). Therefore it seems unfitting
that He should have worked such like miracles.

**On the contrary,** this was foretold (<span
id="TP_Q44_A1-p6.1"></span>[Zech.
13:2](../../../bib/vul/zac013.htm#002)), where it is written: "I will
take away . . . the unclean spirit out of the earth."

I answer that, The miracles worked by Christ were arguments for the
faith which He taught. Now, by the power of His Godhead He was to rescue
those who would believe in Him, from the power of the demons; according
to<span id="TP_Q44_A1-p7.1"></span> [Jn.
12:31](../../../bib/vul/joh012.htm#031): "Now shall the prince of this
world be cast out." Consequently it was fitting that, among other
miracles, He should also deliver those who were obsessed by demons.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Just as men were to be delivered by Christ
from the power of the demons, so by Him were they to be brought to the
companionship of the angels, according to<span
id="TP_Q44_A1-p8.1"></span> [Col.
1:20](../../../bib/vul/col001.htm#020): "Making peace through the blood
of His cross, both as to the things on earth and the things that are in
heaven." Therefore it was not fitting to show forth to men other
miracles as regards the angels, except by angels appearing to men: as
happened in His Nativity, His Resurrection, and His Ascension.

**Reply to Objection 2:** As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix): "Christ
was known to the demons just as much as He willed; and He willed just as
far as there was need. But He was known to them, not as to the holy
angels, by that which is eternal life, but by certain temporal effects
of His power." First, when they saw that Christ was hungry after fasting
they deemed Him not to be the Son of God. Hence, on<span
id="TP_Q44_A1-p9.1"></span> [Lk. 4:3,](../../../bib/vul/luk004.htm#003)
"If Thou be the Son of God," etc., Ambrose says: "What means this way of
addressing Him? save that, though He knew that the Son of God was to
come, yet he did not think that He had come in the weakness of the
flesh?" But afterwards, when he saw Him work miracles, he had a sort of
conjectural suspicion that He was the Son of God. Hence on<span
id="TP_Q44_A1-p9.2"></span> [Mk. 1:24,](../../../bib/vul/mar001.htm#024)
"I know who Thou art, the Holy one of God," Chrysostom \[\*Victor of
Antioch. Cf. Catena Aurea\] says that "he had no certain or firm
knowledge of God's coming." Yet he knew that He was "the Christ promised
in the Law," wherefore it is said (<span id="TP_Q44_A1-p9.3"></span>[Lk.
4:41](../../../bib/vul/luk004.htm#041)) that "they knew that He was
Christ." But it was rather from suspicion than from certainty that they
confessed Him to be the Son of God. Hence Bede says on<span
id="TP_Q44_A1-p9.4"></span> [Lk. 4:41](../../../bib/vul/luk004.htm#041):
"The demons confess the Son of God, and, as stated farther on, 'they
knew that He was Christ.' For when the devil saw Him weakened by His
fast, He knew Him to be a real man: but when He failed to overcome Him
by temptation, He doubted lest He should be the Son of God. And now from
the power of His miracles He either knew, or rather suspected that He
was the Son of God. His reason therefore for persuading the Jews to
crucify Him was not that he deemed Him not to be Christ or the Son of
God, but because he did not foresee that he would be the loser by His
death. For the Apostle says of this mystery" (<span
id="TP_Q44_A1-p9.5"></span>[1 Cor.
2:7](../../../bib/vul/co1002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/vul/co1002.htm#008)), "which is hidden from the
beginning, that 'none of the princes of this world knew it,' for if they
had known it they would never have crucified the Lord of glory."

**Reply to Objection 3:** The miracles which Christ worked in expelling
demons were for the benefit, not of the demons, but of men, that they
might glorify Him. Wherefore He forbade them to speak in His praise.
First, to give us an example. For, as Athanasius says, "He restrained
his speech, although he was confessing the truth; to teach us not to
care about such things, although it may seem that what is said is true.
For it is wrong to seek to learn from the devil when we have the Divine
Scripture": Besides, it is dangerous, since the demons frequently mix
falsehood with truth. Or, as Chrysostom \[\*Cyril of Alexandria,
Comment. in Luc.\] says: "It was not meet for them to usurp the
prerogative of the apostolic office. Nor was it fitting that the mystery
of Christ should be proclaimed by a corrupt tongue" because "praise is
not seemly in the mouth of a sinner" \[\*Cf. Theophylact, Enarr. in
Luc.\]. Thirdly, because, as Bede says, "He did not wish the envy of the
Jews to be aroused thereby" \[\*Bede, Expos. in Luc. iv, 41\]. Hence
"even the apostles are commanded to be silent about Him, lest, if His
Divine majesty were proclaimed, the gift of His Passion should be
deferred."

**Reply to Objection 4:** Christ came specially to teach and to work
miracles for the good of man, and principally as to the salvation of his
soul. Consequently, He allowed the demons, that He cast out, to do man
some harm, either in his body or in his goods, for the salvation of
man's soul---namely, for man's instruction. Hence Chrysostom says
on<span id="TP_Q44_A1-p11.1"></span> [Mat.
8:32](../../../bib/vul/mat008.htm#032) that Christ let the demons depart
into the swine, "not as yielding to the demons, but first, to show . . .
how harmful are the demons who attack men; secondly, that all might
learn that the demons would not dare to hurt even the swine, except He
allow them; thirdly, that they would have treated those men more
grievously than they treated the swine, unless they had been protected
by God's providence."

And for the same motives He allowed the man, who was being delivered
from the demons, to suffer grievously for the moment; yet did He release
him at once from that distress. By this, moreover, we are taught, as
Bede says on<span id="TP_Q44_A1-p12.1"></span> [Mk.
9:25,](../../../bib/vul/mar009.htm#025) that "often, when after falling
into sin we strive to return to God, we experience further and more
grievous attacks from the old enemy. This he does, either that he may
inspire us with a distaste for virtue, or that he may avenge the shame
of having been cast out." For the man who was healed "became as dead,"
says Jerome, "because to those who are healed it is said, 'You are dead;
and your life is hid with Christ in God'" (<span
id="TP_Q44_A1-p12.2"></span>[Col. 3:3](../../../bib/vul/col003.htm#003))

#### Whether it was fitting that Christ should work miracles in the heavenly bodies?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that it was unfitting that Christ should
work miracles in the heavenly bodies. For, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom.
iv), "it beseems Divine providence not to destroy, but to preserve,
nature." Now, the heavenly bodies are by nature incorruptible and
unchangeable, as is proved De Coelo i. Therefore it was unfitting that
Christ should cause any change in the order of the heavenly bodies.

**Objection 2:** Further, the course of time is marked out by the
movement of the heavenly bodies, according to<span
id="TP_Q44_A2-p3.1"></span> [Gn. 1:14](../../../bib/vul/gen001.htm#014):
"Let there be lights made in the firmament of heaven . . . and let them
be for signs, and for seasons, and for days and years." Consequently if
the movement of the heavenly bodies be changed, the distinction and
order of the seasons is changed. But there is no report of this having
been perceived by astronomers, "who gaze at the stars and observe the
months," as it is written (<span id="TP_Q44_A2-p3.2"></span>[Is.
47:13](../../../bib/vul/isa047.htm#013)). Therefore it seems that Christ
did not work any change in the movements of the heavenly bodies.

**Objection 3:** Further, it was more fitting that Christ should work
miracles in life and when teaching, than in death: both because, as it
is written (<span id="TP_Q44_A2-p4.1"></span>[2 Cor.
13:4](../../../bib/vul/co2013.htm#004)), "He was crucified through
weakness, yet He liveth by the power of God," by which He worked
miracles; and because His miracles were in confirmation of His doctrine.
But there is no record of Christ having worked any miracles in the
heavenly bodies during His lifetime: nay, more; when the Pharisees asked
Him to give "a sign from heaven," He refused, as Matthew relates
(12,16). Therefore it seems that neither in His death should He have
worked any miracles in the heavenly bodies.

**On the contrary,** It is written (<span
id="TP_Q44_A2-p5.1"></span>[Luke
23:44](../../../bib/vul/luk023.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/vul/luk023.htm#045)): "There was darkness over all the
earth until the ninth hour; and the sun was darkened."

**I answer that,** As stated above (Q\[43\], A\[4\]) it behooved
Christ's miracles to be a sufficient proof of His Godhead. Now this is
not so sufficiently proved by changes wrought in the lower bodies, which
changes can be brought about by other causes, as it is by changes
wrought in the course of the heavenly bodies, which have been
established by God alone in an unchangeable order. This is what
Dionysius says in his epistle to Polycarp: "We must recognize that no
alteration can take place in the order end movement of the heavens that
is not caused by Him who made all and changes all by His word."
Therefore it was fitting that Christ should work miracles even in the
heavenly bodies.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Just as it is natural to the lower bodies to
be moved by the heavenly bodies, which are higher in the order of
nature, so is it natural to any creature whatsoever to be changed by
God, according to His will. Hence Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxvi;
quoted by the gloss on <span id="TP_Q44_A2-p7.1"></span> [Rom.
11:24](../../../bib/vul/rom011.htm#024): "Contrary to nature thou wert
grafted," etc.): "God, the Creator and Author of all natures, does
nothing contrary to nature: for whatsoever He does in each thing, that
is its nature." Consequently the nature of a heavenly body is not
destroyed when God changes its course: but it would be if the change
were due to any other cause.

**Reply to Objection 2:** The order of the seasons was not disturbed by
the miracle worked by Christ. For, according to some, this gloom or
darkening of the sun, which occurred at the time of Christ's passion,
was caused by the sun withdrawing its rays, without any change in the
movement of the heavenly bodies, which measures the duration of the
seasons. Hence Jerome says on<span id="TP_Q44_A2-p8.1"></span> [Mat.
27:45](../../../bib/vul/mat027.htm#045): "It seems as though the
'greater light' withdrew its rays, lest it should look on its Lord
hanging on the Cross, or bestow its radiancy on the impious
blasphemers." And this withdrawal of the rays is not to be understood as
though it were in the sun's power to send forth or withdraw its rays:
for it sheds its light, not from choice, but by nature, as Dionysius
says (Div. Nom. iv). But the sun is said to withdraw its rays in so far
as the Divine power caused the sun's rays not to reach the earth. On the
other hand, Origen says this was caused by clouds coming between (the
earth and the sun). Hence on<span id="TP_Q44_A2-p8.2"></span> [Mat.
27:45](../../../bib/vul/mat027.htm#045) he says: "We must therefore
suppose that many large and very dense clouds were massed together over
Jerusalem and the land of Judea; so that it was exceedingly dark from
the sixth to the ninth hour. Hence I am of opinion that, just as the
other signs which occurred at the time of the Passion"---namely, "the
rending of the veil, the quaking of the earth," etc.---"took place in
Jerusalem only, so this also: . . . or if anyone prefer, it may be
extended to the whole of Judea," since it is said that "'there was
darkness over the whole earth,' which expression refers to the land of
Judea, as may be gathered from 3 Kings 18:10, where Abdias says to
Elias: 'As the Lord thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom
whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee': which shows that they
sought him among the nations in the neighborhood of Judea."

On this point, however, credence is to be given rather to Dionysius, who
is an eyewitness as to this having occurred by the moon eclipsing the
sun. For he says (Ep. ad Polycarp): "Without any doubt we saw the moon
encroach on the sun," he being in Egypt at the time, as he says in the
same letter. And in this he points out four miracles. The first is that
the natural eclipse of the sun by interposition of the moon never takes
place except when the sun and moon are in conjunction. But then the sun
and moon were in opposition, it being the fifteenth day, since it was
the Jewish Passover. Wherefore he says: "For it was not the time of
conjunction."---The second miracle is that whereas at the sixth hour the
moon was seen, together with the sun, in the middle of the heavens, in
the evening it was seen to be in its place, i.e. in the east, opposite
the sun. Wherefore he says: "Again we saw it," i.e. the moon, "return
supernaturally into opposition with the sun," so as to be diametrically
opposite, having withdrawn from the sun "at the ninth hour," when the
darkness ceased, "until evening." From this it is clear that the wonted
course of the seasons was not disturbed, because the Divine power caused
the moon both to approach the sun supernaturally at an unwonted season,
and to withdraw from the sun and return to its proper place according to
the season. The third miracle was that the eclipse of the sun naturally
always begins in that part of the sun which is to the west and spreads
towards the east: and this is because the moon's proper movement from
west to east is more rapid than that of the sun, and consequently the
moon, coming up from the west, overtakes the sun and passes it on its
eastward course. But in this case the moon had already passed the sun,
and was distant from it by the length of half the heavenly circle, being
opposite to it: consequently it had to return eastwards towards the sun,
so as to come into apparent contact with it from the east, and continue
in a westerly direction. This is what he refers to when he says:
"Moreover, we saw the eclipse begin to the east and spread towards the
western edge of the sun," for it was a total eclipse, "and afterwards
pass away." The fourth miracle consisted in this, that in a natural
eclipse that part of the sun which is first eclipsed is the first to
reappear (because the moon, coming in front of the sun, by its natural
movement passes on to the east, so as to come away first from the
western portion of the sun, which was the first part to be eclipsed),
whereas in this case the moon, while returning miraculously from the
east to the west, did not pass the sun so as to be to the west of it:
but having reached the western edge of the sun returned towards the
east: so that the last portion of the sun to be eclipsed was the first
to reappear. Consequently the eclipse began towards the east, whereas
the sun began to reappear towards the west. And to this he refers by
saying: "Again we observed that the occultation and emersion did not
begin from the same point," i.e. on the same side of the sun, "but on
opposite sides."

Chrysostom adds a fifth miracle (Hom. lxxxviii in Matth.), saying that
"the darkness in this case lasted for three hours, whereas an eclipse of
the sun lasts but a short time, for it is soon over, as those know who
have seen one." Hence we are given to understand that the moon was
stationary below the sun, except we prefer to say that the duration of
the darkness was measured from the first moment of occultation of the
sun to the moment when the sun had completely emerged from the eclipse.

But, as Origen says (on<span id="TP_Q44_A2-p11.1"></span> [Mat.
27:45](../../../bib/vul/mat027.htm#045)), "against this the children of
this world object: How is it such a phenomenal occurrence is not related
by any writer, whether Greek or barbarian?" And he says that someone of
the name of Phlegon "relates in his chronicles that this took place
during the reign of Tiberius Caesar, but he does not say that it
occurred at the full moon." It may be, therefore, that because it was
not the time for an eclipse, the various astronomers living then
throughout the world were not on the look-out for one, and that they
ascribed this darkness to some disturbance of the atmosphere. But in
Egypt, where clouds are few on account of the tranquillity of the air,
Dionysius and his companions were considerably astonished so as to make
the aforesaid observations about this darkness.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Then, above all, was there need for miraculous
proof of Christ's Godhead, when the weakness of human nature was most
apparent in Him. Hence it was that at His birth a new star appeared in
the heavens. Wherefore Maximus says (Serm. de Nativ. viii): "If thou
disdain the manger, raise thine eyes a little and gaze on the new star
in the heavens, proclaiming to the world the birth of our Lord." But in
His Passion yet greater weakness appeared in His manhood. Therefore
there was need for yet greater miracles in the greater lights of the
world. And, as Chrysostom says (Hom. lxxxviii in Matth.): "This is the
sign which He promised to them who sought for one saying: 'An evil and
adulterous generation seeketh a sign; and a sign shall not be given it,
but the sign of Jonas the prophet,' referring to His Cross . . . and
Resurrection . . . For it was much more wonderful that this should
happen when He was crucified than when He was walking on earth."

#### Whether Christ worked miracles fittingly on men?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that Christ worked miracles unfittingly
on men. For in man the soul is of more import than the body. Now Christ
worked many miracles on bodies, but we do not read of His working any
miracles on souls: for neither did He convert any unbelievers to the
faith mightily, but by persuading and convincing them with outward
miracles, nor is it related of Him that He made wise men out of fools.
Therefore it seems that He worked miracles on men in an unfitting
manner.

**Objection 2:** Further, as stated above (Q\[43\], A\[2\]), Christ
worked miracles by Divine power: to which it is proper to work suddenly,
perfectly, and without any assistance. Now Christ did not always heal
men suddenly as to their bodies: for it is written (<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p3.2"></span>[Mk.
8:22-25](../../../bib/vul/mar008.htm#022)) that, "taking the blind man
by the hand, He led him out of the town; and, spitting upon his eyes,
laying His hands on him, He asked him if he saw anything. And, looking
up, he said: I see men as it were trees walking. After that again He
laid His hands upon his eyes, and he began to see, and was restored, so
that he saw all things clearly." It is clear from this that He did not
heal him suddenly, but at first imperfectly, and by means of His
spittle. Therefore it seems that He worked miracles on men unfittingly.

**Objection 3:** Further, there is no need to remove at the same time
things which do not follow from one another. Now bodily ailments are not
always the result of sin, as appears from our Lord's words (<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p4.1"></span>[Jn. 9:3](../../../bib/vul/joh009.htm#003)):
"Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents, that he should be born
blind." It was unseemly, therefore, for Him to forgive the sins of those
who sought the healing of the body, as He is related to have done in the
case of the man sick of the palsy (<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p4.2"></span>[Mat. 9:2](../../../bib/vul/mat009.htm#002)):
the more that the healing of the body, being of less account than the
forgiveness of sins, does not seem a sufficient argument for the power
of forgiving sins.

**Objection 4:** Further, Christ's miracles were worked in order to
confirm His doctrine, and witness to His Godhead, as stated above
(Q\[43\], A\[4\]). Now no man should hinder the purpose of his own work.
Therefore it seems unfitting that Christ commanded those who had been
healed miraculously to tell no one, as appears from<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p5.2"></span> [Mat. 9:30](../../../bib/vul/mat009.htm#030)
and<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p5.3"></span> [Mk.
8:26](../../../bib/vul/mar008.htm#026): the more so, since He commanded
others to proclaim the miracles worked on them; thus it is related
(<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p5.4"></span>[Mk.
5:19](../../../bib/vul/mar005.htm#019)) that, after delivering a man
from the demons, He said to him: "Go into thy house to thy friends, and
tell them, how great things the Lord hath done for thee."

**On the contrary,** It is written (<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p6.1"></span>[Mk. 7:37](../../../bib/vul/mar007.htm#037)):
"He hath done all things well: He hath made both the deaf to hear and
the dumb to speak."

**I answer that,** The means should be proportionate to the end. Now
Christ came into the world and taught in order to save man, according to
<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p7.1"></span>[Jn.
3:17](../../../bib/vul/joh003.htm#017): "For God sent not His Son into
the world to judge the world, but that the world may be saved by Him."
Therefore it was fitting that Christ, by miraculously healing men in
particular, should prove Himself to be the universal and spiritual
Saviour of all.

**Reply to Objection 1:** The means are distinct from the end. Now the
end for which Christ's miracles were worked was the health of the
rational part, which is healed by the light of wisdom, and the gift of
righteousness: the former of which presupposes the latter, since, as it
is written (<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p8.1"></span>[Wis.
1:4](../../../bib/vul/wis001.htm#004)): "Wisdom will not enter into a
malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sins." Now it was
unfitting that man should be made righteous unless he willed: for this
would be both against the nature of righteousness, which implies
rectitude of the will, and contrary to the very nature of man, which
requires to be led to good by the free-will, not by force. Christ,
therefore, justified man inwardly by the Divine power, but not against
man's will. Nor did this pertain to His miracles, but to the end of His
miracles. In like manner by the Divine power He infused wisdom into the
simple minds of His disciples: hence He said to them (<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p8.2"></span>[Lk.
21:15](../../../bib/vul/luk021.htm#015)): "I will give you a mouth and
wisdom" which "all your adversaries will not be able to resist and
gainsay." And this, in so far as the enlightenment was inward, is not to
be reckoned as a miracle, but only as regards the outward
action---namely, in so far as men saw that those who had been unlettered
and simple spoke with such wisdom and constancy. Wherefore it is written
(<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p8.3"></span>[Acts
4:13](../../../bib/vul/act004.htm#013)) that the Jews, "seeing the
constancy of Peter and of John, understanding that they were illiterate
and ignorant men . . . wondered."---And though such like spiritual
effects are different from visible miracles, yet do they testify to
Christ's doctrine and power, according to<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p8.4"></span> [Heb. 2:4](../../../bib/vul/heb002.htm#004):
"God also bearing them witness by signs and wonders and divers miracles,
and distributions of the Holy Ghost."

Nevertheless Christ did work some miracles on the soul of man,
principally by changing its lower powers. Hence Jerome, commenting on
<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p9.1"></span>[Mat.
9:9](../../../bib/vul/mat009.htm#009), "He rose up and followed Him,"
says: "Such was the splendor and majesty of His hidden Godhead, which
shone forth even in His human countenance, that those who gazed on it
were drawn to Him at first sight." And on<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p9.2"></span> [Mat.
21:12,](../../../bib/vul/mat021.htm#012) "(Jesus) cast out all them that
sold and bought," the same Jerome says: "Of all the signs worked by our
Lord, this seems to me the most wondrous---that one man, at that time
despised, could, with the blows of one scourge, cast out such a
multitude. For a fiery and heavenly light flashed from His eyes, and the
majesty of His Godhead shone in His countenance." And Origen says
on<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p9.3"></span> [Jn.
2:15](../../../bib/vul/joh002.htm#015) that "this was a greater miracle
than when He changed water into wine, for there He shows His power over
inanimate matter, whereas here He tames the minds of thousands of men."
Again, on<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p9.4"></span> [Jn.
18:6,](../../../bib/vul/joh018.htm#006) "They went backward and fell to
the ground," Augustine says: "Though that crowd was fierce in hate and
terrible with arms, yet did that one word . . . without any weapon,
smite them through, drive them back, lay them prostrate: for God lay
hidden in that flesh." Moreover, to this must be referred what Luke says
(4:30) ---namely, that Jesus, "passing through the midst of them, went
His way," on which Chrysostom observes (Hom. xlviii in Joan.): "That He
stood in the midst of those who were lying in wait for Him, and was not
seized by them, shows the power of His Godhead"; and, again, that which
is written <span id="TP_Q44_A3-p9.5"></span> [Jn.
8:59,](../../../bib/vul/joh008.htm#059) "Jesus hid Himself and went out
of the Temple," on which Theophylact says: "He did not hide Himself in a
corner of the Temple, as if afraid, or take shelter behind a wall or
pillar; but by His heavenly power making Himself invisible to those who
were threatening Him, He passed through the midst of them."

From all these instances it is clear that Christ, when He willed,
changed the minds of men by His Divine power, not only by the bestowal
of righteousness and the infusion of wisdom, which pertains to the end
of miracles, but also by outwardly drawing men to Himself, or by
terrifying or stupefying them, which pertains to the miraculous itself.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Christ came to save the world, not only by
Divine power, but also through the mystery of His Incarnation.
Consequently in healing the sick He frequently not only made use of His
Divine power, healing by way of command, but also by applying something
pertaining to His human nature. Hence on<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p11.1"></span> [Lk.
4:40,](../../../bib/vul/luk004.htm#040) "He, laying His hands on every
one of them, healed them," Cyril says: "Although, as God, He might, by
one word, have driven out all diseases, yet He touched them, showing
that His own flesh was endowed with a healing virtue." And on<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p11.2"></span> [Mk.
8:23,](../../../bib/vul/mar008.htm#023) "Spitting upon his eyes, laying
His hands on him," etc., Chrysostom \[\*Victor of Antioch\] says: "He
spat and laid His hands upon the blind man, wishing to show that His
Divine word, accompanied by His operation, works wonders: for the hand
signifies operation; the spittle signifies the word which proceeds from
the mouth." Again, on<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p11.3"></span> [Jn.
9:6,](../../../bib/vul/joh009.htm#006) "He made clay of the spittle, and
spread the clay upon the eyes of the blind man," Augustine says: "Of His
spittle He made clay---because 'the Word was made flesh.'" Or, again, as
Chrysostom says, to signify that it was He who made man of "the slime of
the earth."

It is furthermore to be observed concerning Christ's miracles that
generally what He did was most perfect. Hence on<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p12.1"></span> [Jn.
2:10,](../../../bib/vul/joh002.htm#010) "Every man at first setteth
forth good wine," Chrysostom says: "Christ's miracles are such as to far
surpass the works of nature in splendor and usefulness." Likewise in an
instant He conferred perfect health on the sick. Hence on <span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p12.2"></span> [Mat.
8:15,](../../../bib/vul/mat008.htm#015) "She arose and ministered to
them," Jerome says: "Health restored by our Lord returns wholly and
instantly."

There was, however, special reason for the contrary happening in the
case of the man born blind, and this was his want of faith, as
Chrysostom \[\*Victor of Antioch\] says. Or as Bede observes on<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p13.1"></span> [Mk.
8:23](../../../bib/vul/mar008.htm#023): "Whom He might have healed
wholly and instantly by a single word, He heals little by little, to
show the extent of human blindness, which hardly, and that only by
degrees, can come back to the light: and to point out that each step
forward in the way of perfection is due to the help of His grace."

**Reply to Objection 3:** As stated above (Q\[43\], A\[2\]), Christ
worked miracles by Divine power. Now "the works of God are perfect"
(<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p14.2"></span>[Dt.
32:4](../../../bib/vul/deu032.htm#004)). But nothing is perfect except
it attain its end. Now the end of the outward healing worked by Christ
is the healing of the soul. Consequently it was not fitting that Christ
should heal a man's body without healing his soul. Wherefore on<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p14.3"></span> [Jn.
7:23,](../../../bib/vul/joh007.htm#023) "I have healed the whole man on
a Sabbath day," Augustine says: "Because he was cured, so as to be whole
in body; he believed, so as to be whole in soul." To the man sick of the
palsy it is said specially, "Thy sins are forgiven thee," because, as
Jerome observes on<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p14.4"></span>[Matt.
9:5](../../../bib/vul/mat009.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/vul/mat009.htm#006): "We are hereby given to understand
that ailments of the body are frequently due to sin: for which reason,
perhaps, first are his sins forgiven, that the cause of the ailment
being removed, health may return." Wherefore, also (<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p14.5"></span>[Jn.
4:14](../../../bib/vul/joh004.htm#014)), it is said: "Sin no more, lest
some worse thing happen to thee." Whence, says Chrysostom, "we learn
that his sickness was the result of sin."

Nevertheless, as Chrysostom says on<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p15.1"></span>
[Mat. 9:5](../../../bib/vul/mat009.htm#005): "By how much a soul is of
more account than a body, by so much is the forgiving of sins a greater
work than healing the body; but because the one is unseen He does the
lesser and more manifest thing in order to prove the greater and more
unseen."

**Reply to Objection 4:** On<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p16.1"></span> [Mat.
9:30,](../../../bib/vul/mat009.htm#030) "See that no man know this,"
Chrysostom says: "If in another place we find Him saying, 'Go and
declare the glory of God' (cf.<span id="TP_Q44_A3-p16.2"></span> [Mk.
5:19](../../../bib/vul/mar005.htm#019);<span
id="TP_Q44_A3-p16.3"></span> [Lk.
8:39](../../../bib/vul/luk008.htm#039)), that is not contrary to this.
For He instructs us to forbid them that would praise us on our own
account: but if the glory be referred to God, then we must not forbid,
but command, that it be done."

#### Whether Christ worked miracles fittingly on irrational creatures?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that Christ worked miracles unfittingly
on irrational creatures. For brute animals are more noble than plants.
But Christ worked a miracle on plants as when the fig-tree withered away
at His command (<span id="TP_Q44_A4-p2.1"></span>[Mat.
21:19](../../../bib/vul/mat021.htm#019)). Therefore Christ should have
worked miracles also on brute animals.

**Objection 2:** Further, punishment is not justly inflicted save for
fault. But it was not the fault of the fig-tree that Christ found no
fruit on it, when fruit was not in season (<span
id="TP_Q44_A4-p3.1"></span>[Mk.
11:13](../../../bib/vul/mar011.htm#013)). Therefore it seems unfitting
that He withered it up.

**Objection 3:** Further, air and water are between heaven and earth.
But Christ worked some miracles in the heavens, as stated above
(A\[2\]), and likewise in the earth, when it quaked at the time of His
Passion (<span id="TP_Q44_A4-p4.2"></span>[Mat.
27:51](../../../bib/vul/mat027.htm#051)). Therefore it seems that He
should also have worked miracles in the air and water, such as to divide
the sea, as did Moses (<span id="TP_Q44_A4-p4.3"></span>[Ex.
14:21](../../../bib/vul/exo014.htm#021)); or a river, as did Josue
(<span id="TP_Q44_A4-p4.4"></span>[Josh.
3:16](../../../bib/vul/jos003.htm#016)) and Elias (4 Kings 2:8); and to
cause thunder to be heard in the air, as occurred on Mount Sinai when
the Law was given (<span id="TP_Q44_A4-p4.6"></span>[Ex.
19:16](../../../bib/vul/exo019.htm#016)), and like to what Elias did (3
Kings 18:45).

**Objection 4:** Further, miraculous works pertain to the work of Divine
providence in governing the world. But this work presupposes creation.
It seems, therefore, unfitting that in His miracles Christ made use of
creation: when, to wit, He multiplied the loaves. Therefore His miracles
in regard to irrational creatures seem to have been unfitting.

**On the contrary,** Christ is "the wisdom of God" (<span
id="TP_Q44_A4-p6.1"></span>[1 Cor.
1:24](../../../bib/vul/co1001.htm#024)), of whom it is said (<span
id="TP_Q44_A4-p6.2"></span>[Wis. 8:1](../../../bib/vul/wis008.htm#001))
that "she ordereth all things sweetly."

**I answer that,** As stated above, Christ's miracles were ordained to
the end that He should be recognized as having Divine power, unto the
salvation of mankind. Now it belongs to the Divine power that every
creature be subject thereto. Consequently it behooved Him to work
miracles on every kind of creature, not only on man, but also on
irrational creatures.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Brute animals are akin generically to man,
wherefore they were created on the same day as man. And since He had
worked many miracles on the bodies of men, there was no need for Him to
work miracles on the bodies of brute animals. and so much the less that,
as to their sensible and corporeal nature, the same reason applies to
both men and animals, especially terrestrial. But fish, from living in
water, are more alien from human nature; wherefore they were made on
another day. On them Christ worked a miracle in the plentiful draught of
fishes, related <span id="TP_Q44_A4-p8.1"></span>[Lk.
5](../../../bib/vul/luk005.htm#000) and <span
id="TP_Q44_A4-p8.2"></span>[Jn. 21](../../../bib/vul/joh021.htm#000);
and, again, in the fish caught by Peter, who found a stater in it (<span
id="TP_Q44_A4-p8.3"></span>[Mat.
17:26](../../../bib/vul/mat017.htm#026)). As to the swine who were cast
headlong into the sea, this was not the effect of a Divine miracle, but
of the action of the demons, God permitting.

**Reply to Objection 2:** As Chrysostom says on<span
id="TP_Q44_A4-p9.1"></span> [Mat.
21:19](../../../bib/vul/mat021.htm#019): "When our Lord does any such
like thing" on plants or brute animals, "ask not how it was just to
wither up the fig-tree, since it was not the fruit season; to ask such a
question is foolish in the extreme," because such things cannot commit a
fault or be punished: "but look at the miracle, and wonder at the
worker." Nor does the Creator "inflict" any hurt on the owner, if He
choose to make use of His own creature for the salvation of others;
rather, as Hilary says on<span id="TP_Q44_A4-p9.2"></span> [Mat.
21:19,](../../../bib/vul/mat021.htm#019) "we should see in this a proof
of God's goodness, for when He wished to afford an example of salvation
as being procured by Him, He exercised His mighty power on the human
body: but when He wished to picture to them His severity towards those
who wilfully disobey Him, He foreshadows their doom by His sentence on
the tree." This is the more noteworthy in a fig-tree which, as
Chrysostom observes (on<span id="TP_Q44_A4-p9.3"></span> [Mat.
21:19](../../../bib/vul/mat021.htm#019)), "being full of moisture, makes
the miracle all the more remarkable."

**Reply to Objection 3:** Christ also worked miracles befitting to
Himself in the air and water: when, to wit, as related<span
id="TP_Q44_A4-p10.1"></span> [Mat.
8:26,](../../../bib/vul/mat008.htm#026) "He commanded the winds, and the
sea, and there came a great calm." But it was not befitting that He who
came to restore all things to a state of peace and calm should cause
either a disturbance in the atmosphere or a division of waters. Hence
the Apostle says (<span id="TP_Q44_A4-p10.2"></span>[Heb.
12:18](../../../bib/vul/heb012.htm#018)): "You are not come to a fire
that may be touched and approached \[Vulg.: 'a mountain that might be
touched, and a burning fire'\], and a whirlwind, and darkness, and
storm."

At the time of His Passion, however, the "veil was rent," to signify the
unfolding of the mysteries of the Law; "the graves were opened," to
signify that His death gave life to the dead; "the earth quaked and the
rocks were rent," to signify that man's stony heart would be softened,
and the whole world changed for the better by the virtue of His Passion.

**Reply to Objection 4:** The multiplication of the loaves was not
effected by way of creation, but by an addition of extraneous matter
transformed into loaves; hence Augustine says on<span
id="TP_Q44_A4-p12.1"></span> [Jn.
6:1-14](../../../bib/vul/joh006.htm#001): "Whence He multiplieth a few
grains into harvests, thence in His hands He multiplied the five
loaves": and it is clearly by a process of transformation that grains
are multiplied into harvests.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 45 - OF CHRIST'S TRANSFIGURATION (FOUR
ARTICLES)](sum496)
