[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sum574)  [Next](sum576) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF THE EFFECT OF THIS SACRAMENT (THREE ARTICLES)

We must now consider the effect of this sacrament: under which head
there are three points of inquiry:

\(1\) Whether Extreme Unction avails for the remission of sins?

\(2\) Whether bodily health is an effect of this sacrament?

\(3\) Whether this sacrament imprints a character?

#### Whether Extreme Unction avails for the remission of sins?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that Extreme Unction does not avail for
the remission of sins. For when a thing can be attained by one means, no
other is needed. Now repentance is required in the recipient of Extreme
Unction for the remission of his sins. Therefore sins are not remitted
by Extreme Unction.

**Objection 2:** Further, there are no more than three things in sin,
the stain, the debt of punishment, and the remnants of sin. Now Extreme
Unction does not remit the stain without contrition, and this remits sin
even without Unction; nor does it remit the punishment, for if the
recipient recover, he is still bound to fulfill the satisfaction
enjoined; nor does it take away the remnants of sin, since the
dispositions remaining from preceding acts still remain, as may easily
be seen after recovery. Therefore remission of sins is by no means the
effect of Extreme Unction.

**Objection 3:** Further, remission of sins takes place, not
successively, but instantaneously. On the other hand, Extreme Unction is
not done all at once, since several anointings are required. Therefore
the remission of sins is not its effect.

**On the contrary,** It is written (<span
id="XP_Q30_A1-p5.1"></span>[James
5:15](../../../bib/vul/jam005.htm#015)): "If he be in sins, they shall
be forgiven him."

Further, every sacrament of the New Law confers grace. Now grace effects
the forgiveness of sins. Therefore since Extreme Unction is a sacrament
of the New Law, its effect is the remission of sins.

**I answer that,** Each sacrament was instituted for the purpose of one
principal effect, though it may, in consequence, produce other effects
besides. And since a sacrament causes what it signifies, the principal
effect of a sacrament must be gathered from its signification. Now this
sacrament is conferred by way of a kind of medicament, even as Baptism
is conferred by way of washing, and the purpose of a medicament is to
expel sickness. Hence the chief object of the institution of this
sacrament is to cure the sickness of sin. Therefore, just as Baptism is
a spiritual regeneration, and Penance, a spiritual resurrection, so
Extreme Unction is a spiritual healing or cure. Now just as a bodily
cure presupposes bodily life in the one who is cured, so does a
spiritual cure presuppose spiritual life. Hence this sacrament is not an
antidote to those defects which deprive man of spiritual life, namely.
original and mortal sin, but is a remedy for such defects as weaken man
spiritually, so as to deprive him of perfect vigor for acts of the life
of grace or of glory; which defects consist in nothing else but a
certain weakness and unfitness, the result in us of actual or original
sin. against which weakness man is strengthened by this sacrament.
Since, however, this strength is given by grace, which is incompatible
with sin, it follows that. in consequence, if it finds any sin, either
mortal or venial, it removes it as far as the guilt is concerned,
provided there be no obstacle on the part of the recipient; just as we
have stated to be the case with regard to the Eucharist and Confirmation
(TP, Q\[73\], A\[7\]; TP, Q\[79\], A\[3\]). Hence, too, James speaks of
the remission of sin as being conditional, for he says: "If he be in
sins, they shall be forgiven him," viz. as to the guilt. Because it does
not always blot out sin, since it does not always find any: but it
always remits in respect of the aforesaid weakness which some call the
remnants of sin. Some, however, maintain that it is instituted chiefly
as a remedy for venial sin which cannot be cured perfectly in this
lifetime: for which reason the sacrament of the dying is ordained
specially against venial sin. But this does not seem to be true, since
Penance also blots out venial sins sufficiently during this life as to
their guilt, and that we cannot avoid them after doing penance, does not
cancel the effect of the previous penance; moreover this is part of the
weakness mentioned above.

Consequently we must say that the principal effect of this sacrament is
the remission of sin, as to its remnants, and, consequently, even as to
its guilt, if it find it.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Although the principal effect of a sacrament
can be obtained without actually receiving that sacrament (either
without any sacrament at all, or indirectly by means of some other
sacrament), yet it never can be obtained without the purpose of
receiving that sacrament. And so, since Penance was instituted chiefly
against actual sin, whichever other sacrament may blot out sin
indirectly, it does not exclude the necessity of Penance.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Extreme Unction remits sin in some way as to
those three things. For, although the stain of sin is not washed out
without contrition, yet this sacrament, by the grace which it bestows,
makes the movement of the free will towards sin to be one of contrition,
just as may occur in the Eucharist and Confirmation. Again it diminishes
the debt of temporal punishment; and this indirectly, in as much as it
takes away weakness, for a strong man bears the same punishment more
easily than a weak man. Hence it does not follow that the measure of
satisfaction is diminished. As to the remnants of sin, they do not mean
here those dispositions which result from acts, and are inchoate habits
so to speak, but a certain spiritual debility in the mind, which
debility being removed, though such like habits or dispositions remain,
the mind is not so easily prone to sin.

**Reply to Objection 3:** When many actions are ordained to one effect,
the last is formal with respect to all the others that precede, and acts
by virtue of them: wherefore by the last anointing is infused grace
which gives the sacrament its effect.

#### Whether bodily health is an effect of this sacrament?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that bodily health is not an effect of
this sacrament. For every sacrament is a spiritual remedy. Now a
spiritual remedy is ordained to spiritual health, just as a bodily
remedy is ordained to health of the body. Therefore bodily health is not
an effect of this sacrament.

**Objection 2:** Further, the sacraments always produce their effect in
those who approach them in the proper dispositions. Now sometimes the
recipient of this sacrament does not receive bodily health, no matter
how devoutly he receives it. Therefore bodily health is not its effect.

**Objection 3:** Further, the efficacy of this sacrament is notified to
us in the fifth chapter of James. Now healing is ascribed there as the
effect, not of the anointing, but of the prayer, for he says: "The
prayer of faith shall save the sick man." Therefore bodily healing is
not an effect of this sacrament.

**On the contrary,** The operation of the Church is more efficacious
since Christ's Passion than before. Now, before the Passion, those whom
the apostles anointed with oil were healed (<span
id="XP_Q30_A2-p5.1"></span>[Mk. 6:13](../../../bib/vul/mar006.htm#013)).
Therefore unction has its effect now in healing bodies.

Further, the sacraments produce their effect by signifying it. Now
Baptism signifies and effects a spiritual washing, through the bodily
washing in which it consists outwardly. Therefore Extreme Unction
signifies and causes a spiritual healing through the bodily healing
which it effects externally.

**I answer that,** Just as Baptism causes a spiritual cleansing from
spiritual stains by means of a bodily washing, so this sacrament causes
an inward healing by means of an outward sacramental healing: and even
as the baptismal washing has the effect of a bodily washing, since it
effects even a bodily cleansing, so too, Extreme Unction has the effect
of a bodily remedy, namely a healing of the body. But there is a
difference, for as much as the bodily washing causes a bodily cleansing
by a natural property of the bodily element, and consequently always
causes it, whereas Extreme Unction causes a bodily healing, not by a
natural property of the matter, but by the Divine power which works
reasonably. And since reasonable working never produces a secondary
effect, except in so far as it is required for the principal effect, it
follows that a bodily healing does not always ensue from this sacrament,
but only when it is requisite for the spiritual healing: and then it
produces it always, provided there be no obstacle on the part of the
recipient.

**Reply to Objection 1:** This objection proves that bodily health is
not the principal effect of this sacrament: and this is true.

The Reply to the Second Objection is clear from what has been said above
(cf. Q\[29\], A\[8\]).

**Reply to Objection 3:** This prayer is the form of this sacrament as
stated above (Q\[29\], AA\[8\],9). Hence, so far as its form is
concerned, this sacrament derives from it its efficacy in healing the
body.

#### Whether this sacrament imprints a character?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that this sacrament imprints a character.
For a character is a distinctive sign. Now just as one who is baptized
is distinguished from one who is not so is one who is anointed, from one
who is not. Therefore, just as Baptism imprints a character so does
Extreme Unction.

**Objection 2:** Further, there is an anointing in the sacraments or
order and Confirmation, as there is in this sacrament. But a character
is imprinted in those sacraments. Therefore a character is imprinted in
this one also.

**Objection 3:** Further, every sacrament contains something that is a
reality only, something that is a sacrament only, and something that is
both reality and sacrament. Now nothing in this sacrament can be
assigned as both reality and sacrament except a character. Therefore in
this sacrament also, a character is imprinted.

**On the contrary,** No sacrament that imprints a character is repeated.
But this sacrament is repeated as we shall state further on (Q\[33\]).
Therefore it does not imprint a character.

Further, a sacramental character causes a distinction among those who
are in the present Church. But Extreme Unction is given to one who is
departing from the present Church. Therefore it does not imprint a
character.

**I answer that,** A character is not imprinted except in those
sacraments whereby man is deputed to some sacred duty. Now this
sacrament is for no other purpose than a remedy, and man is not deputed
thereby to do or receive anything holy. Therefore it does not imprint a
character.

**Reply to Objection 1:** A character marks a distinction of . states
with regard to duties which have to be performed in the Church, a
distinction which a man does not receive by being anointed.

**Reply to Objection 2:** The unction of orders and Confirmation, is the
unction of consecration whereby a man is deputed to some sacred duty,
whereas this unction is remedial. Hence the comparison fails.

**Reply to Objection 3:** In this sacrament, that which is both reality
and sacrament is not a character, but a certain inward devotion which is
a kind of spiritual anointing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 31 - OF THE MINISTER OF THIS SACRAMENT (THREE
ARTICLES)](sum576)
