[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jss08)  [Next](jss10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029XG0XM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Journey in Southern Siberia*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

### CHAPTER V

### JOURNEY TO THE ISLAND OF OLKHON

AFTER annoying delays the day for starting on the journey came at last
(August 6); but only at one o'clock were we ready for the road. A few
moments before leaving I witnessed an interesting ceremony. Eight men
with Vassya seated themselves in a circle on the ground, then one of the
eight rose and with a glass of vodka in his extended hand implored the
gods, as he sprinkled the vodka on the ground, to grant Vassya a
prosperous journey.

From Usturdi I drove directly to Lazareff's house, whence we were to set
out on the journey together. The two men had proposed to start alone at
two o'clock, but I preferred to have them with me, if possible.

On arrival I found that Lazareff was "not quite ready"; he needed an
hour at least, and he and Vassya wished to stop a short time at a
near-by village where there was a wedding in progress,—a friend of
theirs was celebrating a part of his marriage. Lazareff promised
faithfully to overtake me on the road, or at Olzoni, the next station.

I drove on, and at the first village, which was a short distance from
the highway, I saw a large assembly of people. The inhabitants had no
work on that day, nothing to think of but the marriage. The young people
were dancing most vigorously; the old men and women were sitting around
in groups, laughing and talking, taking refreshments, solid and fluid.

That afternoon in the first half of August was delightful, sunny and
bright, but not too warm. The road was excellent, being the highway
between the capital of eastern Siberia, Irkutsk, and Yakutsk, which has
been for so many years the city of exile. Along the road on the left
there are many good winter houses.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

The places chosen for these buildings are in most cases well sheltered
by high hills from winds of the north and northwest.

There is nothing in which Russian influence on the Buriats is shown more
emphatically than in the matter of winter homes. Before Russian times
the Buriat house was always an eight-sided log structure, with a hole in
the middle of its earth-covered roof to let smoke out. A fire of sticks
was made on the ground under this smoke-hole. How cold those places were
in such a climate we can imagine very easily. The winter house now, with
its great stove made of brick, is in use among the better class, and
often it has double windows.

Though there were many dwellings along the way, people were living
elsewhere for the summer months. There was perfect quiet, no man or
woman was to be seen, no horses or cattle were grazing in the pastures.

Twenty-four hours before there had been rain, hence the road was clean,
with no trace of dust on it. Rarely have I traveled with such pleasure
as on that clear sunny day in August. There was no racing of horses this
time, the carriage moved on at an easy, good pace, very comfortably.
Only once did we meet an equipage. It seemed as though the whole world
was at home sleeping.

About seven o'clock we rolled into Olzoni, a pleasant-looking village in
a narrow valley. Along the middle of the village runs the single street,
which is also the highway.

On the left hand, at the entrance to the village and just out-side the
first buildings, is an ostrog, or palisaded prison enclosure, which has
a suggestive and sinister look, mainly because we know why it is there
and what it is used for. It was the first of the kind I had ever seen.

At the other end of Olzoni the valley turns to the right quite abruptly,
and the street seems to end in a hill. On this hill is a small wooden
church, beyond which there are no houses. The church at one end, the
prison at the other; narrow fields at the right as we enter, and wooded
hills beyond them. On the left green fields and a rolling country,
perhaps fifty feet above the highway.

At Olzoni there is an excellent post station. Tea was in order,

 

<span id="img_05400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![V. HORSE
SACRIFICE.](tn/05400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05400.jpg.md)  
V. HORSE SACRIFICE.  
</span>

*Page* [46](jss08.htm#page_46.md)

<span id="img_05401"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![VI. HORSE
SACRIFICE.](tn/05401.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05401.jpg.md)  
VI. HORSE SACRIFICE.  
</span>

*Page* [46](jss08.htm#page_46.md)

 

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

and then preparations were made for a supper, which came about two hours
later. On the street there was considerable activity. I met two children
who were playing horse, and I discovered that the horse was Timofei and
the driver Andrei. I had to remonstrate with Andrei for using his whip
too freely, though Timofei explained that he was whipped because he was
a horse and did not want to work. A man sitting on an ox and going for
water with his cart and barrel furnished a good picture of domestic
life. The ox was well trained and walked off briskly.

To add to my stock of provisions, and to find out something of possible
interest regarding the inhabitants of the village, I went into the
principal shop, where I made the acquaintance of the merchant Pan
Tembovski, a Pole, who told me very interesting things touching the
Buriats. He was exiled many years ago for political reasons; after
serving out his sentence he went back to Russia, but returned soon,
because "there is more money and life in Siberia." To me it seemed that
all the powers of a financier would be needed to make even a meagre
living in Olzoni.

At ten o'clock Lazareff and Vassya made their appearance. They had not
left the wedding till six in the evening. There had been an immense
consumption of food and drink, and the merry-making, they assured me,
"was great."

Fresh horses were brought, and I set out at eleven o'clock. Olzoni is a
place of some interest, and for a post station really very pleasant.
When returning from the island I remained four days in the village.

About three o'clock in the morning I arrived at Baiandai (pronounced
Buy-and-die), the next station, but saw nothing of that broad,
straggling village with which later on I became quite familiar. There
was no delay for horses, and soon the carriage was moving toward the,
station, Hogotskaya, where I arrived at five o'clock in the morning, and
slept on a hard bed till seven. The night ride had been very pleasant,
for the weather was perfect. Lazareff and Vassya came an hour later, in
time for a short sleep.

About nine o'clock we set out for a visit to the brothers Alexandroff,
who are numbered among the wealthiest and most

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

influential of the Buriats; their estate is about five miles from
Hogotskaya. It was warmer that morning than the day before—it was hot,
in fact.

The country about Hogotskaya is a fine rolling region of good grass-land
and black soil of sufficient depth. Hay and grain are abundant, with
culture. Between ten and eleven o'clock we were at the Alexandroffs'.
The three brothers live in one neighborhood; their houses are near one
another, and form a whole town, if considered together.

As these brothers are good friends of Andrei Mihailoff, they received us
very cordially. We were conducted to a pleasant sitting-room fitted up
in Russian fashion, and while we were conversing there with one brother
another set servants to work in the kitchen and elsewhere. In half an
hour they had ready in the dining-room a zakuska, or "bite," the
collection of preliminary tidbits which, in all parts of Russia,
precedes each considerable meal, and are taken to rouse appetite and
also to nourish. In great houses these "bites" are elaborate and
enticing.

Invited to the dining-room we found there two tables; on one of these
stood bottles containing vodka and two kinds of wine, sherry and claret.
On the other were things to be eaten,—boiled eggs, brown bread, smoked
fish, pickled herrings, sardines, cheese, fish, eggs, and other rich
"appetite rousers."

The zakuska is always taken standing. The first thing is a small glass
of vodka, kummel, or some other liquid of similar quality, "to increase
appetite and induce cheerfulness." Then comes the eating, which bears
somewhat the relation to dinner that a skirmish does to a murderous
battle.

After the zakuska, as our mid-day meal was not ready yet, we went again
to the sitting-room and talked for a time.

We spoke of the country, the Buriat methods of managing land, of rearing
cattle and horses, of moving from one place to another in summer, and
back to the first one in winter.

While the brothers were explaining these customs to me carefully a
servant declared that the "guest meal" was ready and waiting. There were
two tables, at one of these, which was square, sat the master of the
house, with my wife, Vassya,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

and me; at the second table was his brother, with Lazareff and persons
of the family,—a dozen at least in the company.

One cause of the delay in the dinner was that a lamb had been
slaughtered and cooked for our nourishment. The great dish of honor at
our table was the boiled head of that lamb, with the wool on. There was
also a species of soup made of blood and kidneys, which seemed much like
diluted blood pudding. It was relished by the Buriats, but strive as I
might I could only make a very scant trial of its qualities. There was
an abundance of other food, however, hence I could let these Mongol
dainties pass.

The Alexandroffs are the most Russianized of Buriats in their style of
living, and manners; though they, too, live a double life in some
measure. They are of the rich and small class which builds at least
three houses. The winter house is like that in use throughout Russia; it
has brick stoves and chimneys. The old-fashioned Buriat house is
modelled on a tent. In summer these houses are cool and agreeable, but
in winter it is impossible, in a cold country, to heat them sufficiently
for modern comfort. When well improved they are delightful from May to
October. Should a chilly hour happen at any time, or a cool evening come
at the beginning or at the end of the season, a fire is made quickly,
and people sit around it to enjoy the warmth and to talk. To rouse
conviviality tarasun is drunk; it is brought in a jug holding one or two
gallons. This jug, which always has a wooden cup in it, is moved around
the circle, and when emptied of liquor is filled again straightway.

All Buriats, without any exception, prefer the style of house used by
their forefathers, and are attached to it greatly. Pagan Buriats must
have this house, if they are to be married according to the rites of
their people, since the last act in the ceremony of marriage is
performed at the central quadrangle of bare earth, where the fire is
made, when the new wife takes her place at the milk barrel which stands
there, and becomes house mistress. Her special office is to make the
tarasun, always distilled at this fireplace. Beside its good qualities,
the old house is strong through its hold on the ancient religion, the
needs of the people, and their habits and customs.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

The Alexandroff dinner, as to food, was peculiar only by the sudden
slaughter of the lamb, to show honor to strangers, and the special
preparation of its head for the table. Otherwise the dinner might have
been given by a Russian. The flesh of the poor little victim was cooked
in the ordinary fashion, by boiling.

When the meal was ended the masculine part of the company retired to the
summer house, and sat smoking and conversing for an hour or so.

This summer house was very well built. The floor was higher than usual
above the bare earth in the center, and thus afforded a more comfortable
seat for the company; chairs also were in use, so that whoso preferred
one might sit on one. The smoke-escape was better constructed,—wider at
the roof than in other houses.

The Alexandroffs' summer and winter establishments are different from
any among Buriats in this that they are adjoining; only a road lies
between the two places. The houses stand almost opposite each other and
not more than half a mile apart. The difference between the two places
is remarkable, however. The summer land is level or slightly rolling,
and is exposed at every point of the compass, open to winds from north,
south, east, and west, so that whenever the air moves men and animals
feel it. On the right of the road, where the winter place lies, all is
changed. The land slopes away toward the east and the south; on the
north is a large and dense forest, which wards off the north wind
effectively.

Some distance from the highway there are well-watered meadows and
splendid pastures. A great deal of hay is produced on this land; I
counted fourteen immense ricks in one part of the meadow. The wealth of
the Alexandroffs comes chiefly from the breeding of cattle and horses,
and from lending money at a high rate of interest.

Since we had planned to continue our journey that same day we soon bade
good-bye to our host, who strove to persuade us to remain at his house
till the morrow in every case.

An easy life is that of those three brothers. Every year they sell many
horses and cattle. Whether the price falls or rises

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

they have a good income. Thus far they are free of political problems.
They have had their own way under Russia up to this time. At present,
however, they fear that their land supply is about to be lessened.

At Hogotskaya there is a "narodni dom," or people's house, in which
travelers may find a room and a samovar. That room we had made our
headquarters. Near this narodni dom is the home of the chief of the
district. We returned at four o'clock, sent for post horses, drank tea,
and were soon ready to start for the island. In the morning, before
going to the Alexandroffs', I had called on the district chief, and now
he came to wish me a prosperous journey. Though I did not know it at
that time, he had sent forward word to officials to help me in every way
needed. I thanked him heartily for his kind wishes, and promised to
explain my success, if I had any, and tell him all my adventures when I
came back from Olkhon and Lake Baikal.

I was off at exactly five o'clock, Vassya and Lazareff a few minutes
later. Each carriage was drawn by three horses. We intended to travel
all night. The weather was perfect, the road dry and in fairly good
condition. I thought we might reach the third station about daybreak, or
at least very early in the morning.

After leaving Hogotskaya, which was our last station on the Yakuts road,
we passed a mile of level road, and then traveled over land gently
rising till we came to the base of a ridge. This ridge was perhaps eight
hundred feet high where the road lay, and much higher on either side. On
reaching the highest point of the road it was seen that the ridge, which
was wooded for the greater part, turned more and more from the highway
till its direction was at a right angle, then it turned backward
gradually and formed a great ellipse. Into the picturesque valley formed
by this elliptical ridge we now descended, and through it, and a valley
adjoining, we traveled till midnight.

The whole region around was either woodland or meadow. People were
cutting hay and making stacks as we passed along through it that
evening. Places like this are very frequent in

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Siberia. Warded
well against winds and surrounded in great part with dense forests, they
are sheltered marvelously from cold, and cattle are driven to them for
the winter.

At nine o'clock we reached the first station; at midnight we arrived at
the second, where, after some waiting, a samovar was set up, and we ate
a bountiful lunch which I had brought with me. The station furnished hot
water for the tea and boiled eggs; I had sweet bread, brown bread, and
ham of good quality ready cooked.

Roughing it on the road is delightful at times, and at times very
dreary. Good health, good weather, wholesome food, and pleasant people
make traveling a holiday, and joyous. Bad weather, vile food, hostile
people, take away the best charm even from scenery, since they weaken
power and mental vision in the traveler.

If one is working for a purpose, however, all hardships grow easy, they
become even pleasant if devotion be strong enough in the mind of the
worker.

Of all hardships in traveling, and there are many, the greatest and most
bitter, in fact the only serious ones are those caused by people. The
deceit, opposition, and active harmfulness of mankind create the only
troubles worth mentioning as we move on examining the crust of this
earth ball, striving to discover what is on it, and under it, and above
it. If men were as good as they are evil,—and they are evil through
ignorance and weakness,—it would be easier and much pleasanter to travel
than it now is. It would also be easier to do those good deeds of which
each man is capable. I thought thus as I supped at that station, which
was poor and not very clean, but the people in it were obliging and
courteous.

When supper was eaten three horses were attached to my carriage, but
Vassya and Lazareff had to wait for horses which were out in the
pasture. Men had gone to search for them, hence my companions might have
to remain long at the station or only some minutes. I resolved to set
out at once, promising to wait at Kosaya.

It was one o'clock when I started. No moon was visible; the night was
one of stars only, the most impressive of all nights,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

and that means the most impressive sight possible to man during earthly
existence.

The majestic and marvelous dark night of stars, that face of infinity
looking down at us in silence, affects every serious man deeply by its
presence. In days past that presence, though the same in its features as
to-day, was not the same in meaning. It was looked on variously by
different people in different ages. To all men the sky seemed in old
times dome-shaped and solid, the greatest single thing visible to any
one. By some it was revered as a deity, and is so revered even to the
present; by others it was esteemed to be a dwelling-place. Whether a
deity or a dwelling-place, it was closely connected with the earth, to
which it was in great part subservient. I was thinking of this as I
looked on that beautiful night from the swiftly moving carriage, when it
occurred to me on a sudden that if I were to credit my own eyesight I
should believe myself to be just in the center of all things. The
horizon in front, behind, and on both sides was equidistant; the highest
point in the sky was directly above me; I held the center, apparently.
Eye-sight, the first simple witness, uncorrected by examination and
afterthought, formed the basis of current belief and philosophy touching
everything in existence till Copernican teaching destroyed it.

How self-satisfied were men in the old time, how contented and happy.
They believed that this earth was the center of the universe, that it
was fixed and immovable, that the sun went around it, that all things
existent came and vanished because of it. The sun rose and set just to
serve man.

All that belief and philosophy has gone from us. That which seemed to be
the great fact was found non-existent and illusive, that which *is* has
proved so stupendous that no one is able to grasp it. Man's home in the
sky, the heavenly house just above, has been rent from him. His yearning
remains, or at least in most cases, and he is like the poet who never
had a home, but who sang of home, that sweet home, as no man ever sang
of it before him or afterward.

As the carriage rolled on I recalled how a man in London, three months
earlier, had spoken to me very earnestly as follows:

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "This earth is no
longer the center of the universe. People now do not think that in the
sky straight above them is a heavenly city, where they will live through
endless ages in happiness. Science, which is encroaching on ancient
beliefs, and destroying old systems, is taking away every basis of
earnest conviction, and so far has given nothing in the sense of
assuring a future existence, by showing where or how that existence
could be realized. My father died," continued my acquaintance, "with the
firmest conviction that he would live soul and body hereafter. I believe
in nothing. I should be glad to believe, but I cannot. Some scientists
tell me that at death I shall die altogether, that my conscious I, which
is talking this moment, will vanish forever. Others tell me that if for
individuals there be a hereafter, no man can prove it. The majority of
men hope and wish for a life in the future, hope and wish for that which
the old beliefs promised. I should like wonderfully to have such a
belief, but how am I to get it? Who can help me? This is for me the
great question."

The horses had passed half the road, perhaps, when I dropped asleep
while pondering over the words of my London friend. I woke soon, for we
had come to rough places and the harsh jolting roused me. After that we
were in an open region. The whole sky was visible, and the carriage
moved smoothly. Again I fell to thinking, and my friend's words came
back to me:

"Can Science find eternal life possible in the same human being? Science
finds eternal life everywhere, but not in the same form.

"To be permanent and undying a material body must either not change, or
must receive the equivalent exactly of that which goes from it, and,
besides, it must retain all its life vigor. There must be no loss to it
in exchanging.

"Given the immortal body, where is its home to be? The heaven is gone,
that solid region, that firmament, as men once considered it. There is
nothing now overhead save expanse. Where shall we look for the home of
undying individual existence? Not on this earth, since on earth there is
no place for an endless and happy hereafter. Is there in infinite space
out beyond us a place where immortal existence might have a fit

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

dwelling? If there is, how can we find it? From the various groups of
men who ponder over the mystery of existence three may be chosen to
illustrate the problem before us, and how men relate themselves to it.

"The first group is made up of persons who declare that there is no
spirit whatever save what is inseparable from and connected with matter,
and which inheres in it. There is in this way a spirit in everything
various in each case; from that in the atom, which is, perhaps, the most
restricted, to that in man, which on earth is the most comprehensive and
intricate.

"Whenever an organism, such as man, comes to dissolution, or death, the
spirit which inheres in it must vanish; and when that organism is
resolved finally into elements or atoms, there is simply a myriad of
atomic spirits, but no spirit of a man to consider, because there is no
man in existence, and so with all other living creatures and organized
existences.

"There is nothing immortal save the atom in any place. From atoms all
things are aggregated, and from atomic spirit is built up all the mind
in the universe. Since the organisms are transient, the spirit is
transient.

"For thinkers of this group the question just raised has no interest
whatever.

"The second group is formed of all Christian believers, and also of
those who, though they may not be Christians, believe in a spirit, or
soul, as distinct from each body. For this group the question cannot be
without interest.

"The first and the second group have no common ground of agreement.

"The third group ascribes enormous, nay, unbounded, importance to the
atom, but only in conjunction with that all-pervading substance which
men for the moment call ether, but which in reality is spirit.

"What is the atom, and what is ether? The atom is deathless; no one can
seize it, no one can injure it, fire cannot burn it. In the raging heat
of the sun or on Sirius the dog-star, in the maximum of cold where life
would cease suddenly, in a dew-drop, in a tempest, in a blizzard, or in
Niagara the atom is there. Invincible, eternal, equally contented in the
highest heaven

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

and the pit of the inferno, infinitely obedient; inconceivably flexible
it enters into beauty as readily as into the vilest deformity. Equally
at home in the diamond and the dung-heap, the atom is everywhere present
and constitutes all things material. There is no existence possible
without it.

"What may we say of the ether? The atom is everywhere, but the atom is
always embraced by the ether, always upheld and kept down by it.
Wherever the atom, which constitutes all things, has an office, and it
has one in every place, the ether is present.

"In the scheme of the first set of thinkers among the three to which I
have referred, the atom alone is important; in fact, there is nothing to
begin with, the atom which is so small that no human eye can behold it
is the first unit, the starting-point. By an infinite accretion of atoms
effected through impulse or love which atoms have for one another, all
the forms in the universe are constituted gradually; all the beauty and
intellect in existence are thus evolved; all the millions of suns,
stars, and other heavenly bodies, as well as the various kinds of living
creatures, man, and everything that has life on our planet.

"By this scheme all physical forms and all degrees of mentality come
from the association of atoms, which, increasing in certain lines,
always growing in number, cause with each increase a higher mentality
and a more varied physical development.

"The statement of the third group is this substantially: When an
accretion of atoms has happened, an inflow or pressure of ether takes
place with this growth, simultaneously, and at every phase of it. For
instance, if two atoms unite, a mind to grasp this situation is needed;
the ether is present, and the mind is immediately. The association of
atoms increases to a hundred for example, the association is vastly more
complex with that number than it was with two atoms. The great point
being that from an aggregation of atomic mind it is quite possible to
reach a cosmic mind, or one even that embraces a solar system, and
finally the universe.

"With change effected by new atomic accretions there was always an
inflowing of ether and an increase of mentality sufficient to dominate
the situation. If there was not, the new association

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

failed and went to pieces, fell back into atoms, to begin anew and
continue till success came at that or another time.

"The impulse to accretion is indestructible in the atom, and is active
unceasingly. The ether is everywhere present, going through each
accretion, embracing and testing it. The ether finds every joint, seam,
or line of union between atoms, inserts itself and breaks up the union,
unless it be suitable and strong enough. If it be suitable, the ether
stays with it, gives the mentality needed in the new combination while
it is fit to continue. When not fit, its mentality withdraws and it
perishes, that is, drops apart and reverts to its atoms. In this way
from the beginning of ages, from the time when atoms began first to seek
one another, that is, as soon as atoms were divided from ether, from the
time that one became two and the Son was sent forth from the bosom or
personality of the Father, creation began and continues to the present,
and will continue while existence endures, or, in other words, while
there is force in the universe, or still in other words, while there are
atoms and ether in existence.

"We have now this point. From the time of the first dissolution of
atomic aggregation to this moment there is a continuous going out and
returning of ether, each return bringing with it a life history
beginning with the first failure of two atoms to associate beyond a
certain period, and ending with the latest dissolution of some structure
in the universe. Each one of these returns has its memory, and each one
of them is deathless. Each temporary aggregation reverts to its atoms,
which begin new adventures, while the ether returns to the source whence
it started.

"According to the thought inherent in the scheme of this third group of
thinkers there was a period when ether and atoms were indifferentiated,
merged in one. At the end of a period, beyond calculation in length, a
period which might be called an eternity without a beginning, one became
two, atoms and ether became segregated and each was indestructible for
opposite reasons. The atom because it stands alone, the ether because it
is infinitely yielding, no power can separate it, and it pervades all
things no matter how closely their particles are

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

compacted. Out of atoms all forms may be created. *Ether* knows
everything, because it is in all places, and is never separated or
interrupted. The *Great Ether* knows all that the small parts
experience, but the small parts know only by observation, reasoning, and
inference anything of the Great Ether.

"We have thus two forms of immortality at present, existent in all
places, the ether and the atom. The aggregation of atoms is perishable,
and an individual made up of atoms and ether would be immortal and safe
only in a place secure from invasion, safe from every external shock and
collision, and from chemical action which would destroy the adhesive
force of its atoms. Is there such a safe dwelling, and where is it?"

The reasoning of my friend which I give here was in my mind,
unexpressed, as I dropped asleep thinking: Is there a real heaven in
existence instead of that one up there which is lost to us? I had been
looking straight into the wonderful night sky, my mind filled with that
awful reality before me; my eyes closed now, and I was dreaming,

I seemed still to see everything around me, and all grew in size,
gradually; next I saw nothing, and rested, I know not how long, and then
again I was dreaming. I opened my eyes, as I thought, and found myself
standing near a telescope enormous in size and far better than any I had
ever used or seen thus far. "Will you look in?" asked a person, as I
stood there in wonder. "If you look you will see the great center of all
things, the place of repose amidst all the action in existence. You will
see clearly through this telescope the storm center of the universe,
where there is a perfect balance of forces, and where there is peace
kept by infinite power and knowledge. There is no decay there, and there
will never be. It is the great result of all the toil, suffering, death,
and anguish in every other place, and only beings who are perfect can
ever reach it."

"But will the balance not be lost?" I asked. "Will not trouble come to
it, as to all other places?"

"As long as force and matter last this region which I show you will be
as calm and happy as it now is." He moved to go before me, but that
moment something happened; I was

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

pushed and jolted, my driver shouted and whipped his horses, and I woke
and asked:

"Where are we, what 's the matter?"

"Kosaya Steppe!" (Crooked Prairie) called out the driver.

And he rushed into the village, Crooked Prairie, made half a turn in
front of a church, so as to face a large gate before which he stopped,
slipped down from his seat, rang a bell, and then waited. The gate was
opened after some minutes and we drove into the yard of the "People's
House." The woman, who had charge of the building and all that pertained
to it, appeared at a porch, and the gate-keeper came out and took from
the carriage some things for my use.

The house, which was of good size, had apparently not been occupied much
in recent days. The windows had not been opened, the air was close and
unpleasant in odor. The first thing was to open the windows, and then,
pure air secured, to have breakfast made ready.

A boiling samovar was brought about half an hour later. In Russia tea is
the greatest, the best drink of the country. So far as my experience
goes Russian tea is the most refreshing drink in the world and when
there are suhari (rusks) to go with it food and drink are at hand for a
good meal in the morning.

After drinking tea I slept till seven, that is one hour, then I went to
the courtyard and there in the middle of the open space was a carriage
and in it Vassya and Lazareff sleeping soundly. I had engaged my horses
for half past seven, hoping thus to have them in season. A little before
eight the two men woke, and the horses were brought in. Vassya wished to
remain two or three hours at Crooked Prairie, so I went on to Elantsin,
the next station, where I arrived only at two o'clock after some delay
on the road and slow traveling.

At Elantsin I was informed that it would be impossible to get horses
that day; I must wait till the morrow in every case. No help for it.
This station, which is about a verst from the town, is one of the best
on the road. It is a large building with fairly clean rooms and an
immense kitchen. Just across the road is a small house, and near by a
small church with dome

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

and bell tower. Behind the church is a high mountain. The place reminded
us of Ragats, Switzerland.

The station master, a young married man, had provisions in plenty, and
treated us well. Toward evening Vassya appeared and we had the promise
of horses for an early hour on the morrow. But in spite of every
exertion it was almost noon when we started. The road was rough and
dusty. As one approaches the lake there are low, unwooded hills with
stony summits that look in places as if altars had been set up, or as
though covered with the ruins of ancient fortresses.

When within a few versts of the Kutul Vassya and Lazareff turned off to
go to a village where a man lived to whom, as they said, Andrei
Mihailovitch had sent a letter asking him for assistance in our work. I
never saw the man, however, and later I discovered that the letter was
about private business, and had nothing whatever to do with my work.

We reached Kutul in the evening. This station is well kept and spacious.
There is a large room in it where the Buriats hold their public meetings
and discuss questions touching interests in the district. The mistress
of the house, a Russian, was not at home, having gone to a town a
hundred versts away to send a telegram to her husband, who was in the
army.

The journey from Kutul to Olkhon, though a short one, required
considerable exertion and patience. To all appearances there was much
difficulty in obtaining horses. There was delay for other reasons also.
When I was in the greatest doubt as to what to do the chief of the
district arrived at the station, to be present at a Buriat meeting, and
he gave me willing assistance; without his aid I should have had a good
deal of trouble. He advised me to hire an additional man, one who knew
the Olkhon people, and also informed me that the road to the lake was so
rough as to necessitate leaving my carriage at Kutul and taking wagons.

The master of post horses at Kutul is a stripling named Muravieff. This
man, half Russian, half Buriat, is tremendously bent on making money,
and in his dealings is quite as crooked as the world-renowned ram's
horn. His father was a full-blooded Buriat. When Count Muravieff
Amoorski was

 

<span id="img_06800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CONVICT PRISON AT
A POST STATION.&lt;br&gt; What looks in this photograph to be a board
fence is a square enclosure at least twelve feet high ](tn/06800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06800.jpg.md)  
CONVICT PRISON AT A POST STATION.  
What looks in this photograph to be a board fence is a square enclosure
at least twelve feet high  
</span>

*Page* [54](#page_54.md)

<span id="img_06801"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BURIAT WOMEN IN
FULL DRESS.](tn/06801.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06801.jpg.md)  
BURIAT WOMEN IN FULL DRESS.  
</span>

*Page* [67](#page_67.md)

 

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

governor of Eastern Siberia he took a fancy to this Buriat. Through his
influence the young man became a Christian, and at baptism received the
name Muravieff; in this way bettering his condition in a worldly sense.
Some time after that a Russian girl, deceived by a man, who in due time
deserted her, was alone, without a friend or money, and not far from
childbirth; the Buriat Muravieff married her; the child, which was a
son, he adopted. Later she had a son by Muravieff; this is the
half-Buriat stripling whom I have mentioned as being so fond of money.

On the island of Olkhon there is only one store; this store is owned by
Muravieff, the Russian, the half brother of the half-blooded Buriat;
both are sons of the erstwhile deceived Madame Muravieff.

After annoying delays I obtained four horses and two small springless
wagons for the continuation of our journey to the island. My extra man
was Protopotoff, "the official inoculator for small-pox." Starting about
ten o'clock in the forenoon, we had a most interesting day. Between
Kutul and Lake Baikal there are two villages, Kuchulga and Togot; the
first contains about fifty houses, the other is much smaller.

The region from Kutul to the lake is in the main rugged and rocky. From
the brow of the last elevation to the edge of the water, a distance of
two miles, the road we went over is remarkable; it is not the one taken
generally; the road for laden wagons is at least a third longer. By this
shorter route we crossed a broad stretch of smooth grassland which
slopes toward the lake; the descent is not abrupt enough to be
dangerous, but is sufficient for swift driving. When well started we
went along at a pace like that of tobogganing in Canada. It seemed like
coasting on wheels in summer time. The land is so even, its surface
yielding the least trifle under the wheels, that the sensation which
comes of swift motion was wonderfully pleasant, almost equal to sliding
down hill in those days which are now in eternity.

We halted at a house near the water, but still half a mile from the
Olkhon Island ferry. At the house, or rather directly in front of it,
was a Shaman; around him were five or six bark and

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

iron dishes containing sour milk, sweet milk, and tarasun. He was
performing some function of his office. Just before we stopped he made a
libation, throwing tarasun up, and chanting a prayer.

The Shaman was a very strange person in visage and action. To a dark,
sweating face and bright eyes he added a large round lump or knob on his
nose just under and halfway between his eyebrows. He swayed gently from
side to side as he chanted and then made a few steps which were short
and spasmodic, a kind of twitching. Soon he halted, made another
libation, chanted again, sprinkled with tarasun and milk the bushes
growing near the house, took a few more spasmodic steps, and finished.

All I could learn was that these offerings had been made to drive
sickness away.

The Shaman sprinkled my men with tarasun, muttering a prayer meanwhile,
and then he treated them to the liquor with such liberality that it was
only after much delay and great urging that I at last got them started
again.

The passage to the island, which is rather more than a mile, should be
made in good weather, since the lake is very rough at times, and the
boats are far from reliable. Our chance for safety was good, as in
August the weather is excellent, usually. Two boats, all there are in
service, were needed for our company, as we had four horses and two
wagons. One of the boats was at the mainland, the other was returning
from the island, and we waited for it, wishing to set out together.

The wagons were lifted into the boats. The horses sprang on board very
nimbly, showing that they were accustomed to this way of traveling. Each
boat carried two horses and one wagon. On my boat there were six rowers,
men, women, and children; on the other boat there were four. It took
thirty-five minutes to cross.

I felt very curious on approaching the island which the Buriats call
"sacred." On one side of the small bay toward which we were sailing a
lofty cliff juts out boldly. On the front of that cliff are two immense
faces, so distinct that all people note them. One of these looks at the
mountains on the

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

mainland; the other on the water in front of it. One as if watching the
great world outside to see who might come from it to examine the island
and its secrets, the other as if watching the visitors whom the men
ferry across.

I drew attention to the faces and learned that they are called "The
Watchers." There they gaze, watching night and day, never sleeping;
looking, waiting, as waits the great sphynx near the pyramid of Ghizeh.

We landed without any trouble or adventure, and now I was on the sacred
island of the Baikal. There are no houses near the landing. The first
village is about three miles from the lake. At that place, which bears
the name Nur, young Muravieff showed his high qualities and quite a
comedy was presented.

I had supposed when we started from Kutul that we should be taken to Sem
Sosen (Seven Pines), the chief village of the island, and the only one
where there is a store and a possible stopping place. Muravieff, knowing
that we were all going there, and that we expected him to take us, made
his own plans, but he hid them from us carefully, until we reached Nur.
There to our surprise he demanded a change of horses, though we were
only a few miles from Seven Pines, our destination. He drove into the
village and stopped in front of the house of the elder, the official who
is obliged to furnish horses if they are demanded by travelers. The
elder's wife, who was quick enough to see what was wanted, declared that
her husband was off fishing some twenty versts away and that she did not
know when he would return. At that moment he came from an out-house,
where he had evidently been sleeping, and thus unwittingly gave a lie to
her words, but she was not embarrassed in the least.

As soon as he appeared Muravieff demanded a relay of horses. The elder
had no horses to give. All beasts trained to draw wagons were far from
the village at pasture.

It was the bounden duty of the elder to find us four horses—they were
not to be had, and he could not create them. There were only two or
three miles to the end of the journey, and the horses we had were well
able to make it, but Muravieff very bluntly refused to drive them
farther.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

At last, through his friends, he informed the elder that he would take
us to Sevens Pines for ten rubles. The elder's claim was less than a
ruble; government allowed him to receive but three copecks a verst for
each horse. He paid the money, however, and Muravieff drove on.

I told Muravieff what I thought of him, but he only smiled with
satisfaction. He had gained his point and saw no reason to be ashamed.
To him success in any form was a thing to be proud of.

We arrived at Seven Pines about nightfall. The evening was warm and
pleasant. The first move, of course, was to find lodgings. There was
only one row of buildings in that part of Seven Pines where the store
was. The first of these buildings was the storekeeper's dwelling, a
house with but one large room; the second building was his store. This
proved to be very small, and closely packed with groceries and
dry-goods. The third was a shed and could be of no use to me. The fourth
belonged to a Russian who was absent. I went to the fifth house, but the
woman who lived there told me that there were billions of fleas in her
house, and she could not with a clear conscience let any one try to pass
a night in it. She felt obliged to refuse me. My search for a place in
which to spend the night proving fruitless, I went back to the
storekeeper and asked him what I could do. He suggested that I might
sleep in the church, or *Molitvenny dom* (the prayer house). I agreed to
this, and my things were transferred to the little prayer house.

Vassya and Lazareff were to sleep under the shed, in their wagon.

 

<span id="img_07200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HOUSE WHERE WE
BOARDED ON OLKHON ISLAND.&lt;br&gt; The building with the white sign is
the Russian store](tn/07200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07200.jpg.md)  
HOUSE WHERE WE BOARDED ON OLKHON ISLAND.  
The building with the white sign is the Russian store  
</span>

*Page* [72](#page_72.md)

<span id="img_07201"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE ONLY RUSSIAN
CHURCH IN OLKHON.&lt;br&gt; The author spent three nights in the
building](tn/07201.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07201.jpg.md)  
THE ONLY RUSSIAN CHURCH IN OLKHON.  
The author spent three nights in the building  
</span>

*Page* [73](jss10.htm#page_73.md)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Sojourn on the ''Sacred'' Island](jss10.md)
