[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jss11)  [Next](jss13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029XG0XM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Journey in Southern Siberia*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

### CUSTOMS OF THE BURIATS

#### THE MAKING OF TARASUN

THE most important work in a Buriat house and of a Buriat woman is to
keep the milk barrels full, and to distil the milk into tarasun, a
liquor looking like alcohol or pure water. When the milk is sour enough
for the watery part to separate from the curd it is ready to distil. As
much milk as is desired is taken out of the barrel and put in a large
iron pot, then the pot is sealed up with a heavy paste made of mud and
cow manure, and is placed over a slow fire burning on the ground in the
center of the Buriat house.

From the pot a pipe runs into a tub which stands four feet or so away.
From the end of this pipe drips out the tarasun.

If strong tarasun is desired the first is redistilled. The strongest is
made by distilling the liquor three times.

I should judge that the milk barrels in a Buriat house are never empty,
for they look as if they had not been washed for years.

In some of the houses two or three barrels of sour milk stand in the
room where the family lives. But, when there is a large herd of cows,
and many people to be supplied with tarasun, the barrels are kept under
a shed near the house. f These barrels are left uncovered, consequently
the milk is permeated with dust.

The "arsá," or substance left in the pot after the liquor is distilled,
is stored in barrels. It hardens and is mixed with rye flour and cooked
for laborers. Arsá becomes so solid that an axe is used in getting it
out of the barrel. These barrels are also left uncovered in a shed or
outhouse.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

Buriats keep many cows, but nearly all the milk is made into tarasun;
there is no cheese made, and very little butter. What butter is made is
wholly unfit for use.

#### MARRIAGE CEREMONIES

When a young boy and girl take a fancy to each other their parents, if
in favor of the marriage, begin the regular negotiations through
matchmakers, or one father may say to the other, "You have a daughter
and I have a son, let us become relatives." This agreement made, the
matchmakers' work begins.

The matchmakers, usually, if not always, elderly women, go to the father
of the girl with the proposal from the father of the boy. The girl's
father will entertain this formal proposal, or, if he has changed his
mind, will definitely refuse it. In the former case he will receive
another visit. This time five or six persons come. They enter the
eight-sided yurta, and the two matchmakers sit down opposite the door;
with them are men whose business it is to decide upon the sum to be
paid. The father must always get "kalym"—the price of the girl. Now
begins bargaining, one side asking a big price, and the other offering
little. This is often a mere formality, for many times the question has
been decided in advance. The girl's father reduces the price somewhat,
the boy's father offers a trifle more, until finally they reach an
agreement as to the amount.

This kalym is almost always paid in horses, cows, sheep, grain—anything
of value among the Buriats; the amount varies from three to seven
hundred rubles, according to the wealth of the two families. A day is
appointed for the next visit, and the matchmakers and their assistants
go home.

On the day appointed a large company goes to the girl's home. They sit
on the ground, talk, and drink tarasun. Then dancing begins in front of
the house. Sheep are killed, and if the father is rich he kills a horse
also. The meat is cooked, and the crowd feasts. Only friends, relatives,
and neighbors are present; neither the girl nor boy attends the
ceremonies of this first day.

The second day of the marriage ceremony, which may be

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

some weeks later, the bridegroom comes early in the morning to the
bride's father, bringing provisions. If he is wealthy he has a horse
killed and gives the head of the beast to his father-in-law. The ribs
are cut out and given to those of the wedding guests who are most
distinguished. All of the meat is cooked, then the best parts are
distributed among the people present. Tarasun is dealt out in abundance.
There is dancing and feasting. This entertainment takes place in the
open air. Chairs and tables are unnecessary; every one sits on the
ground to eat.

The third day the groom is at his father's. The house where the young
couple are to live is made ready. In the room is a bed, and near the bed
is fixed a place where the bride is to sit. Meanwhile she is at home.
All at once a small party on horse-back is seen in the distance
approaching on the keen run. They halt in front of the door, enter,
seize the girl, put her on a horse, and race away to the new home.
There. she is swept off the horse, taken into the house, and seated by
the bed, where she remains with a handkerchief over her face. The groom
is around everywhere, but does not approach to greet her. A table is
placed near the bride and the Ongons or household divinities are put on
it. Four of the bride's friends now inform the groom that the bride is
there. He approaches, she rises and takes his hand, then three old men,
of family and importance, appear. The bride and groom bow to the Ongons
and are then led around the table three times by the three old men, who
ask of the Ongons that the newly married may be prosperous, gain much
wealth, and have many children to begin a new line. After this ceremony
the bride returns to her father's house.

On the fourth day of the marriage ceremony the bride again goes to the
new house (or yurta), puts on a mask and bows before the Ongons. There
is a fire made on the ground in the center of the yurta; she bows to
this fire, and throws a piece of butter into it; then she takes a piece
of fat mutton, perhaps a pound or two pounds, cuts it into bits, rolls
it into a lump and throws it into the hands of her father-in-law; in
this way she assures him that she will be bountiful and kind to him. The
ceremony over, the bride sits down near the milk barrel, which

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

always stands at the northwest corner of the fire. Taking her place at
the milk barrel concludes the marriage ceremony, for this denotes that
she takes formal possession of the milk of the house. Thereafter she is
mistress of the milk, and everybody must go to her for it. It is her
business to make, or to cause to be made, the tarasun.

In Balagausk, where another branch of the Buriats lives, the marriage
ceremony differs slightly. On the day that the bride is first taken to
the home of the groom, a man, taking with him a large arrow, goes ahead
of the party having the bride in charge. When he arrives at the new home
he sticks the arrow into a pillar in front of the house, and calls out
that the bride's party is coming. When they are within a short distance
of the house a man appointed for the purpose throws the meat of the
second joint of an animal—a cow, sheep, or horse—to the boys of the
village who are waiting to catch it. The bride leaves her father's house
either on horseback or in a wagon, but always approaches her new home on
horseback. She rides up at full gallop, is swept from the horse, and
conducted with covered head and face to the bed, where she sits down on
the chair placed there for her. The more speed with which this is
accomplished the greater the good luck of the bride will be. The horse
she rides is ornamented with a bell. The bell is removed, rung, and hung
on the western post near the door.

The day following the last day of the ceremony the women of the ulus, or
village, come to visit the bride. She must meet them with cap and
handkerchief on. She must not call certain persons by their names, but
always by the relationship. When they come to the house they cough
outside the door; this is done simply for fun and to confuse the bride.

On the second day of the marriage ceremony the bride sits in the house
and begins to cry, and some of her girl friends come and cry with her.
Then she lies down on the bed with her most intimate friend. They take
each a tress of their hair and sew it to the other's shoulder. Then they
clasp each other firmly, friends come in, girls and boys, and try to
pull them apart, to tear one from the other; there is laughter and
screaming. This ceremony is to show that after marriage the young

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

woman will be true to the friends of her girlhood. If a bride is
enceinte she is not permitted to bow down to the Ongons. Such an act
would bring misfortune to the whole community.

#### CEREMONIES AFTER THE BIRTH OF A CHILD

Just before the birth of a child a "receiving mother," or mid-wife, is
summoned. As soon as the child comes into the world the father takes a
broad arrow-head and cuts the umbilical cord. The infant is then washed
in warm water, wrapped in a lamb skin, and put into its father's fur
coat. The friends and neighbors assemble, and an animal, either a cow or
sheep, is killed and the meat cooked. Then a man accustomed to perform
such ceremonies makes libations of the meat and of tarasun, in this way
sending it greatly multiplied to the gods, asking, meanwhile, that the
master of the house may be blessed with many children and an increase of
flocks.

From the animal they have killed is reserved the leg bone below the
knee; this they boil. On the second day the meat is cut from the bone,
and the bone is tied to the outside of the child's cradle, on the
right-hand side. If the baby is a boy, a boy stands by the cradle ready
to answer questions and to give the child a name. If it is a girl, a
girl stands by the cradle.

We will suppose the child to be a boy. The receiving mother holds the
infant in her arms in front of the cradle and asks, "Which are we to
rock, the child or the bone?" She asks the question three times, then
the boy answers, "The child!" Then she asks three times, "Shall we rock
up or down?" the boy answers, "Up!"

The baby is put into the cradle and tied in, then the receiving mother
asks, "What is the name of the child?" and the boy repeats the name
which the parents have selected.

The third day, if the father is well-to-do, a second animal is killed;
this one is divided among the most distinguished people of the village,
those who have not been present at the ceremonies attending the birth
and the naming of the child.

On the third day the tomta (placenta) is buried. Two planks are removed
from the floor near the mother's bed, a hole is dug

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

in the ground, and dry juniper is burned near it. The tomta is put into
the hole, covered up, and the planks are replaced. Then the mother is
purified. Only women are present during this ceremony.

The tomta has a sacred significance among the Buriats. If you ask a
Buriat where he was born, he will answer, "My tomta is buried in that
house;" or will say, in such or such a village "is the house where my
tomta is buried."

The Buriats beyond the Baikal, when questioned about the origin of their
people, will answer, "Our tomta is on the western side of the Baikal."
They make libations to it. In this case the tomta is that of the
recognized ancestor of all the Buriats. When they are making libations
they sprinkle tarasun to the gods, naming them all, then to their
ancestors, and finally to their tomta.

#### ORIGIN OF THE BURIATS

*An account of the origin of the childbirth ceremonies as told me at
Usturdi by two very old men*.

Buhan Khan lived at Haugin Dalai, not far from the sea. He was a bull in
the daytime, but always turned himself into a man at night. Not very far
off, but on the west of the sea, lived Khunshai Khan, who had a
beautiful daughter. One night Buhan Khan saw Khunshai's daughter and
fell in love with her. After a time a son was born to them. When the
child was placed in its cradle Buhan Khan stole it away, tied it firmly
to the cradle, carried it to the edge of the sea, and with his hoofs dug
a hole in the earth, and there buried the child and the cradle.

A Shaman named Usihun and his wife Asihan lived by the sea. They saw
Buhan Khan digging the hole, and when he had gone they went immediately
to find out what he had buried there. They found the cradle and took it
home, but so tightly had Buhan Khan hooped it around that work as they
might they could not open it. Then Usihun began "to shaman" and to ask
how the cradle was to be opened. He was answered by Buga Noyon Babai,
the god to whom he made libations. "Fasten

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

the right leg bone (below the knee) of a two-year-old bull on the right
side of the cradle," said the god, "and place a sharp knife by the
cradle, then ask, 'How is it, shall we rock the bone or the infant?' A
child must answer, 'The infant.' 'Shall it be head down or up?' 'Up.'"
When the Shaman did as Buga Noyon directed, the hoops snapped and the
cords untied, and there in the cradle was a beautiful child. Usihun and
his wife reared the boy and named him Bulugat. When four or five years
old Bulugat became very fond of playing by the sea. After a while he
began to get up and slip away in the night-time. The Shaman's wife
wondered where the child went; then she followed, and saw that two
children, a boy and a girl, came out of the sea and played with him.

The Shaman and his wife were very curious to know what kind of children
they were, so one evening they set out milk and tarasun and told Bulugat
to give it to his playmates. The boy and girl came out of the sea,
played till tired, then they drank the milk and the tarasun, and
straightway fell asleep. The Shaman came from the reeds where he had
been hiding and caught the boy, but the girl slipped away, turned to a
seal, and sprang into the sea.

The Shaman named the boy from the sea Uhurut, and he and Bulugat, son of
the bull, grew up together. All the Buriats west of the Baikal are
descended from Bulugat, and all the Vepholensk Buriats are descended
from Uhurut.

#### ANOTHER VERSION OF THE ORIGIN OF THE TRANS-BAIKAL BURIATS

A hunter one day when out shooting birds saw three beautiful swans
flying toward a lake not far distant. He followed the swans, saw them
come down by the water, take off their feathers, become women, and swim
out from shore.

These three swans were the three daughters of Esege Malan. The hunter
stole the feathers of one of the swans, and when she came from the water
she could not fly away with her sisters. He caught the maiden, took her
home, and made her his wife. Six children had been born to them when one
day the daughter of

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Esege Malan
distilled strong tarasun, and after her husband had drank much she asked
for her feathers, and he gave them to her. That moment she turned to a
swan and flew up through the smoke-hole. One of her daughters, who was
mending the tarasun still, tried to catch her and keep her from flying
away, but only caught at her legs, which the girl's dirty hands made
black. That is why swans, a sacred bird among the Buriats, have black
legs.

The mother circled around, came back within speaking distance of her
daughter, and said, "Alway at the time of the new moon you will pour out
to me mare's milk and tea, and scatter red tobacco."

From this swan, the daughter of Esege Malan, came all the Trans-Baikal
Buriats.

#### SICKNESS

In case of sickness a Shaman is sent for at once. To discover the cause
of the illness he burns the shoulder-blade of a sheep until it is white,
then by the cracks in the bone he learns what the sick person has done
to anger this or that Burkan. When he has thus found out which Burkan
has caused the sickness he knows by experience what sacrifice must be
made to appease him. If the illness is slight, an offering of tarasun
may be sufficient; but in case of serious sickness, besides the offering
of tarasun, an animal must be sacrificed.

Many of the Burkans are very exacting about what is offered to them,
others are indifferent. To some the offering must be a black ram, to
others a white ram; to some a white goat, to others a black goat; and
there are Burkans who cannot be appeased without the sacrifice of a bull
or a horse.

The Shaman kills the animal by making an incision in the breast and
pulling out the heart. The body of the animal is disjointed at the neck
and at the knees, the skin removed, except from the legs and head, and
the body carried away to be boiled. Then a long pole is driven into the
ground and the skin of the animal is fastened to the top of it, the head
facing the mountain, hill, or place where the Burkan who has caused

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

the sickness is supposed to have his home. The pole leans slightly
toward that same mountain.

The flesh of the animal is cut up and cooked, and bits of it offered to
the Burkan, either thrown into the air or burned, the rest is eaten by
the family and those who assist at the sacrifice. Tarasun is used freely
at such times. During the ceremony the Shaman mumbles mysterious words
and prayers.

There is a second way of offering the sacrifice. The liver, gall, and
intestines are burned, the bones of the animal are broken into small
pieces, and together with the pleura put into a bag and placed on a
pole, where the bag remains until it rots and falls.

If the patient has pain in any particular part of his body the Shaman
puts spittle on it and prays to the Burkan who has caused the pain;
sometimes he touches the man's tongue with a red-hot iron, or he pours
hot water over his body, and though the water is very hot it feels cold.

If after the first sacrifice the sick person does not recover, a second
is made, and perhaps a third. The Shaman does not get discouraged, but
continues his efforts until his patient recovers or dies. In former
times he was paid very little for his labor,—whatever the family thought
proper,—but at present the reward is sufficiently large.

The light Burkans, as well as the dark, can cause sickness. Sickness
sent by a light Burkan is usually in punishment for the taking of an
oath (to swear by the name of a Burkan is an oath); or for the killing
of a sacred bird, which is a great sin, and if the man is not punished
for the sin his children will be.

Berkut, the white-headed eagle, is a sacred bird. Ejin, the god of
Olkhon, the sacred island of Lake Baikal, had no children; so he created
the white-headed eagle and called him his son, adopted him. Ejin himself
is the son of the Fiery Heaven, and is called Utá Sagan Noyón (High
White Prince). He is counted a brother of Dalai Lama, who is also a son
of the Fiery Heaven (Galta Tengeri Xubun) (Fiery Heaven son). The swan
is a sacred bird. Vultures are not sacred, but they are often sent by
the Burkans to locate persons whom they are about to punish.

 

<span id="img_10000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE OWNER OF THE
LAND IS SICK; A RAM HAS BEEN SACRIFICED WITH DUE
CEREMONY.](tn/10000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10000.jpg.md)  
THE OWNER OF THE LAND IS SICK; A RAM HAS BEEN SACRIFICED WITH DUE
CEREMONY.  
</span>

*Page* [99](#page_99.md)

<span id="img_10001"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BONES OF THE
RAM.&lt;br&gt; They will remain until the bundles rot and
fall](tn/10001.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10001.jpg.md)  
BONES OF THE RAM.  
They will remain until the bundles rot and fall  
</span>

*Page* [100](#page_100.md)

 

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

No one is permitted to kill a white-headed eagle. If an eagle alights on
a sheep or lamb and scratches it, the owner kills the animal
immediately.

The Buriats do not sacrifice to the eagle, but to its ancestors "the
ancients of eagles." In some cases those ancestors are represented as
people, in others as birds.

#### RITES ATTENDING THE BURNING OF THE DEAD

The Buriats usually burn their dead; occasionally, however, there is
what they call a "Russian burial," that is, the body is placed in a
coffin and the coffin is put in the ground.

But generally if a man dies in the autumn or the winter his body is
placed on a sled and drawn by the horse which he valued most to some
secluded place in the forest. There a sort of house is built of fallen
trees and boughs, the body is placed inside the house, and the building
is then surrounded with two or three walls of logs so that no wolf or
other animal can get into it.

The horse which drew the body to the forest is led away a short distance
and killed by being struck on the head with an axe, then it is left for
wolves to devour.

If the man was so poor as not to have a horse, but had a cow, the cow is
sold and a horse bought to take the body to the forest. If so poor that
a horse cannot be purchased, the body is carried on a stretcher.

If other persons die during the winter their bodies are carried to the
same house. In this lonely, silent place in the forest they rest through
the days and nights until the first cuckoo calls, about the ninth of
May. Then relatives and friends assemble, and without opening the house
burn it to the ground. Persons who die afterward and during the summer
months are carried to the forest, placed on a funeral pile, and burned
immediately. The horse is killed, just as in the first instance.

Often the ornaments and the most valued trinkets of the dead are burned
with them, as well as their best garments. Ordinary garments are left
for their heirs.

A Shaman does not officiate at this cremating ceremony, which is
conducted in the most quiet manner possible.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### BURIAT BURIAL OF THE DEAD

As soon as a Buriat dies he is dressed in his best garments and his face
is covered with a white cloth. On that day no neighbor or friend begins
any work; to do so would bring misfortune. They call the day "mu udir,"
bad day.

It is customary to keep a body three days, but often it is buried or
burned on the second day. In the coffin a small sum of money is placed,
each friend contributing. A sheep or cow is killed and bits of the meat
put in the coffin, together with a small bottle of tarasun. "The spirit
of the dead man will meet the spirits of friends and relatives who have
died earlier, and he will wish to entertain them." Every necessary
article, such as his coat, cap, pillow, and blanket, is put into the
coffin, as well as his pipe and tobacco, even his whip for his horse, if
he has owned one in his earth life, goes with him.

The family and friends eat the meat of the animal they have killed and
drink tarasun. As they drink they pour out some to the dead man, pouring
it on the ground and mentioning his name. For three days and nights
refreshments of every kind are served in the house—the man's spirit is
there among his friends and relatives and it partakes of the food.

The spirit has the form of the body but is invisible, except to persons
having "second sight." The spirit is often sorry to go from among the
living, and tries to prove to itself that it is still alive; that is, in
the visible form. "It goes to the fire, steps on the ashes, and when it
sees no track fears that it is no longer in a material body. It goes
close to the chained dog to see if the dog will bark. If the dog barks
it is a proof that he sees something, and the spirit hopes that it is
visible. When the man's friends breakfast, dine, or drink tea, the
spirit waits anxiously to see if any one will offer it food or drink. If
four or five are drinking tea, the spirit takes a cup and wonders that
they do not notice it; but the five cups are there, it has taken only
the spirit of the cup. The man is there in spirit among his friends, he
moans and weeps, hopes and tests the position; no one sees him, no one
pays any attention to him. Poor man, he is sad indeed."

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

When the corpse is taken from the house for burial it is carried out
head first. During this ceremony, if a button or any small article drops
it is lucky, and each person is anxious to pick it up, for the man who
does so will have a child added to his family, or some other good
fortune will come to him.

Sometimes the dead man is taken from the coffin and placed on the back
of his favorite horse; a friend sits up behind to hold him on, and thus
he rides to his own burial. But more frequently the body is left in the
coffin and the coffin is carried on a sleigh or a wagon. Women and
children take farewell of the dead at the house, only men attend the
burial.

When they reach the spot where the body is to be buried they sprinkle
the earth with tarasun, and then dig the grave. The saddle is taken from
the dead man's horse, broken into small pieces, and put in the bottom of
the grave, and if the body has been brought on a wagon the wagon is
broken up also. This done, the coffin is placed in the grave so that the
body lies facing the southeast. The horse is led aside and killed,
either by the blow of a sledge hammer on the forehead or by a knife
being driven into the spinal marrow; the latter is the nobler form of
death. The skin on the horse's back is cut away to represent a saddle,
and on his head and face a bridle is outlined in the same way; then he
is either burned, or left for wild beasts to devour. The horse has gone
to its master and is ready for use. The friends now return to the grave
and fill it with earth.

Nine days of remembrance are incumbent on the nearest relatives; they
must remain in their houses and think only of the dead. If a near
relative lives far away he will come when he hears of the death, even if
it is not for a month; he will bring food and drink and "make
remembrance."

Where the dead are buried or burned, there are large settlements,
houses, and buildings of every kind; but all this is invisible, except
to persons with second sight.

The spirits of the dead wear not only the garments in which their bodies
have been buried, but also their old garments, those they wore many
years before their death, for they wear "the ghost" of the clothes.

When spirits take the form of living people, as they can if they

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

wish, the effect is the same as if they were clothed in real garments.
The spirit of a woman sometimes takes the form of a bird and flies
around its old home, but this is considered unlucky and the bird is shot
at, not to kill it, but to drive it away.

The Buriats believe that sometimes a person dies because the spirit or
soul gets tired and sad, and wants to leave the body. In such a case the
Shaman and friends talk to the spirit, tell it to come back, and it
shall eat well, drink well, and have a good time. This effort to
persuade the soul to return to the body is called "the invitation." "You
shall sleep well. Come back to your natural ashes. Take pity on your
friends. It is necessary to live a real life. Do not wander along the
mountains. Do not be like bad spirits. Return to your peaceful home."
(They think that the spirits of the dead wander about the mountains,
returning to their homes from time to time.) "Come back and work for
your children. How can you leave these little ones?" And the Shaman
names the children. If it is a woman these words have great effect;
sometimes the spirit moans and sobs, and there have been instances of
its returning to the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Origin of Shamans](jss13.md)
