[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jss28)  [Next](jss30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029XG0XM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Journey in Southern Siberia*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span> <span id="page_302">p. 302</span>
<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

# NOTES

MY collection of Buriat myths and folk-tales is small. The work should
have been done years ago. I found many incomplete stories and fragments
of myths, and am convinced that during the past five decades a large
amount of rich Mongol material has been lost. The collection of the
folk-lore of the different peoples of the world should not be neglected,
for it is of great value. It is the entire stock of wisdom accumulated
by the unlettered masses of mankind in all ages. Like language, it is
the product neither of one mind nor a given number of minds, but of all
the various groups which together form humanity. Like language, it is
property bequeathed by anonymous ancestors or predecessors. As there is
no nation, tribe, or group of persons without language, there is none
without folk-lore, which in a broad sense is the fruit of the
intellectual activity of men before they are modified by what is called
education, and represents their religion, philosophy, and literature, if
the latter term may be used with reference to people unacquainted with
letters.

The term "Folk-lore" first appeared in 1846. Mr. Thoms, in a letter to
the "London Atheneum" dated August 12 of that year, signed Ambrose
Merton, proposed it, adding, "Remember I claim the honor of introducing
the epithet *Folk-lore*, as Disraeli does that of introducing
*Fatherland* into the literature of this country." The term has, I
believe, no exact equivalent in other languages. The words more nearly
corresponding to our folk-lore refer only to that part of it included in
stories or tales, such as the German *märchen*; the French *contes*; the
Russian *skazki*; the Bohemian *pohadki*; and the Magyar *mések*.

I think no language except the English has a word that describes the
result of the whole mental activity of uneducated men. The Russians have
a term as broad as the English, *Narodnoe tvorchestvo*, meaning people's
creativeness. This phrase describes the activity, while ours gives the
result of the activity.

The folk-lore of the great nations of antiquity, the Greeks and Romans,
is lost to us in its popular form, which we can only infer from what we
find preserved in literature, religion, and art. The folk-lore of the
Kelts, Teutons, and Slavs has come to us preserved by the uneducated
people. Keltic folk-lore from Irish and Welsh sources has

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

entered largely into the poetry and imaginative literature of western
Europe. The folk-lore of Germany has had great influence on national
literature and music. By a happy chance the Scandinavian branch of
Teutonic folk-lore was preserved by Iceland, and preserved in its most
developed form,—one in which it more nearly approaches the maturity of
Grecian mythology than that of any other folk-lore in Europe.

The folk-lore of the Aryans of India is preserved in the Vedes and the
great poems, the Maha Bharata and the Ramayana, and exists in a rich
growth of popular lore, only a part of which is yet collected. What
there is in Persia in a modern form is unknown; of the ancient stories
the *Shah Nameh*, or Book of Kings, is the great storehouse.

The Slavs, the most numerous of the Aryan race in Europe, present the
most interesting field possible for the philologist, and no division of
the race has a richer or more beautiful stock of folk-lore.

Folk-lore, though interesting in many directions and of the utmost
value,—for taken together with language it furnishes us with a
documentary history of the human mind,—is undoubtedly of most importance
in what may be called its religions, meaning by religions theories of
the universe and man's place in it.

The first five myths in this volume are not considered as myths by the
Mongols, but as true descriptions of the Creation, the destruction of
evil creatures, and the preparation of the world for its present
inhabitants. They are for the Pagan Buriats what the Bible is for
Christian peoples. Esege Malan is the Creator. To destroy the harmful
creatures which inhabited the earth, Gesir Bogdo, his grandson, leaves
heaven and is born of woman. The Iron Hero is created for the purpose of
aiding Gesir Bogdo. When the earth is purified and inhabited by man,
Mindiu appears.

### MINDIÚ QUBUN NOYAN

PAGE [105](jss13.htm#page_105)

The story of the birth of Mindiú Qúbun Noyan, whose father was one of
the fifty-five Tengeris, is interesting as having parallels in many
mythologies. The spirit of the god enters into a hailstone which falls
to the earth and is swallowed by Mélûk Shin. In one version of this myth
the hailstone falls on Mélûk Shin's head. In due time a son is born.
This son of a heavenly Tengeri establishes the Mongol religion. He
instructs the people, tells them to whom they are to pray, and what
offerings are most acceptable to the gods. He consecrates the first
Shamans and teaches them how to offer sacrifices.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

In Greek mythology, Helena, the heroine of Troy, is the daughter of Leda
and of Zeus, the over-arching heaven, with all its light. Leda after her
death was raised to the rank of a divinity. No such honor was given
Mélûk Shin, but her son is a god, or, at least, prayers are offered to
him and he is supposed to answer them.

Among the Algonkin Indians there is a myth of the Earth-maiden who
becomes a mother when looked upon by the sun. She gives birth to a
daughter who is called Wakos ikwe, the fox woman. In time Wakos ikwe
gives birth to a great hero, the benefactor of aboriginal man in
America, the food-giver. This benefactor's name has not been changed or
its meaning forgotten; he is known to be that warm air which, in fine
weather, we see dancing and quivering above the earth,—that same hot,
dancing air which Mother Earth gave to Esege Malan.

### THE BURNING OF THE DEAD

PAGE [101](jss12.htm#page_101)

It is almost certain that in Mongol mythology there was once a long myth
about the Cuckoo from which we could get some idea of why this bird is
connected with the burning of the dead. From the time that the cuckoo
ceases to sing in August till its first song in spring no one who dies
is burned. The Mongols do not know why this is. To questions asked the
old men in the Buriat land, the answer was always the same: "Mindiú
Qúbun told us when and how to burn our dead."

The cuckoo appears in many of the myths in this volume, and usually in
connection with bringing the dead to life. When the Iron Hero is killed
and thrown into the Black Misty Sea the cuckoo appears, and before her
power the sea vanishes. When the skeleton is taken from the cask she
sings as she moves around it. When she reaches the head the third time
the Iron Hero springs up. When Hanhai is trying to bring her brother to
life, she reads in her book that she must ask a certain cuckoo to aid
her.

A Buriat will never kill or shoot at a cuckoo.

### THE MORNING STAR

PAGE [124](jss14.htm#page_124)

There was once a Mongol myth about Solobung Yubún, the morning star,
but, so far as I could find, only fragments of it remain.

In the religious system of the Buriats the morning star is a great
personage, the son of Esege Malan the Creator. Solobung Yubún is

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

benevolent; if properly propitiated he will grant increase of crops and
of cattle. But the offerings to him must be made at the dawn of day, and
the dance in his honor must continue from sunset till daybreak.

Solobung Yubún, the Lucifer of the Latins, has in Mongol myths much the
same character as in the myths of the Indians, especially in those of
the Modocs and Delawares. The Modocs have a very long story which
contains much valuable material. In this story the morning star appears
as the attendant spirit of the sun. (Introduction to "Myths and
Folk-lore of the Russians, Western Slavs, and Magyars.")

In Delaware myths the morning star often assists people by bringing
daylight quickly. In Yana myths the morning star, Halai Anna, and the
evening star, Paiowa, are the daughters of Wakara, new moon. ("Creation
Myths of Primitive America.")

### A SHAMAN STORY

PAGE [111](jss13.htm#page_111)

The Buriats believe that the spirit can leave the body and return to it,
even after having been away several days. Many of our Indian tribes have
the same belief. When in the Indian Territory an old man of the Sauk
tribe told me of the many countries he had seen "with his spirit,"
stating also that his spirit was not happy when away from the body, for
it feared that something would happen to the body and it could not
return. In India where this conception is universal among the native
peoples, a "wise man" will say "I am going to such a village or town."
He finds where his body will be safe, lies down and apparently falls
asleep, then the spirit leaves the body, makes the long journey and
returns. When the man wakens he describes accurately places which he
knew nothing about previous to his spirit journey. The Malays do not
like to waken a sleeper, lest they may harm him by disturbing his body
while his spirit is away.

### BURIAT BURIAL OF THE DEAD.

PAGE [102](jss12.htm#page_102)

For three days after death the spirit remains near the body. .It is
lonely and sad, and is sorry to go from among the living. The Buriats
think that when a mother dies her spirit hovers around in the mountains,
returning to its home from time to time.

Professor Mooney of the Bureau of Ethnology notes a similar belief among
the Cherokee Indians. (Journal of American Folk-lore, Vol.

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> XIII.) "When a
member of a family dies, it is believed that the spirit is loath to
leave the scenes of life and go alone upon the long journey to the
Darkening Land in the west."

### GESIR BOGDO

PAGE [127](jss15.htm#page_127)

The idea of a man's life being in one place and his body in another is
common to many mythologies. In Mongol tales, no matter how the man is
slaughtered or cut up, he does not die until his life is found and
destroyed. This idea runs through Buriat mythology, and there are few
myths in which it does not appear. The same conception is found in both
Keltic and Slav mythology. There is a well-known Russian myth called
"Koshchéi Without Death." Koshchéi was not deathless. His death was in
the world but "in a place apart from him." There is a good illustration
of the idea in "Phakir Chand," in "Folk-tales of Bengal," by Rev. Lal
Behari Day; also in "The Herding of Cruachan," in "Folk and Hero Tales
from Argyllshire," by Rev. D. MacInnes; and in the Norse tale of "The
Giant who had no Heart in his Body."

The idea frequently occurs in the myths of our North American Indians.
It seems to be explained by the fact that these tales deal with the
adventures of non-human heroes. Whatever the names of the heroes are at
present, the original heroes were not men.

Indian mythology sheds light upon this idea. There are myths which still
preserve the primitive names of the characters. In a myth told me by the
Warm Spring Indians of Oregon the conflict is between the North Wind and
the South Wind. In a Wintu myth the heroes are Rain and Snow.

In a very beautiful myth, found among the Modoc Indians, who live near
Klamath Lake, the chief personage is Winter, or Snow-maker, whose heart
is hidden away at a distance. The heart is found by Winter's enemy,
Heat. This enemy burns Snow-maker's heart and he dies.

When the real heroes are known we find the myth accurate and truthful.
It is only when the heroes are looked upon as men and women that they
perform impossible deeds,—deeds which only one of the forces of Nature
could perform if it had the volition and desire of a person.

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

### THE IRON HERO

PAGE [164](jss18.htm#page_164)

The stubborn battles fought by the heroes of Buriat mythology are
strikingly similar to those fought by mythologic Kelts. Buriat heroes
often fight nine days and nine nights. They tear off all the flesh from
each other's backs with their hands and from each other's breasts with
their teeth, wherever they press their feet they knock out earth to the
size of a calf, they make hills and valleys, "where there was a hill
there is a valley, where there was a valley there is a hill."

Gaelic heroes fight till they make soft ground hard and hard ground
soft, they make high places low and low places high, they bring cold
spring water through hard gravelly ground. Clods the size of a bull
shoot out from under their feet. Usually the battle lasts for a day and
a year, and each day is a day of fierce struggle.

In Indian myths struggles for supremacy are not decided by fighting, as
in Aryan and Mongol myths, but by trials of skill, strength, and
dexterity. The opponents always bet their heads, and the head of the
losing party is cut off at once.

### HÚNKUVAI

PAGE [206](jss23.htm#page_206)

A prominent characteristic of Buriat myths is the wisdom of the horse,
which in many instances is sent from heaven in answer to prayers. These
wonderful stallions of Buriat mythology are different in some respects
from the steeds in Aryan myths; they have the same appearance always,
whereas in Aryan myths the steed when taken from the stable or pasture
is often either a miserable mangy colt or a shaggy-haired,
crooked-legged mare; its wonderful power and beauty being made manifest
only when in action.

The god-given stallion of the Buriats is of enormous size, and travels
with such speed that "he can reach in one day a place so far distant
that a boy of five years of age would be sixty when at the end of the
journey, and a full-grown man would die on the road." Sometimes the
horse foresees the death of his master and warns him.

The steed which the Iron Hero rides is always spoken of as "the blue
stallion of the sky." In most instances the color of the stallion is
mentioned, and not infrequently it is blue or red. Probably in the
original story these steeds were clouds. In Hungarian myths the food

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

of the steed is glowing coals. There are Hungarian myths in which
little, if any, doubt is left that the steed is lightning. It was a
steed of this kind that carried Cahal, son of King Conor, to Striker's
castle, a place to which no ship could go ("Hero-Tales of Ireland").

### BRINGING TO LIFE

PAGE [170](jss18.htm#page_170)

Bringing to life is one of the most ordinary acts in Mongol as well as
in other mythologies: usually where there are hundreds of skeletons and
many piles of dry bones, the Mongol hero sprinkles them with the Water
of Life taken from a spring near a silver-leafed aspen tree; immediately
the bones assume their old connection and take on flesh, and the men
rise to bless their benefactor. When the hero himself is killed,
restoring life is more difficult. For several days the wife, sister, or
friend must pray to the Heavenly Burkans. Often the Water of Life is far
away, and to procure it a long and dangerous journey must be made.
Usually the cuckoo assists. She sings around the body, beginning at the
feet. When she reaches the head the first time flesh comes on the
skeleton, the second time breath enters the body, and when she reaches
the head the third time the hero springs up.

In Gaelic mythology, if the hero has been dead long the bones are
collected, or if they have fallen into dust the dust is gathered up;
some one strikes the bones or the dust with the rod of enchantment or
Druidic switch, and immediately the hero rises up as well and strong as
ever.

In the myth tales of the Iroquois Indians the bones of hundreds or
thousands of people are found lying in a heap. The hero pushes a near-by
hickory tree as if to throw it on them, crying at the same time, "Rise
up! Rise up! or the tree will fall on you." The bones assume their old
arrangement, take on flesh, and the multitude rise up, thank their
benefactor, and each man returns to his home.

Among the Yana Indians of California there are several methods for
restoring life, sometimes it is done by kicking or turning over a corpse
with the foot, sometimes by boiling one hair or the heart, frequently it
is accomplished by the stroke of a twig from a red rose-bush.

In Modoc mythology, when the hero has been dead many hours or perhaps
days the morning star calls out to him, "Rise up! Rise up! why sleep so
long?"

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

### THE WORLD BEFORE THIS

PAGE [130](jss16.htm#page_130)

In Mongol myths we find a conception of "a world before this world," a
common conception in the Creation myths of the Indians of the Pacific
coast, in some of which the idea is worked out with great detail and
beauty. But the "first people" of the Wintu and Yana and other Indian
tribes of the coast and of Mexico, the people who occupied "that world
before this," are unlike the "first people" of the Buriats. With the
Indians the first people lived for untold ages in perfect harmony, then
very slowly a change came, discord appeared, and in time conflict, which
grew in venom and continued till all the first people, except a very
small number, were turned into the various kinds of living
creatures—beasts, birds, insects, trees, plants, etc.—that are now, or
ever have been, on earth.

Two enemies would meet and fight. When one was triumphant he said to the
vanquished, "Hereafter you will be nothing but a ——," and he mentioned
what his enemy was to be, and at once the change was accomplished.

With the Mongols the people of the earlier world were so wicked that
Esege Malan the Creator, and his grandson, Gesir Bogdo, determined to
destroy them. In one or two instances the destruction is accomplished in
the same way as described in the Indian myths,—for example, Gesir Bogdo
takes all power from the Raven; from being a great personage he makes
him the insignificant bird that he is to-day, saying to him, "Hereafter
you will be puny and weak, unable to harm people." The first people were
not Mongols, but Marat and Mangathai, evil spirits.

### ALTIN SHAGOY

PAGE [232](jss25.htm#page_232)

Mongol, Aryan, and Indian ideas agree as to the way a father should
treat the man who wishes to marry his daughter. In Gaelic myths the
suitor is given such tasks as thatching a byre with bird feathers, the
stem of each feather to be inwards and its point outwards; catching a
steed that has never seen a blink of earth or air, etc. ("Folk and Hero
Tales from Argyllshire"). In Mongol myths the suitor is sent on a
dangerous journey to accomplish what is supposed to be an impossible
feat. In Indian mythology similar tasks are given by the father-in-law
to the new son-in-law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](jss30)
