[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jss22)  [Next](jss24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029XG0XM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Journey in Southern Siberia*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

#### HÚNKUVAI AND THE HORSE WITH ROUND HEAD

AFTER this world had become a world, and this earth had become earth,
and water had become water, there lived near the northern side of the
Altai mountains, on the ridge called Huhúi, a khan so rich that he could
not grow poor, and so healthy that he could not die.

This khan had a wife named Deri Sisin (Steel File). She held every place
where she was with her dignity and filled her own yurta with her
presence. The thoughts of Deri Sisin were as clear as the sunlight.

The khan had a gray steed with round head, and this steed was kept at
pasture on the Altai mountains, where thirteen elks pastured with him.

When the khan began to rule, his herds had not been counted for a long
time, so he determined to count them. He went first to Arin, his white
uncle in the northwest, collected all his people, every clan there,
ordered the elders to assemble, and began to count on the northwest
side. When he had counted all on that side he went to the southwest, and
counted every animal in that place.

The khan found that his people and his cattle had increased very
greatly, and he was much pleased; but he failed to find his gray steed
with round head. He saw tracks of a man and of an immense horse, and
knew that some one had come to the Altai And stolen his wonderful steed.
Because of this he went home in great sadness.

Deri Sisin placed food and drink of all kinds before him. "Why art thou
sad?" asked she. "What evil has happened?"

"Some one has stolen my gray steed with round head," said the khan, and
he told of the tracks he had seen.

"Thou hadst a book given thee at birth, look in that and learn what has
happened. The book is under thy midriff."

The khan opened his midriff, took out the book, read, and

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

found that the son of Timur Shi Bain Khan had stolen the gray steed with
round head. In the book it was written also that Timur's kingdom was
distant a journey of fifty-five years, that the khan himself had not
power to go so far, but there was a great hero, a certain Húnkuvai, who
could do it.

To find this Húnkuvai, the khan summoned all subject people. All
appeared except one young man.

"Why did all come and not that man?" asked the khan.

The young man's uncle spoke up and said: "Húnkuvai, my nephew, is the
only son of his father; he is not here because he has much wealth. He is
so rich and powerful that he did not regard thy call."

The khan was enraged, and sent three heroes to bring Húnkuvai.

When the three heroes reached Húnkuvai's yurta they saw that it was
richer than even the khan's yurta.

"We are here from our khan!" proclaimed the three messengers to the
servants of Húnkuvai.

Shik Shuri Nogon, Húnkuvai's wife, appeared before the yurta.

"Why have ye come?" asked the woman.

"We have come at command of the khan to tell thy husband that he is
summoned."

"For the last three days my husband has had a headache. He sees no man,
goes nowhere," answered Shik Shuri. Then she seized a club and drove
away those three messengers.

"Húnkuvai's yurta is better than thine, O Khan," said the three on
returning. "It is so bright from gold and silver that we could not look
at it with open eyes."

"Who came? Why did the dogs bark?" asked Húnkuvai of his wife when she
went into the yurta after beating the messengers.

"People were passing and the dogs barked at them," was her answer.

When he heard what his men said the khan fell into a terrible rage.

"What!" screamed he, "ye three heroes beaten, driven away by a woman!"

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

He sent nine heroes now to summon Húnkuvai. When they appeared in the
distance the man at the yurta whose duty it was to watch for people,
told Shik Shuri that nine men were coming. She went out to meet them.

"Why do ye come?" screamed she. "I have told all that no man is received
here!" And seizing a great club she beat away the nine heroes as she had
the first three, but beat them more savagely.

"What is the trouble? Why do the dogs bark?" asked Húnkuvai when Shik
Shuri went into the yurta.

"A she elk ran by with her little one; the dogs barked at her."

"We could do nothing," said the nine heroes when they stood before the
khan. "The woman clubbed us savagely and drove us away."

Confined by the khan in an iron prison was a very strong hero. The khan
raged at the nine beaten men and let out the strong hero, whose iron cap
weighed forty poods. He seated this hero in a car drawn by nine
stallions and sent him to conquer Shik Shuri. When he was near her
husband's yurta Shik Shuri came out to meet him. She seized her heaviest
club and began at the hero. She clubbed him, and he fought with her till
at last both had to stop for breath. The woman tottered into the yurta,
panting heavily.

"With whom art thou fighting?" asked Húnkuvai.

"I have seen no one," replied she; "I am not well to-day."

"She must be doing something," thought Húnkuvai. "The dogs have barked
three times. She is keeping some secret from me." And he went outside to
see what was taking place; at that moment the great hero was starting
off in his car drawn by nine powerful stallions.

"Why art thou here?" shouted Húnkuvai.

"The khan has sent men three times for thee," answered the hero, "but
thy wife has let no one come near thy threshold."

"If that is true I will obey the khan's orders." So saying Húnkuvai made
ready and went with the hero.

"Why not come at first?" asked the khan. "I wish thee to find and bring
back my gray steed with round head. It has been stolen. Thou mayst be
khan after me."

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

"I am willing to go, but I must have the right steed and good fighting
weapons. In three weeks I might start," said Húnkuvai. "Ask all the
people to pray to the Burkans; thou thyself pray, and I will pray too,
that weapons be given me, and a steed on which I may ride such a
distance."

When Húnkuvai went back to his yurta he had become more active; he was
full of resolve and venom and was twice as strong as before.

One day during those three weeks a stallion appeared in the courtyard,
and on his saddle was a hero's full outfit.

When the time came to go for the steed with round head the khan himself
and all the people came to Húnkuvai's yurta. They prayed to the Burkans
and asked for success. People said that no one could go with the young
hero, since the road was so long that if a boy of five years were to
start he would be sixty years old at the end of his journey, and if a
man of full age were to go he would die while still traveling.

With each step which Húnkuvai's stallion made he covered sixty paces,
and went on increasing the length of his steps. He threw out behind
lumps of earth each as big as a calf a year old, and his speed was of
that sort that in one day he made the whole journey.

Húnkuvai was at Timur Shi's yurta on the following evening, and shouted
for some one to come out and meet him. Timur Shi sent a man to say that
the hour was late; the guest must sleep in some other place and he would
meet him on the morrow.

Húnkuvai turned his stallion into a flint chip, went to the neighboring
forest, and passed the night there.

He met Timur Shi next day, and they went out together to wrestle on a
high place. When they had gone the distance of a promontory Timur Shi
and Húnkuvai began the trial of strength. Each seized the other, and
they wrestled for three weeks. They tore away all the flesh from the
backs of their bodies, and bit away all that was in front of them.

At the end of the three weeks they were so feeble that when a slight
wind blew they bent before it. The sun and moon had grown red from the
awful dust which they raised in that

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

country and from the blood which they shed there. They could not stop
fighting, for neither could free himself from the other.

The thousand Burkans looked down from the sky and were frightened. They
called an assembly and decided to separate the two champions; so they
sent Timur Buqú (Iron Bull), a great hero, to part them. When Iron Bull
came down from the sky and touched the two, they broke one of his legs.
That strong hero went up to the sky again, and declared to the Burkans
that neither Timur Shi nor Húnkuvai would stop till one had killed the
other. Then the thousand Burkans asked Hohodai (Thunder) to strike and
kill both with a thunderbolt.

Hohodai tried, but could not kill them; they did not yield to his
thunderbolt, though it separated them.

They rested for a time, greeted each other, and smoked. Then they
decided to shoot at each other with arrows. One went to the top of the
southwest mountain, the other to the top of the northeast mountain.

"I am master in this place and ought to send the first arrow," shouted
Timur Shi, when they were on the two mountains.

"I came from afar, I am a guest, I should send the first arrow,"
answered Húnkuvai.

After much disputing it was decided at last that Timur, as the master of
the place, should have the first shot. He took from his quiver an arrow
having three edges, drew his bow, and said to the arrow:

"Cut my enemy into seven pieces, and cover the seven pieces with seven
mountains, so that they may never grow into one."

The arrow flew straight at Húnkuvai, cut him into seven pieces, and
covered each piece with a mountain. Barely were they under the
mountains, when the seven pieces turned into seven huge, raging wild
bulls, broke their way out with their horns, freed themselves, and
became Húnkuvai. The hero, now in his own form, called to Timur Shi from
the northeast mountain and said: "Now it is thy turn to stand and my
turn to shoot!" Then he stretched his bowstring and said to the arrow:
"Strike him in his right arm above the elbow, break his spinal column
below the neck, and kill him!"

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

The arrow broke the right forearm of Timur Shi and then his spinal
column. The hero fell to the earth, but had barely touched it, when he
rose well and strong again, just as if nothing had happened.

The two came down from the mountains and met in the valley, greeted each
other like friends, smoked, and talked.

"There is nothing left for us to do but to find where our lives are,"
said Húnkuvai.

"Thy life," said Timur Shi, "is beyond the third valley. On the fourth
mountain lives a black bear in whose body, thy life is. I will take that
bear by the ears and tear him in two; that will be the end of thee."

Húnkuvai knew not where Timur Shi's life was, and he asked his stallion
to tell him.

"On the top of Sehir Mai, the white mountain," said the steed, "is a
great, flat round stone; under that stone are thirteen skylarks; the
life of Timur Shi is in those skylarks."

Húnkuvai sat on his horse, rode away, and never stopped till he came to
Sehir Mai. At the foot of the mountain were bones, immense piles of
them; they were the bones of men who had tried to go to the top of that
mountain and had perished,—had fallen and been killed, for no man could
reach the top of Sehir Mai.

"How are we to climb to that high summit?" inquired Húnkuvai.

"We must go back one day's journey," said the stallion, "then turn and
rush to the mountain. With the force of the running I may spring so high
as to hang at the top. At that moment do thou cut a strip from each
front hoof of mine. I shall succeed then; otherwise I shall fail."

All was done as the steed directed. Húnkuvai rode back a day's journey;
the stallion rushed with mighty force, rose with one leap to the highest
edge of Sehir Mai, and clung to it. Húnkuvai took his knife and cut
strips from the front hoofs of the horse, and he sprang to the summit.
Right there on the top of the mountain was the Water of Life, and
Húnkuvai and his horse drank deeply.

Húnkuvai's whip handle was hollow, and he filled it with

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

water. This water he scattered down on the bones which he had seen at
the foot of the mountain, and all those men were alive again.

"A great hero has brought us to life," cried out thousands of people.
"May he go to whatever object he wishes."

Húnkuvai went farther, went to the great, flat round stone, but struggle
as he might he could not raise it; so he collected wood, lighted a fire
on the stone, and heated it red hot; then he begged the thousand Burkans
to make rain fall. The rain came, and the stone split into four pieces.
Húnkuvai raised one of those pieces, caught the thirteen skylarks,
killed ten of them, put three in his pocket, refilled his whip handle
with the Water of Life, and went down the mountain. He went toward the
fourth mountain, where his own life was in the black bear. He knew that
Timur Shi was going there. When near the mountain he saw a light, rode
up to it, and there lay Timur Shi with his back toward a fire.

"I am sick," said Timur Shi, "I have a terrible headache, I am warming
my spine. Where hast thou been? What hast thou seen, or what hast thou
heard? What hast thou been doing?"

"I have just traveled around here and there, I have seen nothing of
value, but I caught three little skylarks."

"Show them to me!" cried Timur Shi.

Húnkuvai showed the three skylarks.

"Oh," said Timur Shi, "those birds are sacred; a young person should not
touch them. Give those birds to me. I am master of this place, I will
let them fly away."

"Here they are," said Húnkuvai, and he stretched out his hand as he
strangled the three skylarks. That moment Timur Shi put his palm on his
mouth and dropped dead. His head fell toward the north mountain, his
feet stretched out south-westward.

Húnkuvai gathered wood, made a pile, and burned Timur Shi Bain Khan,
broke his larger bones fine, and scattered to the winds all that was
left. Then he went to Timur's yurta and searched for the gray steed with
round head. At first he could not find him anywhere. But he looked and
looked, and

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

at last he found him in a stable of three iron walls, one wall inside
the other.

The steed could hardly stand, was barely living. Húnkuvai gave him the
Water of Life from his whip handle and led him out of the iron stable.

Timur Shi had much silver and gold, flocks and cattle. He had
thirty-three heroes to serve him, and a great many people. Húnkuvai took
away everything, took the thirty-three heroes and all the people. He
told them the way to his yurta, and went home himself by magic as
quickly as possible, leading the gray steed with round head and riding
his own stallion. After he had ridden a part of the way and was on his
own land, he came to a great Shaman place, Huhai Hubshi, and stopped a
short time to rest there.

When going from home Húnkuvai had left his uncle, Hara Zaton (Black
Zaton), to manage in place of himself. While Húnkuvai was returning Shik
Shuri gave birth to twins and named them Huragin and Isbegin.

The uncle had hoped that his nephew would never come back and that he
himself would manage all and possess it. When he knew that his nephew
had conquered and was coming, he decided to meet him on the road at some
distance, and he made ready.

He distilled tarasun of ten strengths and mixed strong poison with it.
From ten pots of this poisoned tarasun he made one pot, from twenty pots
of pure tarasun he made one pot. Next he killed ten sheep and made the
flesh of those ten into the bulk of one sheep. After that twenty sheep
were cooked and made into the size of one sheep. Then he put all into
saddlebags, went to the yurta, and called to his nephew's wife, Shik
Shuri:

"Come out! I thought that my nephew had conquered, but it seems that he
was beaten, and his own stallion trampled and killed him. War is near
us. Three hundred and thirty-three heroes are coming to drive away my
nephew's cattle and take all he valued most. Give me the two little
boys, I will hide them away in a place of safety."

"They are in the cradle," said Shik Shuri. "They are but

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

three days old; let me keep them till to-morrow. Let them grow up a
little. The next day take them whithersoever thou wishest."

As she would not give up the boys willingly and Hara Zaton could not
wait, he mounted quickly. "While I am gone," said he," if thou feed the
boys badly or hide them in any place, I will kill thee."

Hara Zaton rode away to the Shaman Mountain, and there they met,—the
uncle and the nephew.

"I greet thee, and am glad that thou hast gained a great victory," said
Zaton; and he stretched out his hand.

[Húnkuvai](errata.htm#3.md) would not take it.

"While thou wert gone two sons were born to thee. They were born only
four days ago."

Húnkuvai never stopped, or gave his hand, but rode away toward his
yurta.

"Nephew!" cried Zaton, "what is the matter? Why dost thou scorn me?"

Húnkuvai would not stop, would not listen.

"Oh, nephew, of what art thou thinking? Thou hast gained a great
victory, but thou art passing a holy mountain without pouring out a
libation. This is a sin, and, think, thy sons are only four days old!"

Húnkuvai stopped. He stopped because of his sons. When they dismounted
Hara Zaton embraced his nephew and kissed him. He seemed very glad, the
deceiver. They poured a libation of good tarasun, sat down, ate, and
drank. Zaton drank very little; he just feigned to drink. Soon they had
drunk all the pure tarasun and eaten the good meat.

"Well, uncle," said Húnkuvai, "since we have begun let us finish. Hast
thou more tarasun?"

The three horses were tied to trees near them. Hara Zaton now brought
the poisoned meat and drink. The nephew ate and drank and soon dropped
down without life or motion. From his right nostril a green and a blue
flame quivered, from his left came a red flame. The uncle sat down at
some distance, with a drawn bow, ready to send an arrow should his
nephew revive. He sat there day and night and waited. On the third

 

<span id="img_21400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![VILLAGE OF
ALAGUERSK-ROD IN SIBERIA.](tn/21400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21400.jpg.md)  
VILLAGE OF ALAGUERSK-ROD IN SIBERIA.  
</span>

*Page* [76](jss10.htm#page_76.md)

<span id="img_21401"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A GROUP OF
UNMARRIED MONGOL WOMEN OR YOUNG LADIES IN USTURDI](tn/21401.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21401.jpg.md)  
A GROUP OF UNMARRIED MONGOL WOMEN OR YOUNG LADIES IN USTURDI  
</span>

*Page* [82](jss10.htm#page_82.md)

 

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

day Húnkuvai raised his head somewhat, and saw that Hara Zaton was
sitting with bow drawn ready to send an arrow.

"Uncle, it is thy wish to kill me! Well, kill, but spare my children."

Zaton let the arrow go and killed his nephew. When the arrow struck
Húnkuvai his stallion and the gray steed with round head tore themselves
free and called out to Zaton:

"While we have hoofs thou wilt not possess us, we will fly to him who
made us!" And they went to the sky.

The widow of Húnkuvai knew by her magic of all that had happened. "The
murderer will come to-night," thought she; "I must save my two sons."

She put one boy under her right armpit, the second under the left one,
and hurried on toward that same Shaman mountain. By a turn to the
northwest she came to a spot where two immense pine trees stood close
together. She made two small pits under those two pine trees and put her
little boys into them.

Shik Shuri wished to hurry home and be there before the evil uncle. When
she had left her sons behind and had gone some distance, she looked
back. The children had crawled out of the pits and were sucking each
other's fingers. This sight made the mother cry. She turned back, and
gave them her breasts; then she put the boys down in the holes and
vanished.

Near the yurta Shik Shuri saw a ewe with two little lambs. She killed
the lambs, heated an oven and put them into it, and when both were well
burned she placed the bones in a bag, took the bag to a lake, tied a
stone to it, and sank it at a place which she marked carefully. Now it
was daylight, and she went back to the yurta and waited. Hara Zaton was
not long in appearing.

"Come out," called he to Shik Shuri.

She went out to him.

"I saw my nephew's body lying dead," said he. "Give me the little boys.
I will put them in a place where no enemy can find them; I will feed and
bring them up carefully."

"Thou didst say," replied Shik Shuri, "that warriors were coming to kill
us. I thought that we should all have to die; so I burned the boys, put
their bones in a bag, and hid them."

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

"Show me where they are hidden. I must know the place," said the false
uncle.

She led him to the place, raised the bag, and showed it to him. He took
the bag from her and carried it to the yurta. Whether from fear that the
bones might come to life, or thinking that they would strengthen him,
for the boys would have been great heroes, he ground the bones into very
fine dust, mixed the dust with fat, cooked the mixture, and ate it.

Hara Zaton moved now into his nephew's yurta and took possession of all
his wealth and utensils. He put Shik Shuri's left eye out, broke her
left arm and left leg, and set her then, as a serving woman, to feed the
dogs of his courtyard.

The two boys, Huragin and Isbegin, grew up under the two pine trees very
quickly. They made bows for themselves, and then arrows. In two days
they killed birds as well as rabbits; they ate them raw. On the third
day they killed nothing, though they hunted till midday. After midday
they met in a small valley of a great forest Dainjin Sharaman, a
Mangathai of seventy-three heads.

"I have traveled the forest all day and found nothing till now," said
Dainjin Sharaman; "here I find splendid eating!" And seizing the two
boys by the feet, he strode on, holding them like sticks. At his yurta
he tied each boy to a pillar, cut two slices of flesh from their thighs
and spitted them for his supper. While the pieces were roasting he fell
asleep. The two boys, from pain and fear, cried bitterly.

At just this time a man who was as rich as any khan but was childless
was passing with eighty packs of merchandise. He heard the boys crying,
and stopped all his train. He went into the yurta and roused the
sleeping Mangathai. "Why dost thou eat the flesh of these boys?" asked
he.

"I hunted all day and found nothing till I met them. Their flesh is
good, and I am glad to eat it."

"Well," said Turgubai, the rich merchant, "eat what is on the spit, but
sell me the boys. I will give thee eighty horses for them." "Take them!"
said the Mangathai.

The merchant took the boys to his home, cured them, and called them his
sons.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

Huragin and Isbegin lived a whole year with the merchant. They grew
large, and became skilful hunters, filled their father's storehouses
with game and with fine fur of all sorts.

"Hunt no more, I have no place for game," said the merchant, at last.

"Let us herd cattle then," said the brothers.

Near by was Tomtoy mountain. They drove out the merchant's flocks and
herds to pasture on that mountain. While the cattle were eating, the
boys exercised, tried their strength; hurled stones, as big as a sheep,
so far that a man would need two days to go to the place where the
stones fell. Then they threw great rocks, as big as a bullock, and those
fell one day's journey distant. Near by was a fallen cliff covering two
acres; they carried this cliff home in turn,—one brother carrying it a
short distance, then the other. They placed the cliff near the gate, and
carved on it the history of their lives since they hunted the first
time. They told how they had searched for game, how the Mangathai
treated them, how the merchant had bought them. They told all the
present as well, and added: "If any man harms our new father we will
take dreadful vengeance on that man and then slay him."

They went into the yurta, ate and slept, and afterward went to the high
mountain where they had found the fallen cliff. The boys had never been
to the top of Tomtoy. As they climbed they heard cattle roar and men
cry. The cattle roared much, and the men cried as if suffering terribly,
and these sounds seemed to come from a distance. When the boys reached
the top of the mountain they saw a long narrow valley. From the
beginning to the end of that valley was a row of pots; in each pot were
ten bullocks, and at the side of each pot was a huge spit with ten men
impaled on it.

The two brothers sat down on the mountain-top and looked. "Who is doing
all this?" asked they. Then by magic they learned that those were the
people and cattle of Todai Bain Khan. This khan had warred for three
years with Shara Nagóy (Yellow Dog), mad master of the Land of Peace,
and had been conquered.

Todai Bain Khan had two daughters, Altan Hurubshe and

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mūngun Hurubshe.
When he had beaten Todai, Yellow Dog demanded those two daughters.

Huragin and Isbegin, the two brothers, now planned on the mountain-top
how to conquer Yellow Dog and assist Todai Khan. "How much harm Yellow
Dog is doing!" thought they. "He boils one thousand bullocks each day
and spits one thousand people."

Now the two brothers took two huge round stones, which were like two
great wheels, heated them as red as red cloth, and one said to the
other:

"Yellow Dog has such jaws that when he travels the upper one touches the
clouds and the lower one grazes the earth. At sunrise he rushes up the
valley toward the spot where we are now sitting, and goes toward the sun
with open mouth. At that time we will roll these two red-hot stones into
his mouth. If we are lucky he will swallow the two, and they will burn
out the heart in his body."

The next day, as the sun was rising, Shara Nagóy rushed toward it with
open mouth. The two brothers rolled down the hot stones. They bounded
into his mouth. He sprang high, howled dreadfully, and fell backward.
His head struck the northwest mountain, and his feet stretched to the
southeast mountain.

When the mad master of the Land of Peace was dead the two brothers went
along the valley, threw the bullocks from the pots, and drew the men
from the spits. Some were half roasted, and some half alive. They
brought all to sound health, the bullocks from the pots as well as the
men from the spits, and then went toward Todai Bain Khan's yurta.

When they were in sight of the yurta the largest and oldest blue mare,
the largest and oldest red cow, the most aged and decrepit old woman,
came out and addressed the two brothers:

"In vain have ye come to relieve us. Go not against Yellow Dog; he will
kill you, and we shall be lost, whatever else happens."

When Todai Bain Khan heard that Yellow Dog was dead he harnessed eight
blue horses and hurried forward to meet the two brothers. After the
greeting they went with him to his

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

splendid yurta. Nine days they spent there, and Todai Bain Khan made
great feasts of all kinds to please them. "You have done such a deed,"
said he, "that it could not be greater. I will give whatever reward may
seem good to you."

"We live far from here, no reward is needed; only give us your two
daughters."

"I will do that," said Todai Khan; and he went to prepare the wedding. A
sea of drink and a mountain of meat were made ready. Nine days and
nights did the wedding last. When the time came, and the brothers were
ready to go back to their father's yurta, Todai Khan gave orders to
harness eight bay stallions and send with them a low chariot and eight
heroes. The mother went half-way home with her daughters. On the road
they stopped at the yurta of Dainjin the Mangathai, who had cut flesh
from the two brothers and spitted it. The brothers seized him, put
chains on his wrists and ankles, chains weighing forty poods. They laid
a strong beam across the smoke-hole and hung him face downward over the
fire, where he died, and they continued their journey, rejoicing.

At last they reached the yurta where Huragin and Isbegin were born and
where their false uncle was master. Near the yurta they met a woman with
one eye, one hand, and one foot; she was carrying meat to the dogs of
the place, and lamenting.

"What khan's children are ye?" inquired she of the brothers. "Have ye
ever known my Huregin and Isbegin? Have ye ever heard of them? Are they
still living in any place?"

"We have beard that Dainjin the Mangathai caught them in Hapgata valley,
that he spitted their flesh, and then ate it."

"Oh," cried the mother, "I had hoped till this day that they were
living, and that hope held me up in my misery." Then she fell back and
died there before her two sons.

The brothers went in and seized the false uncle. They carried him and
his family northward to the foot of a mountain where three roads met;
there they nailed them to seven pines, put an empty cask near each pine,
with a dull knife and a pair of blunt scissors fastened to each cask.
Above each person was nailed these words: "If a man passes this place he
is to cut off with a

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

knife a small piece of flesh from each person hanging here. If a woman
passes by she is to cut with the scissors a small piece of flesh from
each person. The one who fails to do this will be beheaded."

The two steeds which had gone to the sky rushed in from the west and
stopped at the hitching-posts near the yurta. On them was everything
necessary for the outfit of horse and rider. The two brothers took the
horses and removed the outfits; then they prayed long in thanks, prayed
three days and nights to the Heavenly Burkans; after that they mounted
the steeds and rode away beyond thirteen lands to the northwest, where
stands a high mountain, Sehir Mai, the White mountain. On that mountain
were the healing Water of Life and the red restoring larch tree. They
went to the top of the mountain and took bark from the tree and water
from the spring.

Khan Herdik Shubun (eagle) had gone up three fourths of the way; three
years was he flying. He could go no higher and lay there exhausted,
barely living, holding on by his wings and his beak to the mountain
side.

The brothers took some of the water from the spring and some of the bark
from the red restoring larch tree, and sprinkled the eagle with the
water mixed with the bark. He revived, circled three times about, then
flew to the mountain-top and still higher.

"Thanks to you," said Khan Herdik. "If war or any peril threatens call
me, I will fly to you; we should help one another." Then he vanished in
the clouds.

The two brothers hurried home. They put some of the bark in Shik Shuri's
mouth, poured in the Water of Life, cured her. She grew young; regained
hand, foot, and eye. When she came to her senses she knew her two sons,
embraced and kissed them, led them into the yurta. There were five of
them now.

"Was there a father of ours?" asked the brothers.

"There was, but he was beaten in battle and killed when ye were
infants."

"Thou art hiding something from us, thou art afraid to tell us. We will
dig out and discover the ashes and bones of our father, wherever they
may be."

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

Shik Shuri took their father's book out of a box, brought it to her
sons, and they read all that was in the book. They read how their father
went to find the gray steed with round head, how their uncle had killed
him. All was described there. They saddled their two stallions and rode
away. Shik Shuri had no power to stop them. They went to Huhai Hubshi
Barsam, the Shaman mountain, and there found their father's bones, over
which moss had grown.

Huragin and Isbegin gathered the bones; all were there save the great
toe of the right foot. They searched everywhere, and at last found the
trail of Ungin (fox); she had stolen the toe. They followed the trail,
followed till they discovered that Ungin had been eaten by Shono (wolf).
Going farther, they saw that Shono had been devoured by Hara Grojung
(black bear); yet farther on they found that Hara Grojung had been eaten
by Bara (tiger), and then that Bara had been eaten by Irbit (lion). They
hunted till they came upon Irbit. They killed him and found in his
stomach the great toe of their father; then they returned and fixed the
toe to the foot properly.

They sprinkled the skeleton with the healing Water of Life, mixed with
powdered bark from the red restoring larch tree. The first time they
sprinkled flesh came on the bones, the second time Húnkuvai was like a
man sleeping, the third time he was living and well.

Then Huragin and Isbegin went home with their father, and all feasted
for many days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varhan Tulai Hubun](jss24.md)
