[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jss20)  [Next](jss22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029XG0XM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Journey in Southern Siberia*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

#### BURULDAI BOGDO KHAN. No. II.

BURULDAI BOGDO was the eldest of thirteen khans and was master of
seventy-three tongues. He was seventy years old, and his wife was sixty.
For many years they had no children. Finally, behind seventy-three
curtains twin boys were born to them.

One night while all in the yurta were sleeping the father and mother
were stolen away; it was unknown by whom. When the children opened their
eyes in the morning they could see no one. Immediately one of the boys
became as a child of three and the other as a child of four years of
age. They went into the forest, turned themselves into squirrels, and
began to eat nuts.

The next day seven hundred men came through the forest looking for the
boys, but they could not find them.

When the men had gone the boys took their own forms and walked eastward
till they came to a yurta so immense that it had seven hundred doors.
The elder brother sent the younger brother in to see what kind of a
place it was. He went through thirteen doors, and came to a sixty-three
headed, six-horned Mangathai, sleeping soundly. The boy was frightened
and started to go back quietly, but when he had reached the third door
the Mangathai woke, opened the eyes in all his heads, and called out:

"Whoever thou art, if pure, greet me; if impure, leave me." Then seeing
the boy he asked:

"Whence comest thou?"

"I am the son of Buruldai Bogdo Khan."

"Thy father has injured me, has done me great harm; now thou hast come
to torment me!" cried the Mangathai, in a rage. He seized the boy, bound
him, and said, "To-morrow I will eat thee."

The brother, who was waiting outside, grew tired, turned himself into a
squirrel and went back to the forest.

The Mangathai went to the woods for spits on which to roast

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

the boy. While there he met a merchant returning with goods from various
countries. The Mangathai invited the merchant to his yurta and
entertained him. The merchant heard a child crying. "Who is that?" asked
he.

"The son of a man who has done me much harm. I am going to eat him
to-morrow," answered the Mangathai.

The merchant gave the Mangathai seven kegs of strong wine. The Mangathai
drank the wine and grew merry; then some of his heads talked about war,
some went to sleep, some cried, and others laughed.

"Give me the boy," said the merchant, "I will put him on the spit for
thee." The Mangathai gave up the boy, but the merchant did not kill him
or put him on the spit. He took him home and made him his own son.

The boy cried and cried. "He is afraid of the Mangathai," said the
merchant's wife. "Go to the seven Lamas and let them soothsay; perhaps
the child is sick." But the boy said:

"I am not sick; I am crying for my brother."

The merchant sent seven hundred men to look for that brother; but he was
still a squirrel, and the men searched nine days without finding him.
Then the boy went with the men to look for his brother. He turned
himself into a squirrel, and instead of finding the brother the seven
hundred lost the boy they had brought with them.

The two squirrels met, but the elder did not recognize the younger. "Is
this an enemy," thought he; and he went straight up to Esege Malan.

The younger brother followed him to the door of Esege Malan's yurta, but
did not go in. "Let my brother come out!" cried he. "If not I will choke
myself." But the elder brother did not believe that the other squirrel
was his brother, and he would not go out.

"I have a birth-mark as big as ten finger-tips under my left shoulder;
so has my brother," said the elder boy to Esege Malan. "If this squirrel
has the same, he is my brother; if not, he is an enemy."

The mark was found, and the two brothers embraced. Then they went to the
merchant, who was flogging the seven hundred

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

men, first for failing to find the one boy, and then for losing the
other.

The merchant was glad to have two boys in place of one, and set them to
herding cattle; but they neglected their work, and the calves took all
the milk from the cows. The merchant was going to flog the boys, but his
wife would not let him. He asked where they had been and why they were
gone so long.

"We have been wrestling with the son of Khan Laraja Miná," answered the
boys.

The second day they drove the cows home very late, and the calves had
taken all the milk. "Where have you been?" asked the merchant. "You have
not been watching the herd."

"We went up to the sky to order bows and arrows of the ninety Heavenly
Blacksmiths. Our bows and arrows will be ready in seven days."

At the end of the seven days the blacksmiths had the bows ready and a
quiver of arrows for each boy. The brothers took their bows and arrows
home, and the merchant gave a great feast.

"I found these brothers in an open field," said he to the people. "I ask
you to give them names."

He put out a piece of butter as big as a cup, and a piece of meat as big
as a plate. An old man ate the butter and the meat, and said:

"The elder boy I name Altin Gorye; the younger, Mūngun Gorye."

The people gave each boy a horse; the elder a red stallion ninety
sachens long, with ears nine sachens in length. The horse had forty
teeth, four big ones and thirty-six smaller ones. They gave the younger
boy a bay stallion eighty sachens long, with ears eight sachens in
length. He had forty teeth,—four big ones and thirty-six smaller ones.
The brothers had now all that was needed for warriors, and they made
ready to travel until they found their father and mother.

"When you were young I took you and have cared for you always. Why do
you leave us in our old age?" asked the merchant.

"We are going in search of our own father and mother, but we will come
back; for though we live a thousand years we will not forget thee."

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

They went then to the place where they were born; but everything had
dropped away, except a hitching-post that had stood near the yurta. On
that hitching-post the father had written: "If my sons live, let them
read this: 'We are taken by Bugú Curté Zulut, and are in his power. If
ye are able, rescue us! In the yard of the sheep house is sheep's flesh,
and an iron vessel full of arsá \[solid sour, sour milk\].'"

The brothers opened a granary, and found oats for their horses. They
found the sheep's flesh and the arsá; they ate and drank, and were about
to leave the place when they saw that it was written on the
hitching-post that they must travel eighty versts a day for eight days.

They had traveled for three days when they met the two sons of a khan.
Those two, by their magic, knew of the coming of the brothers, and
preferred to meet them with war. They had an army, and weapons, and all
things needed.

The four advanced, but could not decide who should shoot first; finally
Altin Gorye, the elder of the brothers, said that the khan's sons might
shoot first.

By magic the brothers caught the arrows and put them in their saddles,
then they laughed and said, "You cannot shoot, and still you go to war.
Now it is our turn. Yield not to any magic," said they to their arrows,
"but go and scatter the enemy like sand before the wind." The arrows
flew away from the bows, and both the sons of a khan were killed. The
two brothers burned the two men and burned their horses as well. Then
they went to the yurtas of the dead men, found their wives and children
there, and said:

"We have come to see your husbands. When we came into the world some one
stole our father and mother. Have you seen them?"

"We are but women; we are not wise, like men. We know nothing," they
replied, but among themselves they laughed. "Short hair, short sense,"
said they, when the brothers had left.

The two traveled toward the west till they saw a beautiful yurta, closed
and guarded; but it opened at their command. They entered and found
there their father and mother; their

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

right eyes, hands, and feet were gone. They did not recognize their
children.

"Where was your home?" asked the brothers.

"In the opposite land," said the man. "I was once the eldest of thirteen
khans and I knew many languages. Two sons were born to me. Have ye not
seen them?"

"We are thy sons; while we were asleep behind seventy-three curtains
thou with our mother and all thy property were carried away. Though you
are our parents, a merchant reared us. We are going for the Water of
Life, and will make ye well again."

They brought a vial of the Water of Life, restored the eyes, hands,
feet, and strength of their parents. Then they took father, mother, and
all the property and families of the khan's sons and went home to their
father's ruined yurta, which by magic they made large and beautiful.

"Now," said the younger brother, "we must go to the merchant."

"Go thou," said the elder; "I will remain here to guard our father and
mother."

They argued and disputed, and at last both went. The merchant was glad
when he saw them, and he made a great feast which lasted seven days and
seven nights.

"We rescued you from death," said the merchant. "When one brother was
lost we sent seven hundred to hunt for him. All this cost much time and
treasure. Now you should not leave us. If you wish we will go to your
father's yurta, but in any case we must not part."

"Come with us," said the brothers.

The merchant made all things ready, filled wagons with gold and
treasures, and he and his wife went with the brothers to their father's
home.

In time the two young men became great khans, but they lived always with
their two fathers and two mothers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sharu](jss22)
