[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](moj01)  [Next](moj03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysteries of John*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1946\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

METAPHYSICAL BIBLE students recognize in the Gospel of John a certain
spiritual quality that is not found in the other Gospels. Although this
is not true of all Bible readers, it may be said that those who look for
the mystical find it in the language of this book. The book is
distinctive in this respect and is so successful in setting forth
metaphysical truths that little interpretation is necessary. Only in a
few instances does the original writing conceal the deep truths that the
student seeks to discern. Written language is at best a reflection of
inner ideas, and even though a teacher couples ideas and words as
adroitly as Jesus does, elucidation is sometimes difficult.

Nevertheless ideas are catching, and this may be the best reason for
publishing another book about this spirit-arousing Fourth Gospel. We are
all heavily charged with ideas, and when these ideas are released they
spring forth and pass from mind to mind, being "recorded" as they fly,
and when they are expressed the whole race is lifted up--if the idea is
charged with the uplifting Spirit. Jesus was God's idea of man made
manifest in the flesh; so He was warranted in making that dynamic
assertion, "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto
myself." Nowhere in all literature has this truth of the unity of God,
man, and creation been so fearlessly expressed and affirmed by man as in
the Book of John.

Here the question arises as to God's responsibility

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

for all that appears in the flesh, both good and evil, which seems to
confound our logic and understanding. We are in human consciousness the
fruit of a tree that stemmed from the soil of Being. The laws instituted
in the aeons and ages of the past still prevail in the present.
Interpreting Being from a personal standpoint, we have ignored the
principles and laws at the very foundation of all creation and
substituted a personal God, and many contradictions have followed. Now
through the unfoldment of the spiritual man implanted in us in the
beginning we are discerning the unchangeable laws of the good and the
absolute necessity of conforming to them.

So we see that Jesus taught plainly that God functions in and through
man and nature instead of being a person somewhere in the skies; also
that we demonstrate God by making His Spirit manifest in our life. "He
that hath seen me hath seen the Father." Socrates was asked, "What is a
good man?" He replied, "A man who does good." Again he was asked, "What
is good?" " What the good man does," he replied.

No extended definition of good is necessary to those who follow Jesus;
even converted savages understand good and do it. The universal desire
among awakened Christians to love God and man is part of the law
constantly operating through man when he finds his right relation to
God.

The status of evil is that of a parasite. It has no permanent life of
itself; its whole existence depends on the life it borrows from its
parent, and when its connection with the parent is severed nothing
remains.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

Apparent evil is the result of ignorance, and when the truth is
presented the error disappears. Jesus called it a liar and the father of
lies.

Men personalize good and evil in a multiplicity of gods and devils, but
Truth students follow Jesus in recognizing the supreme Spirit in man as
the "one God and Father of all."

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](moj03.md)
