[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](moj23)  [Next](moj25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysteries of John*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1946\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Question Helps for students of Mysteries of John 

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

Chapter 1

1\. What is the original creative word or logos?

2\. Explain why the Word and the divine creative process are identical.

3\. What is the metaphysical significance of the Book of John?

4\. Explain the parallel between Genesis and John in relation to the
ideal man.

5\. What does John the Baptist represent?

6\. What is the nature of the rock upon which Jesus built?

7\. What is the true light?

8\. How do we become children of God?

9\. When was the "Christ or Word" incorporated into man's being?

10\. Why are receptivity and belief essential?

11\. How does the Word become flesh?

12\. What is meant by "The law was given through Moses"?

13\. Explain the statement "Grace and truth came through Jesus Christ."

14\. Compare discernment with intellectual perception.

15\. Explain the office of "baptism through denial, plus forgiveness" in
the regenerative process.

16\. Why is the recognition of oneself as the "Son of God" of primary
importance?

17\. What does baptism by John the Baptist symbolize?

18\. What is the nature of the Father-Mind?

19\. What is the function of the Holy Spirit?

20\. How is the spiritual mind cultivated?

21\. What mental attitudes are necessary to "put on Christ"?

22\. What is the result of conscious recognition of the Christ Mind?

23\. What quality does Andrew represent? Why is it important?

24\. What is the metaphysical significance of Philip, Andrew, and
Peter's being of the city of Bethsaida?

25\. Why is it wise to develop the faculty of imagination

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

under the direction of Spirit?

26\. What does Bartholomew represent?

27\. What is "consciousness"? "Form"?

28\. What spiritual faculty is necessary for penetrating into the
"fourth dimension."

Chapter 2

1\. What is the spiritual interpretation of marriage? Of Mary? Of Eve?
Of Jesus? Of the disciples?

2\. What does the name Cana mean? Galilee? Philip?

3\. What mind activities are involved in the process of regeneration?

4\. Give the inner meaning of "waterpots."

5\. Explain "I, if I be lifted up . . . will draw all men unto myself."

6\. What does the marriage in Cana of Galilee symbolize? Give the
symbolism of this miracle in detail.

7\. What does Capernaum designate?

8\. What does the Passover symbolize?

9\. Name the steps taken in body cleansing. Why must we deal with the
mind in both the absolute and the relative?

10\. Symbolically what is "the Christ light"?

11\. How is a thought atmosphere produced?

12\. Explain Paul's admonition "Think on these things."

13\. What is the result of man's mastery of mind?

14\. When is the word of God fulfilled in man?

15\. Is Truth self-evident?

Chapter 3

I. What does Nicodemus stand for in individual consciousness?

2\. What is the "new birth"?

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

3\. What are the steps in evolution?

4\. How is permanent peace to be established?

5\. How is man restored to the heavenly state?

6\. What does believing in Jesus do for man?

7\. How do we become like Jesus Christ?

8\. How do we experience salvation?

9\. What is represented by Jesus? By Judea? Metaphysically interpreted,
what is the relationship of Jesus and John the Baptist?

Chapter 4

1\. What does Samaria represent? Sychar?

2\. Where is "Jacob's well" situated?

3\. Interpret metaphysically Jesus' resting by Jacob's well.

4\. How does one worship God truly?

5\. What is the spiritual significance of Jesus' journey from Judea to
Galilee?

6\. What is the "well of water springing up unto eternal life"?

7\. Is the subconscious the true source of wisdom? Why do you answer as
you do?

8\. What is the symbology of the Samaritans' being regarded as
pretenders by the Israelites?

9\. From what sources does the soul draw its life? What is the ultimate
source?

10\. What is the explanation of spiritual things on a material basis?

11\. In what way is Christ the discerner of thoughts?

12\. Explain metaphysically the relation between Jews and Gentiles.

13\. Jesus met the Samaritan woman by Jacob's well. Interpret.

14\. Distinguish between intellectual reasoning and Spiritual
perception.

15\. Differentiate between the outer symbol of worship

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

and worship in Spirit.

16\. Is spiritual substance omnipresent? Explain.

17\. Why is God no respecter of persons?

18\. Why is it important for man to apprehend the laws of Spirit?

19\. Why is absent healing possible? Give an instance of such healing.

20\. What is the result when we attain oneness with the spiritual forces
that move the mind?

Chapter 5

1\. What does Jerusalem represent?

2\. Metaphysically interpreted, what is a feast in Jerusalem?

3\. What do sheep symbolize?

4\. Interpret spiritually the Pool of Bethesda and its five porches.

5\. Why is the work of Spirit not confined to physical activities?

6\. Why does divine life take no cognizance of intellectual laws?

7\. What is the place in demonstration of the "sabbath of the Lord"?

8\. What is the living power back of all nature?

9\. Is the divine creative power continually alive?

10\. Explain the relationship between the Father and the Son.

11\. How does one honor the Christ?

12\. Should one exercise wisdom in handling the life one has? Why?

13\. What is the process involved in "raising the dead"?

14\. Explain the relationship between judgment and love.

15\. Why can one not successfully substitute the

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

Scriptures for the living Word?

16\. How did Jesus create?

17\. Why is the Bible not the living Word of God?

Chapter 6

1\. Why is it important to have an understanding of soul anatomy and the
mind centers in the body?

2\. Explain the nature of the I AM.

3\. What part do the spiritual faculties have in the activity of the I
AM?

4\. How does one learn to live by the "living bread"?

5\. What is the spiritual significance of Jesus and His disciples' going
to the mountain?

6\. Why did Jesus withdraw "into the mountain himself alone"? What is
the significance of this for us today?

7\. Explain the relationship between faith and power in one's walking
"upon the waves of life."

8\. What is the nature of the true source of substance?

9\. Explain the interpretation of the Almighty as El Shaddai.

10\. What process is involved in bringing spiritual substance into
manifestation?

11\. What is meant by the "last day"?

12\. What is the nature of the body of Christ?

13\. What is the true inner self of every individual?

14\. How does one form one's environment, one's heaven or hell?

15\. How do words become active in the body?

Chapter 7

1\. Why did Jesus' disciples want Him to go up to Jerusalem?

2\. What human limitation of His ability to demonstrate did Jesus
experience?

3\. Explain the difference between the Pharisaical

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

mind and the spiritual mind.

4\. What effect does the outpouring of the Holy Spirit have within the
soul?

5\. What is the procedure for handling a mixed state of consciousness?

6\. What is symbolized by the chief priests and officers?

7\. What does Nicodemus' spiritual conversion prove?

Chapter 8

1\. What is represented by Jesus' going up to the Mount of Olives?

2\. What bearing does the story of the woman taken in adultery have on
our own unfoldment?

3\. Explain the Scripture "I am the light of the world: he that
followeth me shall not walk in the darkness, but shall have the light of
life."

4\. How does man hinder his soul unfoldment? How can he accelerate it?

5\. Why must man abide in the Truth?

6\. How does man gain freedom? What part does concentration play in the
quest of freedom?

7\. What is the result of ancestor worship?

8\. How does man bind himself to race beliefs regarding ancestry? How
can he free himself?

9\. What is a liar and the "father" of all lies?

10\. Explain Jesus' words "Before Abraham was born, I am."

11\. Interpret the three parts in the Trinity? What is the "word"?

12\. Why were Jesus' words so powerful?

13\. Can man overcome death? Does this include death of the body?

Chapter 9

1\. What is the general theme of John 9?

2\. Distinguish between the tents and tabernacles in

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

which the Israelites lived and Solomon's Temple.

3\. Explain why the sin of omission is greater than the sin of
commission?

4\. What is man's real work?

5\. What is the significance of the clay placed upon the blind man's
eyes? Of its being washed away?

6\. Explain the reaction that sometimes follows the activity of the
"Jews" and "Pharisees" in consciousness?

Chapter 10

1\. What are the sheep mentioned in John 10? The "thief and a robber"?
The porter? The "good shepherd"?

2\. What part does man's own volition play in his reformation?

3\. What is the result when the higher and lower forces are "married"?

4\. What is the legitimate "door" through which spiritual energy enters
man's consciousness?

5\. What does Solomon's Porch symbolize?

6\. How can a person be sure he is listening to the "still small voice"?

7\. Metaphysically interpreted, what is the significance of Jesus'
activity near the Jordan?

Chapter 11

1\. What does the name Lazarus mean? What does Lazarus represent?

2\. What happens when man fails to recognize God as the origin and
support of his life? What is the remedy for such a condition?

3\. Describe one of the first steps in body restoration.

4\. In what way does affirming life for another help one to overcome
death?

5\. Why do people grow old?

6\. How is the "stone" rolled away?

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

7\. Why is it important to give thanks for the manifestation even before
it appears?

8\. Explain why Jesus "cried with a loud voice."

9\. Does the mind always accept Truth without question?

10\. Explain the symbology of Jesus' withdrawal into Ephraim.

11\. What does the Feast of the Passover represent?

Chapter 12

1\. What do we mean by the "fruit" of our thought?

2\. What is the metaphysical significance of Mary's and Martha's serving
Jesus?

3\. What is symbolized by the anointing of Jesus' feet by Mary?

4\. How does sense consciousness betray man?

5\. How does love heal?

6\. Are "signs" something to be desired for their own sake?

7\. How is equilibrium restored?

8\. "We lose our life in the service of the good." Explain.

9\. What was Jesus' mission on earth?

10\. Explain why Jesus had no real cause for worry.

11\. What is represented by the multitude referred to in verse 34?

12\. What state of consciousness results when the "Pharisaical
intellect" rules?

13\. Where does the preponderance of power in man lie? What is the true
glory of man?

Chapter 13

1\. Can man live unto himself alone? Justify your answer.

2\. How did sin come into the world? How is it cast out? How did Jesus
become the universal Saviour?

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

3\. How can man appropriate His life essence and repay Jesus for His
great sacrifice?

4\. What is soul unfoldment? How did Jesus teach it?

5\. How does one become truly great?

6\. Discuss the symbology of Jesus' washing His apostles feet.

7\. How can one help mankind cleanse their understanding?

8\. Why did Judas betray Jesus? Why did Jesus permit the betrayal?

9\. What is true glorification?

10\. Upon what spiritual quality does the preservation of Christianity
depend?

Chapter 14

1\. Explain the relationship between the Father and the Son.

2\. Explain "I go to prepare a place for you." Why did Jesus use the
word "mansions"?

3\. How does man find the Father? How does the Father principle operate?

4\. What faculty does Philip represent? How does this faculty attain its
highest expression?

5\. What is the cause of and remedy for man's failure to demonstrate?

6\. Why is attention so vital in sustaining our spiritual relation to
the Father?

7\. Where is the Spirit of truth? How is it brought into active touch
with our consciousness?

8\. Explain the Scripture "Ye behold me: because I live, ye shall live
also" and "In that day we shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in
me, and I in you."

9\. In what sense is the individual man all that Jesus claimed He was?
How does he make it manifest?

10\. How does Jesus manifest Himself to us today?

11\. What is the nature and character of the "personality" of the Holy
Spirit?

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

Chapter 15

1\. Explain the relation of Jesus to the Father.

2\. Why must man make intelligent use of his talents and faculties?

3\. Explain how the power of the word functions through the I AM.

4\. When does man cease to strive in external ways?

5\. Give the method used to establish command over the real forces of
Being.

6\. Why did Jesus call the apostles "friends"?

7\. Name the functions of the Holy Spirit.

Chapter 16

1\. What is the cause of persecution?

2\. Why was it expedient for Jesus to go away?

3\. What is your conception of the Holy Spirit?

4\. Jesus said, "A little while, and ye behold me no more; and again a
little while, and ye shall see me." Elucidate.

5\. In reality what is man?

6\. What in consciousness is "the crucifixion"?

7\. Jesus said, "In that day ye shall ask me no question." Clarify.

8\. In terms of mind what are "dark sayings"? Interpret "The night is
far spent, and the day is at hand"?

Chapter 17

1\. For what was Jesus asking when He said, "Glorify thy Son, that the
Son may glorify thee"? For whom did He pray?

2\. When had Jesus made union with the Father?

3\. To what extent does one experience wholeness of mind and body?

4\. What soul attitudes are necessary to the production of the new race?

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

5\. Explain why man must change the basis of his thinking from a grosset
plane to that of pure mind.

6\. Does God always answer prayer? What is the highest form of prayer?

7\. What attitude of mind is involved in selfless prayer?

8\. What is sanctification? What is its result?

9\. What is man's highest attainment?

10\. Discuss obliteration of individual consciousness versus expansion
of the soul?

Chapter 18

1\. What does Kidron symbolize? Garden?

2\. Interpret the action of Judas in the garden of Kidron.

3\. What action is indicated by Jesus' passing over the brook Kidron?

4\. Are spiritual forces invulnerable?

5\. In what way are faith and love helpful in overcoming?

6\. Distinguish between Truth and the letter of the law.

7\. Explain the statement "Every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof."

8\. What is the remedy for the state of consciousness represented by
Barabbas?

Chapter 19

1\. What is the general theme of John 19?

2\. Why does the sense man jeer at religion? What is the spiritual
significance of arraying Jesus in royal robes?

3\. What is indicated by Pilate's vacillating attitude?

4\. Metaphysically explained, why was it necessary for Pilate and the
Jews to co-operate in crucifying Jesus?

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

5\. What is symbolized by Jesus' seamless robe? In what way is this
symbol helpful today?

6\. Discuss Jesus' great purpose in becoming one of the human family?

7\. Was spiritual man crucified on the cross? Explain.

8\. What in consciousness is "the Preparation"?

9\. What is the lesson taught in John 19:31-37?

10\. What is symbolized by Jesus' resting in the tomb of Joseph of
Arimathaea?

Chapter 20

1\. What is the inner meaning of Mary's looking into the tomb?

2\. Explain the Scripture "I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and
my God and your God."

3\. What is the significance of Jesus' words "Touch me not"? What do the
two angels represent?

4\. What is the most effective way to comfort the bereaved? Does
spiritual mind ever grieve?

5\. What influence does the individual Christian have upon the race?

6\. What does Thomas symbolize?

7\. How is the "peace of God, which passeth all understanding" acquired?

8\. Why is spiritual discernment necessary in understanding the
Resurrection? Is the raising of Jesus' flesh body a "mystery"?

9\. Explain something of the law by which the Resurrection was
accomplished.

10\. On what three planes of consciousness did Jesus develop power?

11\. How does Jesus quicken the bodies of men today? How does man
co-operate with Jesus in the regeneration?

12\. How does man immortalize his body? In what way is science helpful
in the regeneration?

13\. Is the resurrection of man's flesh body a part of spiritual
evolution?

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

Chapter 21

1\. Of what is the net symbolic? The sea?

2\. What is the spiritual significance of casting the net on the "right
side"?

3\. Why does man sometimes fail to demonstrate substance?

4\. Discuss the symbology of the bread and fishes on two planes of
consciousness.

5\. What lesson was Jesus teaching when He asked, "Lovest thou me"? Why
must love go hand in hand with faith and the other faculties?

6\. Explain the inner meaning of verse 18.

7\. In what way may the "manner of death" be said to glorify God?

8\. Metaphysically what is the "disciple whom Jesus loved"?

9\. What two attributes of the "mind of the Father" are necessary in
claiming one's good?

10\. How may we "destroy the seeds of death" and implant health and
eternal life in the body?

11\. Why is the resurrected body of Jesus not visible today? How can man
follow Jesus' example?

12\. Paul said, "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind."
Explain.

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](moj25.md)
