[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01021)  [Next](cc01023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiii"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 17.

<span id="xxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
17:1-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)<span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And when Abram was ninety years old
and nine, the LORD appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I *am* the
Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect.

<span id="xxiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit Abram nonaginta et novem
annorum: et visus est Jehova Abram, dixitque ad eum, Ego Deus
Omnipotens, ambula coram me, et esto perfectus.

<span id="xxiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And I will make my covenant between
me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.

<span id="xxiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et ponam pactum meum inter me et to,
et multiplicabo to vehementissime.

<span id="xxiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And Abram fell on his face: and God
talked with him, saying,

<span id="xxiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Tunc prostravit se Abram super
faciem suam, et loquutus est cum eo Deus, dicendo,

<span id="xxiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** As for me, behold, my covenant *is*
with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.

<span id="xxiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ego, ecce pactum meum tecum, et eris
in patrem multitudinis gentium.

<span id="xxiii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Neither shall thy name any more be
called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many
nations have I made thee.

<span id="xxiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et non vocabitur ultra nomen tuum
Abram, sed erit nomen tuum Abraham: quia patrem multitudinis gentium
posui to.

<span id="xxiii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And I will make thee exceeding
fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of
thee.

<span id="xxiii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et multiplicabo to valde, et ponam
to in gentes, et reges ex to egredientur.

<span id="xxiii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And I will establish my covenant
between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an
everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

<span id="xxiii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et statuam foedus meum inter me et
to, et inter semen tuum post to in generationes suas, in foedus
perpetuum, ut sim tibi in Deum et semini tuo post to.

<span id="xxiii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And I will give unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land
of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.

<span id="xxiii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Daboque tibi et semini tuo post to
terram peregrinationum tuarum, omnem terram Chenaan in possessionem
perpetuam, et ero eis in Deum.

<span id="xxiii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And God said unto Abraham, Thou
shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their
generations.

<span id="xxiii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Praeterea dixit Deus ad Abraham, et
tu pactum meum custodies, tu et semen tuum post to in generationibus
suis.

<span id="xxiii.i-p20"></span>**10.** This *is* my covenant, which ye
shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; Every man child
among you shall be circumcised.

<span id="xxiii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Hoc pactum meum quod custodietis
inter me et vos, et inter semen tuum post to, ut circumcidatur in vobis
omnis masculus:

<span id="xxiii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And ye shall circumcise the flesh
of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and
you.

<span id="xxiii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et circumcidetis carnem praeputii
vestri: et erit in signum foederis inter me et vos.

<span id="xxiii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he that is eight days old
shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he
that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which
*is* not of thy seed.

<span id="xxiii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et filius octo dierum
circumcidetur in vobis: omnis masculus in generations vestras, verna, et
emptus argento ab omni filio alienigenae, qui non est de semine tuo.

<span id="xxiii.i-p26"></span>**13.** He that is born in thy house, and
he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my
covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.

<span id="xxiii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Circumcidendo circumcidetur verna
tuus, et emptus argento tuo: et erit pactum meum in carne vestra in
pactum perpetuum.

<span id="xxiii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And the uncircumcised man child
whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut
off from his people; he hath broken my covenant.

<span id="xxiii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et praeputiatus masculus, cui non
circumcisa fuerit carno praeputii sui, exterminabitur anima ipsa de
populis suis, quia pactum meum irritum fecit.

<span id="xxiii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And God said unto Abraham, As for
Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah *shall*
her name *be*

<span id="xxiii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et dixit Deus ad Abraham, Sarai
uxoris tuae non vocabis nomen Sarai, sed Sarah est nomen ejus.

<span id="xxiii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And I will bless her, and give
thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her, and she shall be *a
mother* of nations; kings of people shall be of her.

<span id="xxiii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et benedicam ei, atque etiam dabo
ex ea tibi filium, cui benedicam, et erit in gentes: reges populorum ex
ea erunt.

<span id="xxiii.i-p34"></span>**17.** Then Abraham fell upon his face,
and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall *a child* be born unto him
that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old,
bear?

<span id="xxiii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et prostravit se Abraham in faciem
suam, et risit, dixitque in corde suo, Numquid viro centum annorum
nascetur proles? Et an Sarah mulier nonaginta annorum pariet?

<span id="xxiii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Abraham said unto God, O that
Ishmael might live before thee!

<span id="xxiii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et dixit Abraham ad Deum, Utinam
Ismael vivat coram to.

<span id="xxiii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And God said, Sarah thy wife shall
bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will
establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, *and* with
his seed after him.

<span id="xxiii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et dixit Deus, Vere Sarah uxor tua
pariet tibi filium, et vocabis nomen ejus Isaac: et statuam pactum meum
cum eo in pactum perpetuum, et cum semine ejus post eum.

<span id="xxiii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And as for Ishmael, I have heard
thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will
multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make
him a great nation.

<span id="xxiii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et pro Ismael audivi to: ecce,
benedixi ei, et crescere faciam eum, et multiplicare faciam eum supra
modum: duodecim principes generabit, et ponam eum in gentem magnam.

<span id="xxiii.i-p42"></span>**21.** But my covenant will I establish
with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the
next year.

<span id="xxiii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et pactum meum statuam cum Isaac,
quem pariet tibi Sarah in tempore hoc, anno altero.

<span id="xxiii.i-p44"></span>**22.** And he left off talking with him,
and God went up from Abraham.

<span id="xxiii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et finivit loqui cum co, et
ascendit Deus ab Abraham.

<span id="xxiii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And Abraham took Ishmael his son,
and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his
money, every male among the men of Abraham’s house; and circumcised the
flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.

<span id="xxiii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Tunc Abraham tulit Ismael filium
suum, et omnes vernas domus suae, et omnem acquisitum argento suo: omnis
masculi in viris domus suae circumcidit carnem praeputii eorum in
ipsomet die, sicut loquutus fuerat cum eo Deus.

<span id="xxiii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And Abraham *was* ninety years old
and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

<span id="xxiii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Abraham autem erat vir nonaginta
et novem annorum, quando circumcisa fuit carno praeputii ipsius.

<span id="xxiii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And Ishmael his son *was* thirteen
years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

<span id="xxiii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Et Ismael filius ejus erat
tredecim annorum, quando circumcisus est ipse in carne praeputii sui,

<span id="xxiii.i-p52"></span>**26.** In the selfsame day was Abraham
circumcised, and Ishmael his son.

<span id="xxiii.i-p53"></span>**26.** In ipsomet die circumcisus est
Abraham et Ismael filius ejus.

<span id="xxiii.i-p54"></span>**27.** And all the men of his house, born
in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised
with him.

<span id="xxiii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Et omnes viri domus ejus, verna
domus, et emptus argento a filio alienigenae, circumcisi sunt cum ipso.

<span id="xxiii.i-p56"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.i-p57"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p58"></span>**1.** *And when Abram was ninety years
old and nine* Moses passes over thirteen years of Abram’s life, not
because nothing worthy of remembrance had in the meantime occurred; but
because the Spirit of God, according to his own will, selects those
things which are most necessary to be known. He purposely points out the
length of time which had elapsed from the birth of Ishmael to the period
when Isaac was promised, for the purpose of teaching us that he long
remained satisfied with that son who should, at length, be rejected, and
that he was as one deluded by a fallacious appearance. Meanwhile, we see
in what a circuitous course the Lord led him. It was even possible that
he brought this delay upon himself by his own fault, in having
precipitately entered into second nuptials; yet as Moses declares no
such thing, I leave it undetermined. Let it suffice to accept what is
certain; namely, that Abram being contented with his only son, ceased to
desire any other seed. The want of offspring had previously excited him
to constant prayers and sighings; for the promise of God was so fixed in
his mind, that he was ardently carried forward to seek its fulfillment.
And now, falsely supposing that he had obtained his wish, he is led away
by the presence of his son according to the flesh, from the expectation
of a spiritual seed. Again the wonderful goodness of God shows itself,
in that Abram himself is raised, beyond his own expectation and desire,
to a new hope, and he suddenly hears, that what it never came into his
mind to ask, is granted unto him. If he had been daily offering up
importunate prayers for this blessing, we should not so plainly have
seen that it was conferred upon him by the free gift of God, as when it
is given to him without his either thinking of it or desiring it. Before
however we speak of Isaac, it will repay our labor, to notice the order
and connection of the words.

<span id="xxiii.i-p59"></span>First, Moses says that the Lord *appeared*
unto him, in order that we may know that the oracle was not pronounced
by secret revelation, but that a vision at the same time was added to
it. Besides the vision was not speechless, but had the word annexed,
from which word the faith of Abram might receive profit. Now that word
summarily contains this declaration, that God enters into covenant with
Abram: it then unfolds the nature of the covenant itself, and finally
puts to it the seal, with the accompanying attestations.

<span id="xxiii.i-p60"></span>*I am the Almighty God*  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) The Hebrew noun *El* , which is
derived from power, is here put for God. The same remark applies to the
accompanying word <span id="xxiii.i-p61.5"></span>ידש ( *shaddai* ,) as
if God would declare, that he had sufficient power for Abram’s
protection: because our faith can only stand firmly, while we are
certainly persuaded that the defense of God is alone sufficient for use
and can sincerely despise everything in the world which is opposed to
our salvation. God, therefore, does not boast of that power which lies
concealed within himself; but of that which he manifests towards his
children; and he does so, in order that Abram might hence derive
materials for confidence. Thus, in these words, a promise is included.

<span id="xxiii.i-p62"></span>*Walk before me* The force of this
expression we have elsewhere explained. In making the covenant, God
stipulates for obedience, on the part of his servant. Yet He does not in
vain prefix the declaration that he is ‘the Almighty God,’ and is
furnished with power to help his own people: because it was necessary
that Abram should be recalled from all other means of help,  <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) that he might entirely devote himself
to God alone. For no one will ever retake himself to God, but he who
keeps created things in their proper place, and looks up to God alone.
Where, indeed, the power of God has been once acknowledged, it ought so
to transport us with admiration, and our minds ought so to be filled
with reverence for him, that nothing should hinder us from worshipping
him. Moreover, because the eyes of God look for faith and truth in the
heart, Abram is commanded to aim at integrity. For the Hebrews call him
a *man of perfections* , who is not of a deceitful or double mind, but
sincerely cultivates rectitude. In short, the integrity here mentioned
is opposed, to hypocrisy. And surely, when we have to deal with God, no
place for dissimulation remains. Now, from these words, we learn for
what end God gathers together for himself a church; namely, that they
whom he has called, may be holy. The foundation, indeed, of the divine
calling, is a gratuitous promise; but it follows immediately after, that
they whom he has chosen as a peculiar people to himself, should devote
themselves to the righteousness of God.  <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) For on this condition, he adopts
children as his own, that he may, in return, obtain the place and the
honor of a Father. And as he himself cannot lie, so he rightly demands
mutual fidelity from his own children. Wherefore, let us know, that God
manifests himself to the faithful, in order that they may live as in his
sight; and may make him the arbiter not only of their works, but of
their thoughts. Whence also we infer, that there is no other method of
living piously and justly than that of depending upon God.

<span id="xxiii.i-p65"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p66"></span>**2.** *And I will make my covenant* He
now begins more fully and abundantly to explain what he had before
alluded to briefly. We have said that the covenant of God with Abram had
two parts. The first was a declaration of gratuitous love; to which was
annexed the promise of a happy life. But the other was an exhortation to
the sincere endeavor to cultivate uprightness, since God had given, in a
single word only, a slight taste of his grace; and then immediately had
descended to the design of miscalling; namely, that Abram should be
upright. He now subjoins a more ample declaration of his grace, in order
that Abram may endeavor more willingly to form his mind and his life,
both to reverence towards God, and to the cultivation of uprightness; as
if God had said ‘See how kindly I indulge thee: for I do not require
integrity from thee simply on account of my authority, which I might
justly do; but whereas I owe thee nothing, I condescend graciously to
engage in a mutual covenant.’ He does not, however, speak of this as of
a new thing: but he recalls the memory of the covenant which he had
before made, and now fully confirms and establishes its certainty. For
God is not wont to utter new oracles, which may destroy the credit, or
obscure the light, or weaken the efficacy of those which preceded; but
he continues, as in one perpetual tenor, those promises which he has
once given. Wherefore, by these words, he intends nothing else than that
the covenant, of which Abram had heard before should be established and
ratified: but he expressly introduces that principal point, concerning
the multiplication of seed, which he afterwards frequently repeats.

<span id="xxiii.i-p67"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p68"></span>**3.** *And Abram fell on his face* We
know that this was the ancient rite of adoration. Moreover, Abram
testifies, first, that he acknowledges God, in whose presence all flesh
ought to keep silence, and to be humbled; and, secondly that he
reverently receives and cordially embraces whatever God is about to
speak. If, however, this was intended as a confession of faith, we must
observe, that the faith which relies upon the grace of God cannot be
disjoined from a pure conscience. God, in offering his grace to Abram,
requires of him a sincere disposition to live justly and homily. Abram,
in prostrating himself, declares that he obediently receives both.
 <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) Let us therefore remember, that
in one and the same bond of faith, the gratuitous adoption in which our
salvation is placed, is to be combined with newness of life. And
although Abram utters not a word, he declares more fully by his silence,
than if he had spoken with a loud and sounding voice, that he yields
obedience to the word of God.

<span id="xxiii.i-p70"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p71"></span>**4.** *As for me, behold, my covenant is
with thee*  <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) They who translate
the passage, ‘Behold, I make a covenant with thee,’ or, ‘Behold, I and
my covenant with thee;’ do not seem to me faithfully to represent the
meaning of Moses. For, first, God declares that he is the speaker, in
order that absolute authority may appear in his words. For since our
faith can rest on no other foundation than his eternal veracity, it
becomes, above all things, necessary for us to be informed that what is
proposed to us, has proceeded from his sacred mouth. Therefore, the
pronoun I, is to be read separately as a preface to the rest; in order
that Abram might have a composed mind, and might engage, without
hesitation, in the proposed covenant. Whence a useful doctrine is
deduced, that faith necessarily has reference to God: because, although
all angels and men should speak to us, never would their authority
appear sufficiently great to confirm our minds. And it cannot but be,
that we should at times waver, until that voice sounds from heaven, ‘I
am.’ Whence also it appears what kind of religion is that of the Papacy:
where, instead of the word of God, the fictions of men are alone the
subject of boast. And they are justly exposed to continual fluctuation,
who, depending upon the word of men, act unjustly towards God, by
ascribing to them more than is right. But let us have no other
foundation of our faith than this word ‘I’, not as spoken indifferently
by any mouth whatever, but by the mouth of God alone. If, however,
myriads of men set themselves in opposition, and proudly exclaim, ‘We,
we,’ let this single word of God suffice to dissipate the empty sound of
multitudes.

<span id="xxiii.i-p73"></span>*And thou shalt be a father of many
nations*  <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) It is asked what is
this multitude of nations? It obviously appears, that different nations
had their origin from the holy Patriarch: for Ishmael grew to a great
people: the Idumeans, from another branch were spread far and wide;
large families also sprung from other sons, whom he had by Keturah. But
Moses looked still further, because, indeed, the Gentiles were to be, by
faith, inserted into the stock of Abram, although not descended from him
according to the flesh: of which fact Paul is to us a faithful
interpreter and witness. For he does not gather together the Arabians,
Idumeans, and others, for the purpose of making Abram the father of many
nations; but he so extends the name of father, as to make it applicable
to the whole world, in order that the Gentiles, in other respects
strangers, and separated from each other, might, from all sides combine
in one family of Abram. I grant, indeed, that, for a time, the twelve
tribes were as so many nations; but only in order to form a prelude to
that immense multitude, which, at length, is collected together as the
one family of Abram. And that Moses speaks of those sons, who, being
regenerate by faith, acquire the name, and pass over into the stock of
Abram, is sufficiently proved by this one consideration. For the carnal
race of Abram could not be divided into different nations, without
causing those who had departed from the unity, to be immediately
accounted strangers. Thus the Church rejected the Ishmaelites, the
Idumeans, and others, and regarded them as foreigners. Abram therefore
was not called the father of many nations, because his seed was to be
divided into many nations; but rather, because many nations were to be
gathered together unto him. A change also of his name is added as a
token. For he begins to be called Abraham, in order that the name itself
may teach him, that he should not be the father of one family only; but
that a progeny should rise up to him from an immense multitude, beyond
the common course of nature. For this reason, the Lord so often renews
this promise; because the very repetition of it shows that no common
blessing was promised.

<span id="xxiii.i-p75"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p76"></span>**7.** *And thy seed after thee* There is
no doubt that the Lord distinguishes the race of Abraham from the rest
of the world. We must now see what people he intends. Now they are
deceived who think that his elect alone are here pointed out; and that
all the faithful are indiscriminately comprehended, from whatever
people, according to the flesh, they are descended. For, on the
contrary, the Scripture declares that the race of Abraham, by lineal
descent, had been peculiarly accepted by God. And it is the evident
doctrine of Paul concerning the natural descendants of Abraham, that
they are holy branches which have proceeded from a holy root, (<span
id="xxiii.i-p76.2"></span>[Ro
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span
id="xxiii.i-p76.2"></span>.) And lest any one should restrict this
assertion to the shadows of the law, or should evade it by allegory, he
elsewhere expressly declares, that Christ came to be a minister of the
circumcision, (<span id="xxiii.i-p76.3"></span>[Ro
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)<span id="xxiii.i-p76.3"></span>.)
Wherefore, nothing is more certain, than that God made his covenant with
those sons of Abraham who were naturally to be born of him. If any one
object, that this opinion by no means agrees with the former, in which
we said that they are reckoned the children of Abraham, who being by
faith ingrafted into his body, form one family; the difference is easily
reconciled, by laying down certain distinct degrees of adoption, which
may be collected from various passages of Scripture. In the beginning,
antecedently to this covenant, the condition of the whole world was one
and the same. But as soon as it was said, ‘I will be a God to thee and
to thy seed after thee,’ the Church was separated from other nations;
just as in the creation of the world, the light emerged out of the
darkness. Then the people of Israel was received, as the flock of God,
into their own fold: the other nations wandered, like wild beasts,
through mountains, woods, and deserts. Since this dignity, in which the
sons of Abraham excelled other nations, depended on the word of God
alone, the gratuitous adoption of God belongs to them all in common. For
if Paul deprives the Gentiles of God and of eternal life, on the ground
of their being aliens from the covenant, (<span
id="xxiii.i-p76.4"></span>[Eph
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018)<span id="xxiii.i-p76.4"></span>,)
it follows that all Israelites were of the household of the Church, and
sons of God, and heirs of eternal life. And although it was by the grace
of God, and not by nature, that they excelled the Gentiles; and although
the inheritance at the kingdom of God came to them by promise, and not
by carnal descent; yet they are sometimes said to differ by nature from
the rest of the world. In the Epistle to the Galatians, (<span
id="xxiii.i-p76.5"></span>[Ga
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)<span id="xxiii.i-p76.5"></span>),
and elsewhere, Paul calls them saints ‘by nature,’ because God was
willing that his grace should descend,  <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) by a continual succession, to the
whole seed. In this sense, they who were unbelievers among the Jews, are
yet called the children of the celestial kingdom by Christ. (<span
id="xxiii.i-p77.4"></span>[Mt
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)<span id="xxiii.i-p77.4"></span>.)
Nor does what St Paul says contradict this; namely, that not all who are
from Abraham are to be esteemed legitimate children; because they are
not the children of the promise, but only of the flesh. (<span
id="xxiii.i-p77.5"></span>[Ro 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)<span
id="xxiii.i-p77.5"></span>.) For there, the promise is not taken
generally for that outward word, by which God conferred his favor as
well upon the reprobate as upon the elect; but must be restricted to
that efficacious calling, which he inwardly seals by his Spirit. And
that this is the case, is proved without difficulty; for the promise by
which the Lord had adopted them all as children, was common to all: and
in that promise, it cannot be denied, that eternal salvation was offered
to all. What, therefore, can be the meaning of Paul, when he denies that
certain persons have any right to be reckoned among children, except
that he is no longer reasoning about the externally offered grace, but
about that of which only the elect effectually partake? Here, then, a
twofold class of sons presents itself to us, in the Church; for since
the whole body of the people is gathered together into the fold of God,
by one and the same voice, all without exception, are in this respects
accounted children; the name of the Church is applicable in common to
them all: but in the innermost sanctuary of God, none others are
reckoned the sons of God, than they in whom the promise is ratified by
faith. And although this difference flows from the fountain of
gratuitous election, whence also faith itself springs; yet, since the
counsel of God is in itself hidden from us, we therefore distinguish the
true from the spurious children, by the respective marks of faith and of
unbelief. This method and dispensation continued even to the
promulgation of the gospel; but then the middle wall was broken down,
(<span id="xxiii.i-p77.6"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="xxiii.i-p77.6"></span>,)
and God made the Gentiles equal to the natural descendants of Abraham.
That was the renovation of the world, by which they, who had before been
strangers, began to be called sons. Yet whenever a comparison is made
between Jews and Gentiles, the inheritance of life is assigned to the
former, as lawfully belonging to them; but to the latter, it is said to
be adventitious. Meanwhile, the oracle was fulfilled in which God
promises that Abraham should be the father of many nations. For whereas
previously, the natural sons of Abraham were succeeded by their
descendants in continual succession, and the benediction, which began
with him, flowed down to his children; the coming of Christ, by
inverting the original order, introduced into his family those who
before were separated from his seed: at length the Jews were cast out,
(except that a hidden seed of the election remained among them,) in
order that the rest might be saved. It was necessary that these things
concerning the seed of Abraham should once be stated, that they may open
to us an easy introduction to what follows.

<span id="xxiii.i-p78"></span>*In their generations* This succession of
generations clearly proves that the posterity of Abraham were taken into
the Church, in such a manner that sons might be born to them, who should
be heirs of the same grace. In this way the covenant is called
perpetual, as lasting until the renovation of the world; which took
place at the advent of Christ. I grant, indeed, that the covenant was
without end, and may with propriety be called eternal, as far as the
whole Church is concerned; it must, however always remain as a settled
point, that the regular succession of ages was partly broken, and partly
changed, by the coming of Christ, because the middle wall being broken
down, and the sons by nature being, at length, disinherited, Abraham
began to have a race associated with himself from all regions of the
world.

<span id="xxiii.i-p79"></span>*To be a God unto thee* In this single
word we are plainly taught that this was a spiritual covenant, not
confirmed in reference to the present life only; but one from which
Abraham might conceive the hope of eternal salvations so that being
raised even to heaven, he might lay hold of solid and perfect bliss. For
those whom God adopts to himself, from among a people — seeing that he
makes them partakers of his righteousness and of all good things — he
also constitutes heirs of celestial life. Let us then mark this as the
principal part of the covenant, that He who is the God of the living,
not of the dead, promises to be a God to the children of Abraham. It
follows afterwards, in the way of augmentation of the grant, that he
promised to give them the land. I confess, indeed, that something
greater and more excellent than itself was shadowed forth by the land of
Canaan; yet this is not at variance with the statement, that the promise
now made was an accession to that primary one, ‘I will be thy God.’ Now,
although God again affirms, as before, that He will give the land to
Abraham himself, we nevertheless know, that Abraham never possessed
dominion over it; but the holy man was contented with his title to it
alone, although the possession of it was not granted him; and,
therefore, he calmly passed from his earthly pilgrimage into heaven. God
again repeats that He will be a God to the posterity of Abraham, in
order that they may not settle upon earth, but may regard themselves as
trained for higher things.

<span id="xxiii.i-p80"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p81"></span>**9.** *Thou shalt keep my covenant* As
formerly, covenants were not only committed to public records, but were
also wont to be engraven in brass, or sculptured on stones, in order
that the memory of them might be more fully recorded, and more highly
celebrated; so in the present instance, God inscribes his covenant in
the flesh of Abraham. For circumcision was as a solemn memorial of that
adoption, by which the family of Abraham had been elected to be the
peculiar people of God. The pious had previously possessed other
ceremonies which confirmed to them the certainty of the grace of God;
but now the Lord attests the new covenant with a new kind of symbol. But
the reason why He suffered the human race to be without this testimony
of his grace, during so many ages, is concealed from us; except that we
see it was instituted at the time when he chose a certain nation to
himself; which thing itself depends on his secret counsel. Moreover,
although it would, perhaps, be more suitable for the purpose of
instruction, were we to give a summary of those things which are to be
said concerning circumcision; I will yet follow the order of the text,
which I think more appropriate to the office of an interpreter. In the
first place; since circumcision is called by Moses, the covenant of God,
we thence infer that the promise of grace was included in it. For had it
been only a mark or token of external profession among men, the name of
covenant would be by no means suitable, for a covenant is not otherwise
confirmed, than as faith answers to it. And it is common to all
sacraments to have the word of God annexed to them, by which he
testifies that he is propitious to us, and calls us to the hope of
salvation; yea, a sacrament is nothing else than a visible word, or
sculpture and image of that grace of God, which the word more fully
illustrates. If, then, there is a mutual relation between the word and
faith; it follows, that the proposed end and use of sacraments is to
help, promote and confirm faith. But they who deny that sacraments are
supports to faith, or that they aid the word in strengthening faith,
must of necessity expunge the name of covenant; because, either God
there offers himself as a Promiser, in mockery and falsely, or else,
faith there finds that on which it may support itself, and from which it
may confirm its own assurance. And although we must maintain the
distinction between the word and the sign; yet let us know, that as soon
as the sign itself meets our eyes, the word ought to sound in our ears.
Therefore, while, in this place, Abraham is commanded to keep the
covenant, God does not enjoin upon him the bare use of the ceremony, but
chiefly designs that he should regard the end; and certainly, since the
promise is the very soul of the sign, whenever it is torn away from the
sign, nothing remains but a lifeless and vain phantom. This is the
reason why we say, that sacraments are abolished by the Papists;
because, the voice of God having become extinct, nothing remains with
them, except the residuum of mute figures. Truly frivolous is their
boasts that their magical exorcisms stand in the place of the word. For
nothing can be called a covenants but what is perceived by us to be
clearly revealed, so that it may edify our faith; these actors, who by
gesture alone, or by a confused murmuring, play as on pipes, have
nothing like this.

<span id="xxiii.i-p82"></span>We now consider how the covenant is
rightly kept; namely, when the word precedes, and we embrace the sign as
a testimony and pledge of grace; for as God binds himself to keep the
promise given to us; so the consent of faith and of obedience is
demanded from us. What follows further on this subject is worthy of
notice.

<span id="xxiii.i-p83"></span>*Between me and you*  <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) Whereby we are taught that a sacrament
has not respect only to the external confession, but is an intervening
pledge between God and the conscience of man. And, therefore, whosoever
is not directed to God through the sacraments, profanes their use. But
by the figure metonymy, the name of covenant is transferred to
circumcision which is so conjoined with the word, that it could not be
separated from it.

<span id="xxiii.i-p85"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p86"></span>**10.** *Every man-child among you shall
be circumcised* Although God promised alike to males and females, what
he afterwards sanctioned by circumcision, he nevertheless consecrated,
in one sex, the whole people to himself. For whereas, by this symbol,
the promise which was given, indiscriminately, to males and females, is
confirmed, and it is certain that females as well as males had need of
confirmation, it is hence evident, that the symbol was ordained for the
sake of both sexes. Nor is it of any force in opposition to this
reasoning to say that each individual is commanded to communicate in the
sacraments, if he would derive any benefit from them, on the ground that
no profit is received by those who neglect their use. For the covenant
of God was graven on the bodies of the males, with this condition
annexed, that the females also should as their associates be partakers
of the same sign.

<span id="xxiii.i-p87"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p88"></span>**11.** *Ye shall circumcise the flesh of
your foreskin* Very strange and unaccountable would this command at
first sight appear. The subject treated of, is the sacred covenant, in
which righteousness, salvation, and happiness are promised; whereby the
seed of Abraham is distinguished from other nations, in order that it
may be holy and blessed; and who can say that it is reasonable for the
sign of so great a mystery to consist in circumcision?  <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) But as it was necessary for Abraham to
become a fool, in order to prove himself obedient to God; so whosoever
is wise, will both soberly and reverently receive what God seems to us
foolishly to have commanded. And yet we must inquire, whether any
analogy is here apparent between the visible sign, and the thing
signified. For the signs which God has appointed to assist our
infirmity, should be accommodated to the measure of our capacity, or
they would be unprofitable. Moreover, it is probable that the Lord
commanded circumcision for two reasons; first, to show that whatever is
born of man is polluted; then, that salvation would proceed from the
blessed seed of Abraham. In the first place, therefore, whatever men
have peculiar to themselves, by generation, God has condemned, in the
appointment of circumcision; in order that the corruption of nature
being manifest, he might induce them to mortify their flesh. Whence also
it follows, that circumcision was a sign of repentance. Yet, at the same
time, the blessing which was promised in the seed of Abraham, was
thereby marked and attested. If then it seem absurd to any one, that the
token of a favor so excellent and so singular, was given in that part of
the body, let him become ashamed of own salvation, which flowed from the
loins of Abraham; but it has pleased God thus to confound the wisdom of
the world, that he may the more completely abase the pride of the flesh.
And hence we now learn, in the second place, how the reconciliation
between God and men, which was exhibited in Christ, was testified by
this sign. For which reason it is styled by Paul a seal of the
righteousness of faith. (<span id="xxiii.i-p89.2"></span>[Ro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span id="xxiii.i-p89.2"></span>.)
Let it suffice thus briefly to have touched upon the analogy between the
thing signified and the sign.

<span id="xxiii.i-p90"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p91"></span>**12.** *And he that is eight days old
shall be circumcised*  <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) God now
prescribes the eighth day for circumcision; whence it appears that this
was a part of that discipline, under which he intended to keep his
ancient people; for greater liberty is at this day, permitted in the
administration of baptism. Some, however maintain that we must not
contend earnestly about the number of days, because the Lord spared the
children on account of their tenderness, since it was not without danger
to inflict a wound upon those who were newly born. For although he might
have provided that circumcision should produce no harm or injury; yet
there would be no absurdity in saying, that He has respect to their
tender age, in order to prove to the Jews his paternal love towards
their children. To others this seems to be too frigid; therefore they
seek a spiritual mystery in the number of days. They think that the
present life is allegorically signified by the seven days; that God
commanded infants to be circumcised on the eighth day, in order to show
that though we must give attention to the mortification of the flesh
during the whole course of our life, it will not be completed till the
end. Augustine also thinks that it had reference to the resurrection of
Christ; whereby external circumcision was abolished and the truth of the
figure was set forth. It is probable and consonant with reason, that the
number seven designated the course of the present life. Therefore the
eighth day might seem to be fixed upon by the Lord, to prefigure the
beginning of a new life. But because such a reason is never given in
Scripture, I dare affirm nothing. Wherefore, let it suffice to maintain
what is certain and solid; namely, that God, in this symbol, has so
represented the destruction of the old man, as yet to show that he
restores men to life.

<span id="xxiii.i-p93"></span>*He that is born in the house, or bought
with money* When God commands Abraham to circumcise all whom he has
under his power, his special love towards holy Abraham is conspicuous in
this, that He embraces his whole family in His grace. We know that
formerly slaves were scarcely reckoned among the number of men. But God,
out of regard to his servant Abraham, adopts them as his own sons: to
this mercy nothing whatever can be added. The pride also of the flesh is
cast down; because God, without respect of persons, gathers together
both freemen and slaves. But in the person of Abraham, he has prescribed
it as a law to all his servants, that they should endeavor to bring all
who are subject to them, into the same society of faith with themselves.
For every family of the pious ought to be a church. Therefore, it we
desire to prove our piety, we must labor that every one of us may have
his house ordered in obedience to God. And Abraham is not only commanded
to dedicate and to offer unto God those born in his house, but
whomsoever he might afterwards obtain.

<span id="xxiii.i-p94"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p95"></span>**13.** *For an everlasting covenant* The
meaning of this expression may be twofold: either that God promises that
his grace, of which circumcision was a sign and pledge, should be
eternal; or that he intended the sign itself to be perpetually observed.
Indeed, I have no doubt that this perpetuity ought to be referred to the
visible sign. But they who hence infer, that the use of it ought to
flourish among the Jews even of the present time, are (in my opinion)
deceived. For they swerve from that axiom which we ought to regard as
fixed; that since Christ is the end of the law, the perpetuity which is
ascribed to the ceremonies of the law, was terminated as soon as Christ
appeared. The temple was the perpetual habitation of God, according to
that declaration,

<span id="xxiii.i-p96"></span>“This is my rest forever, here will I
dwell,” (<span id="xxiii.i-p96.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span
id="xxiii.i-p96.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxiii.i-p97"></span>The Sabbath indicated not a temporal but a
perpetual sanctification of the people. Nevertheless, it is not to be
denied, that Christ brought them both to an end. In the same way must we
also think of circumcision. If the Jews object, that in this manner, the
law was violated by Christ; the answer is easy; that the external use of
the law was so abrogated, as to establish its truth. For, at length, by
the coming of Christ, circumcision was substantially confirmed, so that
it should endure forever, and that the covenant which God had before
made, should be ratified. Moreover, lest the changing of the visible
sign should perplex any one, let that renovation of the world, of which
I have spoken, be kept in mind; which renovation — notwithstanding some
interposed variety — has perpetuated those things which would otherwise
have been fading. Therefore, although the use of circumcision has
ceased; yet it does not cerise to be an everlasting, or perpetual
covenant, if only Christ be regarded as the Mediator; who, though the
sign be changed, has confirmed the truth. And that, by the coming of
Christ, external circumcision ceased, is plain from the words of Paul;
who not only teaches that we are circumcised by the death of Christy
spiritually, and not through the carnal sign: but who expressly
substitutes baptism for circumcision; (<span
id="xxiii.i-p97.1"></span>[Col
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011)<span id="xxiii.i-p97.1"></span>;)
and truly baptism could not succeed circumcision, without taking it
away. Therefore in the next chapter he denies that there is any
difference between circumcision and uncircumcision; because, at that
time, the thing was indifferent, and of no importance. Whence we refute
the error of those, who think that circumcision is still in force among
the Jews, as if it were a peculiar symbol of the nation, which never
ought to be abrogated. I acknowledge, indeed, that it was permitted to
them for a time, until the liberty obtained by Christ should be better
known; but though permitted, it by no means retained its original force.
For it would be absurd to be initiated into the Church by two different
signs; of which the one should testify and affirm that Christ was come,
and the other should shadow him forth as absent.

<span id="xxiii.i-p98"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p99"></span>**14.** *And the uncircumcised man-child*
In order that circumcision might be the more attended to, God denounces
a severe punishment on any one who should neglect it. And as this shows
God’s great care for the salvation of men; so, on the other hand, it
rebukes their negligence. For since God thus benignantly offers a pledge
of his love, and of eternal life, for what purpose does he add
threatening but to rouse the sluggishness of those whose duty it is to
run with diligence? Therefore, this denunciation of punishment virtually
charges men with foul ingratitude, because they either reject or despise
the grace of God. The passage however teaches, that such contempt shall
not pass unpunished. And since God threatens punishment only to
despisers, we infer that the uncircumcision of children would do them no
harm, if they died before the eighth day. For the bare promise of God
was effectual to their salvation. He did not so attest this salvation by
external signs, as to restrict his own effectual working to those signs.
Moses, indeed, sets aside all controversy on this subject, by adducing
as a reason, that they would make void the covenant of God: for we know,
that the covenant was not violated, when the power of keeping it was
taken away. Let us then consider, that the salvation of the race of
Abraham was included in that expression, ‘I will be a God to thy seed.’
And although circumcision was added as a confirmation, it nevertheless
did not deprive the word of its force and efficacy. But because it is
not in the power of man to sever what God has joined together; no one
could despise or neglect the sign, without both rejecting the word
itself; and depriving himself of the benefit therein offered. And
therefore the Lord punished bare neglect with such severity. But if any
infants were deprived by death of the tokens of salvation, he spared
them, because they had done nothing derogatory to the covenant of God.
The same reasoning is at this day in force respecting baptism. Whoever,
having neglected baptism, feigns himself to be contented with the bare
promise, tramples, as much as in him lies, upon the blood of Christ, or
at least does not suffer it to flow for the washing of his own children.
Therefore, just punishment follows the contempt of the sign, in the
privation of grace; because, by an impious severance of the sign and the
word, or rather by a laceration of them, the covenant of God is
violated. To consign to destruction those infants, whom a sudden death
has not allowed to be presented for baptism, before any neglect of
parents could intervene, is a cruelty originating in superstition. But
that the promise belongs to such children, is not in the least doubtful.
For what can be more absurd than that the symbol, which is added for the
sake of confirming the promise, should really enervate its force?
Wherefore, the common opinion, by which baptism is supposed to be
necessary to salvation, ought to be so moderated, that it should not
bind the grace of Gods or the power of the Spirit, to external symbols,
and bring against God a charge of falsehood.

<span id="xxiii.i-p100"></span>*He hath broken my covenant* For the
covenant of God is ratified, when by faith we embrace what he promises.
Should any one object, that infants were guiltless of this fault,
because they hitherto were destitute of reason: I answer, we ought not
to press this divine declaration too closely, as if God held the infants
as chargeable with a fault of their own: but we must observe the
antithesis, that as God adopts the infant son in the person of his
father, so when the father repudiates such a benefit, the infant is said
to cut himself off from the Church. For the meaning of the expression is
this, ‘He shall be blotted out from the people whom God had chosen to
himself’. The explanation of some, that they who remained in
uncircumcision would not be Jews, and would have no place in the census
of that people, is too frigid. We must go farther, and say, that God,
indeed, will not acknowledge those as among his people, who will not
bear the mark and token of adoption.

<span id="xxiii.i-p101"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p102"></span>**15.** *As for Sarai thy wife* God now
promises to Abraham a legitimate seed by Sarai. She had been (as I have
said) too precipitate, when she substituted, without any command from
God, her handmaid in her own place: Abraham also bad been too pliant in
following his, wife, who foolishly and rashly wished to anticipate the
design of God; nevertheless, their united fault did not prevent God
frown making it known to them that he was about to give them that seed,
from the expectation of which, they had, in a manner, cut themselves
off. Whence the gratuitous kindness of God shines the more clearly,
because, although men impede the course of it by obstacles of their own,
it nevertheless comes to them. Moreover, God changes the name of Sarai,
in order that he may extend her preeminence far and wide, which in her
former name had been more restricted. For the letter <span
id="xxiii.i-p102.1"></span>י ( *yod* ) has the force among the Hebrews
of the possessive pronoun: this being now taken away, God designs that
Sarah should every where, and without exception, be celebrated as a
sovereign and princess.  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) And
this is expressed in the context, when God promises that he will give
her a son, from whom at length nations and kings should be born. And
although at first sight this benediction appears most ample, it is still
far richer than it seems to be, in the words here used, as we shall see
in a little time.

<span id="xxiii.i-p104"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p105"></span>**17.** *And Abraham fell upon his face*
This was in token, not only of his reverence, but also of his faith. For
Abraham not only adores God, but in giving him thanks, testifies that he
receives and embraces what was promised concerning a son. Hence also we
infer that he laughed, not because he either despised, or regarded as
fabulous, or rejected, the promise of God; but, as is commonly wont to
happen in things which are least expected, partly exulting with joy, and
partly being carried beyond himself in admiration, he breaks forth into
laughter. For I do not assent to the opinion of those who suppose, that
this laughter flowed solely from joy; but I rather think that Abraham
was as one astonished; which his next interrogation also confirms, shall
a child be born to him that an hundred years old? For although he does
not reject as vain what had been said by the angel, he yet shows that he
was no otherwise affected, than as if he had received some incredible
tidings. The novelty of the thing so strikes him, that for a short time
he is confounded; yet he humbles himself before God, and with confused
mind, prostrating himself on the earth, he, by faith, adores the power
of God. For, that this was not the language of one who doubts, Paul, in
his Epistle to the Romans, is a witness, (<span
id="xxiii.i-p105.1"></span>[Ro
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019)<span
id="xxiii.i-p105.1"></span>,) who denies that Abraham considered his
body now dead, or the barren womb of Sarah, or that he staggered through
unbelief; but declares that he believed in hope against hope. And that
which Moses relates, that Abraham said in his heart, I do not so explain
as if he had distinctly conceived this in his mind: but as many things
steal upon us contrary to our purpose, the perplexing thought suddenly
rushed upon his mind, ‘What a strange thing is this, that a son should
be born to one a hundred years old!’ This, however, seems to some, to be
a kind of contest between carnal reason and faith; for although Abraham,
reverently prostrating himself before God, submits his own mind to the
divine word, he is still disturbed by the novelty of the affair. I
answer, that this admiration, which did not obstruct the course of God’s
power, was not contrary to faith; nay, the strength of faith shone the
more brightly, in having surmounted an obstacle so arduous. And
therefore he is not reprehended for laughing, as Sarah is in the next
chapter <span id="xxiii.i-p105.2"></span>[Ge
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)<span id="xxiii.i-p105.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p106"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p107"></span>**18.** *And Abraham said unto God*
Abraham does not now wonder silently within himself, but pours forth his
wish and prayer. His language, however, is that of a mind still
perturbed and vacillating, O that (or I wish that) Ishmael might live!
For, as if he did not dare to hope for all that God promises, he fixes
his mind upon the son already born; not because he would reject the
promise of fresh offspring, but because he was contented with the favor
already received, provided the liberality of God should not extend
further. He does not, then, reject what the Lord offers; but while he is
prepared to embrace it, the expression, *O that Ishmael!* yet flows from
him through the weakness of his flesh. Some think that Abraham spoke
thus, because he was afraid for his firstborn. But there is no reason
why we should suppose that Abraham was smitten with any such fear, as
that God, in giving him another son, would take away the former, or as
if the latter favor should absorb that which had preceded. The answer of
God, which follows shortly after, refutes this interpretation. What I
have said is more certain; namely, that Abraham prayed that the grace of
God, in which he acquiesced, might be ratified and confirmed to him.
Moreover, without reflection, he breaks forth into this wish, when, for
very joy, he could scarcely believe what he had heard from the mouth of
God. ‘To live before Jehovah’ is as much as, to be preserved in safety
under his protection, or to be blessed by Him. Abraham therefore desires
of the Lord, that he will preserve the life which he has given to
Ishmael.

<span id="xxiii.i-p108"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p109"></span>**19.** *Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a
son indeed* Some take the adverb <span id="xxiii.i-p109.1"></span>לבא (
*abal* ,) to mean ‘Truly.’ Others, however, more rightly suppose it to
be used for increasing the force of the expression. For God rouses the
slumbering mind of his servant; as if he would say, ‘The sight of one
favor prevents thee from raising thyself higher; and thus it happens
that thou dost confine thy thoughts within too narrow limits. Now,
therefore, enlarge thy mind, to receive also what I promise concerning
Sarah. For the door of hope ought to be sufficiently open to admit the
word in its full magnitude.’

<span id="xxiii.i-p110"></span>*And I will establish my covenant with
him* He confines the spiritual covenant to one family, in order that
Abraham may hence learn to hope for the blessing before promised; for
since he had framed for himself a false hope, not founded on the word of
God, it was necessary that this false hope should first be dislodged
from his heart, in order that he might now the more fully rely upon the
heavenly oracles, and might fix the anchor of his faith, which before
had wavered in a fallacious imagination, on the firm truth of God. He
calls the covenant everlasting, in the sense which we have previously
explained. He then declares that it shall not be bound to one person
only, but shall be common to his whole race, that it may, by continual
succession, descend to his posterity. Yet it may seem absurd, that God
should command Ishmael, whom he deprives of his grace, to be
circumcised. I answer; although the Lord constitutes Isaac the firstborn
and the head, from whom he intends the covenant of salvation to flow, he
still does not entirely exclude Ishmael, but rather, in adopting the
whole family of Abraham, joins Ishmael to his brother Isaac as an
inferior member, until Ishmael cut himself off from his father’s house,
and his brother’s society. Therefore his circumcision was not useless,
until he apostatized from the covenant: for although it was not
deposited with him, he might, nevertheless, participate in it, with his
brother Isaac. In short, the Lord intends nothing else, by these words,
than that Isaac should be the legitimate heir of the promised
benediction.

<span id="xxiii.i-p111"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p112"></span>**20.** *And as for Ishmael.* He here
more clearly discriminates between the two sons of Abraham. For in
promising to the one wealth, dignity, and other things pertaining to the
present life, he proves him to be a son according to the flesh. But he
makes a special covenant with Isaac, which rises above the world and
this frail life: not for the sake of cutting Ishmael off from the hope
of eternal life, but in order to teach him that salvation is to be
sought from the race of Isaac, where it really dwells. We infers
however, from this passage, that the holy fathers were by no means kept
down to earth, by the promises of God, but rather were borne upwards to
heaven. For God liberally and profusely promises to Ishmael whatever is
desirable with respect to this earthly life: and yet He accounts as
nothing all the gifts He confers on him, in comparison with the covenant
which was to be established in Isaac. It therefore follow, that neither
wealth, nor power, nor any other temporal gift, is promised to the sons
of the Spirit, but an eternal blessing, which is possessed only by hope,
in this world. Therefore, however we may now abound in delights, and in
all good things, our happiness is still transient, unless by faith we
penetrate into the celestial kingdom of God, where a greater and higher
blessing is laid up for us.

<span id="xxiii.i-p113"></span>It is however asked, whether Abraham had
respect only to this earthly life when he prayed for his son? For this
the Lord seems to intimate, when he declares that he had granted what
Abraham asked, and yet only mentions the things we have recorded. But it
was not God’s design to fulfill the whole wish of Abraham on this point;
only he makes it plain that he would have some respect to Ishmael, for
whom Abraham had entreated; so as to show that the fathers prayer had
not been in vain. For he meant to testify that he embraced Abraham with
such love, that, for his sake, he had respect to his whole race, and
dignified it with peculiar benefits.

<span id="xxiii.i-p114"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p115"></span>**22.** *God went up from Abraham* This
expression contains a profitable doctrine, namely, that Abraham
certainly knew this vision to be from God; for the ascent here spoken
implies as much. And it is necessary for the pious to be fully assured
that what they hear proceeds from God, in order that they may not be
carried hither and thither but may depend alone upon heaven. And whereas
God now, when he has spoken to us, does not openly ascend to heaven
before our eyes; this ought to diminish nothing from the certainty of
our faith; because a full manifestation of Him has been made in Christ,
with which it is right that we should be satisfied. Besides, although
God does not daily ascend upwards in a visible form, yet, in this his
majesty is not less resplendent, that he raises us upwards by
transforming us into his own image. Further, he gives sufficient
authority to his word, when he seals it upon our hearts by his spirit.

<span id="xxiii.i-p116"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p117"></span>**23.** *And Abraham took Ishmael* Moses
now commends the obedience of Abraham because he circumcised the whole
of his family as he had been commanded. For he must, of necessity, have
been entirely devoted to God, since he did not hesitate to inflict upon
himself a wound attended with acute pain, and not without danger of
life. To this may be added the circumstance of the time; namely, that he
does not defer the work to another day, but immediately obeys the Divine
mandate. There is, however, no doubt, that he had to contend with
various perplexing thoughts. Not to mention innumerable others, this
might come into his mind, ‘As for me, who have been so long harassed
with many adverse affairs, and tossed about in different exiles, and yet
have never swerved from the word of God; if, by this symbol, he would
consecrate me to himself as a servant, why has he put me off to extreme
old age? What does this mean, that I cannot be saved unless I, with one
foot almost in the grave, thus mutilate myself?’ But this was an
illustrious proof of obedience, that having overcome all difficulties,
he quickly, and without delay, followed where God called him. And he
gave, in so doing, an example of faith not less excellent; because,
unless he had certainly embraced the promises of God, he would by no
means have become so prompt to obey. Hence, therefore, arose his great
alacrity, because he set the word of God in opposition to the various
temptations which might disturb his mind, and draw him in contrary
directions.

<span id="xxiii.i-p118"></span>Two things also here are worthy of
observation. First, that Abraham was not deterred by the difficulty of
the work from yielding to God the duty which he owed him. We know that
he had a great multitude in his house, nearly equal to a people. It was
scarcely credible that so many men would have suffered themselves to be
wounded apparently to be made a laughingstock. Therefore it was justly
to be feared, that he would excite a great tumult in his tranquil
family; yea, that, by a common impulses the major part of his servants
would rise up against him; nevertheless, relying upon the word of God,
he strenuously attempts what seemed impossible.

<span id="xxiii.i-p119"></span>We next see, how faithfully his family
was instructed; because not only his home-born slaves, but foreigners,
and men bought with money, meekly receive the wounds which was both
troublesome, and the occasion of shame to carnal sense. It appears then
that Abraham diligently took care to have them prepared for due
obedience. And since he held them under holy discipline, he received the
reward of his own diligences in finding them so tractable in a most
arduous affair. So, at this day, God seems to enjoin a thing impossible
to be done, when he requires his gospel to be preached every where in
the whole world, for the purpose of restoring it from death to life. For
we see how great is the obstinacy of nearly all men, and what numerous
and powerful methods of resistance Satan employs; so that, in short, all
the ways of access to these principles are obstructed. Yet it behoves
individuals to do their duty, and not to yield to impediments; and,
finally our endeavors and our labors shall by no means fail of that
success which is not yet apparent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc01022.htm#fr_399) <span
id="xxiii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p61"></span> <span id="xxiii.i-p61.1"></span>ידש לא, (
*El Shaddai* ,) a title of Jehovah, apparently of plural form,
*Gesenius* calls it the plural of majesty. It seems chiefly intended to
convey the notion of Omnipotence. Some render the words, ‘God all
sufficient; ‘but the original root of <span
id="xxiii.i-p61.2"></span>ידש conveys the notion, rather of
overwhelming, than of sustaining power. The word is therefore better
rendered, as in our version, Almighty. It corresponds with the Greek
<span id="xxiii.i-p61.3"></span>παντοκράτωρ, and with the Latin <span
id="xxiii.i-p61.4"></span>Omnipotens. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc01022.htm#fr_400) <span
id="xxiii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p63"></span> “<span id="xxiii.i-p63.1"></span>Ab aliis
omnibus.” “<span id="xxiii.i-p63.2"></span>De tous autres moyens.” “From
all other means.” — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc01022.htm#fr_401) <span
id="xxiii.i-p63.3"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p64"></span> “ Yield yourselves unto God, as those
that are alive from the dead and your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God.” <span id="xxiii.i-p64.1"></span>[Ro
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span id="xxiii.i-p64.1"></span>.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc01022.htm#fr_402) <span
id="xxiii.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p69"></span> That is, both the promise of grace, and
the command to yield obedience. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc01022.htm#fr_403) <span
id="xxiii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p72"></span> “<span id="xxiii.i-p72.1"></span>Ego,
ecce pactum meum tecum.” “I, behold, my covenant is with thee.”

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc01022.htm#fr_404) <span
id="xxiii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p74"></span> “<span
id="xxiii.i-p74.1"></span>Multitudinis gentium.” “Of a multitude of
nations.”

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc01022.htm#fr_405) <span
id="xxiii.i-p76.6"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p77"></span> “<span id="xxiii.i-p77.1"></span>Quia
continua serie prosequi nolebat Deus, gratiem suam ergo totum semen.” So
it is, both in the Amsterdam edition, and in that of Hengstenberg; but
the word <span id="xxiii.i-p77.2"></span>nolebat (was unwilling) seems
so contrary to the writer’s line of argument, that the French version is
followed in the translation, which is, “<span
id="xxiii.i-p77.3"></span>Pource que Dieu vouloit poursuyure,” etc. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc01022.htm#fr_406) <span
id="xxiii.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p84"></span> <span id="xxiii.i-p84.1"></span>’Inter me
et to’ But in the chapter itself it stands, <span
id="xxiii.i-p84.2"></span>’Inter me et vos;’ as in the English version.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc01022.htm#fr_407) <span
id="xxiii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p89"></span> “<span id="xxiii.i-p89.1"></span>Tanti
mysterii insigne statui in pudendis partibus.”

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc01022.htm#fr_408) <span
id="xxiii.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p92"></span> “<span id="xxiii.i-p92.1"></span>Et
filius octo dierum circumcidetur.” — “And a son of eight days shall be
circumcised.”

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc01022.htm#fr_409) <span
id="xxiii.i-p102.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p103"></span> Sarah shall her name be. Heb., <span
id="xxiii.i-p103.1"></span>הרש, *Sarah* . Sarai properly signifies “my
princess,” as if sustaining that relation to a single individual or to a
family. The restriction implied in the possessive “my” is now to be done
away: her limited pre-eminence is to be unspeakably enlarged. Thus,
instead of “my princess,” she is henceforth to bear an appellation
importing “princess of a multitude,” and corresponding with the
magnificent promise made to her, ver. 16. — *Bush, Notes on Genesis*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](cc01023)
