[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01002)  [Next](cc01004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERIE GOOD

<span id="iv-p2"></span>LORDE AMBROSE, EARLE OF WARWICKE,

<span id="iv-p3"></span>BARON LISLE, MAISTER OF HER MAIESTIE’S
ORDINANCE, KNIGHT OF THE

<span id="iv-p4"></span>MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER AND ONE OF HER
HIGHNESSE

<span id="iv-p5"></span>PRIUIE COUNSELL, AND TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
LADIE

<span id="iv-p6"></span>HIS WIFE, ENCREASE OF HONOUR, AND TRUE

<span id="iv-p7"></span>KNOWLEDGE IN CHRIST IESVS.

<span id="iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv-p9"></span>If the Apostle Paule (right honorable) condemne
the negligence of men, because they behold not the euident spectacle of
the glorie of God which is set before their eyes in the workemanship of
the worlde,by which they wickedly suppresse the light of trueth: no
lesse foule and shameful was that ignorance of the original and creation
of mankind which almost in euery age and time so greatly preuailed. The
which ignorance immediately ensued. the building of Babylon by the
forgetting of those things which ought to haue beene dayly and howerly
spoken off. For at what time godlesse men were banishcd from their
natiue soile and dispersed, they therewithall abandoned the pure worship
of God: Insomuch that to what part of’ the earth so euer they came, they
had no care to bring with them that which they had heard of their
forefathers, concerning the creating and repairing of the worlde. And so
it came to passe, that no nation, except only the posteritie of Abraham,
knew by the space of two thousand yeares, either from whence or when
mankind had his originall. As for the labour which Ptolome bestowed in
translating the books of. Moses into the Greeke tongue, it was at that
time more laudable than fruitful: when as the light which he went about
to bring out of darknes, was neuerthelesse through the carelesnesse of
men extinguished. Whereby wee may perceiue, that they which ought to
haue endeuored themselues, to knowe the workemaister of the worlde,
sought rather by their vngod- linesse howe they might be wilfully blinde
and ignorant. In the meane time the liberal Sciences florished, men’s
witts were sharpe and quicke, greate paines euery way was taken: and yet
nothing was spoken of the creation of the worlde. Aristotle, the prince
of philosophers, dreamed of the eternitie of the world. Plato, his
schoolmaister, shooting somewhat more neere vnto the marke, wandered
notwithstanding somewhat from the trueth. But whether they, and all
other nations with them, were wilfully blinde, or whether they were
ignorant through their owne negligence, this booke of Moses deserueth to
be esteemed as a most precious iewell, which certifieth vs not only of
the creation of the worlde, but also howe, after the mortall fall of
man, God adopted a Church to him selfe: which was the true worship of
him, and with what exercises of godlinesse the fathers occupied them
selues: howe pure religion, through the wicked negligence of men, was
for a time decayed, and afterward restored to her former state: when God
made a free couenaat of eternall saluation with a certeine people: Howe,
of one man withered, and almost halfe dead, there sprang seede, which
sodainly grewe into a huge people: and, finally, by what wonderfull
meanes God: aduanced and defended his chosen familie, though it were
poore and destitute of al helpe, and enuironed with thousands of enemies
on euery side. Howe necessarie the knowledge of these thinges is, your
Honours by the vse and experience thereof may deeme. Therefore, the
Argument being so diuine, and accordingly handled by that notable
instrument of God’s Church, Iohn Caluine, (whose workes proclaime his
praise,) and no commentarie vpon the same afore this time englished, I
haue thought good to set forth the same in our vulgar tongue, vnder your
Honour’s protection, that a more general profite being thereby reaped of
my countrie men, it may bee somewhat the farther from obliuion. And
because I knowe what godly delight your noble and vertuous Lady taketh
in reading such bookes, I presume to ioyne her with your Honour herein,
that others of her sex, hearing of her honorable name, may followe her
godly steppes with like zeale in that religious exercise. For what
Christian will not thinke it a Booke worthie the reading, which he seeth
warranted by your names? Therefore partely the godly zeale found out in
you by effect, and partely your Honour’s courteous liking afore time of
my pains this way taken, harteneth me to aduenture the offer of this
poore present, as a token proceeding from a well-wishing minde. Thus
hauing bene too tedious vnto your Honours, I most humbly take my leaue,
beseeching the Lord God to defend you both with his shield, to sustein
you with inuincible fortitude, to gouerne you with his spirit of
prudence, and to powre vpon you all manner of blessings.

<span id="iv-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv-p11"></span>Your Honor’s most humble

<span id="iv-p12"></span>Thomas Tymme.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Author's Epistle Dedicatory](cc01004)
