[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01019)  [Next](cc01021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 15.

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
15:1-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)<span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** After these things the word of the
LORD came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I *am* thy
shield, *and* thy exceeding great reward.

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Post haec fuit verbum Jehovae ad Abram
in visione, dicendo, Ne timeas Abram, ego scutum *ero* tibi, merces tua
multa valde.

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And Abram said, Lord GOD, what wilt
thou give me, seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house *is*
this Eliezer of Damascus?

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit Abram, Dominator Jehova, quid
dabis mihi? Et ego incedo orbus, et filius derelictionis domus meae erit
iste Dammescenus Elihezer.

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And Abram said, Behold, to me thou
hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir.

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et dixit Abram, Ecce, mihi non dedisti
semen: et ecce, filius domus meae haeres meus est.

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>**4.** And, behold, the word of the LORD
*came* unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall
come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.

<span id="xxi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et ecce verbum Jehovae ad eum,
dicendo, Non erit haeres tuus iste, sed qui egredietur de visceribus
tuis, ipse haeres tuus erit.

<span id="xxi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And he brought him forth abroad, and
said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to
number them: and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.

<span id="xxi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et eduxit eum foras, et dixit,
Suspice nunc coelum, et numera stellas, si poteris numerare eas. Et
dixit ei, Sic erit semen tuum.

<span id="xxi.i-p12"></span>**6.** And he believed in the LORD; and he
counted it to him for righteousness.

<span id="xxi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et credidit Jehovae, et reputavit
illud ei ad justitiam.

<span id="xxi.i-p14"></span>**7.** And he said unto him, I *am* the LORD
that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to
inherit it.

<span id="xxi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et dixit ad eum, Ego Jehova qui eduxi
to de Ur Chaldeae, ut darem tibi terram istam, ut haeredites eam.

<span id="xxi.i-p16"></span>**8.** And he said, Lord GOD, whereby shall
I know that I shall inherit it?

<span id="xxi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et dixit, Dominator Jehova, in quo
cognoscam quod haereditabo eam?

<span id="xxi.i-p18"></span>**9.** And he said unto him, Take me an
heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram
of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.

<span id="xxi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et dixit ad eum, Tolle mihi vitulam
triennem, et capram triennem, et arietem triennem, et turturem, et
pullum columbarum.

<span id="xxi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And he took unto him all these, and
divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but
the birds divided he not.

<span id="xxi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et tulit sibi omnia ista, et divisit
ea per medium, et posuit quamlibet *partem* divisionis suae e regione
sociae suae; sed aves non divisit.

<span id="xxi.i-p22"></span>**11.** And when the fowls came down upon
the carcases, Abram drove them away.

<span id="xxi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et descenderunt aves super cadavera,
et abigebat eas Abram.

<span id="xxi.i-p24"></span>**12.** And when the sun was going down, a
deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell
upon him.

<span id="xxi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et fuit, sole occumbente sopor
cecidit super Abram: et ecce, terror tenebrosus et magnus cadens super
eum.

<span id="xxi.i-p26"></span>**13.** And he said unto Abram, Know of a
surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land *that is* not theirs,
and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;

<span id="xxi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et dixit ad Abram, Cognoscendo
cognosce quod peregrinum erit semen tuum in terra non sua: et servient
eis, affligentque eos per quadringentos annos.

<span id="xxi.i-p28"></span>**14.** And also that nation, whom they
shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great
substance.

<span id="xxi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Sed etiam gentem cui servierint, ego
judicabo, et postea egredientur cum substantia magna.

<span id="xxi.i-p30"></span>**15.** And thou shalt go to thy fathers in
peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.

<span id="xxi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et tu ingredieris ad patres tuos in
pace, sepelieris in canitie bona.

<span id="xxi.i-p32"></span>**16.** But in the fourth generation they
shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites *is* not yet
full.

<span id="xxi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et generatione quarta revertentur
huc: quia nondum est completa iniquitas Emoraei.

<span id="xxi.i-p34"></span>**17.** And it came to pass, that, when the
sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning
lamp that passed between those pieces.

<span id="xxi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et fuit, sole occumbente caligo
erat, et ecce furnus fumans, et lampas ignis quae transibat inter
divisiones ipsas.

<span id="xxi.i-p36"></span>**18.** In the same day the LORD made a
covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from
the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates:

<span id="xxi.i-p37"></span>**18.** In die ipso pepigit, Jehova cum
Abram foedus dicendo, Semini tuo dabo terram hanc a flumine Aegypti,
usque ad flumen magnum, flumen Euphratem:

<span id="xxi.i-p38"></span>**19.** The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and
the Kadmonites,

<span id="xxi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Cenaeum, et Cenizaeum, et
Cadmonaeum,

<span id="xxi.i-p40"></span>**20.** And the Hittites, and the
Perizzites, and the Rephaims,

<span id="xxi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et Hitthaeum, et Perizaeum, et
Rephaim,

<span id="xxi.i-p42"></span>**21.** And the Amorites, and the
Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.

<span id="xxi.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et Emoraeum, et Chenaanaeum, et
Girgasaeum, et Jebusaeum.

<span id="xxi.i-p44"></span> 

<span id="xxi.i-p45"></span><span id="xxi.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p46"></span>**1.** *The* *word* *of* *the* *Lord* *came*
. When Abram’s affairs were prosperous and were proceeding according to
his wish, this vision might seem to be superfluous; especially since the
Lord commands his servant, as one sorrowful and afflicted with fear, to
be of good courage. Therefore certain writers conjecture, that Abram
having returned after the deliverance of his nephew, was subjected to
some annoyance of which no mention is made by Moses; just as the Lord
often humbles his people, lest they should exult in their prosperity;
and they further suppose that when Abram had been dejected he was again
revived by a new oracle. But since there is no warrant for such
conjecture in the words of Moses, I think the cause was different.
First, although he was on all sides applauded, it is not to be doubted
that various surmises entered into his own mind. For, not withstanding
Chedorlaomer and his allies had been overcome in battle, yet Abram had
so provoked them, that they might with fresh troops, and with renewed
strength, again attack the land of Canaan. Nor were the inhabitants of
the land free from the fear of this danger. Secondly, as signal success
commonly draws its companion envy along with it, Abram began to be
exposed to many disadvantageous remarks, after he had dared to enter
into conflict with an army which had conquered four kings. An
unfavourable suspicion might also arise, that perhaps, by and by, he
would turn the strength which he had tried against foreign kings, upon
his neighbors, and upon those who had hospitably received him.
Therefore, as the victory was an honor to him, so it cannot be doubted,
that it rendered him formidable and an object of suspicion to many,
while it inflamed the hatred of others; since every one would imagine
some danger to himself, from his bravery and good success. It is
therefore not strange, that he should have been troubled, and should
anxiously have revolved many things, until God animated him anew, by the
confident expectation of his assistance. There might be also another end
to be answered by the oracle; namely, that God would meet and correct a
contrary fault in his servant. For it was possible that Abram might be
so elated with victory as to forget his own calling, and to seek the
acquisition of dominion for himself, as one who, wearied with a
wandering course of life and with perpetual vexations, desired a better
fortune, and a quiet state of existence. And we know how liable men are
to be ensnared by the blandishments of prosperous and smiling fortune.
Therefore God anticipates the danger; and before this vanity takes
possession of the mind of the holy man, recalls to his memory the
spiritual grace vouchsafed to him to the end that he, entirely
acquiescing therein, may despise all other things. Yet because this
expression, Fear not, sounds as if God would soothe his sorrowing and
anxious servant with some consolation; it is probable that he had need
of such confirmation, because he perceived that many malignantly stormed
against his victory, and that his old age would be exposed to severe
annoyances. It might however be, that God did not forbid him to fear,
because he was already afraid; but that he might learn courageously to
despise, and to account as nothing, all the favor of the world, and all
earthly wealth; as if he had said, ‘If only I am propitious to thee,
there is no reason why thou shouldst fear; contented with me alone in
the world, pursue, as thou hast begun, thy pilgrimage; and rather depend
on heaven, than attach thyself to earth.’ However this might be, God
recalls his servant to himself, showing that far greater blessings were
treasured up for him in God; in order that Abram might not rest
satisfied with his victory. Moses says that God spoke to him in a
vision, by which he intimates that some visible symbol of God’s glory
was added to the word, in order that greater authority might be given to
the oracle. And this was one of two ordinary methods by which the Lord
was formerly wont to manifest himself to his prophets, as it is stated
in the book of Numbers, (<span id="xxi.i-p46.1"></span>[Ge
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006)<span id="xxi.i-p46.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.i-p47"></span>*Fear* *not* *,* *Abram* . Although the
promise comes last in the text, it yet has precedence in order; because
on it depends the confirmation, by which God frees the heart of Abram
from fear. God exhorts Abram to be of a tranquil mind; but what
foundation is there for such security, unless by faith we understand
that God cares for us, and learn to rest in his providence? The promise,
therefore, that God will be Abram’s shield and his exceeding great
reward, holds the first place; to which is added the exhortation, that,
relying upon such a guardian of his safety, and such an author of his
felicity, he should not fear. Therefore, to make the sense of the words
more clear, the causal particle is to be inserted. ‘Fear not, Abram,
because I am thy shield.’ Moreover, by the use of the word “shield,” he
signifies that Abram would always be safe under his protection. In
calling himself his “reward,” He teaches Abram to be satisfied with
Himself alone. And as this was, with respect to Abram, a general
instruction, given for the purpose of showing him that victory was not
the chief and ultimate good which God had designed him to pursue; so let
us know that the same blessing is promised to us all, in the person of
this one man. For, by this voice, God daily speaks to his faithful ones;
inasmuch as having once undertaken to defend us, he will take care to
preserve us in safety under his hand, and to protect us by his power.
Now since God ascribes to himself the office and property of a shield,
for the purpose of rendering himself the protector of our salvation; we
ought to regard this promise as a brazen wall, so that we should not be
excessively fearful in any dangers. And since men, surrounded with
various and innumerable desires of the flesh, are at times unstable, and
are then too much addicted to the love of the present life; the other
member of the sentence follows, in which God declares, that he alone is
sufficient for the perfection of a happy life to the faithful. For the
word “reward” has the force of *inheritance,* or *felicity* . Were it
deeply engraven on our minds, that in God alone we have the highest and
complete perfection of all good things; we should easily fix bounds to
those wicked desires by which we are miserably tormented. The meaning
then of the passage is this, that we shall be truly happy when God is
propitious to us; for he not only pours upon us the abundance of his
kindness, but offers himself to us, that we may enjoy him. Now what is
there more, which men can desire, when they really enjoy God? David knew
the force of this promise, when he boasted that he had obtained a goodly
lot, because the Lord was his inheritance, (<span
id="xxi.i-p47.1"></span>[Ps 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.i-p47.1"></span>.) But since nothing is more difficult than to
curb the depraved appetites of the flesh, and since the ingratitude of
man is so vile and impious, that God scarcely ever satisfies them; the
Lord calls himself not simply “a reward,” but an exceeding great reward,
with which we ought to be more than sufficiently contented. This truly
furnishes most abundant material, and most solid support, for
confidence. For whosoever shall be fully persuaded that his life is
protected by the hand of God, and that he never can be miserable while
God is gracious to him; and who consequently resorts to this haven in
all his cares and troubles, will find the best remedy for all evils. Not
that the faithful can be entirely free from fear and care, as long as
they are tossed by the tempests of contentions and of miseries; but
because the storm is hushed in their own breast; and whereas the defense
of God is greater than all dangers, so faith triumphs over fear.

<span id="xxi.i-p48"></span><span id="xxi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p49"></span>**2.** *And* *Abram* *said* *,* *Lord* *God*
. The Hebrew text has <span id="xxi.i-p49.1"></span>תנודא הוחי (
*Adonai* *Jehovah* .) From which appellation it is inferred that some
special mark of divine glory was stamped upon the vision; so that Abram,
having no doubt respecting its author, confidently broke out in this
expression. For since Satan is a wonderful adept at deceiving, and
deludes men with so many wiles in the name of God, it was necessary that
some sure and notable distinction should appear in true and heavenly
oracles, which would not suffer the faith and the minds of the holy
fathers to waver. Therefore in the vision of which mention is made, the
majesty of the God of Abram was manifested, which would suffice for the
confirmation of his faith. Not that God appeared as he really is, but
only so far as he might be comprehended by the human mind. But Abram, in
overlooking a promise so glorious, in complaining that he is childless,
and in murmuring against God, for having hitherto given him no seed,
seems to conduct himself with little modesty. What was more desirable
than to be received under God’s protection, and to be happy in the
enjoyment of Him? The objection, therefore, which Abram raised, when
disparaging the incomparable benefit offered to him, and refusing to
rest contented until he receives offspring, appears to be wanting in
reverence. Yet the liberty which he took admits of excuse; first,
because the Lord permits us to pour into his bosom those cares by which
we are tormented, and those troubles with which we are oppressed.
Secondly, the design of the complaint is to be considered; for he does
not simply declare that he is solitary, but, seeing that the effect of
all the promises depended upon his seed, he does, not improperly,
require that a pledge so necessary should be given him. For if the
benediction and salvation of the world was not to be hoped for except
through his seed; when that principal point seemed to fail him, it is
not to be wondered at, that other things should seem to vanish from his
sight, or should at least not appease his mind, nor satisfy his wishes.
And this is the very reason why God not only regards with favor the
complaint of his servant, but immediately gives a propitious answer to
his prayer. Moses indeed ascribes to Abram that affection which is
naturally inherent in us all; but this is no proof that Abram did not
look higher when he so earnestly desired to be the progenitor of an
heir. And certainly these promises had not faded from his recollection;
‘To thy seed will I give this land,’ and ‘In thy seed shall all nations
be blessed;’ the former of which promises is so annexed to all the rest,
that if it be taken away, all confidence in them would perish; while the
latter promise contains in it the whole gratuitous pledge of salvation.
Therefore Abram rightly includes in it, every thing which God had
promised.

<span id="xxi.i-p50"></span>*I* *go* *childless* . The language is
metaphorical. We know that our life is like a race. Abram, seeing he was
of advanced age, says that he has so far proceeded, that little of his
course still remains. ‘Now,’ he says, ‘I am come near the goal; and the
course of my life being finished, I shall die childless.’ He adds, for
the sake of aggravating the indignity, ‘that a foreigner would be his
heir.’ For I do not doubt that Damascus is the name of his *country* ,
and not the proper name of his *mother* , as some falsely suppose; as if
he had said, ‘Not one of my own relatives will be my heir, but a Syrian
from Damascus.’ For, perhaps, Abram had bought him in Mesopotamia. He
also calls him the son of <span id="xxi.i-p50.1"></span>קשמ ( *mesek* ,)
concerning the meaning of which word grammarians are not agreed. Some
derive it from <span id="xxi.i-p50.2"></span>קקש ( *shakak* ,) which
means to run to and fro, and translate it, *steward* or *superintendent*
, because he who sustains the care of a large house, runs hither and
thither in attending to his business. Others derive it from <span
id="xxi.i-p50.3"></span>קוש ( *shook* ,) and render it *cup-bearer* ,
which seems to me incongruous. I rather adopt a different translation,
namely, that he was called the son of the deserted house, (<span
id="xxi.i-p50.4"></span>*filius derelictionis*  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) ), because <span
id="xxi.i-p51.3"></span>קשמ *mashak* sometimes signifies to *leave* .
Yet I do not conceive him to be so called because Abram was about to
leave all things to him; but because Abram himself had no hope left in
any other. It is therefore (in my judgment) just as if he called him the
son of a house destitute of children,  <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) because this was a proof of a deserted
and barren house, that the inheritance was devolving upon a foreigner
who would occupy the empty and deserted place. He afterwards
contemptuously calls him his servant, or his home-born slave, ‘the son
of my house (he says) will be my heir.’ He thus speaks in contempt, as
if he would say, ‘My condition is wretched, who shall not have even a
freeman for my successor.’ It is however asked, how he could be both a
Damascene and a home-born slave of Abram? There are two solutions of the
difficulty, either that he was called the son of the house, not because
he was *born* , but only because he was *educated* in it; or, that he
sprang from Damascus, because his father was from Syria.

<span id="xxi.i-p53"></span><span id="xxi.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p54"></span>**4.** *This* *shall* *not* *be* *thine*
*heir* . We hence infer that God had approved the wish of Abram. Whence
also follows the other point, that Abram had not been impelled by any
carnal affection to offer up this prayer, but by a pious and holy desire
of enjoying the benediction promised to him. For God not only promises
him a seed, but a great people, who in number should equal the stars of
heaven. They who expound the passage allegorically; implying that a
heavenly seed was promised him which might be compared with the stars,
may enjoy their own opinion: but we maintain what is more solid; namely,
that the faith of Abram was increased by the sight of the stars. For the
Lord, in order more deeply to affect his own people, and more
efficaciously to penetrate their minds, after he here reached their ears
by his word, also arrests their eyes by external symbols, that eyes and
ears may consent together. Therefore the sight of the stars was not
superfluous; but God intended to strike the mind of Abram with this
thought, ‘He who by his word alone suddenly produced a host so numerous
by which he might adorn the previously vast and desolate heaven; shall
not He be able to replenish my desolate house with offspring?’ It is,
however, not necessary to imagine a nocturnal vision, because the stars,
which, during the day, escape our sight, would then appear; for since
the whole was transacted in vision, Abram had a wonderful scene set
before him, which would manifestly reveal hidden things to him.
Therefore though he perhaps might not move a step, it was yet possible
for him in vision to be led forth out of his tent. The question now
occurs, concerning what seed the promise is to be understood. And it is
certain that neither the posterity of Ishmael nor of Esau is to be taken
into this account, because the legitimate seed is to be reckoned by the
promise, which God determined should remain in Isaac and Jacob; yet the
same doubt arises respecting the posterity of Jacob, because many who
could trace their descent from him, according to the flesh, cut
themselves off, as degenerate sons and aliens, from the faith of their
fathers. I answer, that this term seed is, indiscriminately, extended to
the whole people whole God has adopted to himself. But since many were
alienated by their unbelief, we must come for information to Christ, who
alone distinguishes true and genuine sons from such as are illegitimate.
By pursuing this method, we find the posterity of Abram reduced to a
small numbers that afterwards it may be the more increased. For in
Christ the Gentiles also are gathered together, and are by faith
ingrafted into the body of Abram, so as to have a place among his
legitimate sons. Concerning which point more will be said in the
seventeenth chapter <span id="xxi.i-p54.1"></span>[Ge
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)<span id="xxi.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p55"></span><span id="xxi.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p56"></span>**6.** *And* *he* *believed* *in* *the*
*Lord* . None of us would be able to conceive the rich and hidden
doctrine which this passage contains, unless Paul had borne his torch
before us. (<span id="xxi.i-p56.1"></span>[Ro
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003)<span id="xxi.i-p56.1"></span>.)
But it is strange, and seems like a prodigy, that when the Spirit of God
has kindled so great a light, yet the greater part of interpreters
wander with closed eyes, as in the darkness of night. I omit the Jews,
whose blindness is well known. But it is (as I have said) monstrous,
that they who have had Paul as their luminous expositor; should so
foolishly have depraved this place. However it hence appears, that in
all ages, Satan has labored at nothing more assiduously than to
extinguish, or to smother, the gratuitous justification of faith, which
is here expressly asserted. The words of Moses are, “He believed in the
Lord, and he counted it to him for righteousness.” In the first place,
the faith of Abram is commended, because by it he embraced the promise
of God; it is commended, in the second place, because hence Abram
obtained righteousness in the sight of God, and that by imputation. For
the word <span id="xxi.i-p56.2"></span>בשח ( *chashab* ,) which Moses
uses, is to be understood as relating to the judgment of God, just as in
<span id="xxi.i-p56.3"></span>[Ps
106:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#031)<span id="xxi.i-p56.3"></span>,
where the zeal of Phinehas is said to have been counted to him for
righteousness. The meaning of the expression will, however, more fully
appear by comparison with its opposites.  <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) In <span id="xxi.i-p57.3"></span>[Le
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#018)<span id="xxi.i-p57.3"></span>, it
is said that when expiation has been made, iniquity ‘shall not be
imputed’ to a man. Again, in <span id="xxi.i-p57.4"></span>[Le
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004)<span id="xxi.i-p57.4"></span>,
‘Blood shall be imputed unto that man.’ So, in <span
id="xxi.i-p57.5"></span>[2Sa
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#019)<span id="xxi.i-p57.5"></span>,
Shimei says, ‘Let not the king impute iniquity unto me.’ Nearly of the
same import is the expression in <span id="xxi.i-p57.6"></span>[2Ki
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#015)<span id="xxi.i-p57.6"></span>,
‘They reckoned not with the man into whose hand they delivered the money
for the work;’ that is, they required no account of the money, but
suffered them to administer it, in perfect confidence. Let us now return
to Moses. Just as we understand that they to whom iniquity is imputed
are guilty before God; so those to whom he imputes righteousness are
approved by him as just persons; wherefore Abram was received into the
number and rank of just persons by the imputation of righteousness. For
Paul, in order that he may show us distinctly the force and nature, or
quality of this righteousness, leads us to the celestial tribunal of
God. Therefore, they foolishly trifle who apply this term to his
character as an honest man;  <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) as
if it meant that Abram was personally held to be a just and righteous
man. They also, no less unskilfully, corrupt the text, who say that
Abram is here ascribing to God the glory of righteousness seeing that he
ventures to acquiesce surely in His promises, acknowledging Him to be
faithful and true; for although Moses does not expressly mention the
name of God, yet the accustomed method of speaking in the Scriptures
removes all ambiguity. Lastly, it is not less the part of stupor than of
impudence, when this faith is said to have been imputed to him for
righteousness, to mingle with it some other meaning, than that the faith
of Abram was accepted in the place of righteousness with God.

<span id="xxi.i-p59"></span>It seems, however, to be absurd, that Abram
should be justified by believing that his seed would be as numerous as
the stars of heaven; for this could be nothing but a particular faith,
which would by no means suffice for the complete righteousness of man.
Besides, what could an earthly and temporal promise avail for eternal
salvation? I answer, first, that the *believing* of which Moses speaks,
is not to be restricted to a single clause of the promise here referred
to, but embraces the whole; secondly that Abram did not form his
estimate of the promised seed from this oracle alone, but also from
others, where a special benediction is added. Whence we infer that he
did not expect some common or undefined seed, but that in which the
world was to be blessed. Should any one pertinaciously insist, that what
is said in common of all the children of Abram, is forcibly distorted
when applied to Christ; in the first place, it cannot be denied that God
now again repeats the promise before made to his servant, for the
purpose of answering his complaint. But we have said — and the thing
itself clearly proves — that Abram was impelled thus greatly to desire
seed, by a regard to the promised benediction. Whence it follows, that
this promise was not taken by him separately from others. But to pass
all this over; we must, I say, consider what is here treated of, in
order to form a judgment of the faith of Abram. God does not promise to
his servant this or the other thing only, as he sometimes grants special
benefits to unbelievers, who are without the taste of his paternal love;
but he declares, that He will be propitious to him, and confirms him in
the confidence of safety, by relying upon His protection and His grace.
For he who has God for his inheritance does not exult in fading joy;
but, as one already elevated towards heaven, enjoys the solid happiness
of eternal life. It is, indeed, to be maintained as an axiom, that all
the promises of God, made to the faithful, flow from the free mercy of
God, and are evidences of that paternal love, and of that gratuitous
adoption, on which their salvation is founded. Therefore, we do not say
that Abram was justified because he laid hold on a single word,
respecting the offspring to be brought forth, but because he embraced
God as his Father. And truly faith does not justify us for any other
reason, than that it reconciles us unto God; and that it does so, not by
its own merit; but because we receive the grace offered to us in the
promises, and have no doubt of eternal life, being fully persuaded that
we are loved by God as sons. Therefore, Paul reasons from contraries,
that he to whom faith is imputed for righteousness, has not been
justified by works. (<span id="xxi.i-p59.1"></span>[Ro
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#004)<span id="xxi.i-p59.1"></span>.)
For whosoever obtains righteousness by works, his merits come into the
account before God. But we apprehend righteousness by faith, when God
freely reconciles us to himself. Whence it follows, that the merit of
works ceases when righteousness is sought by faith; for it is necessary
that this righteousness should be freely given by God, and offered in
his word, in order that any one may possess it by faith. To render this
more intelligible, when Moses says that faith was imputed to Abram for
righteousness, he does not mean that faith was that first cause of
righteousness which is called the *efficient*, but only the *formal*
cause; as if he had said, that Abram was therefore justified, because,
relying on the paternal loving-kindness of God, he trusted to His mere
goodness, and not to himself, nor to his own merits. For it is
especially to be observed, that faith borrows a righteousness elsewhere,
of which we, in ourselves, are destitute; otherwise it would be in vain
for Paul to set faith in opposition to works, when speaking of the mode
of obtaining righteousness. Besides, the mutual relation between the
free promise and faith, leaves no doubt upon the subject.

<span id="xxi.i-p60"></span>We must now notice the circumstance of
*time*. Abram was justified by faith many years after he had been called
by God; after he had left his country a voluntary exile, rendering
himself a remarkable example of patience and of continence; after he had
entirely dedicated himself to sanctity and after he had, by exercising
himself in the spiritual and external service of God, aspired to a life
almost angelical. It therefore follows, that even to the end of life, we
are led towards the eternal kingdom of God by the righteousness of
faith. On which point many are too grossly deceived. For they grant,
indeed, that the righteousness which is freely bestowed upon sinners and
offered to the unworthy is received by faith alone; but they restrict
this to a moment of time, so that he who at the first obtained
justification by faith, may afterwards be justified by good works. By
this method, faith is nothing else than the beginning of righteousness,
whereas righteousness itself consists in a continual course of works.
But they who thus trifle must be altogether insane. For if the angelical
uprightness of Abram faithfully cultivated through so many years, in one
uniform course, did not prevent him from fleeing tofaith, for the sake
of obtaining righteousness; where upon earth besides will such
perfection be found, as may stand in God’s sight? Therefore, by a
consideration of the time in which this was said to Abram,  <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) we certainly gather, that the
righteousness of works is not to be substituted for the righteousness of
faith, in any such way, that one should perfect what the other has
begun; but that holy men are only justified by faith, as long as they
live in the world. If any one object, that Abram previously believed
God, when he followed Him at His call, and committed himself to His
direction and guardianship, the solution is ready; that we are not here
told when Abram first began to be justified, or to believe in God; but
that in this one place it is declared, or related, how he had been
justified through his whole life. For if Moses had spoken thus
immediately on Abram’s first vocation, the cavil of which I have spoken
would have been more specious; namely, that the righteousness of faith
was only *initial* (so to speak) and not perpetual. But now since after
such great progress, he is still said to be justified by faith, it
thence easily appears that the saints are justified freely even unto
death. I confess, indeed, that after the faithful are born again by the
Spirit of God, the method of justifying differs, in some respect, from
the former. For God reconciles to himself those who are born only of the
flesh, and who are destitute of all good; and since he finds nothing in
them except a dreadful mass of evils, he counts them just, by
imputation. But those to whom he has imparted the Spirit of holiness and
righteousness, he embraces with his gifts. Nevertheless, in order that
their good works may please God, it is necessary that these works
themselves should be justified by gratuitous imputation; but some evil
is always inherent in them. Meanwhile, however, this is a settled point,
that men are justified before God by believing not by working; while
they obtain grace by faith, because they are unable to deserve a reward
by works. Paul also, in hence contending, that Abram did not merit by
works the righteousness which he had received before his circumcision,
does not impugn the above doctrine. The argument of Paul is of this
kind: The circumcision of Abram was posterior to his justification in
the order of time, and therefore could not be its cause, for of
necessity the cause precedes its effect. I also grant, that Paul, for
this reason, contends that works are not meritorious, except under the
covenant of the law, of which covenant, circumcision is put as the
earnest and the symbol. But since Paul is not here defining the force
and nature of circumcision, regarded as a pure and genuine institution
of God, but is rather disputing on the sense attached to it, by those
with whom he deals, he therefore does not allude to the covenant which
God before had made with Abram, because the mention of it was
unnecessary for the present purpose. Both arguments are therefore of
force; first, that the righteousness of Abram cannot be ascribed to the
covenant of the law, because it preceded his circumcision; and,
secondly, that the righteousness even of the most perfect characters
perpetually consists in faith; since Abram, with all the excellency of
his virtues, after his daily and even remarkable service of God, was,
nevertheless, justified by faith. For this also is, in the last place,
worthy of observation, that what is here related concerning one man, is
applicable to all the sons of God. For since he was called the father of
the faithful, not without reason; and since further, there is but one
method of obtaining salvation; Paul properly teaches, that a real and
not personal righteousness is in this place described.

<span id="xxi.i-p62"></span><span id="xxi.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p63"></span>**7.** *I am the Lord that brought thee.*
Since it greatly concerns us, to have God as the guide of our whole
life, in order that we may know that we have not rashly entered on some
doubtful way, therefore the Lord confirms Abram in the course of his
vocation, and recalls to his memory the original benefit of his
deliverance; as if he had said, ‘I, after I had stretched out my hand to
thee, to lead thee forth from the labyrinth of death, have carried my
favor towards thee thus far. Thou, therefore, respond to me in turn, by
constantly advancing; and maintain steadfastly thy faith, from the
beginning even to the end.’ This indeed is said, not with respect to
Abram alone, in order that he, gathering together the promises of God,
made to him from the very commencement of his life of faith, should form
them into one whole;  <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) but that
all the pious may learn to regard the beginning of their vocation as
flowing perpetually from Abram, their common father; and may thus
securely boast with Paul, that they know in whom they have believed,
(<span id="xxi.i-p64.3"></span>[2Ti
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)<span id="xxi.i-p64.3"></span>,)
and that God, who, in the person of Abram, had separated a church unto
himself; would be a faithful keeper of the salvation deposited with Him.
That, for this very end, the Lord declares himself to have been the
deliverer of Abram appears hence; because he connects the promise which
he is now about to give with the prior redemption; as if he were saying,
‘I do not now first begin to promise thee this land. For it was on this
account that I brought thee out of thy own country, to constitute thee
the lord and heir of this land. Now therefore I covenant with thee in
the same form; lest thou shouldst deem thyself to have been deceived, or
fed with empty words; and I command thee to be mindful of the first
covenant, that the new promise, which after many years I now repeat, may
be the more firmly supported.’

<span id="xxi.i-p65"></span><span id="xxi.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p66"></span>**8.** *Lord* *God* *,* *whereby* *shall*
*I* *know* . It may appear absurd, first, that Abram, who before had
placed confidence in the simple word of God, without moving any question
concerning the promises given to him, should now dispute whether what he
hears from the mouth of God be true or not. Secondly, that he ascribes
but little honor to God, not merely by murmuring against him, when he
speaks, but by requiring some additional pledge to be given him.
Further, whence arises the knowledge which belongs to faith, but from
the word? Therefore Abram in vain desires to be assured of the future
possession of the land, while he ceases to depend upon the word of God.
I answer, the Lord sometimes concedes to his children, that they may
freely express any objection which comes into their mind. For he does
not act so strictly with them, as not to suffer himself to be
questioned. Yea, the more certainly Abram was persuaded that God was
true, and the more he was attached to His word, so much the more
familiarly did he disburden his cares into God’s bosom. To this may be
added, that the protracted delay was no small obstacle to Abram’s faith.
For after God had held him in suspense through a great part of his life,
now when he was worn down with age, and had nothing before his eyes but
death and the grave, God anew declares that he shall be lord of the
land. He does not, however, reject, on account of its difficulty, what
might have appeared to him incredible, but brings before God the anxiety
by which he is inwardly oppressed. And therefore his questioning with
God is rather a proof of faith, than a sign of incredulity. The wicked,
because their minds are entangled with various conflicting thoughts, do
not in any way receive the promises, but the pious, who feel the
impediments in their flesh, endeavor to remove them, lest they should
obstruct the way to God’s word; and they seek a remedy for those evils
of which they are conscious. It is, nevertheless, to be observed, that
there were some special impulses in the saints of old, which it would
not now be lawful to draw into a precedent. For though Hezekiah and
Gideon required certain miracles, this is not a reason why the same
thing should be attempted by us in the present day; let it suffice us to
seek for such confirmation only as the Lord himself according to his own
pleasure, shall judge most eligible.

<span id="xxi.i-p67"></span><span id="xxi.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p68"></span>**9.** *Take* *me* *an* *heifer* *of*
*three* *years* *old* . Some, instead of an heifer of three years old
translate the passage, ‘three heifers’ and in each species of animals
enumerated, would make the number three. Yet the opinion of those who
apply the word three to the age of the heifer, is more general.
Moreover, although God would not deny his servant what he had asked; he
yet, by no means, granted what would gratify the desire of the flesh.
For, what certainty could be added to the promise, by the slaughter of
an heifer, or goat, or ram? For the true design of sacrifice, of which
we shall see more presently, was hitherto hidden from Abram. Therefore
by obeying the command of God, of which, however, no advantage was
apparent, he hence proves the obedience of his faith; nor did his wish
aim at any other end than this; namely, that the obstacle being removed,
he might, as was just, reverently acquiesce in the word of the Lord. Let
us, therefore, learn meekly to embrace those helps which God offers for
the confirmation of our faith; although they may not accord with our
judgment, but rather may seem to be a mockery; until, at length, it
shall become plain from the effect, that God was as far as possible from
mocking us.

<span id="xxi.i-p69"></span><span id="xxi.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p70"></span>**10.** *And* *divided* *them* *in* *the*
*midst* . That no part of this sacrifice may be without mystery, certain
interpreters weary themselves in the fabrication of subtleties; but it
is our business, as I have often declared, to cultivate sobriety. I
confess I do not know why he was commanded to take three kinds of
animals besides birds; unless it were, that by this variety itself, it
was declared, that all the posterity of Abram, of whatever rank they
might be, should be offered up in sacrifice, so that the whole people,
and each individual, should constitute one sacrifice. There are also
some things, concerning which, if any one curiously seeks the reason, I
shall not be ashamed to acknowledge my ignorance, because I do not
choose to wander in uncertain speculations. Moreover, this, in my
opinion, is the sum of the whole: That God, in commanding the animals to
be killed, shows what will be the future condition of the Church. Abram
certainly wished to be assured of the promised inheritance of the land.
Now he is taught that it would take its commencement from death; that is
that he and his children must die before they should enjoy the dominion
over the land. In commanding the slaughtered animals to be cut in parts,
it is probable that he followed the ancient rite in forming covenants
whether they were entering into any alliance, or were mustering an army,
a practice which also passed over to the Gentiles. Now, the allies or
the soldiers passed between the severed parts, that, being enclosed
together within the sacrifice, they might be the more sacredly united in
one body. That this method was practiced by the Jews, Jeremiah bears
witness, (<span id="xxi.i-p70.1"></span>[Jer
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018)<span id="xxi.i-p70.1"></span>,)
where he introduces God as saying, ‘They have violated my covenant, when
they cut the calf in two parts, and passed between the divisions of it,
as well the princes of Judas, and the nobles of Jerusalem, and the whole
people of the land.’ Nevertheless, there appears to me to have been this
special reason for the act referred to; that the Lord would indeed
admonish the race of Abram, not only that it should be like a dead
carcass, but even like one torn and dissected. For the servitude with
which they were oppressed for a time, was more intolerable than simple
death; yet because the sacrifice is offered to God, death itself is
immediately turned into new life. And this is the reason why Abram,
placing the parts of the sacrifice opposite to each other, fits them one
to the other, because they were again to be gathered together from their
dispersion. But how difficult is the restoration of the Church and what
troubles are involved in it, is shown by the horror with which Abram was
seized. We see, therefore, that two things were illustrated; namely, the
hard servitude, with which the sons of Abram were to be pressed almost
to laceration and destruction; and then their redemption, which was to
be the signal pledge of divine adoption; and in the same mirror the
general condition of the Church is represented to us, as it is the
peculiar province of God to create it out of nothing, and to raise it
from death.

<span id="xxi.i-p71"></span><span id="xxi.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p72"></span>**11.** *And* *when* *the* *fowls* *came*
*down* . Although the sacrifice was dedicated to God, yet it was not
free from the attack and the violence of birds. So neither are the
faithful, after they are received into the protection of God, so covered
with his hand, as not to be assailed on every side; since Satan and the
world cease not to cause them trouble. Therefore, in order that the
sacrifice we have once offered to God may not be violated, but may
remain pure and uninjured, contrary assaults must be repulsed, with
whatever inconvenience and toil.

<span id="xxi.i-p73"></span><span id="xxi.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p74"></span>**12.** *A* *deep* *sleep* *fell* *upon*
*Abram* . The vision is now mingled with a dream. Thus the Lord here
joins those two kinds of communication together, which I have before
related from <span id="xxi.i-p74.1"></span>[Nu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006)<span id="xxi.i-p74.1"></span>,
where it is said,

<span id="xxi.i-p75"></span>‘When I appear unto my servants the
prophets,  
I speak to them in a vision or a dream.’

<span id="xxi.i-p76"></span>mention has already been made of a vision:
Moses now relates, that a dream was superadded. A horrible darkness
intervened, that Abram might know that the dream is not a common one,
but that the whole is divinely conducted; it has, nevertheless, a
correspondence with the oracle then present, as God immediately
afterwards explains in his own words, “Thou shalt surely know that thy
seed shall be a stranger,” etc. We have elsewhere said, that God was not
wont to dazzle the eyes of his people with bare and empty spectres; but
that in visions, the principal parts always belonged to the word. Thus
here, not a mute apparition is presented to the eyes of Abram, but he is
taught by an oracle annexed, what the external and visible symbol meant.
It is, however, to be observed, that before one son is given to Abram,
he hears that his seed shall be, for a long time, in captivity and
slavery. For thus does the Lord deal with his own people; he always
makes a beginning from death, so that by quickening the dead, he the
more abundantly manifests his power. It was necessary, in part, on
Abram’s account, that this should have been declared; but the Lord
chiefly had regard to his posterity, lest they should faint in their
sufferings, of which, however, the Lord had promised a joyful and happy
issue; especially since their long continuance would produce great
weariness. And three things are, step by step, brought before them;
first, that the sons of Abram must wander four hundred years, before
they should attain the promised inheritance; secondly, that they should
be slaves; thirdly that they were to be inhumanly and tyrannically
treated. Wherefore the faith of Abram was admirable and singular, seeing
that he acquiesced in an oracle so sorrowful, and felt assured, that God
would be his Deliverer, after his miseries had proceeded to their
greatest height.

<span id="xxi.i-p77"></span>It is, however, asked, how the number of
years here given agrees with the subsequent history? Some begin the
computation from the time of his departure out of Charran. But it seems
more probable that the intermediate time only is denoted;  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) as if he would say, ‘It behoves thy
posterity to wait patiently; because I have not decreed to grant what I
now promise, until the four hundredth year: yea, up to that very time
their servitude will continue.’ According to this mode of reckoning,
Moses says, (<span id="xxi.i-p78.2"></span>[Ex
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040)<span id="xxi.i-p78.2"></span>,)
that the children of Israel dwelt in Egypt four hundred and thirty
years: while yet, from the sixth chapter (<span
id="xxi.i-p78.3"></span>[Ge 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.i-p78.3"></span>,) we may easily gather, that not more than two
hundred and thirty years, or thereabouts, elapsed from the time that
Jacob went down thither, to their deliverance. Where then, shall we find
the remaining two hundred years, but by referring to the oracle? Of this
matter all doubt is removed by Paul, who (<span
id="xxi.i-p78.4"></span>[Ga 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.i-p78.4"></span>) reckons the years from the gratuitous covenant
of life, to the promulgation of the Law. In short, God does not indicate
how long the servitude of the people should be from its commencement to
its close, but how long he intended to suspend, or to defer his promise.
As to his omitting the thirty years, it is neither a new nor unfrequent
thing, where years are not accurately computed, to mention only the
larger sums. But we see here, that for the sake of brevity, the whole of
that period is divided into four centuries. Therefore, there is no
absurdity in omitting the short space of time: this is chiefly to be
considered, that the Lord, for the purpose of exercising the patience of
his people, suspends his promise more than four centuries.

<span id="xxi.i-p79"></span><span id="xxi.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p80"></span>**14.** *Also* *that* *nations* *whom*
*they* *serve* . A consolation is now subjoined, in which this is the
first thing, God testifies that he will be the vindicator of his people.
Whence it follows, that he will take upon himself the care of the
sa1vation of those whom he has embraced, and will not suffer them to be
harassed by the ungodly and the wicked with impunity. And although he
here expressly announces that he will take vengeance on the Egyptians;
yet all the enemies of the Church are exposed to the same judgment: even
as Moses in his song extends to all ages and nations the threat that the
Lord will exact punishment for unjust persecutions.  <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376)

<span id="xxi.i-p82"></span>‘Vengeance is mine, I, saith he, will
repay,’  
(<span id="xxi.i-p82.2"></span>[De
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035)<span id="xxi.i-p82.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.i-p83"></span>Therefore, whenever we happen to be treated
with inhumanity by tyrants, (which is very usual with the Church,) let
this be our consolation, that after our faith shall be sufficiently
proved by bearing the cross, God, at whose pleasure we are thus humbled,
will himself be the Judge, who will repay to our enemies the due reward
of the cruelty which they now exercise. Although they now exult with
intoxicated joy, it will at length appear by the event itself, that our
miseries are happy ones, but their triumphs wretched; because God, who
cares for us, is their adversary. But let us remember that we must give
place unto the wrath of God, as Paul exhorts, in order that we may not
be hurried headlong to seek revenge. Place also must be given to hope,
that it may sustain us when oppressed and groaning under the burden of
evils. To judge the nation, means the same thing as to summon it to
judgment, in order that God, when he has long reposed in silence, may
openly manifest himself as the Judge.

<span id="xxi.i-p84"></span><span id="xxi.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p85"></span>**15.** *And* *thou* *shalt* *go* *to* *thy*
*fathers* *in* *peace* . Hitherto the Lord had respect to the posterity
of Abram as well as to himself, that the consolation might be common to
all; but now he turns his address to Abram alone, because he had need of
peculiar confirmation. And the remedy proposed for alleviating his
sorrow was, that he should die in peace, after he had attained the
utmost limit of old age. The explanation given by some that he should
die a natural death, exempt from violence; or an easy death, in which
his vital spirits should spontaneously and naturally fail, and his life
itself should fall by its own maturity, without any sense of pain, is,
in my opinion, frigid. For Moses wishes to express that Abram should
have not only a long, but a placid old age, with a corresponding joyful
and peaceful death. The sense therefore is that although through his
whole life, Abram was to be deprived of the possession of the land, yet
he should not be wanting in the essential materials of quiet and joy, so
that having happily finished his life, he should cheerfully depart to
his fathers. And certainly death makes the great distinction between the
reprobate and the sons of God, whose condition in the present life is
commonly one and the same, except that the sons of God have by far the
worst of it. Wherefore peace in death ought justly to be regarded as a
singular benefit, because it is a proof of that distinction to which I
have just alluded.  <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) Even profane
writers, feeling their way in the dark, have perceived this. Plato, in
his book on the Republic, (lib.1) cites a song of Pindar, in which he
says, that they who live justly and homily, are attended by a sweet
hope, cherishing their hearts and nourishing their old age; which hope
chiefly governs the fickle mind of men. Because men, conscious of guilt,
must necessarily be miserably harassed by various torments; the Poet,
when he asserts that hope is the reward of a good conscience, calls it
the nurse of old age.  <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) For as
young men, while far removed from death, carelessly take their pleasure;
 <span id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) the old are admonished by their
own weakness, seriously to reflect that they must depart. Now unless the
hope of a better life inspires them, nothing remains for them but
miserable fears. Finally, as the reprobate indulge themselves during
their whole life, and stupidly sleep in their vices, it is necessary
that their death should be full of trouble; while the faithful commit
their souls into the hand of God without fear and sadness. Whence also
Balaam was constrained to break forth in this expression,

<span id="xxi.i-p89"></span>‘Let my soul die the death of the
righteous,’  
(<span id="xxi.i-p89.2"></span>[Nu
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010)<span id="xxi.i-p89.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.i-p90"></span>Moreover, since men have not such a
desirable close of life in their own power; the Lord, in promising a
placid and quiet death to his servant Abram, teaches us that it is his
own gift. And we see that even kings, and others who deem themselves
happy in this world, are yet agitated in death; because they are visited
with secret compunctions for their sins, and look for nothing in death
but destruction. But Abram willingly and joyfully went forward to his
death, seeing that he had in Isaac a certain pledge of the divine
benediction, and knew that a better life was laid up for him in heaven.

<span id="xxi.i-p91"></span><span id="xxi.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p92"></span>**16.** *The* *iniquity* *of* *the*
*Amorites* *is* *not* *yet* *full* . The reason here given is deemed
absurd, as seeming to imply that the sons of Abram could not otherwise
be saved, than by the destruction of others. I answer, that we must with
modesty and humility yield to the secret counsel of God. Since he had
given that land to the Amorites, to be inhabited by them in perpetuity,
he intimates, that he will not, without just cause, transfer the
possession of it to others; as if he would say, ‘I grant the dominion of
this land to thy seed without injury to any one. The land, at present,
is occupied by its lawful possessors, to whom I delivered it. Until,
therefore, they shall have deserved, by their sins, to be rightfully
expelled, the dominion of it sill not come to thy posterity.’ Thus God
teaches him that the land must be evacuated, in order that it may lie
open to new inhabitants. And this passage is remarkable, as showing,
that the abodes of men are so distributed in the world, that the Lord
will preserve quiet people, each in their several stations, till they
cast themselves out by their own wickedness. For by polluting the place
of their habitation, they in a certain sense tear away the boundaries
fixed by the hand of God, which would otherwise have remained immovable.
Moreover, the Lord here commends his own longsuffering. Even then the
Amorites had become unworthy to occupy the land, yet the Lord not only
bore with them for a short time, but granted them four centuries for
repentance. And hence it appears, that he does not, without reason, so
frequently declare how slow he is to anger. But the more graciously he
waits for men, if, at length, instead of repenting they remain
obstinate, the more severely does he avenge such great ingratitude.
Therefore Paul says, that they who indulge themselves in sin, while the
goodness and clemency of God invite them to repentance, heap up for
themselves a treasure of wrath, (<span id="xxi.i-p92.1"></span>[Ro
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span id="xxi.i-p92.1"></span>;)
and thus they reap no advantage from delay, seeing that the severity of
the punishment is doubled; just as it happened to the Amorites, whom, at
length, the Lord commanded to be so entirely cut off, that not even
infants were spared. Therefore when we hear that God out of heaven is
silently waiting until iniquities shall fill up their measure; let us
know, that this is no time for torpor, but rather let every one of us
stir himself up, that we may be beforehand with the celestial judgment.
It was formerly said by a heathen, that the anger of God proceeds with a
slow step to avenge itself, but that it compensates for its tardiness by
the severity of its punishment. Hence there is no reason why reprobates
should flatter themselves, when he seems to let them pass unobserved,
 <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) since he does not so repose in
heaven, as to cease to be the Judge of the world; nor will he be
unmindful of the execution of his office, in due time.  <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) We infer, however, from the words of
Moses, that though space for repentance is given to the reprobate, they
are still devoted to destruction. Some take the word <span
id="xxi.i-p94.3"></span>ןוע ( *ayon* ) for punishment, as if it had been
said that *punishment* was not yet matured for them. But the former
exposition is more suitable; namely, that they will set no bound to
their *wickedness* , until they bring upon themselves final destruction.

<span id="xxi.i-p95"></span><span id="xxi.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p96"></span>**17.** *Behold* *,* *a* *smoking* *furnace*
. Again a new vision was added, to confirm his faith in the oracle. At
first, Abram was horror-struck with the thick darkness; now, in the
midst of a smoking furnace, he sees a burning lamp. Many suppose that a
sacrifice was consumed with this fire; but I rather interpret it as a
symbol of future deliverance, which would well agree with the fact
itself. For there are two things contrary to each other in appearance;
the obscurity of smoke, and the shining of a lamp. Hence Abram knew that
light would, at length, emerge out of darkness. An analogy is always to
be sought for between signs, and the things signified, that there may be
a mutual correspondence between them. Then, since the symbol, in itself,
is but a lifeless carcass, reference ought always to be made to the word
which is annexed to it. But here, by the word, liberty was promised to
Abram’s seed, in the midst of servitude. Now the condition of the Church
could not be painted more to the life, than when God causes a burning
torch to proceed out of the smoke, in order that the darkness of
afflictions may not overwhelm us, but that we may cherish a good hope of
life even in death; because the Lord will, at length, shine upon us, if
only we offer up ourselves in sacrifice to Him.

<span id="xxi.i-p97"></span><span id="xxi.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p98"></span>**18.** *In* *the* *same* *day* *the* *Lord*
*made* *a* *covenant* . I willingly admit what I have alluded to above,
that the covenant was ratified by a solemn rite, when the animals were
divided into parts. For there seems to be a repetition, in which he
teaches what was the intent of the sacrifice which he has mentioned.
Here, also, we may observe, what I have said, that the word is always to
be joined with the symbols, lest our eyes be fed with empty and
fruitless ceremonies. God has commanded animals to be offered to him;
but he has shown their end and use, by a covenant appended to them. If,
then, the Lord feeds us by sacraments, we infer, that they are the
evidences of his grace, and the tokens of those spiritual blessings
which flow from it.

<span id="xxi.i-p99"></span>He then enumerates the nations, whose land
God was about to give to the sons of Abram, in order that he may confirm
what he before said concerning a numerous offspring. For that was not to
be a small band of men, but an immense multitude, for which the Lord
assigns a habitation of such vast extent. God had before spoken only of
the Amorites, among whom Abram then dwelt; but now, for the sake of
amplifying his grace, he recounts all the others by name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc01020.htm#fr_369) <span
id="xxi.i-p50.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p51"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p51.1"></span>Et filius
derelictionis domus meae erit iste Dammescenus Elihezer.” That is,
according to the usual interpretation of the Hebrew phrase, the son or
person to whom the house was left in charge by its master; though Calvin
gives it a different turn. The various ancient versions, except the
Syriac, agree in this interpretation. Dathe prefers the translation of
Schultens, who refers the word to an Arabic root, <span
id="xxi.i-p51.2"></span>קוש, which signifies to comb, to dress, or
polish, and which he supposes may be applied generally to the care which
a steward takes of everything in the house. But this is fanciful. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc01020.htm#fr_370) <span
id="xxi.i-p51.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p52"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p52.1"></span>Acsi
vocaret, Filium orbitatis.” — “<span id="xxi.i-p52.2"></span>Comme s’il
l’appeloit, Fils de la maison, ou il n’y a point d’enfans.” — *French
Tr*

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc01020.htm#fr_371) <span
id="xxi.i-p56.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p57"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p57.1"></span>Melius ex
antitheto patebit.” — “<span id="xxi.i-p57.2"></span>Toutefois on
entendra mieux par l’antithese, c’est a dire, par ce qui est opposite,
ce qu’ emporte ceci.” — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc01020.htm#fr_372) <span
id="xxi.i-p57.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p58"></span> The French version is strongly expressed.
“<span id="xxi.i-p58.1"></span>Et pourtant ceus — la gazouillent bien
sottement, qui tirent ceci au bruit et renom de preud’hommie.”
Especially do they chatter foolishly enough, who draw this aside to the
fame and renown of honesty. — *French Tr*.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc01020.htm#fr_373) <span
id="xxi.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p61"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p61.1"></span>Ergo ex
ratione temporis certo colligimus.” — “<span
id="xxi.i-p61.2"></span>Nous recueillons donc pour certain, selon la
raison du temps auquel ceci fut dit a Abram.” — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc01020.htm#fr_374) <span
id="xxi.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p64"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p64.1"></span>Corpus unum
efficeret.” — “<span id="xxi.i-p64.2"></span>Et les joindre ensemble
comme en un corps.” And should join them together, as in one body. —
*French Tr*.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc01020.htm#fr_375) <span
id="xxi.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p78"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p78.1"></span>Sed magis
probabile videtur, notari duntaxat tempus intermedium.” Calvin evidently
means the time which was to intervene between the giving of the oracle
and the exodus from Egypt. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc01020.htm#fr_376) <span
id="xxi.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p81"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p81.1"></span>De justis
persequutionibus.” Most probably a misprint for <span
id="xxi.i-p81.2"></span>injustis; as both the Old French and English
translations agree in rendering the word unjust.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc01020.htm#fr_377) <span
id="xxi.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p86"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p86.1"></span>Quod nuper
attigit,” — should doubtless be <span id="xxi.i-p86.2"></span>attigi; as
the sense requires, and as it is rendered in the French version, with
which the Old English Translation corresponds. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc01020.htm#fr_378) <span
id="xxi.i-p86.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p87"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p87.1"></span>Eam <span
id="xxi.i-p87.2"></span>γηροτρόφον <span
id="xxi.i-p87.3"></span>appellat.”

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc01020.htm#fr_379) <span
id="xxi.i-p87.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p88"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p88.1"></span>Secure
delicientur.” — “<span id="xxi.i-p88.2"></span>Prenent leurs plaisirs
sans souci ne crainte.” — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc01020.htm#fr_380) <span
id="xxi.i-p92.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p93"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p93.1"></span>Eo
dissimulante.”

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc01020.htm#fr_381) <span
id="xxi.i-p93.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p94"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p94.1"></span>Nec officii
sui in tempore obliviscatur.” The sense given in the translation would
perhaps scarcely have been elicited from these words, without the aid of
Calvin’s own French translation, which thus renders the passage, ‘<span
id="xxi.i-p94.2"></span>Et ne s’oublie point de faire son office en
temps due.’ The Old English version, by adhering to a barely literal
rendering, deprives the sentence of all meaning; “neither doth he in
time forget his duty.” — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](cc01021)
