[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01013)  [Next](cc01015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 9.

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
9:1-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And God blessed Noah and his sons, and
said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et benedixit Deus Noah, et filiis ejus:
et dixit ad eos, Crescite, et multiplicamini, et replete terram.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the fear of you and the dread of
you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the
air, upon all that moveth *upon* the earth, and upon all the fishes of
the sea; into your hand are they delivered.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et timor vester et pavor vester erit
super omnem bestiam terrae, et super omne volatile coeli, cum omnibus
quae gradiuntur in terra, et omnibus piscibus maris: *quia* manui
vestrae tradita sunt.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Every moving thing that liveth shall be
meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Omne reptile quod vivit, vobis erit ad
vescendum: sicut virentem herbam dedi vobis omnia.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**4.** But flesh with the life thereof, *which
is* the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Veruntamen carnem cum anima ejus,
sanguine ejus, non comedetis.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>**5.** And surely your blood of your lives
will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the
hand of man; at the hand of every man’s brother will I require the life
of man.

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et profecto sanguinem vestrum, qui
vobis est in animas, requiram: de manu omnis bestiae requiram illum, et
de manu hominis, et de manu viri fratris ejus requiram animam hominis.

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>**6.** Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man
shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Qui effuderit sanguinem hominis in
homine, sanguis ejus effundetur: quia ad imaginem Dei fecit hominem.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>**7.** And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply;
bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein.

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et vos crescite, et multiplicamini, et
generate in terra, et multiplicemini in ea.

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>**8.** And God spake unto Noah, and to his
sons with him, saying,

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et dixit Deus ad Noah, et ad filios
ejus qui cum eo erant, dicendo,

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>**9.** And I, behold, I establish my covenant
with you, and with your seed after you;

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et ego, ecce ego statuo pactum meum
vobiscum, et cum semine vestro post vos.

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span>**10.** And with every living creature that
*is* with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the
earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the
earth.

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et cum omni anima vivente quae est
vobiscum, tam cum volatili quam cum animali, et omni bestia terrae
vobiscum, ab omnibus quae egressa sunt ex arca: cum omni, *inquam* ,
bestia terrae.

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span>**11.** And I will establish my covenant with
you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a
flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et statuam pactum meum vobiscum, et
non excidetur omnis caro ultra ab aquis diluvii, et non erit ultra
diluvium, ut disperdat terram.

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span>**12.** And God said, This *is* the token of
the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature
that *is* with you, for perpetual generations:

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et dixit Deus, Hoc est signum
foederis quod ego do inter me et bos, et omnem animan viventem quae est
vobiscum in generationes saeculi:

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span>**13.** I do set my bow in the cloud, and it
shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span>**13.** Arcum meum ponam in nube, et erit in
signum foederis inter me et terram.

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span>**14.** And it shall come to pass, when I
bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud:

<span id="xv.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et erit, quum obnubilavero nubem
super terram, tunc apparebit arcus in nube.

<span id="xv.i-p30"></span>**15.** And I will remember my covenant,
which *is* between me and you and every living creature of all flesh;
and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.

<span id="xv.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et recordabor foederis mei quod est
inter me et vos, et omnem animam viventem cum omni carne: et non erit
ultra aqua ad diluvium, ut disperdat omnem carnem.

<span id="xv.i-p32"></span>**16.** And the bow shall be in the cloud;
and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant
between God and every living creature of all flesh that *is* upon the
earth.

<span id="xv.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et erit arcus in nube, et videbo
illum, ut recorder pacti perpetui inter Deum et omnem animam viventem
cum omni carne quae est super terram.

<span id="xv.i-p34"></span>**17.** And God said unto Noah, This *is* the
token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all flesh
that *is* upon the earth.

<span id="xv.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et dixit Deus ad Noah, Hoc est signum
foederis quod statui inter me et omnem carnem quae est super terram.

<span id="xv.i-p36"></span>**18.** And the sons of Noah, that went forth
of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham *is* the father of
Canaan.

<span id="xv.i-p37"></span>**18.** Erant autem filii Noah qui egressi
sunt de arca, Sem, Cham, et Jepheth: et Cham est pater Chenaan.

<span id="xv.i-p38"></span>**19.** These *are* the three sons of Noah:
and of them was the whole earth overspread.

<span id="xv.i-p39"></span>**19.** Tres isti, filii Noah: et ab istis
dispersa est universa terra.

<span id="xv.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Noah began *to be* an husbandman,
and he planted a vineyard:

<span id="xv.i-p41"></span>**20.** Coepit vero Noah colere terram, et
plantavit vineam.

<span id="xv.i-p42"></span>**21.** And he drank of the wine, and was
drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.

<span id="xv.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et bibit de vino et inebriatus est,
et discooperuit se in medio tabernaculi sui.

<span id="xv.i-p44"></span>**22.** And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw
the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.

<span id="xv.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et vidit Cham pater Chenaan
turpitudinem patris sui, et nuntiavit duobus fratribus suis in platea.

<span id="xv.i-p46"></span>**23.** And Shem and Japheth took a garment,
and laid *it* upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered
the nakedness of their father; and their faces *were* backward, and they
saw not their father’s nakedness.

<span id="xv.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et tulerunt Sem et Jepheth
vestimentum, et posuerunt super humerum ambo ipse: et euntes retrorsum,
operuerunt turpitudinem patris sui: et facies eorum erant retrorsum, et
turpitudinem patris sui non viderunt.

<span id="xv.i-p48"></span>**24.** And Noah awoke from his wine, and
knew what his younger son had done unto him.

<span id="xv.i-p49"></span>**24.** Expergefactus autem Noah a vino suo,
cognovit quod fecerat sibi filius suus minor.

<span id="xv.i-p50"></span>**25.** And he said, Cursed *be* Canaan; a
servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.

<span id="xv.i-p51"></span>**25.** Et dixit, Maledictus Chenaan, servus
servorum erit fratribus suis.

<span id="xv.i-p52"></span>**26.** And he said, Blessed *be* the LORD
God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

<span id="xv.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et dixit, Benedictus Jehova Deus Sem,
et sit Chenaan servus eis.

<span id="xv.i-p54"></span>**27.** God shall enlarge Japheth, and he
shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

<span id="xv.i-p55"></span>**27.** Dilatet Deus Jepheth, et habitet in
tabernaculis Sem: et sit Chenaan servus eis.

<span id="xv.i-p56"></span>**28.** And Noah lived after the flood three
hundred and fifty years.

<span id="xv.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et vixit Noah post diluvium trecentos
annos et quinquaginta annos.

<span id="xv.i-p58"></span>**29.** And all the days of Noah were nine
hundred and fifty years: and he died.

<span id="xv.i-p59"></span>**29.** Fuerunt autem omnes dies Noah
nongenti anni et quinquaginta: et mortuus est.

<span id="xv.i-p60"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p61"></span><span id="xv.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p62"></span>**1.** *And* *God* *blessed* *Noah* . We
hence infer with what great fear Noah had been dejected, because God, so
often and at such length, proceeds to encourage him. For when Moses here
says, that God blessed Noah and his sons, he does not simply mean that
the favor of fruitfulness was restored to them; but that, at the same
time, the design of God concerning the new restitution of the world was
revealed unto them. For to the blessing itself is added the voice of God
by which he addresses them. We know that brute animals produce offspring
in no other way than by the blessing of God; but Moses here commemorates
a privilege which belongs only to men. Therefore, lest those four men
and their wives, seized with trepidation, should doubt for what purpose
they had been delivered, the Lord prescribes to them their future
condition of life: namely, that they shall raise up mankind from death
to life. Thus he not only renews the world by the same word by which he
before created it; but he directs his word to men, in order that they
may recover the lawful use of marriage, may know that the care of
producing offspring is pleasing to Himself, and may have confidence that
a progeny shall spring from them which shall diffuse itself through all
regions of the earth, so as to render it again inhabited; although it
had been laid waste and made a desert. Yet he did not permit promiscuous
intercourse, but sanctioned anew that law of marriage which he had
before ordained. And although the blessing of God is, in some way,
extended to illicit connections, so that offspring is thence produced,
yet this is an impure fruitfulness; that which is lawful flows only from
the expressly declared benediction of God.

<span id="xv.i-p63"></span><span id="xv.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p64"></span>**2.** *And* *the* *fear* *of* *you* . This
also has chiefly respect to the restoration of the world, in order that
the sovereignty over the rest of animals might remain with men. And
although after the fall of man, the beasts were endued with new
ferocity, yet some remains of that dominion over them, which God had
conferred on him in the beginning, were still left. He now also promises
that the same dominion shall continue. We see indeed that wild beasts
rush violently upon men, and rend and tear many of them in pieces; and
if God did not wonderfully restrain their fierceness, the human race
would be utterly destroyed. Therefore, what we have said respecting the
inclemency of the air, and the irregularity of the seasons, is also here
applicable. Savage beasts indeed prevail and rage against men in various
ways, and no wonder; for since we perversely exalt ourselves against
God, why should not the beasts rise up against us? Nevertheless, the
providence of God is a secret bridle to restrain their violence. For,
whence does it arise that serpents spare us, unless because he represses
their virulence? Whence is it that tigers, elephants, lions, bears,
wolves, and other wild beasts without number, do not rend, tear, and
devour everything human, except that they are withheld by this
subjection, as by a barrier? Therefore, it ought to be referred to the
special protection and guardianship of God, that we remain in safety.
For, were it otherwise, what could we expect; since they seem as if born
for our destruction, and burn with the furious desire to injure us?
Moreover, the bridle with which the Lord restrains the cruelty of wild
beasts, to prevent them falling upon men, is a certain fear and dread
which God has implanted in them, to the end that they might reverence
the presence of men. Daniel especially declares this respecting kings;
namely, that they are possessed of dominion, because the Lord has put
the fear and the dread of them both on men and beasts. But as the first
use of fear is to defend the society of mankind; so, according to the
measure in which God has given to men a general authority over the
beasts, there exists in the greatest and the least of men, I know not
what hidden mark, which does not suffer the cruelty of wild beasts, by
its violence to prevail. Another advantage, however and one more widely
extended, is here noted; namely, that men may render animals subservient
to their own convenience, and may apply them to various uses, according
to their wishes and their necessities. Therefore, the fact that oxen
become accustomed to bear the yoke; that the wildness of horses is so
subdued as to cause them to carry a rider; that they receive the
pack-saddle to bear burdens; that cows give milk, and suffer themselves
to be milked; that sheep are mute under the hand of the shearer; all
these facts are the result of this dominion, which, although greatly
diminished, is nevertheless not entirely abolished.

<span id="xv.i-p65"></span><span id="xv.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p66"></span>**3.** *Every* *moving* *thing* *that*
*liveth* *shall* *be* *meat* *for* *you* . The Lord proceeds further,
and grants animals for food to men, that they may eat their flesh. And
because Moses now first relates that this right was given to men, nearly
all commentators infer, that it was not lawful for man to eat flesh
before the deluge, but that the natural fruits of the earth were his
only food. But the argument is not sufficiently firm. For I hold to this
principle; that God here does not bestow on men more than he had
previously given, but only restores what had been taken away, that they
might again enter on the possession of those good things from which they
had been excluded. For since they had before offered sacrifices to God,
and were also permitted to kill wild beasts, from the hides and skins of
which, they might make for themselves garments and tents, I do not see
what obligation should prevent them from the eating of flesh. But since
it is of little consequence what opinion is held, I affirm nothing on
the subject.  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) This ought justly
to be deemed by us of greater importance, that to eat the flesh of
animals is granted to us by the kindness of God; that we do not seize
upon what our appetite desires, as robbers do, nor yet tyrannically shed
the innocent blood of cattle; but that we only take what is offered to
us by the hand of the Lord. We have heard what Paul says, that we are at
liberty to eat what we please, only we do it with the assurance of
conscience, but that he who imagines anything to be unclean, to him it
is unclean, (<span id="xv.i-p67.1"></span>[Ro
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)<span id="xv.i-p67.1"></span>.)
And whence has this happened to man, that he should eat whatever food he
pleased before God, with a tranquil mind, and not with unbridled
license, except from his knowing, that it has been divinely delivered
into his hand by the right of donation? Wherefore, (the same Paul being
witness,) the word of God sanctifies the creatures, that we may purely
and lawfully feed on them, (<span id="xv.i-p67.2"></span>[1Ti
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span id="xv.i-p67.2"></span>.) Let
the adage be utterly rejected which says, ‘that no one can feed and
refresh his body with a morsel of bread, without, at the same time,
defiling his soul.’ Therefore it is not to be doubted, that the Lord
designed to confirm our faith, when he expressly declares by Moses, that
he gave to man the free use of flesh, so that we might not eat it with a
doubtful and trembling conscience. At the same time, however, he invites
us to thanksgiving. On this account also, Paul adds “prayer” to the
“word,” in defining the method of sanctification in the passage recently
cited.

<span id="xv.i-p68"></span>And now we must firmly retain the liberty
given us by the Lord, which he designed to be recorded as on public
tables. For, by this word, he addresses all the posterity of Noah, and
renders this gift common to all ages. And why is this done, but that the
faithful may boldly assert their right to that which, they know, has
proceeded from God as its Author? For it is an insupportable tyranny,
when God, the Creator of all things, has laid open to us the earth and
the air, in order that we may thence take food as from his storehouse,
for these to be shut up from us by mortal man, who is not able to create
even a snail or a fly. I do not speak of external prohibition;  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) but I assert, that atrocious injury is
done to God, when we give such license to men as to allow them to
pronounce that unlawful which God designs to be lawful, and to bind
consciences which the word of God sets free, with their fictitious laws.
The fact that God prohibited his ancient people from the use of unclean
animals, seeing that exception was but temporary, is here passed over by
Moses.

<span id="xv.i-p70"></span><span id="xv.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p71"></span>**4.** *But* *flesh* *with* *the* *life*
*thereof* *,* *which* *is* *the* *blood* *thereof* Some thus explain
this passages ‘Ye may not eat a member cut off from a living animal,’
which is too trifling. However, since there is no copulative conjunction
between the two words, *blood* and *life* , I do not doubt that Moses,
speaking of the life, added the word *blood* exegetically,  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) as if he would say, that flesh is in
some sense devoured with its life, when it is eaten imbued with its own
blood. Wherefore, the life and the blood are not put for different
things, but for the same; not because blood is in itself the life, but
inasmuch as the vital spirits chiefly reside in the blood, it is, as far
as our feeling is concerned, a token which represents life. And this is
expressly declared, in order that men may have the greater horror of
eating blood For if it be a savage and barbarous thing to devour lives,
or to swallow down living flesh, men betray their brutality by eating
blood. Moreover, the tendency of this prohibition is by no means
obscure, namely, that God intends to accustom men to gentleness, by
abstinence from the blood of animals; but, if they should become
unrestrained, and daring in eating wild animals they would at length not
be sparing of even human blood. Yet we must remember, that this
restriction was part of the old law.  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) Wherefore, what Tertullian relates,
that in his time it was unlawful among Christians to taste the blood of
cattle, savours of superstition. For the apostles, in commanding the
Gentiles to observe this rite, for a short time, did not intend to
inject a scruple into their consciences, but only to prevent the liberty
which was otherwise sacred, from proving an occasion of offense to the
ignorant and the weak.

<span id="xv.i-p74"></span><span id="xv.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p75"></span>**5.** *And* *surely* *your* *blood* *of*
*your* *lives* *will* *I* *require* . In these words the Lord more
explicitly declares that he does not forbid the use of blood out of
regard to animals themselves, but because he accounts the life of men
precious: and because the sole end of his law is, to promote the
exercise of common humanity between them. I therefore think that Jerome,
in rendering the particle <span id="xv.i-p75.1"></span>ךא ( *ach,* )
*for* , has done better than they who read it as an adversative
disjunctive; ‘otherwise your blood will I require;’ yet literally it may
best be thus translated, ‘And truly your blood.’  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) The whole context is (in my opinion)
to be thus read, ‘And truly your blood, which is *in* your lives, or
which is *as* your lives, that is which vivifies and quickens you, as it
respects your body, will I require: from the hand of all animals will
require it; from the hand of man, from the hand, I say, of man, his
brother, will I require the life of man.’ The distinction by which the
Jews constitute four kinds of homicide is frivolous; for I have
explained the simple and genuine sense, namely, that God so highly
estimates our life, that he will not suffer murder to go unavenged. And
he inculcates this in so many words, in order that he may render the
cruelty of those the more detestable, who lay violent hands upon their
neighbors. And it is no common proof of God’s love towards us, that he
undertakes the defense of our lives, and declares that he will be the
avenger of our death. In saying that he will exact punishment from
animals for the violated life of men, he gives us this as an example.
For if, on behalf of man, he is angry with brute creatures who are
hurried by a blind impulse to feed upon him; what, do we suppose, will
become of the man who, unjustly, cruelly, and contrary to the sense of
nature, falls upon his brother?

<span id="xv.i-p77"></span><span id="xv.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p78"></span>**6.** *Whoso* *sheddeth* *man’s* *blood*
 <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) The clause in man which is here
added, has the force of amplification. Some expound it, ‘Before
witnesses.’ Others refer it to what follows, namely, ‘that by man his
blood should be shed.’  <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) But all
these interpretations are forced. What I have said must be remembered,
that this language rather expresses the atrociousness of the crime;
because whosoever kills a man, draws down upon himself the blood and
life of his brother. On the whole, they are deceived (in my judgment)
who think that a political law, for the punishment of homicides, is here
simply intended. Truly I do not deny that the punishment which the laws
ordain, and which the judges execute, are founded on this divine
sentence; but I say the words are more comprehensive. It is written,

<span id="xv.i-p81"></span>‘Men of blood shall not live out half their
days,’  
(<span id="xv.i-p81.2"></span>[Ps
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023)<span id="xv.i-p81.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p82"></span>And we see some die in highways, some in
stews, and many in wars. Therefore, however magistrates may connive at
the crime, God sends executioners from other quarters, who shall render
unto sanguinary men their reward. God so threatens and denounces
vengeance against the murderer, that he even arms the magistrate with
the sword for the avenging of slaughter, in order that the blood of men
may not be shed with impunity.

<span id="xv.i-p83"></span>*For* *in* *the* *image* *of* *God* *made*
*he* *man* . For the greater confirmation of the above doctrines God
declares, that he is not thus solicitous respecting human life rashly,
and for no purpose. Men are indeed unworthy of God’s care, if respect be
had only to themselves. but since they bear the image of God engraven on
them, He deems himself violated in their person. Thus, although they
have nothing of their own by which they obtain the favor of God, he
looks upon his own gifts in them, and is thereby excited to love and to
care for them. This doctrine, however is to be carefully observed that
no one can be injurious to his brother without wounding God himself.
Were this doctrine deeply fixed in our minds, we should be much more
reluctant than we are to inflict injuries. Should any one object, that
this divine image has been obliterated, the solution is easy; first,
there yet exists some remnant of it, so that man is possessed of no
small dignity; and, secondly, the Celestial Creator himself, however
corrupted man may be, still keeps in view the end of his original
creation; and according to his example, we ought to consider for what
end he created men, and what excellence he has bestowed upon them above
the rest of living beings.

<span id="xv.i-p84"></span><span id="xv.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p85"></span>**7.** *And* *you* *,* *be* *ye* *fruitful*
*and* *multiply* . He again turns his discourse to Noah and his sons,
exhorting them to the propagation of offspring: as if he would say, ‘You
see that I am intent upon cherishing and preserving mankind, do you
therefore also attend to it.’ At the same time, in commending to them
the preservation of seed, he deters them from murder, and from unjust
acts of violence. Yet his chief end was that to which I have before
alluded, that he might encourage their dejected minds. For in these
words is contained not a bare precept, but also a promise.

<span id="xv.i-p86"></span><span id="xv.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p87"></span>**8.** *And* *God* *spake* *unto* *Noah* .
That the memory of the deluge might not inspire them with new terrors,
as often as the sky were covered with clouds, lest the earth should
again be drowned; this source of anxiety is taken away. And certainly,
if we consider the great propensity of the human mind to distrust, we
shall not deem this testimony to have been unnecessary even for Noah. He
was indeed endued with a rare and incomparable faith, even to a miracle;
but no strength of constancy could be so great, that this most sad and
terrible vengeance of God should not shake it. Therefore, whenever any
great and continued shower shall seem to threaten the earth with a
deluge, this barrier, on which the holy man may rely, is interposed. Now
although his sons would need this confirmation more than he, yet the
Lord speaks especially on his account. And the clause which follows,
‘and to his sons who were with him,’ is to be referred to this point.
For how is it, that God, making his covenant with the sons of Noah,
commands them to hope for the best? Truly, because they are joined with
their father, who is, as it were, the stipulator of the covenant, so as
to be associated with him, in a subordinate place  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) . Moreover, there is no doubt that it
was the design of God to provide for all his posterity. It was not
therefore a private covenant confirmed with one family only, but one
which is common to all people, and which shall flourish in all ages to
the end of the world. And truly, since at the present time, impiety
overflows not less than in the age of Noah, it is especially necessary
that the waters should be restrained by this word of God, as by a
thousand bolts and bars lest they should break forth to destroy us.
Wherefore, relying on this promise, let us look forward to the last day,
in which the consuming fire shall purify heaven and earth.

<span id="xv.i-p89"></span><span id="xv.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p90"></span>**10.** *And* *with* *every* *living*
*creature* . Although the favor which the Lord promises extends also to
animals, yet it is not in vain that he addresses himself only to men,
who, by the sense of faith, are able to perceive this benefit. We enjoy
the heaven and the air in common with the beasts, and draw the same
vital breath; but it is no common privilege, that God directs his word
to us; whence we may learn with what paternal love he pursues us. And
here three distinct steps are to be traced. First, God, as in a matter
of present concern, makes a covenant with Noah and his family, lest they
should be afraid of a deluge for themselves. Secondly, he transmits his
covenant to posterity, not only that, as by continual succession, the
effect may reach to other ages; but that they who should afterwards be
born might also apprehend this testimony by faith, and might conclude
that the same thing which had been promised to the sons of Noah, was
promised unto them. Thirdly, he declares that he will be propitious also
to brute animals, so that the effect of the covenant towards them, might
be the preservation of their lives only, without imparting to them sense
and intelligence. Hence the ignorance of the Anabaptists may be refuted,
who deny that the covenant of God is common to infants, because they are
destitute of present faith. As if, truly, when God promises salvation to
a thousand generations, the fathers were not intermediate parties
between God and their children, whose office it is to deliver to their
children (so to speak) from hand to hand the promise received from God.
But as many as withdraw their life from this protection of God (since
the greater part of men either despise or ridicule this divine covenant)
deserve, by this single act of ingratitude, to be immersed in eternal
fire. For although this be an earthly promise, yet God designs the faith
of his people to be exercised, in order that they may be assured that a
certain abode will, by his special goodness, be provided for them on
earth, until they shall be gathered together in heaven.

<span id="xv.i-p91"></span><span id="xv.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p92"></span>**12.** *This* *is* *the* *token* *of* *the*
*covenant* . A sign is added to the promise, in which is exhibited the
wonderful kindness of God; who, for the purpose of confirming our faith
in his word, does not disdain to use such helps. And although we have
more fully discussed the use of signs in <span
id="xv.i-p92.1"></span>[Ge 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)<span
id="xv.i-p92.1"></span>, yet we must briefly maintain, from these words
of Moses, that it is wrong to sever signs from the word. By the word, I
mean not that of which Papists boast; whereby they enchant bread, wine,
water, and oil, with their magical whisperings; but that which may
strengthen faith: according no the Lord here plainly addresses holy Noah
and his sons; he then annexes a seal, for the sake of assurance.
Wherefore, if the sacrament be wrested from the word, it ceases to be
what it is called. It must, I say, be a vocal sign, in order that it may
retain its force, and not degenerate from its nature. And not only is
that administration of sacraments in which the word of God is silent,
vain and ludicrous; but it draws with it pure satanic delusions. Hence
we also infer, that from the beginning, it was the peculiar property of
sacraments, to avail for the confirmation of faith. For certainly, in
the covenant that promise is included to which faith ought to respond.
It appears to some absurd, that faith should be sustained by such helps.
But they who speak thus do not, in the first place, reflect on the great
ignorance and imbecility of our minds; nor do they, secondly, ascribe to
the working of the secret power of the Spirit that praise which is due.
It is the work of God alone to begin and to perfect faith; but he does
it by such instruments as he sees good; the free choice of which is in
his own power.

<span id="xv.i-p93"></span><span id="xv.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p94"></span>**13.** *I* *do* *set* *my* *bow* *in* *the*
*cloud* . From these words certain eminent theologians have been induced
to deny, that there was any rainbow before the deluge: which is
frivolous. For the words of Moses do not signify, that a bow was then
formed which did not previously exist; but that a mark was engraven upon
it, which should give a sign of the divine favor towards men. That this
may the more evidently appear, it will be well to recall to memory what
we have elsewhere said, that some signs are natural, and some
preternatural. And although there are many examples of this second class
of signs in the Scriptures; yet they are peculiar, and do not belong to
the common and perpetual use of the Church. For, as it pleases the Lord
to employ earthly elements, as vehicles for raising the minds of men on
high, so I think the celestial arch which had before existed naturally,
is here consecrated into a sign and pledge; and thus a new office is
assigned to it; whereas, from the nature of the thing itself, it might
rather be a sign of the contrary; for it threatens continued rain. Let
this therefore he the meaning, of the words, ‘As often as the rain shall
alarm you, look upon the bow. For although it may seem to cause the rain
to overflow the earth, it shall nevertheless be to you a pledge of
returning dryness, and thus it will then become you to stand with
greater confidence, than under a clear and serene sky.’ Hence it is not
for us to contend with philosophers respecting the rainbow; for although
its colors are the effect of natural causes, yet they act profanely who
attempt to deprive God of the right and authority which he has over his
creatures.

<span id="xv.i-p95"></span><span id="xv.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p96"></span>**15.** *And* *I* *will* *remember* *my*
*covenant* . Moses, by introducing God so often as the speaker, teaches
us that the word holds the chief place, and that signs are to be
estimated by it.  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) God, however,
speaks after the manner of men, when he says, that at the sight of the
rainbow he will remember his covenant. But this mode of speaking has
reference to the faith of men, in order that they may reflect, that God,
whenever he stretches out his arch over the clouds, is not unmindful of
his covenant.

<span id="xv.i-p98"></span><span id="xv.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p99"></span>**18.** *The* *sons* *of* *Noah* . Moss
enumerates the sons of Noah, not only because he is about to pass on to
the following history, but for the purpose of more fully illustrating
the force of the promise, “Replenish the earth.” For we may hence better
conceive how efficacious the blessing of God has been, because an
immense multitude of men proceeded in a short time from so small a
number; and because one family, and that a little one, grew into so
many, and such numerous nations.

<span id="xv.i-p100"></span><span id="xv.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p101"></span>**20.** *And* *Noah* *began* *to* *be* *an*
*husbandman* . I do not so explain. the words, as if he then, for the
first time, began to give his attention to the cultivation of the
fields; but, (in my opinion,) Moses rather intimates, that Noah, with a
collected mind, though now an old man, returned to the culture of the
fields, and to his former labors. It is, however, uncertain whether he
had been a vine-dresser or not. It is commonly believed that wine was
not in use before that time. And this opinion has been the more
willingly received, as affording an honorable pretext for the excuse of
Noah’s sin. But it does not appear to me probable that the fruit of the
vine, which excels all others, should have remained neglected and
unprofitable. Also, Moses does not say that Noah was drunken on the
first day on which he tasted it. Therefore, leaving this question
undetermined, I rather suppose, that we are to learn from the
drunkenness of Noah, what a filthy and detestable crime drunkenness is.
The holy patriarch, though he had hitherto been a rare example of
frugality and temperance, losing all self-possession, did, in a base and
shameful manner, prostrate himself naked on the ground, so as to become
a laughingstock to all. Therefore, with what care ought we to cultivate
sobriety, lest anything like this, or even worse, should happen to us?
Formerly, the heathen philosopher said, that ‘wine is the blood of the
earth; and, therefore, when men intemperately pour it down their
throats, they are justly punished by their mother. Let us, however,
rather remember, that when men, by shameful abuse, profane this noble
and most precious gift of God, He himself becomes the Avenger. And let
us know, that Noah, by the judgement of Gods has been set forth as a
spectacle to be a warning to others, that they should not become
intoxicated by excessive drinking. Some excuse might certainly be made
for the holy man; who, having completed his labor, and being exhilarated
with wine, imagines that he is but taking his just reward. But God
brands him with an eternal mark of disgrace. What then, do we suppose,
will happen to those idle-bellies and insatiable gluttons whose sole
object of contention is who shall consume the greatest quantity of wine?
And although this kind of correction was severe, yet it was profitable
to the servant of God; since he was recalled to sobriety, lest by
proceeding in the indulgence of a vice to which he had once yielded, he
should ruin himself; just as we see drunkards become at length
brutalized by continued intemperance.

<span id="xv.i-p102"></span><span id="xv.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p103"></span>**22.** *And* *Ham* *,* *the* *father* *of*
*Canaan* . This circumstance is added to augment the sorrow of Noah,
that he is mocked by his own son. For we must ever keep in memory, that
this punishment was divinely inflicted upon him; partly, because his
fault was not a light one; partly that God in his person might present a
lesson of temperance to all ages. Drunkenness in itself deserves as its
reward, that they who deface the image of their heavenly Father in
themselves, should become a laughingstock to their own children. For
certainly, as far as possible, drunkards subvert their own
understanding, and so far deprive themselves of reason as to degenerate
into beasts. And let us remember, that if the Lord so grievously avenged
the single transgression of the holy man, he will prove an avenger no
less severe against those who are daily intoxicated; and of this we have
examples sufficiently numerous before our eyes. In the meanwhile, Ham,
by reproachfully laughing at his feather, betrays his own depraved and
malignant disposition. We know that parents, next to God, are most
deeply to be reverenced; and if there were neither books nor sermons,
nature itself constantly inculcates this lesson upon us. It is received
by common consent, that piety towards parents is the mother of all
virtues. This Ham, therefore, must have been of a wicked, perverse, and
crooked disposition; since he not only took pleasure in his father’s
shame, but wished to expose him to his brethren. And this is no slight
occasion of offense; first, that Noah, the minister of salvation to men,
and the chief restorer of the world, should in extreme old age, lie
intoxicated in his house; and then, that the ungodly and wicked Ham
should have proceeded from the sanctuary of God.  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) God had selected eight souls as a
sacred seed, thoroughly purged from all corruption, for the renovation
of the Church: but the son of Noah shows, how necessary it is for men to
be held as with the bridle of God, however they may be exalted by
privilege. The impiety of Ham proves to us how deep is the root of
wickedness in men; and that it continually puts forth its shoots, except
where the power of the Spirit prevails over it. But if, in the hallowed
sanctuary of God, among so small a number, one fiend was preserved; let
us not wonder if, at this day, in the Church, containing a much greater
multitude of men, the wicked are mingled with the good. Nor is there any
doubt that the minds of Shem and Japheth were grievously wounded, when
they perceived in their own brother such a prodigy of scorn; and, on the
other hand, their father shamefully lying prostrate on the ground. Such
a debasing alienation of mind in the prince of the new world, and the
holy patriarch of the Church, could not less astonish them, than if they
had seen the ark itself broken, dashed in pieces, cleft asunder, and
destroyed. Yet this cause of offense they alike overcome by their
magnanimity, and conceal by their modesty. Ham alone eagerly seizes the
occasion of ridiculing and inveighing against his father; just as
perverse men are wont to catch at occasions of offense in others, which
may serve as a pretext for indulgence in sin. And his age renders him
the less excusable; for he was not a lascivious youth, who, by his
thoughtless laughter, betrayed his own folly, seeing that he was already
more than one hundred years old. Therefore, it is probable, that he thus
perversely insulted his father, for the purpose of acquiring for himself
the license of sinning with impunity. We see many such at this day, who
most studiously pry into the faults of holy and pious men, in order that
without shame they may precipitate themselves into all iniquity; they
even make the faults of other men an occasion of hardening themselves
into a contempt for God.

<span id="xv.i-p105"></span><span id="xv.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p106"></span>**23.** *And* *Shem* *and* *Japheth* *took*
*a* *garment* . Here the piety, as well as the modesty, of the two
brothers is commended; who, in order that the dignity of their father
might not be lowered in their esteem, but that they might always cherish
and keep entire the reverence which they owed him, turned away their
eyes from the sight of his disgrace. And thus they gave proof of the
regard they paid to their father’s honor, in supposing that their own
eyes would be polluted, if they voluntarily looked upon the nakedness by
which he was disgraced. At the same time they also consulted their own
modesty. For (as it was said in <span id="xv.i-p106.1"></span>[Ge
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p106.1"></span>)
there is something so unaccountably shameful in the nakedness of man,
that scarcely any one dares to look upon himself, even when no witness
is present. They also censure the impious rashness of their brother, who
had not spared his father. Hence, then, we may learn how acceptable to
God is that piety, of which the example here recorded receives a signal
encomium of the Spirit. But if piety towards an earthly father was a
virtue so excellent, and so worthy of praise; with how much greater
devotedness of piety ought the sacred majesty of God to be worshipped?
The Papists make themselves ridiculous by desiring to cover the
filthiness of their idol, yea, the abominations of their whole impure
clergy, with the cloak of Shem and Japheth. I omit to state how great is
the difference between the disgrace of Noah and the execrable vileness
of so many crimes which contaminate heaven and earth. But it is
necessary that Antichrist and his horned bishops, with all that rabble,
should prove themselves to be fathers,  <span
id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) if they with that any honor should be
paid them.

<span id="xv.i-p108"></span><span id="xv.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p109"></span>**24.** *And* *Noah* *awoke* . It might seem
to some that Noah, although he had just cause of anger, still conducted
himself with too little modesty and gravity; and that he ought, at
least, silently to have mourned over his sin before God; and also, with
shame, to have given proof of his repentance to men: but that now as if
he had committed no offense, he fulminates with excessive severity
against his son.  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) Moses,
however, does not here relate reproaches uttered by Noah, under the
excitement of rage and anger, but rather introduces him speaking in the
spirit of prophecy. Wherefore we ought not to doubt, that the holy man
was truly humbled (as he ought to be) under a sense of his fault, and
honestly reflected on his own deserts; but now, having received the
grant of pardon, and his condemnation being removed, he proceeds as the
herald of Divine judgment. It is not indeed to be doubted that the holy
man, endued with a disposition otherwise gentle, and being one of the
best of parents, would pronounce this sentence upon his son with the
most bitter grief of mind. For he saw him miraculously preserved amongst
a few and having a place among the very flower of the human race. Now,
therefore, when, with his own mouth, he is compelled to separate him
from the Church of God, he doubtless would grievously bewail the
malediction of his son. But by this example, God would admonish us that
the constancy of our faith must be retained, if at any time we see those
fail who are most closely united to us, and that our spirits ought not
to be broken; nay, that we must so exercise the severity which God
enjoins, as not to spare even our own bowels. And whereas, Noah does not
pronounce a sentence so harsh, except by Divine inspiration, it behaves
us to infer from the severity of the punishment how abominable in the
sight of God is the impious contempt of parents, since it perverts the
sacred order of nature, and violates the majesty and authority of God,
in the person of those whom he has commanded to preside in his place.

<span id="xv.i-p111"></span><span id="xv.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p112"></span>**25.** *Cursed* *be* *Canaan*  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) It is asked in the first place, why
Noah instead of pronouncing the curse upon his son, inflicts the
severity of punishment, which that son had deserved, upon his innocent
grandson; since it seems not consistent with the justice of God, to
visit the crimes of parents upon their children? But the answer is well
known; namely that God, although he pursues his course of judgments upon
the sons and the grandchildren of the ungodly, yet in being angry with
them, is not angry with the innocent, because even they themselves are
found in fault. Wherefore there is no absurdity in the act of avenging
the sins of the fathers upon their reprobate children; since, of
necessity, all those whom God has deprived of his Spirit are subject to
his wrath. But it is surprising that Noah should curse his grandson; and
should pass his son Ham, the author of the crime, over in silence. The
Jews imagine that the reason of this was to be traced to the special
favor of God; and that since the Lord had bestowed on Ham so great an
honor,  <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) the curse was
transferred from him to his son. But the conjecture is futile.
Certainly, to my mind, there is no doubt that the punishment was carried
forward even to his posterity in order that the severity of it might be
the more apparent; as if the Lord had openly proclaimed that the
punishment of one man would not satisfy him but that he would attach the
curse also to the posterity of the offender, so that it should extend
through successive ages. In the meantime, Ham himself is so far from
being exempt, that God, by involving his son with him, aggravates his
own condemnation.

<span id="xv.i-p121"></span>Another question is also proposed; namely,
why among the many sons of Ham, God chooses one to be smitten? But let
not our curiosity here indulge itself too freely; let us remember that
the judgments of God are, not in vain, called “a great deep,” and that
it would be a degrading thing for God, before whose tribunal we all must
one day stand, to be subjected to our judgments, or rather to our
foolish temerity. He chooses whom he sees good, that he may show forth
in them an example of his grace and kindness; others he appoints to a
different end, that they may be proofs of his anger and severity. Here,
although the minds of men are blinded, let every one of us, conscious of
his own infirmity, learn rather to ascribe praise to God’s justice, than
plunge, with insane audacity, into the profound abyss. While God held
the whole seed of Ham as obnoxious to the curse, he mentions the
Canaanites by name, as those whom he would curse above all others. And
hence we infer that this judgment proceeded from God, because it was
proved by the event itself. What would certainly be the condition of the
Canaanites, Noah could not know by human means. Wherefore in things
obscure and hidden, the Spirit directed his tongue.

<span id="xv.i-p122"></span>Another difficulty still remains: for since
the Scripture teaches that God avenges the sins of men on the third and
fourth generation, it seems to assign this limit to the wrath of God;
but the vengeance of which mention is now made extends itself to the
tenth generation. I answer, that these words of Scripture are not
intended to prescribe a law to God, which he may not so far set aside,
as to be at liberty to punish sins beyond four generations. The thing to
be here observed is, the comparison instituted between punishment and
grace; by which we are taught, that God, while he is a just avenger of
crimes, is still more inclined to mercy. In the meantime, let his
liberty remain unquestioned, to extend his vengeance as far as he
pleases.

<span id="xv.i-p123"></span>*A* *servant* *of* *servants* *shall* *he*
*be* . This Hebraism signifies that Canaan shall be the last, even among
servants: as if it had been said, ‘Not only shall his condition be
servile, but worse than that of common servitude.’  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) Yet the thunder of this severe and
dreadful prophecy seems weak and illusory, since the Canaanites excelled
in strength and in riches, and were possessed of extensive dominion.
Where then is this servitude? In the first place, I answer, that though
God, in threatening men, does not immediately execute what he denounces,
yet his threats are never weak and ineffectual. Secondly, that the
judgments of God are not always exhibited before our eyes, nor
apprehended by our carnal reason. The Canaanites, having shaken off the
yoke of servitude, which was divinely imposed upon them, even proceeded
to grasp at empire for themselves. But although they triumph for a time,
yet in the sight of God their condition is not deemed free. Just as when
the faithful are iniquitously oppressed, and tyrannically harassed by
the wicked, their spiritual liberty is still not extinct in the sight of
God. It behaves us then to be content with this proof of the divine
judgment, that God promised the dominion of the land of Canaan to his
servant Abraham, and at length devoted the Canaanites to destruction.
But because the Pope so earnestly maintains that he sometimes utters
prophecies, — as did even Caiaphas, (<span id="xv.i-p124.1"></span>[Joh
11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051)<span id="xv.i-p124.1"></span>,)
— lest we should seem to refuse him everything, I do not deny that the
title with which he adorns himself was dictated by the Spirit of God,
‘Let him be a servant of servants,’ in the same sense that Canaan was.

<span id="xv.i-p125"></span><span id="xv.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p126"></span>**26.** *Blessed* *be* *the* *Lord* *God*
*of* *Shem* . Noah blesses his other children, but in a different
manner. For he places Shem in the highest post of honor. And this is the
reason why Noah, in blessing him, breaks forth in the praise of God,
without adhering to the person of man. For the Hebrews, when they are
speaking of any rare and transcendent excellence, raise their thoughts
to God. Therefore the holy man, when he perceived that the most abundant
grace of God was destined for his son Shem, rises to thanksgiving.
Whence we infer, that he spoke, not from carnal reason, but rather
treated of the secret favors of God, the result of which was to be
deferred to a remote period. Finally, by these words it is declared,
that the benediction of Shem would be divine or heavenly.

<span id="xv.i-p127"></span><span id="xv.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p128"></span>**27.** *God* *shall* *enlarge* *Japheth* .
In the Hebrew words <span id="xv.i-p128.1"></span>תפי ( *japhte* ) and
<span id="xv.i-p128.2"></span>תפי ( *japheth* ,) there is an elegant
allusion. For the root of the word is <span id="xv.i-p128.3"></span>התפ
( *pathah* ,) which, among the Hebrews, signifies to entice with smooth
words, or to allure in one direction or another. Here, however, nearly
all commentators take it as signifying to enlarge.  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) If this exposition be received, the
meaning will be, that the posterity of Japheth, which for a time would
be scattered, and removed far from the tents of Shem, would at length be
increased, so that it should more nearly approach them, and should dwell
together with them, as in a common home. But I rather approve the other
version, ‘God shall gently bring back, or incline Japheth.’  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) Moreover, whichever interpretation we
follow, Noah predicts that there will be a temporary dissension between
Shem and Japheth, although he retains both in his family and calls both
his lawful heirs; and that afterwards the time will come, in which they
shall again coalesce in one body, and have a common home. It is,
however, most absolutely certain, that a prophecy is here put forth
concerning things unknown to man, of which, as the event, at length,
shows God alone was the Author. Two thousand years and some centuries
more, elapsed before the Gentiles and the Jews were gathered together in
one faith. Then the sons of Shem, of whom the greater part had revolted
and cut themselves off from the holy family of God, were collected
together, and dwelt under one tabernacle.  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) Also the Gentiles, the progeny of
Japheth, who had long been wanderers and fugitives were received into
the same tabernacle. For God, by a new adoption, has formed a people out
of those who were separated, and has confirmed a fraternal union between
alienated parties. This is done by the sweet and gentle voice of God,
which he has uttered in the gospel; and this prophecy is still daily
receiving its fulfillment, since God invites the scattered sheep to join
his flock, and collects, on every side, those who shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. It is truly no
common support of our faith, that the calling of the Gentiles is not
only decreed in the eternal counsel of God, but is openly declared by
the mouth of the Patriarch; lest we should think it to have happened
suddenly or by chance, that the inheritance of eternal life was offered
generally to all. But the form of the expression, ‘Japheth shall dwell
in the tabernacles of Shem,’  <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303)
commends to us that mutual society which ought to exist, and to be
cherished among the faithful. For whereas God had chosen to himself a
Church from the progeny of Shem, he afterwards chose the Gentiles
together with them, on this condition, that they should join themselves
to that people, who were in possession of the covenant of life.

<span id="xv.i-p133"></span><span id="xv.i-p133.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p134"></span>**28.** *And* *Noah* *lived* . Although
Moses briefly states the age of the holy man, and does not record his
annals and the memorable events of his life, yet those things which are
certain, and which Scripture elsewhere commemorates, ought to recur to
our minds. Within one hundred and fifty years, the offspring of his
three sons became so numerous, that he had sufficient and even abundant
proof of the efficacy of the Divine benediction Increase and multiply.
He sees, not one city only, filled with his grandchildren, nor his seed
expanded barely to three hundred families; but many nations springing
from one of his sons who should inhabit extensive regions. This
astonishing increase, since it was a visible representation of the
divine favor towards him, would doubtless fill him with unbounded joy.
For Abraham was nearly fifty years old when his ancestor Noah died.
 <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) In the meantime, he was
compelled to behold many things, which would afflict his holy breast
with incredible grief. To omit other things; he saw in the family of
Shem, the sanctuary of God, — into which the sons of Japheth were to be
received, — destroyed, or, at least, dilapidated and rent. For whereas
the father of Abraham himself, having deserted his proper station, had
erected for himself a profane tabernacle; a very small portion indeed
remained of those who worshipped God in the harmonious consent of a pure
faith. With what tormenting pains this terrible confusion affected him
cannot be sufficiently expressed in words. Hence we may know, that his
eyes of faith must have been exceedingly penetrating, which did not fail
to behold afar of, the grace of God, in preserving the Church, at that
time overwhelmed by the wickedness of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc01014.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xv.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p67"></span> The question which Calvin here dismisses as
one of little importance has, in modern controversy, assumed a very
different position; and most commentators have come to a decision, the
reverse of that to which he inclines. His arguments appears chargeable
with the want of firmness, which he imputes to others. The inference
that the flesh of sacrifices was eaten, since otherwise it must have
been wasted, is of no force, if we suppose the first sacrifices to have
been all holocausts, or whole burnt offering unto the Lord. The garments
or tents referred to as made from the skins of animals were, in all
probability, those of the very animals which were thus sacrificed; so
that there is no reason hence to conclude, that flesh was eaten before
the deluge. But let the reader refer to Magee on the Atonement,
Dissertation, No.li2 — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc01014.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xv.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p69"></span> By external prohibition, is probably meant
such as might be enjoined by the magistrate during a time of scarcity,
or for any purely civil purpose. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc01014.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xv.i-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p72"></span> This is apparent in the English version,
where the words, “which is,” are added in Italics, showing that in the
judgment of the translators, the word following was explanatory of that
which preceded. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc01014.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xv.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p73"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p73.1"></span>Partem fuisse
veteris paedagogiae.”

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc01014.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xv.i-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p76"></span> Thus agreeing with the English version.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc01014.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xv.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p79"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p79.1"></span>Qui effuderit
sanguinem hominis in homine.” He who shall have shed the blood of man in
man.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc01014.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xv.i-p79.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p80"></span> This is the interpretation of the English
version.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc01014.htm#fr_292) <span
id="xv.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p88"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p88.1"></span>Ut secundo
loco in societatem accedant.”

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc01014.htm#fr_293) <span
id="xv.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p97"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p97.1"></span>Precipuas esse
verbi partes, et inde aestimanda signa.” — “<span
id="xv.i-p97.2"></span>Queleprincipal gist en la parole, et que d’icelle
il faut estimer les sacramens.” That the principal force is in the word,
and that from it we must estimate the sacraments. — *French Tr*.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc01014.htm#fr_294) <span
id="xv.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p104"></span> Reference is here made to the ark, as the
type of the Church. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc01014.htm#fr_295) <span
id="xv.i-p106.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p107"></span> That is, legitimate fathers.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc01014.htm#fr_296) <span
id="xv.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p110"></span> This is an objection, to which the answer
immediately follows.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc01014.htm#fr_297) <span
id="xv.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p113"></span> It has been remarked by Bishop Lowth, that
nearly all the indications of future events in the Holy Scriptures are
announced in verse and in numbers. — Prael. 2 We have here a remarkable
instance of this peculiarity. The following is a translation of Bishop
Lowth’s version of Noah’s prediction: —

<span id="xv.i-p114"></span>*Cursed be Canaan!  
A servant of servants he shall be to his brethren.  
Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem!  
And let Canaan be their servant.  
May God enlarge Japheth,  
And may he dwell in the tents of Shem;  
And let Canaan be their servant.* — *Prael. 4*

<span id="xv.i-p115"></span>The adoption of some differences of reading
has been suggested by later critics. It has been especially observed,
that the first hemistich is a broken or short line, and does not
correspond with the next in length or rhyme. And on the authority of the
Arabic version, (see Walton’s Polyglott,) many learned men would thus
fill up the line —

<span id="xv.i-p116"></span>“Cursed be Ham, the father of Canaan.”

<span id="xv.i-p117"></span>They would also, on the same authority,
alter the fourth and sixth lines, by inserting the word “father,” thus —

<span id="xv.i-p118"></span>“And let the father of Canaan be their
servant.”

<span id="xv.i-p119"></span>Yet such alterations are not lightly to be
made in the sacred text; and it seems highly probable, that the addition
in the Arabic version was intended for nothing more originally than a
paraphrase to explain the translator’s view of the passage. The reader
is referred to Caunter on the Poetry of the Pentateuch, for further
information respecting the poetical character of these verses; and to
Bishop Newton’s Dissertations, No. I., for its prophetical application.
Some excellent remarks, of a practical kind, will be found in Bishop
Hall’s contemplations. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc01014.htm#fr_298) <span
id="xv.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p120"></span> Namely, that of having preserved him in the
ark. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc01014.htm#fr_299) <span
id="xv.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p124"></span> Vide Ainsworth in loco, Bishop Newton’s
Dissertation i.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc01014.htm#fr_300) <span
id="xv.i-p128.4"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p129"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p129.1"></span>Dilatet Deus
Japheth.” — *Vulg* . “<span id="xv.i-p129.2"></span>πλατύναι ὅ Θεὸς” —
*Sept*

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc01014.htm#fr_301) <span
id="xv.i-p129.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p130"></span> See marginal reading of English version,
“God will persuade Japheth.” — See also Schindler’s Lexicon, sub voce
<span id="xv.i-p130.1"></span>התפ, and Ainsworth in loco. It is however
objected, and not without reason, that the word here rendered *persuade*
is rarely, if ever, used in a good sense, that it generally means to
entice, or allure to evil; and, therefore, the most judicious critics
seem rather inclined to fall back upon the version given in the text of
our translation, than to accept the marginal reading, with which Calvin
agrees. See Professor Bush’s note on this place. Dathe gives the
preference to the Arabic version, which signifies that God will prosper
Japheth; but for this there is no sufficient authority. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc01014.htm#fr_302) <span
id="xv.i-p130.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p131"></span> Allusion here seems to be made to the words
quoted by James from the prophecy of Amos: “I will return, and will
build again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and I will
build again the ruins thereof and I will set it up.” — <span
id="xv.i-p131.1"></span>[Ac 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#016)<span
id="xv.i-p131.1"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc01014.htm#fr_303) <span
id="xv.i-p131.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p132"></span> It is not clear whether the original really
means that “Japheth,” or that “God,” “shall dwell in the tents of Shem.”
If the former, then this is a plain prediction of events which have been
in a remarkable manner fulfilled, by the conversion of the Gentiles, and
by the diffusion of a vast European population over those regions which
were originally occupied by the descendants of Shem. If the original
really means the latter, then it has been fulfilled by the manifestation
of God’s glory among the Israelites, first through the Shechinah which
appeared in the tabernacle and temple, and then more especially through
the advent of the Messiah, of whom St. John says, “The Word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us; and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth,” (<span
id="xv.i-p132.1"></span>[Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xv.i-p132.1"></span>.) — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc01014.htm#fr_304) <span
id="xv.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p135"></span> Lightfoot places the death of Noah two
years before the birth of Abraham; Dr. A. Clarke two years after it.
These chronological differences, however, do not materially affect the
general conclusions drawn by Calvin. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc01015)
