[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01006)  [Next](cc01008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2.

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
2:1-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Thus the heavens and the earth were
finished, and all the host of them.

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Perfecti fuerunt igitur coeli et
terra, et omnis exercitus eorum.

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And on the seventh day God ended his
work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his
work which he had made.

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Perfeceratque Deus die septimo opus
suum quod fecerat, et quievit die septimo ab omni opere suo quod
fecerat.

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And God blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which
God created and made.

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Benedixit autem diei septimo, et
sanctificavit illum: quod in illo quievisset abomni opere suo quod
creaverat Deus ut faceret.

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span>**4.** These *are* the generations of the
heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the
LORD God made the earth and the heavens,

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Istae sunt generationes coeli et
terrae, quando creati sunt, in die qua fecit Jehova Deus terram et
coelos,

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And every plant of the field before
it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the
LORD God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and *there was* not a
man to till the ground.

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et omne virgultum agri antequam
esset in terra, et omnem herbam agri antequam germinaret: quia nondum
pluere fecerat Jehova Deus super terram, et homo non erat qui coleret
terram:

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span>**6.** But there went up a mist from the
earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Sed vapot ascendebat e terra, et
irrigabat universam superficiem terrae.

<span id="viii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the LORD God formed man *of* the
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life;
and man became a living soul.

<span id="viii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Formaverat autem Jehova Deus hominem
e pulvere terrae; et inspiaverat in faciem ejus spiraculum vitae, et
fuit homo in animam viventem.

<span id="viii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And the LORD God planted a garden
eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.

<span id="viii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Plantaverat quoque Jehova Deus
hortum in Heden ab Oriente: et posuit ibi hominem quem formaverat.

<span id="viii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And out of the ground made the LORD
God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food;
the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil.

<span id="viii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et germinare fecerat Jehova Deus e
terra omnem arborem concupiscibilem visu, et bonam ad vescendum; et
arborem scientiae boni et mali.

<span id="viii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And a river went out of Eden to
water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four
heads.

<span id="viii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et fluvius egrediebatur ex Heden ad
irrigandum hortum; et inde dividebatur, eratque in quatuor capita.

<span id="viii.i-p22"></span>**11.** The name of the first *is* Pison:
that *is* it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where *there
is* gold;

<span id="viii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Nomen unius, Pison: ipse circuit
totam terram Havila, ubi est aurum:

<span id="viii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And the gold of that land *is*
good: there *is* bdellium and the onyx stone.

<span id="viii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et aurum terrae illius bonum: ibi
est bdellium, et lapis onychinus.

<span id="viii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And the name of the second river
*is* Gihon: the same *is* it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

<span id="viii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Nomen vero fluvii secundi Gihon:
ipse circuit omnem terram Aethipiae.

<span id="viii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And the name of the third river
*is* Hiddekel: that *is* it which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And
the fourth river *is* Euphrates.

<span id="viii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et nomen fluvii tertii Hiddekel;
ipse tendit ad orientem Assur; et flumen quartum est Perath.

<span id="viii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And the LORD God took the man, and
put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.

<span id="viii.i-p31"></span>**15.** tulit itaque Jehova Deus hominem,
et posuit eum in horto Heden, ut coleret eum, et custodiret eum.

<span id="viii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And the LORD God commanded the man,
saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat:

<span id="viii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Praecepitque Jehova Deus homini,
dicendo, De omni arbore horti comedendo comedes:

<span id="viii.i-p34"></span>**17.** But of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shalt surely die.

<span id="viii.i-p35"></span>**17.** At de arbore scientiae boni et mali
ne comedas ex illa: quia in die quo comederis ex ea, moriendo morieris.

<span id="viii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And the LORD God said, *It is* not
good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.

<span id="viii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et dixit Jehova Deus, Non est bonum
esse hominem solum: faciam ei adjutorium quod sit coram ipso.

<span id="viii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And out of the ground the LORD God
formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought
*them* unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam
called every living creature, that *was* the name thereof.

<span id="viii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Formaverat autem Jehova Deus e
terra omnem bestiam agri et omne volatile coeli; et adduxerat ad Adam ut
videret quomodo vocaret illud: et omne quod vocavit illi, *illi inquum*
, animae viventi, est nome ejus.

<span id="viii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Adam gave names to all cattle,
and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for
Adam there was not found an help meet for him.

<span id="viii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Vocavit itaque Adam nomina cuique
jumento, et volatili coeli omnique bestiae agri: Adae vero non invenerat
adjutorium quod esset coram se.

<span id="viii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And the LORD God caused a deep
sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and
closed up the flesh instead thereof;

<span id="viii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Cadere igitur fecit Jehova Deus
soporem super Adam, et dormivit: et tulit unam e costis ejus, et clausit
carnem pro ea.

<span id="viii.i-p44"></span>**22.** And the rib, which the LORD God had
taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

<span id="viii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et aedificavit Jehova Deus costam
quam tulerat ex Adam in mulierem, et adduxit eam ad Adam.

<span id="viii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And Adam said, This *is* now bone
of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because
she was taken out of Man.

<span id="viii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et dixit Adam, Hac vice os est ex
ossibus meis, et caro ex carne mea: et vocabitur Virissa, quia ex viro
sumpta est ista.

<span id="viii.i-p48"></span>**24.** Therefore shall a man leave his
father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be
one flesh.

<span id="viii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Idcirco relinquet unusquisque
paterm suum et matrem suam, et adhaerebit uxori suae, eruntque in carnem
unam.

<span id="viii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And they were both naked, the man
and his wife, and were not ashamed.

<span id="viii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Erant autem ambo nudi, Adam et uxor
ejus: et non pudebat eos.

<span id="viii.i-p52"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p53"></span><span id="viii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p54"></span>**1.** *Thus the heavens and the earth were
finished*  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) Moses summarily repeats
that in six days the fabric of the heaven and the earth was completed.
The general division of the world is made into these two parts, as has
been stated at the commencement of the first chapter. But he now adds,
all the host of them, by which he signifies that the world was furnished
with all its garniture. This epilogue, moreover, with sufficient
clearness entirely refutes the error of those who imagine that the world
was formed in a moment; for it declares that all end was only at length
put to the work on the sixth day. Instead of *host* we might not
improperly render the term *abundance* ;  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) for Moses declares that this world was
in every sense completed, as if the whole house were well supplied and
filled with its furniture. The heavens without the sun, and moon, and
stars, would be an empty and dismantled palace: if the earth were
destitute of animals, trees, and plants, that barren waste would have
the appearance of a poor and deserted house. God, therefore, did not
cease from the work of the creation of the world till he had completed
it in every part, so that nothing should be wanting to its suitable
abundance.

<span id="viii.i-p57"></span><span id="viii.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p58"></span>**2.** *And he rested on the seventh day*
The question may not improperly be put, what kind of rest this was. For
it is certain that inasmuch as God sustains the world by his power,
governs it by his providence, cherishes and even propagates all
creatures, he is constantly at work. Therefore that saying of Christ is
true, that the Father and he himself had worked from the beginning
hitherto,  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) because, if God
should but withdraw his hand a little, all things would immediately
perish and dissolve into nothing, as is declared in <span
id="viii.i-p59.2"></span>[Ps
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)<span id="viii.i-p59.2"></span>
 <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) And indeed God is rightly
acknowledged as the Creator of heaven and earth only whilst their
perpetual preservation is ascribed to him.  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) The solution of the difficulty is well
known, that God ceased from all his work, when he desisted from the
creation of new kinds of things. But to make the sense clearer,
understand that the last touch of God had been put, in order that
nothing might be wanting to the perfection of the world. And this is the
meaning of the words of Moses, *From all his work which he had made* ;
for he points out the actual state of the work as God would have it to
be, as if he had said, then was completed what God had proposed to
himself. On the whole, this language is intended merely to express the
perfection of the fabric of the world; and therefore we must not infer
that God so ceased from his works as to desert them, since they only
flourish and subsist in him. Besides, it is to be observed, that in the
works of the six days, those things alone are comprehended which tend to
the lawful and genuine adorning of the world. It is subsequently that we
shall find God saying, Let the earth bring forth thorns and briers, by
which he intimates that the appearance of the earth should be different
from what it had been in the beginning. But the explanation is at hand;
many things which are now seen in the world are rather corruptions of it
than any part of its proper furniture. For ever since man declined from
his high original, it became necessary that the world should gradually
degenerate from its nature. We must come to this conclusion respecting
the existence of fleas, caterpillars, and other noxious insects. In all
these, I say, there is some deformity of the world, which ought by no
means to be regarded as in the order of nature, since it proceeds rather
from the sin of man than from the hand of God. Truly these things were
created by God, but by God as an avenger. In this place, however, Moses
is not considering God as armed for the punishment of the sins of men;
but as the Artificer, the Architect, the bountiful Father of a family,
who has omitted nothing essential to the perfection of his edifice. At
the present time, when we look upon the world corrupted, and as if
degenerated from its original creation, let that expression of Paul
recur to our mind, that the creature is liable to vanity, not willingly,
but through our fault, (<span id="viii.i-p61.2"></span>[Ro
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020)<span id="viii.i-p61.2"></span>,)
and thus let us mourn, being admonished of our just condemnation.

<span id="viii.i-p62"></span><span id="viii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p63"></span>**3.** *And God blessed the seventh day* It
appears that God is here said to bless according to the manner of men,
because they bless him whom they highly extol. Nevertheless, even in
this sense, it would not be unsuitable to the character of God; because
his blessing sometimes means the favor which he bestows upon his people,
as the Hebrews call that man the blessed of God, who, by a certain
special favor, has power with God. (See <span
id="viii.i-p63.1"></span>[Ge
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#031)<span id="viii.i-p63.1"></span>.)
Enter thou blessed of God. Thus we may be allowed to describe the day as
blessed by him which he has embraced with love, to the end that the
excellence and dignity of his works may therein be celebrated. Yet I
have no doubt that Moses, by adding the word sanctified, wished
immediately to explain what he had said, and thus all ambiguity is
removed, because the second word is exegetical of the former. For <span
id="viii.i-p63.2"></span>שדק ( *kadesh* ,) with the Hebrews, is to
separate from the common number. God therefore sanctifies the seventh
day, when he renders it illustrious, that by a special law it may be
distinguished from the rest. Whence it also appears, that God always had
respect to the welfare of men. I have said above, that six days were
employed in the formation of the world; not that God, to whom one moment
is as a thousand years, had need of this succession of time, but that he
might engage us in the consideration of his works. He had the same end
in view in the appointment of his own *rest* , for he set apart a day
selected out of the remainder for this special use. Wherefore, that
benediction is nothing else than a solemn consecration, by which God
claims for himself the meditations and employments of men on the seventh
day. This is, indeed, the proper business of the whole life, in which
men should daily exercise themselves, to consider the infinite goodness,
justice, power, and wisdom of God, in this magnificent theater of heaven
and earth. But, lest men should prove less sedulously attentive to it
than they ought, every seventh day has been especially selected for the
purpose of supplying what was wanting in daily meditation. First,
therefore, God rested; then he blessed this rest, that in all ages it
might be held sacred among men: or he dedicated every seventh day to
rest, that his own example might be a perpetual rule. The design of the
institution must be always kept in memory: for God did not command men
simply to keep holiday every seventh day, as if he delighted in their
indolence; but rather that they, being released from all other business,
might the more readily apply their minds to the Creator of the world.
Lastly, that is a sacred rest,  <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104)
which withdraws men from the impediments of the world, that it may
dedicate them entirely to God. But now, since men are so backward to
celebrate the justice, wisdom, and power of God, and to consider his
benefits, that even when they are most faithfully admonished they still
remain torpid, no slight stimulus is given by God’s own example, and the
very precept itself is thereby rendered amiable. For God cannot either
more gently allure, or more effectually incite us to obedience, than by
inviting and exhorting us to the imitation of himself. Besides, we must
know, that this is to be the common employment not of one age or people
only, but of the whole human race. Afterwards, in the Law, a new precept
concerning the Sabbath was given, which should be peculiar to the Jews,
and but for a season; because it was a legal ceremony shadowing forth a
spiritual rest, the truth of which was manifested in Christ. Therefore
the Lord the more frequently testifies that he had given, in the
Sabbath, a symbol of sanctification to his ancient people.  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) Therefore when we hear that the
Sabbath was abrogated by the coming of Christ, we must distinguish
between what belongs to the perpetual government of human life, and what
properly belongs to ancient figures, the use of which was abolished when
the truth was fulfilled. Spiritual rest is the mortification of the
flesh; so that the sons of God should no longer live unto themselves, or
indulge their own inclination. So far as the Sabbath was a figure of
this rest, I say, it was but for a season; but inasmuch as it was
commanded to men from the beginning that they might employ themselves in
the worship of God, it is right that it should continue to the end of
the world.

<span id="viii.i-p66"></span>*Which God created and made*  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) Here the Jews, in their usual method,
foolishly trifle, saying, that God being anticipated in his work by the
last evening, left certain animals imperfect, of which kind are fauns
and satyrs, as though he had been one of the ordinary class of artifices
who have need of time. Ravings so monstrous prove the authors of them to
have been delivered over to a reprobate mind, as a dreadful example of
the wrath of God. As to the meaning of Moses, some take it thus: that
God created his Works in order to make them, inasmuch as from the time
he gave them being, he did not withdraw his hand from their
preservation. But this exposition is harsh. Nor do I more willingly
subscribe to the opinion of those who refer the word make to man, whom
God placed over his works, that he might apply them to use, and in a
certain sense perfect them by his industry. I rather think that the
perfect form of God’s works is here noted; as if he had said God so
created his works that nothing should be wanting to their perfection; or
the creation has proceeded to sucks a point, that the work is in all
respects perfect.

<span id="viii.i-p68"></span><span id="viii.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p69"></span>**4.** *These are the generations*  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) The design of Moses was deeply to
impress upon our minds the *origin* of the heaven and the earth, which
he designates by the word *generation* . For there have always been
ungrateful and malignant men, who, either by feigning, that the world
was eternal or by obliterating the memory of the creations would attempt
to obscure the glory of God. Thus the devil, by his guile, turns those
away from God who are more ingenious and skillful than others in order
that each may become a god unto himself. Wherefore, it is not a
superfluous repetition which inculcates the necessary fact, that the
world existed only from the time when it was created since such
knowledge directs us to its Architect and Author. Under the names of
heaven and earth, the whole is, by the figure *synecdochee* , included.
Some of the Hebrews thinks that the essential name of God is here at
length expressed by Moses, because his majesty shines forth more clearly
in the completed world.  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108)

<span id="viii.i-p75"></span><span id="viii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p76"></span>**5.** *And every plant* This verse is
connected with the preceding, and must be read in continuation with it;
for he annexes the plants and herbs to the earth, as the garment with
which the Lord has adorned it, lest its nakedness should appear as a
deformity. The noun <span id="viii.i-p76.1"></span>היש ( *sicah* ,
 <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) ) which we translate plant,
sometimes signifies trees, as below, (<span id="viii.i-p77.4"></span>[Ge
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#015)<span id="viii.i-p77.4"></span>
 <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) ) Therefore, some in this place
translate it *shrub* , to which I have no objection. Yet the word
*plant* is not unsuitable; because in the former place, Moses seems to
refer to the genus, and here to the species.  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) But although he has before related
that the herbs were created on the third day, yet it is not without
reason that here again mention is made of them, in order that we may
know that they were then produced, preserved, and propagated, in a
manner different from that which we perceive at the present day. For
herbs and trees are produced from seed; or grafts are taken from another
roots or they grow by putting forth shoots: in all this the industry and
the hand of man are engaged. But, at that time, the method was
different: God clothed the earth, not in the same manner as now, (for
there was no seed, no root, no plant, which might germinate,) but each
suddenly sprung into existence at the command of God, and by the power
of his word. They possessed durable vigor, so that they might stand by
the force of their own nature, and not by that quickening influence
which is now perceived, not by the help of rain, not by the irrigation
or culture of man; but by the vapor with which God watered the earth.
For he excludes these two things, the rain whence the earth derives
moisture, that it may retain its native sap; and human culture, which is
the assistant of nature. When he says, that God had ‘not yet caused it
to rain,’ he at the same time intimates that it is God who opens and
shuts the cataracts of heaven, and that rain and drought are in his
hand.

<span id="viii.i-p80"></span><span id="viii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p81"></span>**7.** *And the Lord God formed man* He now
explains what he had before omitted in the creation of man, that his
body was taken out of the earth. He had said that he was formed after
the image of God. This is incomparably the highest nobility; and, lest
men should use it as an occasion of pride, their first origin is placed
immediately before them; whence they may learn that this advantage was
adventitious; for Moses relates that man had been, in the beginning,
dust of the earth. Let foolish men now go and boast of the excellency of
their nature! Concerning other animals, it had before been said, Let the
earth produce every living creature;  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) but, on the other hand, the body of
Adam is formed of clay, and destitute of sense; to the end that no one
should exult beyond measure in his flesh. He must be excessively stupid
who does not hence learn humility. That which is afterwards added from
another quarter, lays us under just so much obligation to God.
Nevertheless, he, at the same time, designed to distinguish man by some
mark of excellence from brute animals: for these arose out of the earth
in a moment; but the peculiar dignity of man is shown in this, that he
was gradually formed. For why did not God command him immediately to
spring alive out of the earth, unless that, by a special privilege, he
might outshine all the creatures which the earth produced?

<span id="viii.i-p83"></span>*And breathed into his nostrils*  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) Whatever the greater part of the
ancients might think, I do not hesitate to subscribe to the opinion of
those who explain this passage of the animal life of man; and thus I
expound what they call the vital spirits by the word *breath* . Should
any one object, that if so, no distinction would be made between man and
other living creatures, since here Moses relates only what is common
alike to all: I answer, though here mention is made only of the lower
faculty of the soul, which imparts breath to the body, and gives it
vigor and motion: this does not prevent the human soul from having its
proper rank, and therefore it ought to be distinguished from others.
 <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) Moses first speaks of the
breath; he then adds, that a soul was given to man by which he might
live, and be endued with sense and motion. Now we know that the powers
of the human mind are many and various. Wherefore, there is nothing
absurd in supposing that Moses here alludes only to one of them; but
omits the intellectual part, of which mention has been made in the first
chapter. Three gradations, indeed, are to be noted in the creation of
man; that his dead body was formed out of the dust of the earth; that it
was endued with a soul, whence it should receive vital motion; and that
on this soul God engraved his own image, to which immortality is
annexed.

<span id="viii.i-p86"></span>*Man became a living soul*  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) I take <span
id="viii.i-p87.2"></span>שפנ ( *nepesh* ,) for the very essence of the
soul: but the epithet *living* suits only the present place, and does
not embrace generally the powers of the soul. For Moses intended nothing
more than to explain the animating of the clayey figure, whereby it came
to pass that man began to live. Paul makes an antithesis between this
living soul and the quickening spirit which Christ confers upon the
faithful, (<span id="viii.i-p87.3"></span>[1Co
15:45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045)<span id="viii.i-p87.3"></span>,)
for no other purpose than to teach us that the state of man was not
perfected in the person of Adam; but it is a peculiar benefit conferred
by Christ, that we may be renewed to a life which is *celestial* ,
whereas before the fall of Adams man’s life was only earthly, seeing it
had no firm and settled constancy.

<span id="viii.i-p88"></span><span id="viii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p89"></span>**8.** *And the Lord God planted*  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) Moses now adds the condition and rule
of living which were given to man. And, first, he narrates in what part
of the world he was placed, and what a happy and pleasant habitation was
allotted to him. Moses says, that God had *planted* accommodating
himself, by a simple and uncultivated style, to the capacity of the
vulgar. For since the majesty of God, as it really is, cannot be
expressed, the Scripture is wont to describe it according to the manner
of men. God, then, had planted Paradise in a place which he had
especially embellished with every variety of delights, with abounding
fruits and with all other most excellent gifts. For this reason it is
called a garden, on account of the elegance of its situation, and the
beauty of its form. The ancient interpreter has not improperly
translated it Paradise;  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) because
the Hebrews call the more highly cultivated gardens <span
id="viii.i-p91.2"></span>םיסדרפ ( *Pardaisim* ,  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) ) and Xenophon pronounces the word to
be Persian, when he treats of the magnificent and sumptuous gardens of
kings. That region which the Lord assigned to Adam, as the firstborn of
mankind, was one selected out of the whole world.

<span id="viii.i-p93"></span>*In Eden* That Jerome improperly translates
this, from the beginning,  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) is
very obvious: because Moses afterwards says, that Cain dwelt in the
southern region of this place. Moreover it is to be observed, that when
he describes paradise as in the east, he speaks in reference to the
Jews, for he directs his discourse to his own people. Hence we infer, in
the first place, that there was a certain region assigned by God to the
first man, in which he might have his home. I state this expressly,
because there have been authors who would extend this garden over all
regions of the world. Truly, I confess, that if the earth had not been
cursed on account of the sin of man, the whole — as it had been blessed
from the beginning — would have remained the fairest scene both of
fruitfulness and of delight; that it would have been, in short, not
dissimilar to Paradise, when compared with that scene of deformity which
we now behold. But when Moses here describes particularly the situation
of the region, they absurdly transfer what Moses said of a certain
particular place to the whole world. It is not indeed doubtful (as I
just now hinted) that God would choose the most fertile and pleasant
place, the first-fruits (so to speak) of the earth, as his gift to Adam,
whom he had dignified with the honor of primogeniture among men, in
token of his special favor. Again, we infer, that this garden was
situated on the earth, not as some dream in the air; for unless it had
been a region of our world, it would not have been placed opposite to
Judea, towards the east. We must, however, entirely reject the
allegories of Origin, and of others like him, which Satan, with the
deepest subtlety, has endeavored to introduce into the Church, for the
purpose of rendering the doctrine of Scripture ambiguous and destitute
of all certainty and firmness. It may be, indeed, that some, impelled by
a supposed necessity, have resorted to an allegorical sense, because
they never found in the world such a place as is described by Moses: but
we see that the greater part, through a foolish affectation of
subtleties, have been too much addicted to allegories. As it concerns
the present passage, they speculate in vain, and to no purpose, by
departing from the literal sense. For Moses has no other design than to
teach man that he was formed by God, with this condition, that he should
have dominion over the earth, from which he might gather fruit, and thus
learn by daily experience that the world was subject unto him. What
advantage is it to fly in the air, and to leave the earth, where God has
given proof of his benevolence towards the human race? But some one may
say, that to interpret this of celestial bliss is more skillful. I
answer, since the eternal inheritance of man is in heaven, it is truly
right that we should tend thither; yet must we fix our foot on earth
long enough to enable us to consider the abode which God requires man to
use for a time. For we are now conversant with that history which
teaches us that Adam was, by Divine appointment, an inhabitant of the
earth, in order that he might, in passing through his earthly life,
meditate on heavenly glory; and that he had been bountifully enriched by
the Lord with innumerable benefits, from the enjoyment of which he might
infer the paternal benevolence of God. Moses, also, will hereafter
subjoin that he was commanded to cultivate the fields and permitted to
eat certain fruits: all which things neither suit the circle of the
moon, nor the aerial regions. But although we have said, that the
situation of Paradise lay between the rising of the sun and Judea, yet
something more definite may be required respecting that region. They who
contend that it was in the vicinity of Mesopotamia, rely on reasons not
to be despised; because it is probable that the sons of Eden were
contiguous to the river Tigris. But as the description of it by Moses
will immediately follow, it is better to defer the consideration of it
to that place. The ancient interpreter has fallen into a mistake in
translating the proper name Eden by the word pleasure.  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) I do not indeed deny that the place
was so called from its delights; but it is easy to infer that the name
was imposed upon the place to distinguish it from others.

<span id="viii.i-p96"></span><span id="viii.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p97"></span>**9** *And out of the ground made the Lord
God to grow* The production here spoken of belongs to the third day of
the creation. But Moses expressly declares the place to have been richly
replenished with every kind of fruitful trees, that there might be a
full and happy abundance of all things. This was purposely done by the
Lord, to the end that the cupidity of man might have the less excuse if,
instead of being contented with such remarkable affluence, sweetness,
and variety, it should (as really happened) precipitate itself against
the commandment of God. The Holy Spirit also designedly relates by Moses
the greatness of Adam’s happiness, in order that his vile intemperance
might the more clearly appear, which such superfluity was unable to
restrain from breaking forth upon the forbidden fruit. And certainly it
was shameful ingratitude, that he could not rest in a state so happy and
desirable: truly, that was more than brutal lust which bounty so great
was not able to satisfy. No corner of the earth was then barren, nor was
there even any which was not exceedingly rich and fertile: but that
benediction of God, which was elsewhere comparatively moderate, had in
this place poured itself wonderfully forth. For not only was there an
abundant supply of food, but with it was added sweetness for the
gratification of the palate, and beauty to feast the eyes. Therefore,
from such benignant indulgence, it is more than sufficiently evident,
how inexplicable had been the cupidity of man.

<span id="viii.i-p98"></span>*The tree of life also* It is uncertain
whether he means only two individual trees, or two kinds of trees.
Either opinion is probable, but the point is by no means worthy of
contention; since it is of little or no concern to us, which of the two
is maintained. There is more importance in the epithets, which were
applied to each tree from its effect, and that not by the will of man
but of God.  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) He gave the tree of
life its name, not because it could confer on man that life with which
he had been previously endued, but in order that it might be a symbol
and memorial of the life which he had received from God. For we know it
to be by no means unusual that God should give to us the attestation of
his grace by external symbols.  <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122)
He does not indeed transfer his power into outward signs; but by them he
stretches out his hand to us, because, without assistance, we cannot
ascend to him. He intended, therefore, that man, as often as he tasted
the fruit of that tree, should remember whence he received his life, in
order that he might acknowledge that he lives not by his own power, but
by the kindness of God alone; and that life is not (as they commonly
speak) an intrinsic good, but proceeds from God. Finally, in that tree
there was a visible testimony to the declaration, that ‘in God we are,
and live, and move.’ But if Adams hitherto innocent, and of an upright
nature, had need of monitory signs to lead him to the knowledge of
divine grace, how much more necessary are signs now, in this great
imbecility of our nature, since we have fallen from the true light? Yet
I am not dissatisfied with what has been handed down by some of the
fathers, as Augustine and Eucherius, that the tree of life was a figure
of Christ, inasmuch as he is the Eternal Word of God: it could not
indeed be otherwise a symbol of life, than by representing him in
figure. For we must maintain what is declared in the first chapter of
John (<span id="viii.i-p101.3"></span>[Joh
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i-p101.3"></span>,) that the life of all things was included in
the Word, but especially the life of men, which is conjoined with reason
and intelligence. Wherefore, by this sign, Adam was admonished, that he
could claim nothing for himself as if it were his own, in order that he
might depend wholly upon the Son of God, and might not seek life
anywhere but in him. But if he, at the time when he possessed life in
safety, had it only as deposited in the word of God, and could not
otherwise retain it, than by acknowledging that it was received from
Him, whence may we recover it, after it has been lost? Let us know,
therefore, that when we have departed from Christ, nothing remains for
us but death.

<span id="viii.i-p102"></span>I know that certain writers restrict the
meaning of the expression here used to corporeal life. They suppose such
a power of quickening the body to have been in the tree, that it should
never languish through age; but I say, they omit what is the chief thing
in life, namely, the grace of intelligence; for we must always consider
for what end man was formed, and what rule of living was prescribed to
him. Certainly, for him to live, was not simply to have a body fresh and
lively, but also to excel in the endowments of the soul.

<span id="viii.i-p103"></span>Concerning the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, we must hold, that it was prohibited to man, not because God
would have him to stray like a sheep, without judgment and without
choice; but that he might not seek to be wiser than became him, nor by
trusting to his own understanding, cast off the yoke of God, and
constitute himself an arbiter and judge of good and evil. His sin
proceeded from an evil conscience; whence it follows, that a judgment
had been given him, by which he might discriminate between virtues and
vices. Nor could what Moses relates be otherwise true, namely, that he
was created in the image of God; since the image of God comprises in
itself the knowledge of him who is the chief good. Thoroughly insane,
therefore, and monsters of men are the libertines, who pretend that we
are restored to a state of innocence, when each is carried away by his
own lust without judgment. We now understand what is meant by abstaining
from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; namely, that Adam might
not, in attempting one thing or another, rely upon his own prudence; but
that, cleaving to God alone, he might become wise only by his obedience.
Knowledge is here, therefore, taken disparagingly, in a bad sense, for
that wretched experience which man, when he departed from the only
fountain of perfect wisdom, began to acquire for himself. And this is
the origin of freewill, that Adam wished to be independent,  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) and dared to try what he was able to
do.

<span id="viii.i-p105"></span><span id="viii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p106"></span>**10.** *And a river went out* Moses says
that one river flowed to water the garden, which afterwards would divide
itself into four heads. It is sufficiently agreed among all, that two of
these heads are the Euphrates and the Tigris; for no one disputes that
<span id="viii.i-p106.1"></span>לקדיה ( *Hiddekel* ) is the Tigris. But
there is a great controversy respecting the other two. Many think, that
Pison and Gihon are the Ganges and the Nile; the error, however, of
these men is abundantly refuted by the distance of the positions of
these rivers. Persons are not wanting who fly across even to the Danube;
as if indeed the habitation of one man stretched itself from the most
remote part of Asia to the extremity of Europe. But since many other
celebrated rivers flow by the region of which we are speaking, there is
greater probability in the opinion of those who believe that two of
these rivers are pointed out, although their names are now obsolete. Be
this as it may, the difficulty is not yet solved. For Moses divides the
one river which flowed by the garden into four heads. Yet it appears,
that the fountains of the Euphrates and the Tigris were far distant from
each other. From this difficulty, some would free themselves by saying,
that the surface of the globe may have been changed by the deluge; and,
therefore, they imagine it might have happened that the courses of the
rivers were disturbed and changed, and their springs transferred
elsewhere; a solution which appears to me by no means to be accepted.
For although I acknowledge that the earth, from the time that it was
accursed, became reduced from its native beauty to a state of wretched
defilement, and to a garb of mourning, and afterwards was further laid
waste in many places by the deluge; still, I assert, it was the same
earth which had been created in the beginning. Add to this, that Moses
(in my judgment) accommodated his topography to the capacity of his age.
Yet nothing is accomplished, unless we find that place where the Tigris
and Euphrates proceed from one river. Observe, first, that no mention is
made of a spring or fountain, but only that it is said, there was one
river. But the four heads I understand to mean, both the beginnings from
which the rivers are produced, and the mouths  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) by which they discharge themselves
into the sea. Now the Euphrates was formerly so joined by confluence
with the Tigris, that it might justly be said, one river was divided
into four heads; especially if what is manifest to all be conceded, that
Moses does not speak acutely, nor in a philosophical manner, but
popularly, so that every one least informed may understand him. Thus, in
the first chapter, he called the sun and moon two great luminaries; not
because the moon exceeded other planets in magnitude, but because, to
common observation, it seemed greater. Add further, that he seems to
remove all doubt when he says, that the river had four heads, because it
was divided from that place. What does this mean, except that the
channels were divided, out of one confluent stream, either above or
below Paradise? I will now submit a plan to view, that the readers may
understand where I think Paradise was placed by Moses.  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125)

<span id="viii.i-p109"></span>  

<span id="viii.i-p110"></span>Pliny indeed relates, in his Sixth Book,
that the Euphrates was so stopped in its course by the Orcheni, that it
could not flow into the sea, except through the Tigris.  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) And Pomponius Mela, in his Third Book,
denies that it flowed by any given outlet, as other rivers, but says
that it failed in its course. Nearchus, however, (whom Alexander had
made commander of his fleet, and who, under his sanction, had navigated
all these regions,) reckons the distance from the mouth of the Euphrates
to Babylon, three thousand three hundred stadia.  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) But he places the mouths of the Tigris
at the entrance of Susiana; in which region, returning from that long
and memorable voyage, he met the king with his fleet, as Adrian relates
in his Eighth Book of the Exploits of Alexander. This statement Strabo
also confirms by his testimony in his Fifteenth Book. Nevertheless,
wherever the Euphrates either submerges or mingles its stream, it is
certain, that it and the Tigris, below the point of their confluence,
are again divided. Adrian, however, in his Seventh Book, writes that not
one channel only of the Euphrates runs into the Tigris, but also many
rivers and ditches, because waters naturally descend from higher to
lower ground. With respect to the confluence, which I have noted in the
plate, the opinion of some was, that it had been effected be the labor
of the Praefect Cobaris, lest the Euphrates, by its precipitate course,
should injure Babylon. But he speaks of it as of a doubtful matter. It
is more credible, that men, by art and industry, followed the guidance
of Nature in forming ditches, when they saw the Euphrates any where
flowing of its own accord from the higher ground into the Tigris.
Moreover, if confidence is placed in Pomponius Mela, Semiramis conducted
the Tigris and Euphrates into Mesopotamia, which was previously dry; a
thing by no means credible. There is more truth in the statement of
Strabo, — a diligent and attentive writer, — in his Eleventh Book, that
at Babylon these two rivers unite: and then, that each is carried
separately, in its own bed, into the Red Sea.  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) He understands that junction to have
taken place above Babylon, not far from the town Massica, as we read in
the Fifth Book of Pliny. Thence one river flows through Babylon, the
other glides by Seleucia, two of the most celebrated and opulent cities.
If we admit this confluence, by which the Euphrates was mixed with the
Tigris, to have been natural, and to have existed from the beginning,
all absurdity is removed. If there is anywhere under heaven a region
preeminent in beauty, in the abundance of all kinds of fruit, in
fertility, in delicacies, and in other gifts, that is the region which
writers most celebrate. Wherefore, the eulogies with which Moses
commends Paradise are such as properly belong to a tract of this
description. And that the region of Eden was situated in those parts is
probable from <span id="viii.i-p113.2"></span>[Isa
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#012)<span id="viii.i-p113.2"></span>
<span id="viii.i-p113.3"></span>[Eze
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023)<span id="viii.i-p113.3"></span>.
Moreover, when Moses declares that a river went forth, I understand him
as speaking of the flowing of the stream; as if he had said, that Adam
dwelt on the bank of the river, or in that land which was watered on
both sides if you choose to take Paradise for both banks of the river.
However, it makes no great difference whether Adam dwelt below the
confluent stream towards Babylon and Seleucia, or in the higher part; it
is enough that he occupied a well-watered country. How the river was
divided into four heads is not difficult to understand. For there are
two rivers which flow together into one, and then separate in different
directions; thus, it is one at the point of confluence, but there are
two heads  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) in its upper
channels, and two towards the sea; afterwards, they again begin to be
more widely separated.

<span id="viii.i-p116"></span>The question remains concerning the names
Pison and Gihon. For it does not seem consonant with reason, to assign a
double name to each of the rivers. But it is nothing new for rivers to
change their names in their course, especially where there is any
special mark of distinction. The Tigris itself (by the authority of
Pliny) is called *Diglito* near its source; but after it has formed many
channels, and again coalesces, it takes the name of *Pasitigris*. There
is, therefore, no absurdity in saying, that after its confluence it had
different names. Further there is some such affinity between Pasin and
Pison, as to render it not improbable, that the name Pasitigris is a
vestige of the ancient appellation. In the Fifth Book of Quintus
Curtius, concerning the Exploits of Alexander, where mention is made of
Pasitigris, some copies read, that it was called by the inhabitants
Pasin. Nor do the other circumstances, by which Moses describes three of
these rivers, in accord with this supposition. Pison surrounds  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) the land of Havila, where gold is
produced. Surrounding is rightly attributed to the Tigris, on account of
its winding course below Mesopotamia. The land of Havila, in my
judgment, is here taken for a region adjoining Persia. For subsequently,
in the twenty-fifth chapter (<span id="viii.i-p117.2"></span>[Ge
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p117.2"></span>,)
Moses relates, that the Ishmaelites dwelt from Havila unto Shur, which
is contiguous to Egypt, and through which the road lies into Assyria.
Havila, as one boundary, is opposed to Shur as another, and this
boundary Moses places near Egypt, on the side which lies towards
Assyria. Whence it follows, that Havila (the other boundary) extends
towards Susia and Persia. For it is necessary that it should lie below
Assyria towards the Persian Sea; besides, it is placed at a great
distance from Egypt; because Moses enumerates many nations which dwelt
between these boundaries.  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) Then
it appears that the Nabathaeans,  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) of whom mention is there made, were
neighbors to the Persian. Every thing which Moses asserts respecting
gold and precious stones is most applicable to this district.  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133)

<span id="viii.i-p121"></span>The river Gihon still remains to be
noticed, which, as Moses declares, waters the land of *Chus*. All
interpreters translate this word *Ethiopia*; but the country of the
Midianites, and the conterminous country of Arabia, are included under
the same name by Moses; for which reason, his wife is elsewhere called
an Ethiopian woman. Moreover, since the lower course of the Euphrates
tends toward that region, I do not see why it should be deemed absurd,
that it there receives the name of Gihon. And thus the simple meaning of
Moses is, that the garden of which Adam was the possessor was well
watered, the channel of a river passing that way, which was afterwards
divided into four heads.  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134)

<span id="viii.i-p123"></span><span id="viii.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p124"></span>**15.** *And the Lord God took the man*
Moses now adds, that the earth was given to man, with this condition,
that he should occupy himself in its cultivation. Whence it follows that
men were created to employ themselves in some work, and not to lie down
in inactivity and idleness. This labor, truly, was pleasant, and full of
delight, entirely exempt from all trouble and weariness; since however
God ordained that man should be exercised in the culture of the ground,
he condemned in his person, all indolent repose. Wherefore, nothing is
more contrary to the order of nature, than to consume life in eating,
drinking, and sleeping, while in the meantime we propose nothing to
ourselves to do. Moses adds, that the custody of the garden was given in
charge to Adam, to show that we possess the things which God has
committed to our hands, on the condition, that being content with a
frugal and moderate use of them, we should take care of what shall
remain. Let him who possesses a field, so partake of its yearly fruits,
that he may not suffer the ground to be injured by his negligence; but
let him endeavor to hand it down to posterity as he received it, or even
better cultivated. Let him so feed on its fruits that he neither
dissipates it by luxury, nor permits to be marred or ruined by neglect.
Moreover, that this economy, and this diligence, with respect to those
good things which God has given us to enjoy, may flourish among us; let
every one regard himself as the steward of God in all things which he
possesses. Then he will neither conduct himself dissolutely, nor corrupt
by abuse those things which God requires to be preserved.

<span id="viii.i-p125"></span><span id="viii.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p126"></span>**16.** *And the Lord God commanded* Moses
now teaches, that man was the governor of the world, with this
exception, that he should, nevertheless, be subject to God. A law is
imposed upon him in token of his subjection; for it would have made no
difference to God, if he had eaten indiscriminately of any fruit he
pleased. Therefore the prohibition of one tree was a test of obedience.
And in this mode, God designed that the whole human race should be
accustomed from the beginning to reverence his Deity; as, doubtless, it
was necessary that man, adorned and enriched with so many excellent
gifts, should be held under restraint, lest he should break forth into
licentiousness. There was, indeed, another special reason, to which we
have before alluded, lest Adam should desire to be wise above measure;
but this is to be kept in mind as God’s general design, that he would
have men subject to his authority. Therefore, abstinence from the fruit
of one tree was a kind of first lesson in obedience, that man might know
he had a Director and Lord of his life, on whose will he ought to
depend, and in whose commands he ought to acquiesce. And this, truly, is
the only rule of living well and rationally, that men should exercise
themselves in obeying God. It seems, however, to some as if this did not
accord with the judgment of Paul, when he teaches, that the law was not
made for the righteous, (<span id="viii.i-p126.1"></span>[1Ti
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009)<span id="viii.i-p126.1"></span>.)
For if it be so, then, when Adam was yet innocent and upright, he had no
need of a law. But the solution is ready. For Paul is not there writing
controversially; but from the common practice of life, he declares, that
they who freely run, do not require to be compelled by the necessity of
law; as it is said, in the common proverb, that ‘Good laws spring from
bad manners.’ In the meantime, he does not deny that God, from the
beginning, imposed a law upon man, for the purpose of maintaining the
right due to himself. Should any one bring, as an objection, another
statement of Paul, where he asserts that the “law is the minister of
death,” (<span id="viii.i-p126.2"></span>[2Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span id="viii.i-p126.2"></span>,)
I answer, it is so accidentally, and from the corruption of our nature.
But at the time of which we speak, a precept was given to man, whence he
might know that God ruled over him. These minute things, however I
lightly pass over. What I have before said, since it is of far greater
moment, is to be frequently recalled to memory, namely, that our life
will then be rightly ordered, if we obey God, and if his will be the
regulator of all our affections.

<span id="viii.i-p127"></span>*Of every tree* To the end that Adam might
the more willingly comply, God commends his own liberality. ‘Behold,’ he
says, ‘I deliver into thy hand whatever fruits the earth may produce,
whatever fruits every kind of tree may yield: from this immense
profusion and variety I except only one tree.’ Then, by denouncing
punishment, he strikes terror, for the purpose of confirming the
authority of the law. So much the greater, then, is the wickedness of
man, whom neither that kind commemoration of the gifts of God, nor the
dread of punishment, was able to retain in his duty.

<span id="viii.i-p128"></span>But it is asked, what kind of death God
means in this place? It appears to me, that the definition of this death
is to be sought from its opposite; we must, I say, remember from what
kind of life man fell. He was, in every respect, happy; his life,
therefore, had alike respect to his body and his soul, since in his soul
a right judgment and a proper government of the affections prevailed,
there also life reigned; in his body there was no defect, wherefore he
was wholly free from death. His earthly life truly would have been
temporal; yet he would have passed into heaven without death, and
without injury. Death, therefore, is now a terror to us; first, because
there is a kind of annihilation, as it respects the body; then, because
the soul feels the curse of God. We must also see what is the cause of
death, namely alienation from God. Thence it follows, that under the
name of death is comprehended all those miseries in which Adam involved
himself by his defection; for as soon as he revolted from God, the
fountain of life, he was cast down from his former state, in order that
he might perceive the life of man without God to be wretched and lost,
and therefore differing nothing from death. Hence the condition of man
after his sin is not improperly called both the privation of life, and
death. The miseries and evils both of soul and body, with which man is
beset so long as he is on earth, are a kind of entrance into death, till
death itself entirely absorbs him; for the Scripture everywhere calls
those dead who, being oppressed by the tyranny of sin and Satan, breath
nothing but their own destruction. Wherefore the question is
superfluous, how it was that God threatened death to Adam on the day in
which he should touch the fruit, when he long deferred the punishment?
For then was Adam consigned to death, and death began its reign in him,
until supervening grace should bring a remedy.

<span id="viii.i-p129"></span><span id="viii.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p130"></span>**18.** *It is not good that the man
should be alone*  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) Moses now
explains the design of God in creating the woman; namely, that there
should be human beings on the earth who might cultivate mutual society
between themselves. Yet a doubt may arise whether this design ought to
be extended to progeny, for the words simply mean that since it was not
expedient for man to be alone, a wife must be created, who might be his
helper. I, however, take the meaning to be this, that God begins,
indeed, at the first step of human society, yet designs to include
others, each in its proper place. The commencement, therefore, involves
a general principle, that man was formed to be a social animal.  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) Now, the human race could not exist
without the woman; and, therefore, in the conjunction of human beings,
that sacred bond is especially conspicuous, by which the husband and the
wife are combined in one body, and one soul; as nature itself taught
Plato, and others of the sounder class of philosophers, to speak. But
although God pronounced, concerning Adam, that it would not be
profitable for him to be alone, yet I do not restrict the declaration to
his person alone, but rather regard it as a common law of man’s
vocation, so that every one ought to receive it as said to himself, that
solitude is not good, excepting only him whom God exempts as by a
special privilege. Many think that celibacy conduces to their advantage,
 <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) and therefore, abstain from
marriage, lest they should be miserable. Not only have heathen writers
defined that to be a happy life which is passed without a wife, but the
first book of Jerome, against Jovinian, is stuffed with petulant
reproaches, by which he attempts to render hallowed wedlock both hateful
and infamous. To these wicked suggestions of Satan let the faithful
learn to oppose this declaration of God, by which he ordains the
conjugal life for man, not to his destruction, but to his salvation.

<span id="viii.i-p134"></span>*I will make him an help* It may be
inquired, why this is not said in the plural number, *Let us make* , as
before in the creation of man. Some suppose that a distinction between
the two sexes is in this manner marked, and that it is thus shown how
much the man excels the woman. But I am better satisfied with an
interpretation which, though not altogether contrary, is yet different;
namely, since in the person of the man the human race had been created,
the common dignity of our whole nature was without distinction, honored
with one eulogy, when it was said, Let us make man; nor was it necessary
to be repeated in creating the woman, who was nothing else than an
accession to the man. Certainly, it cannot be denied, that the woman
also, though in the second degree, was created in the image of God;
whence it follows, that what was said in the creation of the man belongs
to the female sex. Now, since God assigns the woman as a help to the
man, he not only prescribes to wives the rule of their vocation to
instruct them in their duty, but he also pronounces that marriage will
really prove to men the best support of life. We may therefore conclude,
that the order of nature implies that the woman should be the helper of
the man. The vulgar proverb, indeed, is, that she is a necessary evil;
but the voice of God is rather to be heard, which declares that woman is
given as a companion and an associate to the man, to assist him to live
well. I confess, indeed, that in this corrupt state of mankind, the
blessing of God, which is here described, is neither perceived nor
flourishes; but the cause of the evil must be considered, namely, that
the order of nature, which God had appointed, has been inverted by us.
For if the integrity of man had remained to this day such as it was from
the beginning, that divine institution would be clearly discerned, and
the sweetest harmony would reign in marriage; because the husband would
look up with reverence to God; the woman in this would be a faithful
assistant to him; and both, with one consent, would cultivate a holy, as
well as friendly and peaceful intercourse. Now, it has happened by our
fault, and by the corruption of nature, that this happiness of marriage
has, in a great measure, perished, or, at least, is mixed and infected
with many inconveniences. Hence arise strifes, troubles, sorrows,
dissensions, and a boundless sea of evils; and hence it follows, that
men are often disturbed by their wives, and suffer through them many
discouragements. Still, marriage was not capable of being so far
vitiated by the depravity of men, that the blessing which God has once
sanctioned by his word should be utterly abolished and extinguished.
Therefore, amidst many inconveniences of marriage, which are the fruits
of degenerate nature, some residue of divine good remains; as in the
fire apparently smothered, some sparks still glitter. On this main point
hangs another, that women, being instructed in their duty of helping
their husbands, should study to keep this divinely appointed order. It
is also the part of men to consider what they owe in return to the other
half of their kind, for the obligation of both sexes is mutual, and on
this condition is the woman assigned as a help to the man, that he may
fill the place of her head and leader. One thing more is to be noted,
that, when the woman is here called the help of the man, no allusion is
made to that necessity to which we are reduced since the fall of Adam;
for the woman was ordained to be the man’s helper, even although he had
stood in his integrity. But now, since the depravity of appetite also
requires a remedy, we have from God a double benefit: but the latter is
accidental.

<span id="viii.i-p135"></span>*Meet for him*  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) In the Hebrew it is <span
id="viii.i-p136.3"></span>ודגנכ ( *kenegedo* ,) “as if opposite to,” or
“over against him.” <span id="viii.i-p136.4"></span>כ ( *Caph* ) in that
language is a note of similitude. But although some of the Rabbies think
it is here put as an affirmative, yet I take it in its general sense, as
though it were said that she is a kind of counterpart, (<span
id="viii.i-p136.5"></span>ἀντίστοικον, or <span
id="viii.i-p136.6"></span>ἀντίστροφον;  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) ) for the woman is said to be
*opposite* to or *over against* the man, because she responds to him.
But the particle of similitude seems to me to be added because it is a
form of speech taken from common usage.  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) The Greek translators have faithfully
rendered the sense, <span id="viii.i-p138.2"></span>Κατ᾿’ αὐτόν;  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) and Jerome, “Which may be like him,”
 <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) for Moses intended to note some
equality. And hence is refitted the error of some, who think that the
woman was formed only for the sake of propagation, and who restrict the
word “good,” which had been lately mentioned, to the production of
offspring. They do not think that a wife was personally necessary for
Adam, because he was hitherto free from lust; as if she had been given
to him only for the companion of his chamber, and not rather that she
might be the inseparable associate of his life. Wherefore the particle
<span id="viii.i-p140.2"></span>כ ( *caph* ) is of importance, as
intimating that marriage extends to all parts and usages of life. The
explanation given by others, as if it were said, Let her be ready to
obedience, is cold; for Moses intended to express more, as is manifest
from what follows.

<span id="viii.i-p141"></span><span id="viii.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p142"></span>**19.** *And out of the ground the Lord
God formed, etc*  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) This is a more
ample exposition of the preceding sentence, for he says that, of all the
animals, when they had been placed in order, not one was found which
might be conferred upon and adapted to Adam; nor was there such affinity
of nature, that Adam could choose for himself a companion for life out
of any one species. Nor did this occur through ignorance, for each
species had passed in review before Adam, and he had imposed names upon
them, not rashly but from certain knowledge; yet there was no just
proportion between him and them. Therefore, unless a wife had been given
him of the same kind with himself, he would have remained destitute of a
suitable and proper help. Moreover, what is here said of God’s bringing
the animals to Adam  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) signifies
nothing else than that he endued them with the disposition to obedience,
so that they would voluntarily offer themselves to the man, in order
that he, having closely inspected them, might distinguish them by
appropriate names, agreeing with the nature of each. This gentleness
towards man would have remained also in wild beasts, if Adam, by his
defection from God, had not lost the authority he had before received.
But now, from the time in which he began to be rebellious against God,
he experienced the ferocity of brute animals against himself; for some
are tamed with difficulty, others always remain unsubdued, and some,
even of their own accord, inspire us with terror by their fierceness.
Yet some remains of their former subjection continue to the present
time, as we shall see in the second verse of the ninth chapter (<span
id="viii.i-p144.2"></span>[Ge 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i-p144.2"></span>.) Besides, it is to be remarked that Moses
speaks only of those animals which approach the nearest to man, for the
fishes live as in another world. As to the names which Adam imposed, I
do not doubt that each of them was founded on the best reason; but their
use, with many other good things, has become obsolete.

<span id="viii.i-p145"></span><span id="viii.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p146"></span>**21.** *And the Lord God caused a deep
sleep to fall, etc.* Although to profane persons this method of forming
woman may seem ridiculous, and some of these may say that Moses is
dealing in fables, yet to us the wonderful providence of God here shines
forth; for, to the end that the conjunction of the human race might be
the more sacred he purposed that both males and females should spring
from one and the same origin. Therefore he created human nature in the
person of Adam, and thence formed Eve, that the woman should be only a
portion of the whole human race. This is the import of the words of
Moses which we have had before, (<span id="viii.i-p146.1"></span>[Ge
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span id="viii.i-p146.1"></span>,)
“God created man... he made them male and female.” In this manner Adam
was taught to recognize himself in his wife, as in a mirror; and Eve, in
her turn, to submit herself willingly to her husband, as being taken out
of him. But if the two sexes had proceeded from different sources, there
would have been occasion either of mutual contempt, or envy, or
contentions. And against what do perverse men here object? ‘The
narration does not seem credible, since it is at variance with custom.’
As if, indeed, such an objection would have more color than one raised
against the usual mode of the production of mankind, if the latter were
not known by use and experience.  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) But they object that either the rib
which was taken from Adam had been superfluous, or that his body had
been mutilated by the absence of the rib. To either of these it may be
answered, that they find out a great absurdity. If, however, we should
say that the rib out of which he would form another body had been
prepared previously by the Creator of the world, I find nothing in this
answer which is not in accordance with Divine Providence. Yet I am more
in favor of a different conjecture, namely, that something was taken
from Adam, in order that he might embrace, with greater benevolence, a
part of himself. He lost, therefore, one of his ribs; but, instead of
it, a far richer reward was granted him, since he obtained a faithful
associate of life; for he now saw himself, who had before been
imperfect, rendered complete in his wife.  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) And in this we see a true resemblance
of our union with the Son of God; for he became weak that he might have
members of his body endued with strength. In the meantime, it is to be
noted, that Adam had been plunged in a sleep so profound, that he felt
no pain; and further, that neither had the rupture been violent, nor was
any want perceived of the lost rib, because God so filled up the vacuity
with flesh, that his strength remained unimpaired; only the hardness of
bone was removed. Moses also designedly used the word *built* ,  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) to teach us that in the person of the
woman the human race was at length complete, which had before been like
a building just begun. Others refer the expression to the domestic
economy, as if Moses would say that legitimate family order was then
instituted, which does not differ widely from the former exposition.

<span id="viii.i-p150"></span><span id="viii.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p151"></span>**22.** *And brought her, etc* Moses now
relates that marriage was divinely instituted, which is especially
useful to be known; for since Adam did not take a wife to himself at his
own will, but received her as offered and appropriated to him by God,
the sanctity of marriage hence more clearly appears, because we
recognize God as its Author. The more Satan has endeavored to dishonor
marriage, the more should we vindicate it from all reproach and abuse,
that it may receive its due reverence. Thence it will follow that the
children of God may embrace a conjugal life with a good and tranquil
conscience, and husbands and wives may live together in chastity and
honor. The artifice of Satan in attempting the defamation of marriage
was twofold: first, that by means of the odium attached to it he might
introduce the pestilential law of celibacy; and, secondly, that married
persons might indulge themselves in whatever license they pleased.
Therefore, by showing the dignity of marriage, we must remove
superstition, lest it should in the slightest degree hinder the faithful
from chastely using the lawful and pure ordinance of God; and further,
we must oppose the lasciviousness of the flesh, in order that men may
live modestly with their wives. But if no other reason influenced us,
yet this alone ought to be abundantly sufficient, that unless we think
and speak honorably of marriage, reproach is attached to its Author and
Patron, for such God is here described as being by Moses.

<span id="viii.i-p152"></span><span id="viii.i-p152.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p153"></span>**23.** *And Adam said, etc* It is
demanded whence Adam derived this knowledge since he was at that time
buried in deep sleep. If we say that his quickness of perception was
then such as to enable him by conjecture to form a judgment, the
solution would be weak. But we ought not to doubt that God would make
the whole course of the affair manifest to him, either by secret
revelation or by his word; for it was not from any necessity on God’s
part that He borrowed from man the rib out of which he might form the
woman; but he designed that they should be more closely joined together
by this bonds which could not have been effected unless he had informed
them of the fact. Moses does not indeed explain by what means God gave
them this information; yet unless we would make the work of God
superfluous, we must conclude that its Author revealed both the fact
itself and the method and design of its accomplishment. The deep sleep
was sent upon Adam, not to hide from him the origin of his wife, but to
exempt him from pain and trouble, until he should receive a compensation
so excellent for the loss of his rib.

<span id="viii.i-p154"></span>*This is now bone of, etc*  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) In using the expression <span
id="viii.i-p155.5"></span>םעפה ( *hac vice* ,) Adam indicates that
something had been wanting to him; as if he had said, Now at length I
have obtained a suitable companion, who is part of the substance of my
flesh, and in whom I behold, as it were, another self. And he gives to
his wife a name taken from that of man,  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) that by this testimony and this mark
he might transmit a perpetual memorial of the wisdom of God. A
deficiency in the Latin language has compelled the ancient interpreter
to render <span id="viii.i-p156.7"></span>השא ( *ishah* ,) by the word
*virago* . It is, however, to be remarked, that the Hebrew term means
nothing else than the female of the man.

<span id="viii.i-p157"></span><span id="viii.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p158"></span>**24.** *Therefore shall a man leave* It
is doubted whether Moses here introduces God as speaking, or continues
the discourse of Adam, or, indeed, has added this, in virtue of his
office as teacher, in his own person.  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) The last of these is that which I most
approve. Therefore, after he has related historically what God had done,
he also demonstrates the end of the divine institution. The sum of the
whole is, that among the offices pertaining to human society, this is
the principal, and as it were the most sacred, that a man should cleave
unto his wife. And he amplifies this by a superadded comparison, that
the husband ought to prefer his wife to his father. But the father is
said to be *left* not because marriage severs sons from their fathers,
or dispenses with other ties of nature, for in this way God would be
acting contrary to himself. While, however, the piety of the son towards
his father is to be most assiduously cultivated and ought in itself to
be deemed inviolable and sacred, yet Moses so speaks of marriage as to
show that it is less lawful to desert a wife than parents. Therefore,
they who, for slight causes, rashly allow of divorces, violate, in one
single particular, all the laws of nature, and reduce them to nothing.
If we should make it a point of conscience not to separate a father from
his son, it is a still greater wickedness to dissolve the bond which God
has preferred to all others.

<span id="viii.i-p160"></span>*They shall be one flesh*  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) Although the ancient Latin interpreter
has translated the passage ‘in one flesh,’ yet the Greek interpreters
have expressed it more forcibly: ‘They two shall be *into* one flesh,’
and thus Christ cites the place in <span id="viii.i-p161.4"></span>[Mt
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#005)<span id="viii.i-p161.4"></span>.
But though here no mention is made of *two* , yet there is no ambiguity
in the sense; for Moses had not said that God has assigned many wives,
but only one to one man; and in the general direction given, he had put
the wife in the singular number. It remains, therefore, that the
conjugal bond subsists between two persons only, whence it easily
appears, that nothing is less accordant with the divine institution than
polygamy. Now, when Christ, in censuring the voluntary divorces of the
Jews, adduces as his reason for doing it, that ‘it was not so in the
beginning,’ (<span id="viii.i-p161.5"></span>[Mt
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#005)<span id="viii.i-p161.5"></span>,)
he certainly commands this institution to be observed as a perpetual
rule of conduct. To the same point also Malachi recalls the Jews of his
own time:

<span id="viii.i-p162"></span>‘Did he not make them one from the
beginning? and yet the Spirit was abounding in him.’  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) (<span id="viii.i-p163.3"></span>[Mal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015)<span id="viii.i-p163.3"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p164"></span>Wherefore, there is no doubt that polygamy
is a corruption of legitimate marriage.

<span id="viii.i-p165"></span><span id="viii.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p166"></span>**25.** *They were both naked* That the
nakedness of men should be deemed indecorous and unsightly, while that
of cattle has nothing disgraceful, seems little to agree with the
dignity of human nature. We cannot behold a naked man without a sense of
shame; yet at the sight of an ass, a dog, or an ox, no such feeling will
be produced. Moreover, every one is ashamed of his own nakedness, even
though other witnesses may not be present. Where then is that dignity in
which we excel? The cause of this sense of shame, to which we are now
alluding, Moses will show in the next chapter. He now esteems it enough
to say, that in our uncorrupted nature, there was nothing but what was
honorable; whence it follows, that whatsoever is opprobrious in us, must
be imputed to our own fault, since our parents had nothing in themselves
which was unbecoming until they were defiled with sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc01007.htm#fr_99) <span
id="viii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p55"></span> The three verses at the commencement of
this chapter evidently belong to the first, being a summing up of the
preceding history of the creation, and an account of the sabbatical
institution on the seventh day. The remark of Dathe is, “<span
id="viii.i-p55.1"></span>Male capita hoc loco sunt divisa. Tres versus
priores ad primum caput sunt referendi.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc01007.htm#fr_100) <span
id="viii.i-p55.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p56"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p56.1"></span>Copiam,” a
questionable rendering, surely of the word <span
id="viii.i-p56.2"></span>םאבצ. The Septuagint gives the word <span
id="viii.i-p56.3"></span>κόσμος, and the Vulgate, <span
id="viii.i-p56.4"></span>ornatus; the meaning of both words is
“ornaments,” or garniture. The other versions in Walton translate it
exercitus, host or army. Fagius, in Poli Synopsi, seems the chief
maintainer of Calvin’s interpretation. The words of Poole are, “<span
id="viii.i-p56.5"></span>Alii, virtus, copia eorum, quia eis declarat
Deus (sicutrex copiis suis,) potentiam et sapientiam.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc01007.htm#fr_101) <span
id="viii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p59"></span> <span id="viii.i-p59.1"></span>[Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="viii.i-p59.1"></span>.
This sentence is omitted in Tymme’s English version. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc01007.htm#fr_102) <span
id="viii.i-p59.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p60"></span> “Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled;
thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust.”

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc01007.htm#fr_103) <span
id="viii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p61"></span> The word translated preservation is <span
id="viii.i-p61.1"></span>vegetationem, which means an enlivening or a
quickening motion; to explain this the Old English translation here
adds, though without authority, “According to this saying of the
apostle, In him we live, and move, and have our being.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc01007.htm#fr_104) <span
id="viii.i-p63.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p64"></span> Both in the Amsterdam edition of 1761,a nd
Hengstenberg’s, the word is <span id="viii.i-p64.1"></span>vocatio; but
as the French translation gives <span id="viii.i-p64.2"></span>reste,
and the Old English one rest, there can be little doubt that the
original word was <span id="viii.i-p64.3"></span>vacatio, as the sense
of the passage seems to require. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc01007.htm#fr_105) <span
id="viii.i-p64.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p65"></span> “<span
id="viii.i-p65.1"></span>Sanctificationis symbolum.” — “A symbol or sign
of santification;” that is, a sign that God had set them apart as a holy
and peculiar people to himself. “Moreover, also, I gave them my
Sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I
am the Lord that sanctify them.” <span id="viii.i-p65.2"></span>[Eze
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012)<span id="viii.i-p65.2"></span>.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc01007.htm#fr_106) <span
id="viii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p67"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p67.1"></span>Quod
creavarat Deus ut faceret.” Hebrew <span id="viii.i-p67.2"></span>תושעל
םיהלא ארב רשא. “Which God created to make.” For the various opinions and
fancies of learned men on this passage, the reader is referred to
Poole’s Synopsis. The more respectable commentators mainly agree with
Calvin. Ainsworth says: “created to make, that is, to exist and be, and
that perfectly and gloriously, as by divine power of creation. Or
rather, created and made perfectly and excellently: for so the Hebrew
phrase may be explained.” The version of Dathe is “<span
id="viii.i-p67.3"></span>creando perfecerat,” — “he had perfected in
creating.” See also Professor Bush in loco. Le Clerc, whose
extraordinary learning and industry render his opinion on merely
critical questions of great value, notwithstanding his lamentable
scepticism, would rather translate the expression, “which he had begun
to make.” But the other translation is to be preferred. Vide Johannes
Clericus in Genesin. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc01007.htm#fr_107) <span
id="viii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p70"></span> A new section of the history of Moses
commences at this point; and, from the repetition which occurs of some
facts — such as the creation of man — which had been recorded in the
preceding chapter, as well as from certain peculiarities of phraseology,
many learned men have inferred, that the early portion of the Mosaic
history is older than the time of Moses, and that he, under the
infallible direction of the Spirit of God, collected and arranged the
several fragments of primeval annals in one consistent narrative. One
chief argument on which such a conclusion rests is, that from the
commencement of the first chapter to the end of the third verse of the
second chapter, God is spoken of only under the name of Elohim; from the
fourth verse of the second to the end of the third chapter, he is
uniformly styled Jehovah Elohim; and in the fourth and fifth chapters,
the name of Elohim or of Jehovah stands alone. This, it is argued, could
scarcely have occurred without some cause; and the inference has been
drawn, that different records had different forms of expression, which
Moses did not alter, unless truth required him to do so. See Dathe on
the Pentateuch, Professor Bush on Genesis, and Robertson’s Clavis
Pentateuchi, where reference will be found to Vitringa and others.
Against this view, however, Hengstenberg argues with considerable force,
in his Dissertation “on the Names of God in the Pentateuch;” and if some
of his reasonings in the use of these names seem too refined for the
simplicity of the Holy Scriptures, and for the comprehension of those to
whom the Scriptures are chiefly addressed, yet we may discover the germ
of very important truths, thought they may be, in some degree, hidden
beneath a variety of fanciful developments.

<span id="viii.i-p71"></span>By a very careful examination of the
passages in which the terms <span id="viii.i-p71.1"></span>םיהלא (
*Elohim* ), <span id="viii.i-p71.2"></span>הוהי ( *Jehovah* ), and <span
id="viii.i-p71.3"></span>םיהלא הוהי ( *Jehovah Elohim* ), occur, he
thinks he has ascertained a reason for the use of each in its place, so
that, with some exceptions, in which he allows that one term might have
been exchanged for the other, the sense of the passage absolutely
requires the introduction of the very appellation, and no other, which
is there employed. Believing that a theory so general cannot, with all
the author’s ingenuity and learning, be applied in every case, we may
still admit the importance of the distinction he makes, and may readily
allow that these names are intended to present the Divine character
under different aspects to our view. For instance, we may suppose that
Elohim and Jehovah have different meanings, arising from their
derivations; but we are not to infer, that, in reading the Scriptures,
we must have this diversity, or any diversity at all, in our view, when
we meet with these different names of Deity.

<span id="viii.i-p72"></span>“These are the generations.” <span
id="viii.i-p72.1"></span>תודלות, ( *toledoth* ), “<span
id="viii.i-p72.2"></span>modo origines ejus rei de qua sermo est, modo
posteros eorum de quibus agitur, significat. Priori sensu hoc loco
sumitur posteriori, cap. 5:1.” “The term signifies, sometimes, the
origin of the thing spoken of, sometimes the posterity of those who are
mentioned. It is taken here in the former of those senses; and in chap.
5:1, in the latter.” — *Dathe*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc01007.htm#fr_108) <span
id="viii.i-p72.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p73"></span> The word <span
id="viii.i-p73.1"></span>הוהי, *Jehovah* , here first occurs, — that
most sacred and incommunicable name of Deity, called tetragrammaton,
because it consisted of four letters, which the Jews, through reverence
or superstition, refuse to pronounce. The principal meaning of the term
is self-existence; which is, in truth, necessary existence, as opposed
to that which is derived from, or is dependent upon, another. It has
been supposed by some that Moses here introduces this title of Deity by
anticipation; because, in <span id="viii.i-p73.2"></span>[Ex
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003)<span id="viii.i-p73.2"></span>,
God declares that he had not been previously known by the name of
Jehovah. But this, as Dathe forcibly reasons, is to increase
difficulties rather than to remove them; for the patriarchs, Abraham and
Jacob, are represented as using the name; and God himself, in speaking
to them, also makes use of it. The true solution of the passage in
Exodus seems to be, that God had not made known to the patriarchs the
full import of his name, as he was now about to do. An elaborate
investigation of the origin and import of the name <span
id="viii.i-p73.3"></span>הוהי ( *Jehovah* ,) will be found in the work
of Hengstenberg, referred to in the preceding note. He begins with
putting aside the notion of an Egyptian origin, which has been put forth
with much confidence by those who would trace all the religious
peculiarities of the Israelites to their connection with Egypt. He then
disposes of the fancied Phoenician pedigree of the name, founded upon
spurious fragments ascribed to Sanchoniathon; and concludes the negative
part of his argument, by showing that the name was not derived from any
heathen source whatever. Consequently, it is to be traced to “a Hebrew
etymology.” We need not follow him into the discussion on the right
pronunciation of the word, and the use of the vowel points belonging to
<span id="viii.i-p73.4"></span>נדא, ( *Adonai* ); it may suffice to
state, that he deduces the name <span id="viii.i-p73.5"></span>היה (
*Jehovah* ,) from the future of the verb <span
id="viii.i-p73.6"></span>הוה or <span id="viii.i-p73.7"></span>היה, *to
be* . Hence the meaning of the appellation may be expressed in the
words, “He who is to be (for ever).” This derivation of the name Jehovah
he regards as being confirmed “by all the passages of Scripture, in
which a derivation of the name is either expressly given or simply
hinted.” And, beginning with the Book of Revelation, at the title <span
id="viii.i-p73.8"></span>ὁ ὡν καὶ ὁ ἤν καὶ ὁ ερχόμενος, “who is, and
was, and is to come,” he goes upward through the sacred volume, quoting
the passages which bear upon the question, till he comes to the
important passage in Exodus in. 13-16, in which God declares his name to
be, “I am that I am.” “Everything created,” he adds, “remains not like
itself, but is continually changing under circumstances, God only,
because he is the being, is always the same; and because he is always
the same, is the being.” See Dissertations, p. 231-265.

<span id="viii.i-p74"></span>“The Lord God.”-Jehovah Elohim. The two
titles of Deity are here combined. “Elohim,” says Hengstenberg, “is the
more general, and Jehovah the deep and more discriminating name of the
Godhead.” This may well be admitted, without accepting all the
inferences which the author deduces. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc01007.htm#fr_109) <span
id="viii.i-p76.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p77"></span> <span id="viii.i-p77.1"></span>חיש <span
id="viii.i-p77.2"></span>Frutex, stirps; a shrub — “<span
id="viii.i-p77.3"></span>cujus pulluli in summa tellure expatiantur,” —
“whose shoots are spread abroad over the surface of the earth.” —
Robertson’s Clavis Pentateuch. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc01007.htm#fr_110) <span
id="viii.i-p77.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p78"></span> “And the water was spent in the bottle,
and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.” — English version.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc01007.htm#fr_111) <span
id="viii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p79"></span> It seems remarkable that Calvin should
himself translate the word “<span id="viii.i-p79.1"></span>virgultum,”
and then reason, in his commentary, as if he preferred the word “<span
id="viii.i-p79.2"></span>planta.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc01007.htm#fr_112) <span
id="viii.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p82"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p82.1"></span>Omnem
animam viventum,” — “every living soul.” The word is applied here, and
frequently in the Holy Scriptures, to describe only the sensitive and
animal life, that by which a created being breathes; and thus
distinguishes the animal from the vegetative life. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc01007.htm#fr_113) <span
id="viii.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p84"></span> “<span
id="viii.i-p84.1"></span>Inspiraverat in faciem.”

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc01007.htm#fr_114) <span
id="viii.i-p84.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p85"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p85.1"></span>Non tamen
obstare quin gradum suum obtineat anima, ideoque seorsum poni debuerit.”

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc01007.htm#fr_115) <span
id="viii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p87"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p87.1"></span>Factus est
in animam viventem.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc01007.htm#fr_116) <span
id="viii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p90"></span> “<span
id="viii.i-p90.1"></span>Plantaverat quoque Dominus.” — “The Lord had
also planted.”

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc01007.htm#fr_117) <span
id="viii.i-p90.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p91"></span> “<span
id="viii.i-p91.1"></span>Paradisum.” — *Vulgate*.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc01007.htm#fr_118) <span
id="viii.i-p91.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p92"></span> <span id="viii.i-p92.1"></span>סדרפ <span
id="viii.i-p92.2"></span>Baumgarten, Park, etc. “<span
id="viii.i-p92.3"></span>Wahrschenlich aus der Persichen Sprache, wo es
die Lustparks der Koenige bezeichnet.” — “Orchard, Park, etc. — probably
from the Persian, where it signifies the pleasure — parks of kings.” —
*Gesenius*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc01007.htm#fr_119) <span
id="viii.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p94"></span> “<span
id="viii.i-p94.1"></span>Plantaverat autem Dominus Deus Paradisum
voluptatis a principio.” — “But the Lord God had planted a paradise from
the beginning.” — *Vulgate*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc01007.htm#fr_120) <span
id="viii.i-p94.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p95"></span> The Hebrew word <span
id="viii.i-p95.1"></span>ןדע signifies pleasure, delight, loveliness. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc01007.htm#fr_121) <span
id="viii.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p99"></span> The above passage is wholly omitted in the
Old English translation by Tymme. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc01007.htm#fr_122) <span
id="viii.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p100"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p100.1"></span>Scimus
minime esse insolens ut virtutem suam Deus externis symbolis testatam
nobis reddat.” — “<span id="viii.i-p100.2"></span>Nous savons que ce
n’est point chose nouvelle, que Dieu nous testifie sa vertu par signes
exterieurs.” — French Trans. <span id="viii.i-p100.3"></span>Virtus in
Latin, and <span id="viii.i-p100.4"></span>vertu in French, may both
signify power, virtue, efficacy; but it seems that the term grace more
correctly conveys to an English ear the meaning of the Author. — *Ed*.

<span id="viii.i-p101"></span>On the sacramental character of the tree
of life, which Calvin here maintains, but which Dr. Kennicott, in his
first Dissertation, endeavors, with more learning than sound judgment,
to set aside, the generality of commentators seem to be agreed. See
Patrick, Scott, etc. Patrick says, — “This garden being a type of
heaven, perhaps God intended by this tree to represent that immortal
life which he meant to bestow upon man with himself, (<span
id="viii.i-p101.1"></span>[Re
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002)<span id="viii.i-p101.1"></span>).
And so St. Austin, in that famous saying of his, ‘<span
id="viii.i-p101.2"></span>Erat ei in caeteris lignis Alimentum, in isto
autem Sacrcramentum.’ In other trees there was nourishment for man; but
in this also a sacrament. For it was both a symbol of that life which
God had already bestowed upon man, and of that life which he was to hope
for in another world, if he proved obedient.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc01007.htm#fr_123) <span
id="viii.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p104"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p104.1"></span>Dum Adam
per se esse voluit, et quid valeret tentare ausus est.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc01007.htm#fr_124) <span
id="viii.i-p106.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p107"></span> It appears that by the beginnings (<span
id="viii.i-p107.1"></span>principia) and the mouths (<span
id="viii.i-p107.2"></span>ostia) of the rivers, Calvin simply means the
streams above, and the streams below, the site of the garden. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc01007.htm#fr_125) <span
id="viii.i-p107.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p108"></span> This is a facsimile from the Old English
translation; and the same, with Latin and French names, are introduced
in the early editions of each language. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc01007.htm#fr_126) <span
id="viii.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p111"></span> “The Orcheni inhabiting a city name
Orchoe, caused the diminution of the Euphrates, by derving it through
their lands, which could not otherwise be watered.” — D’Anville’s
Ancient Geography.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc01007.htm#fr_127) <span
id="viii.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p112"></span> About 420 miles.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc01007.htm#fr_128) <span
id="viii.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p113"></span> <span id="viii.i-p113.1"></span>Mare
Rubrum. By the Red Sea, in this place, is not meant the Gulf of Suez,
which is called by that name in sacred history, and over which the
Israelites passed in their journey from Egypt to Canaan; but the Indian
Ocean, the Mare Erythraeum of the ancients, into which the Tigris and
Euphrates flowed, through the Persian Gulf. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc01007.htm#fr_129) <span
id="viii.i-p113.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p114"></span> Or “principal streams.” “The river, or
single channel, must be looked upon as a highway, crossing over a
forest, and which may be said from thence to divide itself into four
ways, whether the division be made above or below the forest.” — Well’s
Geography of the Old and New Test., vol. 1, p. 19.

<span id="viii.i-p115"></span>The reader is referred to the first
chapter of that useful work, for an account agreeing in many points with
Calvin, though differing from it in others. The principal difference in
the two accounts lies in this, that Wells places the site of Paradise
near the Persian Gulf into which the Tigris and Euphrates discharge
themselves, while Calvin fixes it higher up the streams, in the vicinity
of ancient Babylon. Wells derives his account mainly from the celebrated
French Bishop, Peter Daniel Huet, who had been the intimate friend of
the famous Protestant traveler Bochart. The following extract from a
note in the Clavis Pentateuchi of Robertson is added for the reader’s
satisfaction: — “<span id="viii.i-p115.1"></span>Eden est regio sen in
Mesopotamio, sen non procul inde. Observandum est hancce sententiam
Calvini, quam parum emendaverat clarissimus Huetis, verissimam omnium
videri: Hoc demonstravit calrissimus Vitringa, qui paululum in quibusdam
circumstantis etiam Huetium emendaverat.” — “Eden is a region either in
Mesopotamia, or near it. It is to be observed, that this opinion of
Calvin, which the celebrated Huet has slightly amended, seems to be the
most true of all. The celebrated Vitringa has demonstrated this; who
also, in some circumstances, has slightly amended Huet.” — Robertson’s
Clavis, p. 177. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc01007.htm#fr_130) <span
id="viii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p117"></span> Circuit. It is observed, that the word
surrounds, or “compasses,” conveys, to an English reader, more than is
meant by the sacred writer. He only intends to say, that the river
sweeps round in that direction, so as to embrace, by its winding, a part
of the region of Havila. <span id="viii.i-p117.1"></span>Flexuoso cursu
alluit. — Johannes Clericus in loco. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc01007.htm#fr_131) <span
id="viii.i-p117.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p118"></span> That is, the nations peopled by the
twelve sons of Ishmael. See <span id="viii.i-p118.1"></span>[Ge
25:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i-p118.1"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc01007.htm#fr_132) <span
id="viii.i-p118.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p119"></span> The descendants of Nebajoth, the eldest
son of Ishmael. Yet, as they inhabited the western side of the great
desert of Arabia, which lay between them and the Euphrates, they cannot,
with much propriety, be called neighbors to the Persians. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc01007.htm#fr_133) <span
id="viii.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p120"></span> “There is bdellium and the onyx-stone.”
It is a question among the learned, whether bdellium is an aromatic gum
of great value, or a pearl. Dathe, however, renders this word “crystal,”
and the next, “emerald.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc01007.htm#fr_134) <span
id="viii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p122"></span> It would be wrong to omit all mention of
the work of Adrian Reland on this subject; who devoted to it the most
profound learning and diligent investigation. An abstract of his
description is given in Dr. Adam Clarke’s Commentary. He places Eden in
Armenia, near the sources of the Euphrates and Tigris, which flow into
the Persian Gulf, the Phasis (*Pison*,) which empties itself into the
Euxine, where Chabala, corresponding with Havila, is famous for its
gold; and the Araxes, (*Gihon*,) which runs into the Caspian. The
objection to this locality is, that these rivers do not actually meet
together; so that they cannot be said to divide into four heads, or
principal streams in Eden. The learned reader may see Dathe’s Commentary
on the Pentateuch, p. 23, note (k.) — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc01007.htm#fr_135) <span
id="viii.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p131"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p131.1"></span>Non est
bonum ut sit Adam solus.” This is a variation from Calvin’s text, which
has man instead of Adam; as the English version has. The word <span
id="viii.i-p131.2"></span>םדא stands for both. As a proper name, it
means Adam; as an appellation, it belongs to the human species; as an
adjective, it means red; and, with a slight alteration, it signifies the
ground. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc01007.htm#fr_136) <span
id="viii.i-p131.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p132"></span> “<span
id="viii.i-p132.1"></span>Principium ergo generale est, conditum esse
hominem ut sit sociale animal.”

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc01007.htm#fr_137) <span
id="viii.i-p132.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p133"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p133.1"></span>Putant
multi suisrationibus conducere coelibatum.” — “<span
id="viii.i-p133.2"></span>Plusieurs estiment que le celibat — leur est
plus profitable.” — French Tr.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc01007.htm#fr_138) <span
id="viii.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p136"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p136.1"></span>Coram
ipso,” before him. — “<span id="viii.i-p136.2"></span>Pour luy
assister,” to help him. — French Tr.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc01007.htm#fr_139) <span
id="viii.i-p136.7"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p137"></span> <span id="viii.i-p137.1"></span>Quod “ex
adverso ei” respondet. <span id="viii.i-p137.2"></span>Lud. de Dieu. His
counterpart.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc01007.htm#fr_140) <span
id="viii.i-p137.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p138"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p138.1"></span>Quia sit
translatitia loquutio.”

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc01007.htm#fr_141) <span
id="viii.i-p138.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p139"></span> A help according to him. See Septuagint.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc01007.htm#fr_142) <span
id="viii.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p140"></span> “<span
id="viii.i-p140.1"></span>Adjutorium simile sibi,” a help like himself.
— Vulgate. Meet for him. “In whose company he shall take delight; so the
Hebrew phrase, as before him, imports, being as much answerable to him,
every way fitted for him, not only in likeness of body, but of mind,
disposition, and affection, which laid the foundation of perpetual
familiarity and friendship.” — *Patrick*.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc01007.htm#fr_143) <span
id="viii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p143"></span> “<span
id="viii.i-p143.1"></span>Formaverat autem Deus,” — “God had formed,”
plainly referring to what had already taken place. The Hebrew language
has not the same distinction of times in its verbs which is common to
more modern tongues.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc01007.htm#fr_144) <span
id="viii.i-p143.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p144"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p144.1"></span>Porro
istud adducere Dei.”

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc01007.htm#fr_145) <span
id="viii.i-p146.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p147"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p147.1"></span>Ex
putrido semine quotidie gigni homines.”

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc01007.htm#fr_146) <span
id="viii.i-p147.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p148"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p148.1"></span>Quum se
integrum vidit in uxore, qui prius tantum dimidius erat.”

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc01007.htm#fr_147) <span
id="viii.i-p148.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p149"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p149.1"></span>Et
aedificavit Jehova Deus costam quam tulerat ex Adam, in mulierem.” — And
Jehovah God built the rib which he had taken out of Adam into a woman.
<span id="viii.i-p149.2"></span>ןביו, from <span
id="viii.i-p149.3"></span>הנב, to build.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc01007.htm#fr_148) <span
id="viii.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p155"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p155.1"></span>Hac vice
os est ex ossibus meis.” <span id="viii.i-p155.2"></span>םעפה תאז, (
*zot haphaam* .) These words are rendered in the English version by
“This now,” which very feebly and imperfectly expresses the sense of the
original; nor does the version of Calvin, “At this turn,” give the true
emphasis of the words. It is perhaps scarcely possible to do so without
a paraphrase. The two words of the original are both intended to be
emphatic. “This living creature (<span id="viii.i-p155.3"></span>תאז)
which at the present time (<span id="viii.i-p155.4"></span>םעפה, *hac
vice* ) passes before me, is the companion which I need, for it is bone
of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.” — Vide Dathe in loco. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc01007.htm#fr_149) <span
id="viii.i-p155.6"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p156"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p156.1"></span>Nomen
uxori a viro imponit.” <span id="viii.i-p156.2"></span>השא, ( *ishah* ,)
from <span id="viii.i-p156.3"></span>שיא, ( *ish* ,) which is the Hebrew
word man with a feminine termination; as if we should say, “She shall be
called manness, because she was taken out of the man.” Calvin uses the
word <span id="viii.i-p156.4"></span>virissa; Dathe, after Le Clerc, the
word <span id="viii.i-p156.5"></span>vira; and though neither of them
are strictly classical, yet are they far preferable to the term <span
id="viii.i-p156.6"></span>virago in the Vulgate, which Calvin justly
rejects, and which means a woman of masculine character. The English
word woman is a contraction of womb-man. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc01007.htm#fr_150) <span
id="viii.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p159"></span> See Le Clerc on this verse, who takes the
same view as Calvin.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc01007.htm#fr_151) <span
id="viii.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p161"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p161.1"></span>Erunt in
carnem unam.” — “<span id="viii.i-p161.2"></span>In carne una.” —
Vulgate. <span id="viii.i-p161.3"></span>Εἰς σάρκα μίαν. — Sept.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc01007.htm#fr_152) <span
id="viii.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p163"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p163.1"></span>Spiritus
abundans in eo erat” The word <span id="viii.i-p163.2"></span>abundans
has in English the force of superabounding. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc01008)
